Appellant has filed this miscellaneous appeal under Section 173(1)
of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 challenging award dated 21.11.2017
passed in Claim Case No.219/2014 by Eighteenth Additional Motor
2.     Brief facts of the case are that, an accident had occurred at about
12:20 pm on 02.12.2013 by vehicle i.e. Xylo Car bearing No.MP-20-
CC/7823. Owner of the vehicle was Urmila Uikey and driver of said
vehicle was Dhaniram. Vehicle was insured by appellant-Company by
issuing policy in favour of owner namely Urmila Uikey. On fateful day,
vehicle was driven rashly and negligently and it plunged into a pond
which resulted in death of two persons by drowning.
3.      Appellant has challenged the award on ground that Urmila Uikey
owner of said vehicle had died on 08.10.2010. Insurance policy was
brought on 19.05.2013 in name of a dead person. There cannot be any
contract between as dead and living person and therefore, insurance
policy is null and void and Claims Tribunal had committed an error in
fixing liability on appellant/Insurance Company to indemnify the owner
and pay to legal representatives of deceased.
4.      Learned counsel appearing for respondents supported the award
and relied on the reasons given by Claims Tribunal. Claim Tribunal had
dismissed the aforesaid plea on the ground that party has complied with
the promise before death of Urmila Uikey and other party has to perform
their promise. Policy does not violate any fundamental conditions and
Insurance Company has received full premium amount on 16.05.2013
and had issued the policy for period of one year only because information
regarding death of owner was not given to Insurance Company. Insurance
Company cannot be absolved of its liability and appellant was held to be
6.      Section 19 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 provides as under:-
“Section 19 in The Indian Contract Act, 1872
19. Voidability of agreements without free consent.—When
consent to an agreement is caused by coercion, 1[***]
fraud or misrepresentation, the agreement is a contract
voidable at the option of the party whose consent was so
caused. —When consent to an agreement is caused by
coercion, 1[***] fraud or misrepresentation, the agreement
is a contract voidable at the option of the party whose
consent was so caused." A party to contract, whose consent
was caused by fraud or misrepresentation, may, if he thinks
fit, insist that the contract shall be performed, and that he
shall be put in the position in which he would have been if
the representations made had been true.
(Exception)       —If   such    consent    was    caused   by
misrepresentation or by silence, fraudulent within the
meaning of section 17, the contract, nevertheless, is not
voidable, if the party whose consent was so caused had the
means of discovering the truth with ordinary diligence.
Explanation.—A fraud or misrepresentation which did not
cause the consent to a contract of the party on whom such
fraud was practised, or to whom such misrepresentation
was made, does not render a contract voidable.
(a) A, intending to deceive B, falsely represents that five
hundred maunds of indigo are made annually at A’s factory,
and thereby induces B to buy the factory. The contract is
voidable at the option of B. (a) A, intending to deceive B,
falsely represents that five hundred maunds of indigo are
made annually at A’s factory, and thereby induces B to buy
the factory. The contract is voidable at the option of B."
(b) A, by a misrepresentation, leads B erroneously to
believe that five hundred maunds of indigo are made
annually at A’s factory. B examines the accounts of the
factory, which show that only four hundred maunds of
indigo have been made. After this B buys the factory. The
contract    is   not   voidable    on   account     of    A’s
misrepresentation. (b) A, by a misrepresentation, leads B
erroneously to believe that five hundred maunds of indigo
are made annually at A’s factory. B examines the accounts
of the factory, which show that only four hundred maunds
of indigo have been made. After this B buys the factory. The
contract    is   not   voidable    on   account     of    A’s
(c) A fraudulently informs B that A’s estate is free from
incumbrance. B thereupon buys the estate. The estate is
subject to a mortgage. B may either avoid the contract, or
may insist on its being carried out and mortgage-debt
redeemed. (c) A fraudulently informs B that A’s estate is
free from incumbrance. B thereupon buys the estate. The
estate is subject to a mortgage. B may either avoid the
contract, or may insist on its being carried out and
mortgage-debt redeemed."
(d) B, having discovered a vein of ore on the estate of A,
adopts means to conceal, and does conceal the existence of
the ore from A. Through A’s ignorance B is enabled to buy
the estate at an under-value. The contract is voidable at the
option of A. (d) B, having discovered a vein of ore on the
estate of A, adopts means to conceal, and does conceal the
existence of the ore from A. Through A’s ignorance B is
enabled to buy the estate at an under-value. The contract is
voidable at the option of A."
(e) A is entitled to succeed to an estate at the death of B; B
dies: C, having received intelligence of B’s death, prevents
the intelligence reaching A, and thus induces A to sell him
his interest in the estate. The sale is voidable at the option
of A. (e) A is entitled to succeed to an estate at the death of
B; B dies\: C, having received intelligence of B’s death,
prevents the intelligence reaching A, and thus induces A to
sell him his interest in the estate. The sale is voidable at the
option of A.”
7.    In this case as owner has died before purchasing insurance policy,
therefore, there was a misrepresentation on the part of legal
representatives/driver/owner of vehicle in contracting with the appellant
for purchase of policy in name of deceased owner Urmila Uikey. Contract
entered between the parties is not voidable as consent given by appellant
for covering the risk on purchase of policy was given by
misrepresentation or silence hiding the fact that Urmila Uikey has died as
appellant had means to discover the truth with ordinary diligence.
Proposal is to be forwarded and signed by the purchaser of the policy.
Since, owner-Urmila Uikey has died, therefore, she could not have
appeared for signing application and proposal for purchase of policy.
Insurance Company made no efforts to find out why Insured has not
appeared and signed the application. Insurer could have discovered the
truth by ordinary diligence following proper procedure for issuing of
policy. Insurer received the money and had issued the policy. Insurer has
not exercised ordinary care and diligence in the case. During pendency of
case no effort was made for declaring policy to be void or cancel the
policy. In these circumstances, policy cannot be held to be voidable at
option of appellant. No error can be found in the award which has been
passed by the Claims Tribunal.
DN: c=IN, o=HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH, ou=HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH, postalCode=482001,
st=Madhya Pradesh, 2.5.4.20=4bc06f2e678b75148b60bb7947ee9ffc5ed27ef1f43a5d4d93d2d13dda510735,