This is one of the classic appeals whereby the
appellant / accused is challenging the impugned judgment
of conviction and order of sentence dated 22.07.2017
rendered by the IV-Additional District and Sessions Judge,
Madhugiri (hereinafter for brevity referred to as the ‘trial
Court’) in S.C.No.5051/2016, convicting the appellant /
accused for the offence punishable under section 302 of
Indian Penal Code, 1860 and sentencing her to undergo
life imprisonment and pay fine of Rs.10,000/-, in default,
to undergo simple imprisonment for one year. Whereas in
this    appeal, the   appellant   /  accused   is  seeking
intervention in the aforesaid judgment of conviction and
order of sentence by considering the grounds urged in the
appeal and consequently, seeking for setting aside the
judgment of conviction and order of sentence rendered in
the aforesaid case against her and acquit her of the offence
punishable under section 302 of Indian Penal Code, 1860
(hereinafter for brevity referred to as the ‘IPC’).
2.      Heard learned counsel Sri.R.P.Chandrashekar
appearing for the appellant / accused and Sri.Vijaykumar
Majage,     learned   Additional   State   Public     Prosecutor
appearing for the respondent - State and perused the
impugned judgment of conviction and order of sentence
rendered by the trial Court in S.C.No.5051/2016.
3.      The factual matrix of the appeal are as under:
It is transpired in the case of the prosecution that, on
24.08.2016 at around 2.00 p.m., the accused had come
with her husband CW.1, who is examined as PW.1 –
Manjunatha,       to  the   Renuka     Hospital     situated  at
Koratagere along with their two months’ old girl baby for
treatment,     as   the  child   was   suffering    from   some
respiratory problem and also epilepsy. Later, on the same
day, at around 4.00 p.m., as the child had respiratory
problem and epilepsy, the accused, who is none other than
the mother of the deceased girl baby, was not getting the
enough milk to feed the baby, threw her baby into
Suvarnamukhi river by the side of Koratagere town. This
is the narration in the complaint made by PW.1 –
Manjunatha and based upon his complaint, criminal law
was set into motion by recording FIR as per Ex.P15 for the
offence punishable under section 302 of IPC. Subsequent
to registration of the crime and so also criminal law was
set into motion, PW.15 – S.Muniraju being an Investigating
Officer, took up the case for investigation and during
investigation, he conducted spot panchanama at Ex.P2 in
the presence of PW.7 and PW.12 and took photographs at
Ex.P3 and Ex.P4 and also conducted inquest over the dead
body of two months’ old baby in the presence of the panch
witnesses as per Ex.P8 in the presence of PW.5 – Babu,
PW.6 – Abhilash and PW.7 – Adinarayana. The dead body
of the two months’ old baby had been sent to the mortuary
and whereby PW.14 – Dr.Rudramurthy who conducted
autopsy over the dead body and issued postmortem report
as per Ex.P14 and whereby he opined that the cause of
death was due to asphyxia as a result of drowning.
4.    Subsequent to completion of the investigation
done by PW.15 by following the requisite provisions of
section 173(2) of Code of Criminal Procedure, whereby laid
the charge sheet against the accused before the committal
court and the committal court had passed an order under
section 209 of Code of Criminal Procedure, by following the
requisite provisions and the case has been committed to
the Sessions Court for trial.  Subsequently, the accused
has been secured to face the trial, whereby the trial Court
has framed charges against the accused for the offence
punishable under section 302 of IPC and by hearing on
charge by the learned Public Prosecutor so also defence
counsel, read over and explained the charges to the
accused in the language known to her.        However, the
accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried and
accordingly, plea of the accused has been recorded
5.    In order to prove the case of the prosecution,
the prosecution examined, in all, 15 witnesses as PW.1 to
PW.15 and got marked 16 material documents as Ex.P1 to
Ex.P16. The trial Court has called upon the accused to
enter on her defence evidence as contemplated under
section 233 of Cr.P.C., but the accused did not come
forward to adduce any defence evidence. After completion
of evidence of the prosecution witnesses, the statement of
the accused, as contemplated under the provision of
section 313 of Cr.P.C., was recorded.  The accused denied
the incriminating evidence adduced by the prosecution
witnesses against her, but not led any defence evidence on
her behalf.
6.    Subsequently,   the  trial  Court  heard   the
arguments advanced by the learned Public Prosecutor and
so also the defence counsel and after appreciating the
evidence of PW.3 – Dr.Mallikarjunaiah who treated the
child aged of two months and the evidence of PW.14 –
Dr.Rudramurthy who conducted autopsy over the dead
body of the child aged two months and issued postmortem
report – Ex.P14 and so also the evidence of         PW.15 –
S.Muniraju, Investigating Officer who conducted spot
mahazar at Ex.P2 and inquest over the dead body of two
months’ old baby at Ex.P8 and received the postmortem
report at Ex.P14, the trial Court came to the conclusion
that the prosecution has proved the case against the
accused for the offence punishable under section 302 of
IPC, but strangely even after having noticed that CW.1,
CW.3, CW.4, CW.8 and CW.9 have turned hostile and
CW.1, 8 and 9 are her close relative, the trial Court has
completely given a goby to the versions of their statements,
but has given more credentiality to the evidence of PW.3 –
Dr.Mallikarjunaiah, PW.13 – Nataraju, who drew the map
of scene of crime at Ex.P13, PW.14 – Dr.Rudramurthy who
conducted autopsy over the dead body and issued
postmortem report at Ex.P14 and PW.15 – S.Muniraju,
Investigating   Officer, while  rendering    the   conviction
judgment which is reflected in the operative portion of the
order.   The trial Court has held that the circumstances
and the evidence of the Doctor proves the case of the
prosecution and has observed that the only inference that
can be drawn from the completed chain of events is that
the accused threw the child into the river and killed it.
These are the observations that were made by the trial
Court while rendering conviction to the accused for the
offence under section 302 of IPC. The trial court relied on
the judgments reported in following cases;
i) 2007 Crl.L.J. 2282 - YOGESH NARASIN SAXENA vs.
ii) 2015(4) KCCR – SN 413(SC) - STATE OF PUNJAB
vs. BITTU & Another, and;
iii) (2017)2 SCC (Crimes) 262 - KISHORE BHADKE vs.
STATE OF MAHARASHTRA, while rendering a conviction
judgment against the accused for the offence punishable
under section 302 of IPC. It is this impugned judgment
which has been challenged in this appeal, urging the
various grounds.
7.      Heard learned counsel Sri.R.P.Chandrashekar
appearing for the appellant / accused, who has taken us
through the evidence of PW.1- Manjunatha, who is the
father of the deceased two months’ old baby and the
author     of   the  complaint   at  Ex.P1   whereby     the
circumstances were narrated in the FIR at Ex.P15, has
turned hostile to the case of the prosecution, but the trial
Court had given conviction without appreciation of the
evidence on the part of the prosecution.       Therefore, it
requires intervention in this appeal, if not intervened,
certainly gravamen of accusations would be the sufferer
and also substantial miscarriage of justice would arise. It
is  further    contended  that  the  evidence   of  PW.3   –
Dr.Mallikarjunaiah who treated the child at Renuka
Hospital, Koratagere and advised PW.1 – Manjunatha and
accused, who are the parents of the child, to get blood test
done of that baby, does not support the case of the
prosecution to prove that the accused has caused death of
the deceased two months’ old baby.
8.     PW.2 and PW.4 are the witnesses on the part of
the prosecution to prove the last scene theory. But this
theory requires to be established by the prosecution by
facilitating worthwhile evidence, but in the case on hand,
both PW.2 and PW.4 have turned hostile to the case of the
prosecution theory. They are the most material witnesses
in respect of the offences leveled against the accused, but
PW.2 and PW.4 did not support the case of the prosecution
to any extent, but this grave discrepancy has not been
taken into consideration and also not properly appreciated
by the trial Court and conviction has been rendered by the
trial Court, therefore, on this count alone, it requires to be
intervened in this appeal, by considering the grounds as
urged therein by referring to the evidence of PW.2 and
PW.4 inclusive of the evidence of PW.5, PW.6 and PW.7.
PW.5 to PW.7 are the panch witnesses in respect of
inquest (Ex.P8) done over the dead body of girl baby aged
about two months, but nothing incriminating against this
accused is forthcoming on the part of the prosecution by
facilitating worthwhile evidence. Even PW.8, PW.9, PW.10
and PW.11 have been subjected to examination on the part
of the prosecution who were present during the inquest
done over the dead body of girl baby aged about two
months, but these witnesses have also turned around the
fulcrum of the facts of the inquest proceedings at Ex.P8.
Even though they are the material witnesses on the part of
the prosecution, they did not withstood examination done
on the part of the prosecution to prove the guilt against the
accused.    PW.12, who is one of the witnesses, has been
subjected to examination in respect of spot mahazar at
Ex.P2. Even this witness has also not withstood relating
to the incriminating facts as narrated or stated in the spot
mahazar said to have been conducted by PW.15 being an
Investigating Officer. PW.13 being the Engineer who drew
the map of scene of crime as per Ex.P13, nothing
incriminating has been elicited by the prosecution to prove
the guilt against the accused. PW.14 being the Doctor who
conducted autopsy over the dead body and issued
postmortem report as per Ex.P14, nothing worthwhile has
been elicited by the prosecution. But the trial Court has
given more credentiality to the evidence of PW.14 –
Dr.Rudramurthy      who   is the   Doctor   who    conducted
postmortem, PW.15 – S.Muniraju who is the Investigating
Officer and PW.3 – Dr.Mallikarjunaiah, being the Doctor
who provided treatment to that baby aged of two months,
but the gravamen of the accusations is the sufferer, who is
in judicial custody for almost six years since from the date
of arrest.  Even though there is no worthwhile evidence
which has been facilitated by the prosecution, despite of
which conviction has been held by the trial Court.
Therefore, in this appeal, it requires to be intervened by
considering the grounds as urged therein, if not, the
accused would be the sufferer and there shall be
substantial miscarriage of justice. On all these premises,
learned counsel for the appellant / accused emphatically
submitted for consideration of the grounds as urged in this
appeal and sought for intervention and consequently
setting aside the judgment of conviction and order of
sentence rendered by the trial Court in S.C.No.5051/2016
and to acquit the accused of the offence punishable under
section 302 of IPC.
9.   On the other hand, Sri.Vijaykumar Majage,
learned Addl. SPP appearing for State, has taken us
through the evidence of PW.3 – Dr.Mallikarjunaiah being
the Doctor who provided the treatment to the girl baby
aged two months who was suffering from some sort of
respiratory problem and also epilepsy, for that reason the
parents namely PW.1 – Manjunatha and accused Kavitha,
who is none other than the genital mother of that baby,
have taken the baby to the Renuka Hospital at Koratagere,
where the Doctor - PW.3 had given treatment and gave
advice to the parents that the child requires to be
subjected to blood test, but the accused Kavitha who is
mother of the deceased baby aged of two months, threw
that baby into the Suvarnamukhi river which is situated
by the side of Koratagere town on 24.08.2016 at around
4.00 p.m.    The allegation is the child had respiratory
problem and also epilepsy and accused was not getting
proper milk to feed that child and this was the intention
kept in her mind which made her to throw the child into
Suvarnamukhi river and cause her death.         This is the
theory put forth by the prosecution and same has been
established by the prosecution by facilitating the evidence
through PW.3 – Dr.Mallikarjunaiah who gave treatment to
the baby and PW.14 – Dr.Rudramurthy who conducted
autopsy over the dead body at Ex.P14 and PW.15 –
S.Muniraju, Investigating Officer, who laid charge-sheet
against the accused, drew the spot mahazar at Ex.P2 and
conducted the inquest mahazar at Ex.P8, these are the
evidence appreciated by the trial Court and the entire
evidence available on record has led conjunctively to the
only inference that can be drawn is the guilt of the
accused.    Therefore the very accused Kavitha threw the
child into the Suvarnamukhi river with an intention to
killing the child knowing fully that the child of two months
of age would drown in the river and die, as the accused
thought that the child was suffering with breathing
problem and epilepsy and she had no enough milk to feed
that child. Therefore, the prosecution has facilitated the
evidence and has successfully proved its allegation made
against the accused. The same has been appreciated by
the trial Court while rendering a conviction for the offence
punishable under section 302 of IPC and several citations
were also stated in the impugned judgment at para
Nos.44, 45, 46, 47 and 48.      Therefore, in this appeal, it
does not call for any interference and no warranting
circumstances would arise for intervention, re-appreciation
of the evidence and also re-visiting the impugned judgment
of conviction rendered by the trial Court and more over,
the child of two months’ age was thrown into the river
merely because the child was suffering with respiratory
problem and also epilepsy, these are all the evidence which
have been forthcoming on part of the prosecution.        The
accused is none other than the mother of the deceased
child aged of two months. Therefore, in this appeal, it does
not call for any interference and there is no perversity and
illegality noticed in the impugned judgment of conviction
and consequently, the appeal deserves to be rejected being
devoid of merits.    On these premises, learned Addl. SPP
appearing for State is seeking for dismissal of this appeal.
10.   We have gone through the entire evidence of
the prosecution i.e., PW.1 to PW.15 and so also material
documents, but strangely, the trial Court has given more
credentiality to the evidence of PW.14 – Dr.Rudramurthy
who conducted autopsy over the dead body and issued
postmortem report at Ex.P14 and opined that the death
was due to asphyxia as a result of drowning and more
credentiality   is  given  to  the  evidence    of  PW.15    –
S.Muniraju being an IO, who conducted investigation,
recorded the voluntary statement of the accused at Ex.P16
and based upon her voluntary statement, conducted spot
panchanama at Ex.P2, inquest mahazar at Ex.P8 and also
recorded statement of witnesses.
11.   PW.1 – Manjunatha is the author of the
complaint at Ex.P1 and he         did not withstood the
averments made in the complaint and even PW.5, PW.6
and PW.7 who are the panch witnesses have been secured
and in their presence, panchanama has been drawn by
PW.15 at Ex.P8.      But they did not support the case of
prosecution to any extent and the same has been seen in
their evidence itself. Ex.P2 – spot panchanama has been
drawn by PW.15 being an IO in the presence of PW.7 –
Adinarayana and PW.12 – Hanumantharayappa. However,
the entire case has been revolving around the evidence of
PW.3 – Dr.Mallikarjunaiah who provided treatment to the
deceased child, which was brought by PW.1 and also his
wife Kavitha, who is arraigned as an accused, as the child
was suffering with respiratory problem and also epilepsy
and more so, Kavitha being the mother of the child was not
getting adequate milk to feed her child.     These are the
things as according to the theory of the prosecution that
the accused Kavitha was having an intention to throw that
baby   into  the  Suvarnamukhi     river  by  the  side   of
Koratagere town on 24.08.2016. Even prior to the child
aged of two months, the aforesaid Kavitha, being arraigned
as an accused, had given birth to a child who is aged of six
years, at the time the criminal law was set into motion by
receipt of a complaint at Ex.P1 by PW.1 – Manjunatha.
PW.9, who is also subjected to examination on the part of
the prosecution, being secured as a witness and in whose
presence, inquest proceedings were held over the dead
body of child aged of two months at Ex.P8 and whose
statement was recorded as per Ex.P10 at the time of
inquest held over the      dead body whereby PW.1 –
Manjunatha who was secured by the Investigating Agency
by telephonical information to him on 24.08.2016 at
around 9.00 p.m. that he has told that he and accused
had taken the child to Renuka Hospital at Koratagere as
there was some respiratory problem to the child and the
Doctor who had examined the child, told the parents of the
child to get the blood test of the child done and after giving
the blood for blood test as per the advice made by Doctor –
PW.3 – Dr.Mallikarjunaiah, they had returned to the
hospital and at around 3.00 p.m., the accused Kavitha
gone out along with the child aged two months and when
she did not return, PW.1 – Manjunatha searched for them
everywhere. At about 6.30 p.m., when Manjunatha went
to Koratagere bus stand area, he noticed his wife Kavitha
sitting there and when he questioned her about the child,
she told him that somebody closed her mouth and took
away the child and the jewelry.      Later he along with his
wife, went to the police station and informed the police,
then the PSI asked her to show the place where the alleged
incident took place and the PSI along with his staff were
taken to the spot, again when the accused Kavitha was
questioned to tell the truth, the accused told that she does
not get enough milk to feed the baby aged of two months
and that baby was suffering with respiratory problem and
also epilepsy. Therefore, at about 4.00 p.m., she took the
child aged of two months to the river side near a house
situated in Koratagere and threw the child into the river
and by saying so, she took the complainant and the police
to the aforesaid spot and there they found the baby
floating in the river and had died. Though this theory has
been put on the part of the prosecution, but PW.1 –
Manjunatha, who is the author of the complaint – Ex.P1,
by securing certain information about the child of two
months from his wife - accused Kavitha and thereafter
initiated criminal prosecution against the accused by filing
complaint at Ex.P1, but PW.1 has turned around and he is
treated as hostile to the case of the prosecution as he has
stated in his evidence that he does not know how the child
had died and he has not given any statement to the police
regarding the death of the child, but he has specifically
admitted in his evidence that he is the husband of the
accused and hence it is clear that he wants to hide the
truth. Thus if other evidence proves the prosecution case,
the hostilities of these witnesses were also appreciated by
the trial court, but not proved fatal to the case of the
prosecution.    This was also an observation made by the
trial Court while assessing the evidence of PW.1, PW.14
and PW.15, but the entire case is rested on circumstantial
evidence    and   that   each    circumstance   should    be
established by the prosecution without giving any room to
12.   Therefore, it is deemed appropriate to refer to
the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of
LALIT KUMAR & Others vs. SUPERINTENDENT &
REMEMBRANCER         reported in AIR     1989    SC   2134,
wherein it is held that the power of an Appellate Court to
review evidence in appeals against acquittal is as extensive
as its power in appeals against convictions, but Appellate
Court should always be re-appreciating the evidence and
revisiting the entire evidence as well as marking of the
documents on their part to prove the guilt against the
accused beyond all reasonable doubt. But, in the instant
case, the Trial Court has given more credentiality to the
evidence of PW.3, PW.14 and PW.15.          Therefore, it is
deemed appropriate to refer to section 3 of the Indian
13.   Even last seen theory requires corroboration.
Accused persons cannot be convicted solely on the basis of
the evidence of last seen together with the deceased and it
was extensively addressed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court
of India in a judgment of AIR 2018 SC 2027 in the case of
NAVANEETHAKRISHNAN vs. STATE, By Inspector of
14.    In case of circumstantial evidence, the onus
lies upon the prosecution to prove the complete chain of
events which shall undoubtedly point towards guilt of the
accused.      It was also extensively addressed by the
judgment rendered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India
reported    in   AIR    2012   SC    2435   in  the  case of
SAHADEVAN vs. STATE OF TAMIL NADU.
15.    It is relevant to refer to one more judgment in
the case of WAKKAR vs. STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH
reported in 2011 Crl.L.J. 1639, the principle for basing a
conviction on the basis of the circumstantial evidence is
that each and every incriminating circumstance must be
clearly established by reliable and clinching evidence and
the circumstances so proved must form a chain of events
from which the only irresistible conclusion about the guilt
of the accused can be safely drawn and no other
hypothesis against the guilt is possible.
16.   Insofar as the circumstantial evidence on the
part of the prosecution, it is the duty of the Court to
scrutinize the evidence carefully and to see that acceptable
evidence is accepted and the same is extensively addressed
by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in a judgment in
the  case    of STATE     OF   GUJARAT      v.  GANDABHAI
GOVINDBHAI reported in of 2000 Crl.L.J 92 (Gujarat).
17.   Where    there   are   material    contradictions
creating some reasonable doubt in a reasonable mind,
such eyewitnesses cannot be relied upon to base their
evidence in the conviction of accused and this view is
expressed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of
NATHIA vs. STATE OF RAJASTAN reported in 1999
18.   These are all the reliances which are required
in the instant appeal, preferred by the appellant / accused
being gravamen of the accusation, while re-appreciating
the evidence on record and so also revisiting the impugned
judgment of conviction and order of sentence.        In the
instant case, though the prosecution has examined PW.1
to PW.15 and got marked Ex.P1 to Ex.P16, but the trial
Court has given more credentiality to the evidence of PW.3
– Dr.Mallikarjunaiah, who had provided treatment to the
child aged of two months and evidence of PW.14 –
Dr.Rudramurthy who conducted autopsy over the dead
body of the child aged of two months and PW.15 –
S.Muniraju, being an Investigating Officer who conducted
entire investigation and laid charge-sheet against the
accused and on basis of the evidence of those witnesses,
the trial Court has arrived at the conclusion that the
prosecution has proved the guilt against the accused
beyond all reasonable doubt, which view, in the instant
appeal, requires to be re-appreciated and the impugned
judgment of conviction and order of sentence requires to
be revisited.  If re-appreciation as well as revisiting the
impugned judgment is not done by this Court, certainly
there shall be some substantial miscarriage of justice
against the accused being a gravamen of accusations.
Therefore, it is deemed to be appropriate to state that merit
of the statement is important. It is well known principle of
law that reliance can be based on the solitary statement of
a witness if the court comes to the conclusion that the said
statement is the true and also correct version of the case of
the prosecution. It was also extensively addressed by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case of RAJA vs.
STATE reported in (1997) 2 Crimes 175.
19.   Similarly the Court is always expected of
quality of evidence and not the quantity of evidence and
this aspect also has been addressed by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India extensively in a judgment in the
case of STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH vs. KISHANPAL
reported in 2008 (8) JT 650.       Even section 134 of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 it is envisaged that it is the
quality and not the quantity which determines the
adequacy of evidence. It was also extensively addressed by
the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the judgment in the
case    of    LAXMIBAI      (Dead)   Through       LRs.    V.
BHAGWANTBURA (Dead) Through LRs. reported in AIR
20.    In   the   instant    case,    the   importance   of
corroboration of the evidence which was facilitated by the
prosecution, it must be positive, cogent, consistent and
probabalized that the accused had committed the murder
of the deceased. But in the instant case, Kavitha who is
none other than the mother of the deceased baby aged two
months, though the prosecution in their case put on trial
of this accused, subjected examination of PW.1 to PW.15,
but no worthwhile evidence has been facilitated by the
prosecution for securing the conviction of the accused for
the offence under section 302 of Indian Penal Code, 1860.
Therefore, in this appeal it requires intervention.        If not
intervened     by   re-appreciation   of    evidence   and   also
revisiting judgment of conviction and order of sentence,
certainly there shall be some substantial miscarriage of
justice   to   the   accused,    who     is   gravamen   of   the
21.   In the light of the aforesaid reasons and
findings, we are of the opinion that the appeal deserves
consideration keeping in view the grounds urged and also
referring the evidence which is contended by the learned
counsel   for  the   appellant   and  more    so  there   are
substances in the contentions made by the learned
counsel for the appellant seeking setting aside of the
judgment of conviction and order of sentence rendered by
the trial Court.   Accordingly, the appeal deserves to be
22.   In view of the aforesaid reasons, we proceed to
pass the following:-
i)    The   appeal   preferred  by  the   appellant   /
accused under Section 374(2) of Cr.P.C. is hereby allowed.
ii)   Consequently,    the   impugned    judgment    of
conviction and order of sentence rendered by the learned
IV Addl. District and Sessions Judge, Madhugiri, in
S.C.No.5051/2016 dated 22.07.2017 is hereby set-aside.
iii)   Consequent upon setting aside the impugned
judgment of conviction       and    order   of sentence, the
appellant / accused is acquitted of the offence punishable
under Section 302 of IPC which was charged against her.
iv)    The fine amount, if any, deposited by the
appellant / accused shall be returned to her, on due
identification. Accordingly, it is ordered.
v)     Registry of this Court is directed to forward
copy of the operative portion of the judgment to the
concerned Jail authority with a direction to release the
appellant/accused forthwith, if she is not required in any
other case. Accordingly, it is directed.