State of Rajasthan Through Public Prosecutor
1.    While hearing this anticipatory bail application, the question
of law arose whether an anticipatory bail application would be
maintainable by an accused who is already arrested and is in
judicial custody in relation to another FIR registered against him
for the offences mentioned therein.
2.    Learned counsel for the petitioner and learned counsel for
the complainant as well as learned Public Prosecutor had advanced
their submissions.
3.   It would therefore be apposite to first note down the relevant
provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure (“Cr.P.C.”). Sections 41,
46, 81, 105 and Section 438 Cr.P.C. are as under:
“41. When police may arrest without warrant.—(1) Any police
officer may without an order from a Magistrate and without a
1(a) who commits, in the presence of a police officer, a cognizable
(b) against whom a reasonable complaint has been made, or credible
information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists that
he    has   committed      a    cognizable      offence     punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may be less than seven years or
which may extend to seven years whether with or without fine, if the
following conditions are satisfied, namely:—
(i) the police officer has reason to believe on the basis of such
complaint, information, or suspicion that such person has committed
(ii) the police officer is satisfied that such arrest is necessary—
(a) to prevent such person from committing any further offence; or
(b) for proper investigation of the offence; or
(c) to prevent such person from causing the evidence of the offence
to disappear or tampering with such evidence in any manner; or
(d) to prevent such person from making any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to
dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to the police
(e) as unless such person is arrested, his presence in the Court
whenever required cannot be ensured, and the police officer shall
record while making such arrest, his reasons in writing:
Provided that a police officer shall, in all cases where the arrest of a
person is not required under the provisions of this sub-section,
record the reasons in writing for not making the arrest.
(ba) against whom credible information has been received that he
has committed a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to more than seven years whether with
or without fine or with death sentence and the police officer has
reason to believe on the basis of that information that such person
(c) who has been proclaimed as an offender either under this Code
(d) in whose possession anything is found which may reasonably be
suspected to be stolen property and who may reasonably be
suspected of having committed an offence with reference to such
(e) who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his duty,
or who has escaped, or attempts to escape, from lawful custody; or
(f) who is reasonably suspected of being a deserter from any of the
(g) who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable
complaint has been made, or credible information has been received,
or a reasonable suspicion exists, of his having been concerned in,
any act committed at any place out of India which, if committed in
India, would have been punishable as an offence, and for which he
is, under any law relating to extradition, or otherwise, liable to be
apprehended or detained in custody in India; or
(h) who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any rule
(i) for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, has been
received from another police officer, provided that the requisition
specifies the person to be arrested and the offence or other cause for
which the arrest is to be made and it appears therefrom that the
person might lawfully be arrested without a warrant by the officer
who issued the requisition.
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 42, no person concerned in a
non-cognizable offence or against whom a complaint has been made
or credible information has been received or reasonable suspicion
exists of his having so concerned, shall be arrested except under a
warrant or order of a Magistrate.
46. Arrest how made.—(1) In making an arrest the police officer or
other person making the same shall actually touch or confine the
body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a submission to the
Provided that where a woman is to be arrested, unless the
circumstances indicate to the contrary, her submission to custody on
an oral intimation of arrest shall be presumed and, unless the
circumstances otherwise require or unless the police officer is a
female, the police officer shall not touch the person of the woman
for making her arrest.
(2) If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest him, or
attempts to evade the arrest, such police officer or other person may
use all means necessary to effect the arrest.
(3) Nothing in this section gives a right to cause the death of a
person who is not accused of an offence punishable with death or
with imprisonment for life.
(4) Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall be arrested
after sunset and before sunrise, and where such exceptional
circumstances exist, the woman police officer shall, by making a
written report, obtain the prior permission of the Judicial Magistrate
of the first class within whose local jurisdiction the offence is
committed or the arrest is to be made.
81. Procedure by Magistrate before whom such person arrested
is    brought.—(1)      The     Executive        Magistrate  or  District
Superintendent of Police or Commissioner of Police shall, if the
person arrested appears to be the person intended by the Court
which issued the warrant, direct his removal in custody to such
Provided that, if the offence is bailable, and such person is ready and
willing to give bail to the satisfaction of such Magistrate, District
Superintendent or Commissioner, or a direction has been endorsed
under section 71 on the warrant and such person is ready and willing
to give the security required by such direction, the Magistrate,
District Superintendent or Commissioner shall take such bail or
security, as the case may be, and forward the bond, to the Court
Provided further that if the offence is a non-bailable one, it shall be
lawful for the Chief Judicial Magistrate (subject to the provisions of
section 437), or the Sessions Judge, of the district in which the arrest
is made on consideration of the information and the documents
referred to in sub-section (2) of section 78, to release such person on
(2) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a police
officer from taking security under section 71.
105. Reciprocal arrangements regarding processes.—(1) Where a
Court in the territories to which this Code extends (hereafter in this
section referred to as the said territories) desires that—
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person, or
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a
issued by it shall be served or executed at any place,—
(i) within the local jurisdiction of a Court in any State or area in
India outside the said territories, it may send such summons or
warrant in duplicate by post or otherwise, to the presiding officer of
that Court to be served or executed; and where any summons
referred to in clause (a) or clause (c) has been so served, the
provisions of section 68 shall apply in relation to such summons as
if the presiding officer of the Court to whom it is sent were a
(ii) in any country or place outside India in respect of which
arrangements have been made by the Central Government with the
Government of such country or place for service or execution of
summons or warrant in relation to criminal matters (hereafter in this
section referred to as the contracting State), it may send such
summons or warrant in duplicate in such form, directed to such
Court, Judge or Magistrate, and send to such authority for
transmission, as the Central Government may, by notification,
specify in this behalf.
(2) Where a Court in the said territories has received for service or
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person, or
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a
(i) a Court in any State or area in India outside the said territories;
(ii) a Court, Judge or Magistrate in a contracting State,
it shall cause the same to be served or executed as if it were a
summons or warrant received by it from another Court in the said
territories for service or execution within its local jurisdiction; and
(i) a warrant of arrest has been executed, the person arrested shall,
so far as possible, be dealt with in accordance with the procedure
(ii) a search-warrant has been executed, the things found in the
search shall, so far as possible, be dealt with in accordance with the
Provided that in a case where a summons or search-warrant received
from a contracting State has been executed, the documents or things
produced or things found in the search shall be forwarded to the
Court issuing the summons or search-warrant through such authority
as the Central Government may, by notification, specify in this
438. Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest.—
(1) When any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested
on an accusation of having committed a non-bailable offence, he
may apply to the High Court or the Court of Session for a direction
under this section that in the event of such arrest he shall be
released on bail; and that court may, after taking into consideration
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether
he has previously undergone imprisonment on conviction by a court
(iii) the possibility of applicant to flee from justice; and
(iv) where the accusation has been made with the object of injuring
or humiliating the applicant by having him so arrested, either reject
the application forthwith or issue an interim order for the grant of
Provided that, where the High Court or, as the case may be, the
Court of Session has not passed any interim order under this sub-
section or has rejected the application for grant of anticipatory bail,
it shall be open to an officer incharge of a police station to arrest,
without warrant the applicant on the basis of the accusation
apprehended in such application.
(1A) Where the court grants an interim order under sub-section (1),
it shall forthwith cause a notice being not less than seven days
notice, together with a copy of such order to be served on the Public
Prosecutor and the Superintendent of Police, with a view to give the
Public Prosecutor a reasonable opportunity of being heard when the
application shall be finally heard by the court.
(1B) The presence of the applicant seeking anticipatory bail shall be
obligatory at the time of final hearing of the application and passing
of final order by the court, if on an application made to it by the
Public Prosecutor, the court considers such presence necessary in
the interest of justice.
(2) When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a direction
under sub-section (1), it may include such conditions in such
directions in the light of the facts of the particular case, as it may
(i) a condition that the person shall make himself available for
interrogation by a police officer as and when required;
(ii) a condition that the person shall not, directly or indirectly, make
any inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the
facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to
(iii) a condition that the person shall not leave India without the
(iv) such other condition as may be imposed under sub-section (3)
of section 437, as if the bail were granted under that section.
(3) If such person is thereafter arrested without warrant by an officer
in charge of a police station on such accusation, and is prepared
either at the time of arrest or at any time while in the custody of
such officer to give bail, he shall be released on bail; and if a
Magistrate taking cognizance of such offence decides that a warrant
should be issued in the first instance against that person, he shall
issue a bailable warrant in conformity with the direction of the Court
under sub-section (1).
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to any case involving the
arrest of any person on accusation of having committed an offence
under sub-section (3) of section 376 or section 376AB or section
376DA or section 376DB of the Indian Penal Code.”
4.    Learned     counsel      for     the     petitioner        submits    that  an
anticipatory bail application would be maintainable even if a
person is arrested in another case or in a similar case as he
cannot be prevented from seeking restrained order from the court
in the present FIR.
5.    Learned    counsel      for the petitioner               has   relied  on the
judgments of the Supreme Court in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia etc.,
Vs. The State of Punjab, reported in AIR 1980 SC 1632,
Central Bureau of Investigation, Special Investigation Cell-
I, New Delhi Vs. Anupam J. Kulkarni, reported in (1992) 3
SCC 141, Sushila Aggarwal & Ors. Vs. State (NCT of Delhi)
& Anr., reported in (2020) 5 SCC 1, Sundeep Kumar Bafna
Vs. State of Maharashtra & Anr., reported in (2014) 16 SCC
623. and in State of W.B. Vs. Dinesh Dalmia, reported in
(2007) 5 SCC 773. He also relied on judgment of this Court in
State of Rajasthan Vs. Santosh Yadav, reported in (2005) 1
RLW 538 and judgment of Madras High Court in State by
Inspector of Police, Anti Land Grabbing Special Cell, City
M. Anbhazhagan, reported in 2012 (1) MWN (Cr.) 4 (DB).
He also relied on the order of Punjab & Haryana High Court in
Gurjant     Singh      Vs.     State        of      Punjab,       Criminal     Misc.
No.10829/2011, decided on 11.05.2011 and the order of
Bombay High Court in Vikram Sujit Das & Anr. Vs. State of
Maharashtra, 2020 SCC OnLine Bom 11401 to submit that an
anticipatory bail application under Section 438 Cr.P.C. would be
6.    Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the complainant
submits that once a person stands already arrested, would not be
entitled for moving an anticipatory bail application in another case
as he stands already arrested and has to be produced by way of
production warrant in any other case where it is alleged that he
has committed a non-bailable cognizable offence.
7.    Learned counsel has relied on the judgment of the Supreme
Court in Narinderjit Singh Sahni & Anr. Vs. Union of India &
Ors.,   reported   in    (2002)         2    SCC        210,  Directorate    of
Enforcement Vs. Deepak Mahajan & Anr., reported in
8.    I have considered the submissions and also examined the
law as laid down by the Supreme Court in the aforesaid judgments
cited by both the parties.
9.    However, it appears that the issue which has been raised
before this Court, has not been addressed at any point of time by
the Supreme Court or by any other High Court. Although two
orders have been placed by learned counsel for the petitioner of
Punjab & Haryana High Court and Bombay High Court but in both
the cases the court did not examine whether the bail application
was maintainable or not and simply granted anticipatory bail to
the accused who stood already arrested and was confined to
custody in another case.
10.   Section 438 Cr.P.C. as quoted above, provides an opportunity
to a person to move an application for direction that if he is to be
arrested in a case and the said person has reasons to believe that
he shall be arrested then he may be released on bail and the said
person if granted anticipatory bail, it would be on the conditions as
specified under Section 438 Cr.P.C.
11.   In Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia etc. (supra), the Supreme Court
“7. The facility which Section 438 affords is generally referred to as
'anticipatory bail', an expression which was used by the Law
Commission in its 41st report. Neither the section nor its marginal
note so describes it but, the expression 'anticipatory bail' is a
convenient mode of conveying that it is possible to apply for bail in
anticipation of arrest. Any order of bail can, of course, be effective
only from the time of arrest because, to grant bail, as stated in
Wharton's Law Lexicon, is to 'set at liberty a person arrested or
imprisoned, on security being taken for his appearance'. Thus, bail is
basically release from restraint, more particularly, release from the
custody of the police. The act of arrest directly affects freedom of
movement of the person arrested by the police, and speaking
generally, an order of bail gives back to the accused that freedom on
condition that he will appear to take his trial. Personal recognisance,
suretyship bonds and such other modalities are the means by which
an assurance is secured from the accused that though he has been
released on bail, he will present himself at the trial of offence or
offences of which he is charged and for which he was arrested. The
distinction between an ordinary order of bail and an order of
anticipatory bail is that whereas the former is granted after arrest
and therefore means release from the custody of the police, the latter
is granted in anticipation of arrest and is therefore effective at the
very moment of arrest. Police custody is an inevitable concomitant
of arrest for non-bailable offences. An order of anticipatory bail
constitutes, so to say, an insurance against police custody following
upon arrest for offence or offences in respect of which the order is
issued. In other words, unlike a post-arrest order of bail, it is a pre-
arrest legal process which directs that if the person in whose favour
it is issued is thereafter arrested on the accusation in respect of
which the direction is issued, he shall be released on bail. Section
46(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure which deals with how
arrests are to be made, provides that in making the arrest, the police
officer or other person making the arrest "shall actually touch or
confine the body of the person to be arrested, unless there be a
submission to the custody by word or action". A direction under
section 438 is intended to confer conditional immunity from this
'touch' or confinement.”
12.  Again the Supreme Court in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia etc.
“35. Section 438(1) of the Code lays down a condition which has to
be satisfied before anticipatory bail can be granted. The applicant
must show that he has "reason to believe" that he may be arrested
for a non-bailable offence. The use of the expression "reason to
believe" shows that the belief that the applicant may be so arrested
must be founded on reasonable grounds. Mere 'fear' is not 'belief',
for which reason it is not enough for the applicant to show that he
has some sort of a vague apprehension that some one is going to
make an accusation against him, in pursuance of which he may be
arrested. The grounds on which the belief of the applicant is based
that he may be arrested for a non- bailable offence, must be capable
of being examined by the court objectively, because it is then alone
that the court can determine whether the applicant has reason to
believe that he may be so arrested. Section 438(1), therefore, cannot
be invoked on the basis of vague and general allegations, as if to
arm oneself in perpetuity against a possible arrest. Otherwise, the
number of applications for anticipatory bail will be as large as, at
any rate, the adult populace. Anticipatory bail is a device to secure
the individual's liberty; it is neither a passport to the commission of
crimes nor a shield against any and all kinds of accusations, likely or
unlikely.
Secondly, if an application for anticipatory bail is made to the High
Court or the Court of Session it must apply its own mind to the
question and decide whether a case has been made out for granting
such relief. It cannot leave the question for the decision of the
Magistrate concerned under Section 437 of the Code, as and when
an occasion arises. Such a course will defeat the very object of
Thirdly, the filing of a First Information Report is not a condition
precedent to the exercise of the power under Section 438. The
imminence of a likely arrest founded on a reasonable belief can be
shown to exist even if an F.I.R. is not yet filed.
Fourthly, anticipatory bail can be granted even after an F.I.R. is
filed, so long as the applicant has not been arrested.
Fifthly, the provisions of Section 438 cannot be invoked after the
arrest of the accused. The grant of "anticipatory bail" to an accused
who is under arrest involves a contradiction in terms, in so far as the
offence or offences for which he is arrested, are concerned. After
arrest, the accused must seek his remedy under Section 437 or
Section 439 of the Code, if he wants to be released on bail in respect
of the offence or offences for which he is arrested.”
13.   Thus, where the accused has already been arrested, the
anticipatory bail application would not lie in the said case.
However, the question still remains that if a person is to be
arrested in another case other than for which he had already been
arrested whether anticipatory bail would lie. In Sushila Aggarwal
(supra), the Constitution Bench was examining the following
“(1) Whether the protection granted to a person under Section 438
CrPC should be limited to a fixed period so as to enable the person
to surrender before the trial court and seek regular bail.
(2) Whether the life of an anticipatory bail should end at the time
and stage when the accused is summoned by the court.”
14.   The Constitution Bench speaking through M.R. Shah, J.
“7.1 At the outset, it is required to be noted that as such the
expression “anticipatory bail” has not been defined in the Code. As
observed by this Court in Balchand Jain, “anticipatory bail” means
“bail in anticipation of arrest”. As held by this Court, the expression
“anticipatory bail” is a misnomer inasmuch as it is not as if bail is
presently granted by the Court in anticipation of arrest. An
application for “anticipatory bail” in anticipation of arrest could be
moved by the accused at a stage before an FIR is filed or at a stage
when FIR is registered but the charge sheet has not been filed and
the investigation is in progress or at a stage after the investigation is
concluded. Power to grant “anticipatory bail” under Section 438
Cr.P.C. vests only with the Court of Sessions or the High Court.
Therefore, ultimately it is for the court concerned to consider the
application for “anticipatory bail” and while granting the
“anticipatory bail” it is ultimately for the court concerned to impose
conditions including the limited period of “anticipatory bail”,
depends upon the stages at which the application for anticipatory
bail is moved. A person in whose favour a pre-arrest bail order is
made under Section 438 Cr.P.C. has to be arrested. However, once
there is an order of pre-arrest bail/anticipatory bail, as and when he
is arrested he has to be released on bail. Otherwise, there is no
distinction or difference between the pre-arrest bail order under
Section 438 and the bail order under Sections 437 & 439 Cr.P.C.
The only difference between the pre-arrest bail order under Section
438 and the bail order under Sections 437 and 439 is the stages at
which the bail order is passed. The bail order under Section 438
Cr.P.C. is prior to his arrest and in anticipation of his arrest and the
order of bail under Sections 437 and 439 is after a person is arrested.
A bare reading of Section 438 Cr.P.C. shows that there is nothing in
the language of the Section which goes to show that the pre-arrest
bail granted under Section 438 has to be time-bound. The position is
the same as in Section 437 and Section 439 Cr.P.C.
7.2 While considering the issues referred to a larger Bench, referred
to hereinabove, the decision of the Constitution Bench of this Court
in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia (supra) is required to be referred to and
considered in detail. The matter before the Constitution Bench in the
case of Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia (supra) was arising out of the
decision of the Full Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court.
The High Court rejected the application for bail after summarising,
what according to it was the true legal position, thus,
“(1) The power under Section 438, Criminal Procedure Code, is of
an extraordinary character and must be exercised sparingly in
(2) Neither Section 438 nor any other provision of the Code
authorises the grant of blanket anticipatory bail for offences not yet
committed or with regard to accusations not so far levelled.
(3) The said power is not unguided or uncanalised but all the
limitations imposed in the preceding Section 437, are implicit
therein and must be read into Section 438.
(4) In addition to the limitations mentioned in Section 437, the
petitioner must make out a special case for the exercise of the power
to grant anticipatory bail.
(5) Where a legitimate case for the remand of the offender to the
police custody under Section 167(2) can be made out by the
investigating agency or a reasonable claim to secure incriminating
material from information likely to be received from the offender
under Section 27 of the Evidence Act can be made out, the power
under Section 438 should not be exercised.
(6) The discretion under Section 438 cannot be exercised with
regard to offences punishable with death or imprisonment for life
unless the court at that very stage is satisfied that such a charge
appears to be false or groundless.
(7) The larger interest of the public and State demand that in serious
cases like economic offences involving blatant corruption at the
higher rungs of the executive and political power, the discretion
under Section 438 of the Code should not be exercised; and
(8) Mere general allegations of mala fides in the petition are
inadequate. The court must be satisfied on materials before it that
the allegations of mala fides are substantial and the accusation
appears to be false and groundless.”
15.  In the concurring judgment delivered by Ravindra Bhat, J.,
“47. Section 438 Cr.PC provides for the issuance of directions for
the grant of bail to a person apprehending arrest. The Criminal
Procedure Code, 1973 replaced the old code of 1898. The old code
did not provide for any corresponding provision to Section 438 of
the code of 1973. Under the old code, there was a sharp difference
of opinion amongst the various High Courts on the question as to
whether courts had the inherent power to pass an order of bail in
anticipation of arrest. The predominant position was that courts did
not have such a power. Subsequently, the need for various
amendments to make the code more comprehensive resulted in the
enactment of the Code of Criminal Procedure in 1973. Interestingly,
Section 438 does not expressly use the term “anticipatory bail”; its
language instead empowers the court concerned to issue directions
for grant of bail.
56. The reason for enactment of Section 438 in the Code was
Parliamentary acceptance of the crucial underpinning of personal
liberty in a free and democratic country. Parliament wished to foster
respect for personal liberty and accord primacy to a fundamental
tenet of criminal jurisprudence, that everyone is presumed to be
innocent till he or she is found guilty. Life and liberty are the
cherished attributes of every individual. The urge for freedom is
natural to each human being. Section 438 is a procedural provision
concerned with the personal liberty of each individual, who is
entitled to the benefit of the presumption of innocence. As denial of
bail amounts to deprivation of personal liberty, the court should lean
against the imposition of unnecessary restrictions on the scope of
Section 438, especially when not imposed by the legislature. In
“35…...Anticipatory bail is a device to secure
the individual's liberty; it is neither a passport to the
commission of crimes nor a shield against any and all
kinds of accusations, likely or unlikely.”
57. The interpretation of Section 438 - that it does not encapsulate
Article 21, is erroneous. This court is of the opinion that the issue is
not whether Section 438 is an intrinsic element of Article 21: it is
rather whether that provision is part of fair procedure. As to that,
there can be no doubt that the provision for anticipatory bail is pro-
liberty and enables one anticipating arrest, a facility of approaching
the court for a direction that he or she not be arrested; it was
specifically enacted as a measure of protection against arbitrary
arrests and humiliation by the police, which Parliament itself
recognized as a widespread malaise on the part of the police.”
16.   Thus the court answered the question raised before it that
there is no time limit required to be laid down in the order of
granting anticipatory bail.
17.   The Scheme of Code of Criminal Procedure does not define
the word “arrest”. In Chapter V of Code of Criminal Procedure,
Section 41 lays down when police may arrest without warrant.
Section 41B lays down procedure of arrest and duties of officer.
Section 46 mentions how arrest is to be made.
18.   Upon reading Section 46 Cr.P.C. (supra), it is apparent that
arrest would mean to actually touch or confine the body of the
person to custody of the police officer. Section 167 Cr.P.C. lays
down that the custody may be given to the police for the purpose
of investigation (called as remand) or be sent to jail (called as
judicial custody). Thus the essential part of arrest is placing the
corpus, body of the person in custody of the police authorities
whether of a police station or before him or in a concerned jail.
19.   The natural corollary is therefore that a person who is
already in custody cannot have reasons to believe that he shall be
arrested as he stands already arrested. In view thereof, the pre-
condition of bail application to be moved under Section 438 Cr.P.C.
i.e. “reasons to believe that he may be arrested” do not survive
since a person is already arrested in another case and is in
custody whether before the police or in jail.
20.   In order to meet out such provisions, Section 105 Cr.P.C.
read with Sections 68 and 81 would apply.
21.   In Narinderjit Singh Sahni & Anr. (supra), the Apex Court did
examine somewhat a similar issue though not completely. In the
said case, writ petitions were filed under Article 32 of the
Constitution of India before the Supreme Court and the Apex
Court was confronted with twin issues – firstly pertaining to the
maintainability of the petition under Article 32 and secondly that
an order in the nature of anticipatory bail ought to be made
available to the petitioners therein with regard to all the cases
which were registered against them under Sections 407, 409, 420
and 120B IPC in various cases.
22.   Examining        the    aforesaid        aspects,         the Apex    Court   in
Narinderjit Singh Sahni & Anr. (supra) observed as under:
“49. Let us, therefore, analyse the situation in totality and consider
the plea as emphasised by the petitioners herein. The records depict
that thousands of innocent persons have fallen a prey in the
methodology of working of finance companies and firms but does
that mean and imply a denial of an opportunity of being heard or
considered - the answer however, cannot possibly be in the
affirmative. Doctrine of natural justice warrants a fair opportunity -
we do not wish even to adumbrate the issue of natural justice here
but the fact remains that the writ petitioners herein have come up
with a petition on the ground that they have not been able to obtain
benefit of the justice delivery system, reasons of which need not be
dealt with presently but the factum of not being able to obtain the
benefit and thereby it has been alleged that Article 21 stands
violated : In our view, judicial review or in other words
maintainability of the petition under Article 32 cannot possibly be
doubted in any way and as such we are unable to record our
concurrence with the submissions of the respondents in the matter.
50. Let us however, try and analyse the grievance of the petitioners
and consider as to whether there is any substance in such a
grievance. Shortly put, the petitioners' grievance, which stands
identical in all the writ petitions, stands out to be that though the
petitioners were favoured with an order of bail in one case but are
being detained by reason of production warrant in another matter
and resultantly the petitioners are languishing in the jails being
deprived of the order of grant of bail - this aspect of the matter has
been stated to be violative of Article 21. In our view, however, the
situation as noticed above does not ipso facto render it violative of
Article 21. Article 21 of the Constitution postulates deprivation of
life or personal liberty except according to the procedure established
by law. Admittedly, the protection of personal liberty stands
expanded to make the right to life under Article 21 more
meaningful, the language of the Article itself records an exception
indicating thereby that a person may be deprived of his liberty in
accordance with the procedure established by law and it is in this
sphere the courts will scrupulously observe as to whether the same
stands differently and contra as regards the procedure established by
law and in the event it is not so done, it would be a plain exercise of
judicial power to grant redress to the petitioner. While there is no
difficulty in appreciating the grievance and grant of relief in a given
case but facts are too insufficient however, to come to a conclusion
as regards the infraction of Article 21. Production warrants have
been spoken of without any details whatsoever therefor - the reason
offered is that the petitioners, in fact, are not in the know of things
being behind the prison bars and it starts pouring in from all parts of
the country and in the factual backdrop, as noticed above it is well
nigh impossible to come to a finding as regards the infraction of
Article 21 and since in the factual matrix, no infraction can be
identified and thus question of sustaining the plea of infringement of
Article 21 would not arise. In any event the liberty of the petitioners
cannot be said to have been trifled within the absence of due process
of law. Deprivation, if any cannot be claimed to be not in
accordance with due process of law.
51. On the score of anticipatory bail, it is trite knowledge that
Section 438 CrPC is made applicable only in the event of there
being an apprehension of arrest. The petitioners in the writ
petitions herein are all inside the prison bars upon arrest against
all cognizable offences, and in the wake of the aforesaid question
relieving the petitioners from unnecessary disgrace and
harassment would not arise.
52. In that view of the matter and since no infraction can be
identified, the petition also cannot be sustained as regards the issue
of anticipatory bail under Section 438.”
23.   As pointed out by learned counsel for the petitioner that
there may be cases where a person who has already been
arrested in a particular case may be faced with registering of
several FIRs by the persons who do not want him to be released
from jail and in the said circumstances, only option available is to
take anticipatory bail in other FIRs as the police would seek his
arrest in all the cases. It may be subsequently registered against
him for non-bailable offences and in such an event, there would be
infraction of his personal liberty. However, this Court does not
agree to the submissions noticed as above. Once the FIR has been
registered in relation to an offence committed against any person
by an accused, he cannot claim to be protected from offences
which he may have committed with other persons who have their
individual right of registering an FIR against such an accused. The
accused will have to face investigation and subsequent trial in
relation to each and every case individually. The question whether
he may be punished separately or jointly for other cases, is a
completely different question altogether and need not be gone
into the present case.
24.   However, keeping in view observations in Narinderjit Singh
Sahni & Anr. (supra) and considering that the purpose of
preventive arrest by a direction of the court on an application
under Section 438 Cr.P.C. would be an order in vacuum. As a
person is already in custody with the police, this Court is of the
view that such an anticipatory bail application under Section 438
Cr.P.C. would not lie and would be nothing but travesty of justice
in allowing anticipatory bail to such an accused who is already in
25.   Examining     the   issue      from      another        angle,  if such   an
application is held to be maintainable, the result would be that if
an accused is arrested say for an offence committed of abduction
and another case is registered against him for having committed
murder and third case is registered against him for having stolen
the car which was used for abduction in a different police station
and the said accused is granted anticipatory bail in respect to the
offence of stealing of the car or in respect to the offence of having
committed murder, the concerned Police Investigating Agency
where FIRs have been registered, would be prevented from
conducting individual investigation and making recoveries as
anticipatory bail once granted would continue to operate without
limitation as laid down by the Apex Court in Sushila Aggarwal
(supra). The concept of anticipatory bail as envisaged under
Section 438 Cr.P.C. would stand frustrated. The provisions of grant
of anticipatory bail are essentially to prevent the concerned person
from litigation initiated with the object of injuring and humiliating
the applicant by having him so arrested and for a person who
stands already arrested, such a factor does not remain available.
26.    In view of above discussion, this Court holds that the
anticipatory bail would not lie and would not be maintainable if a
person is already arrested and is in custody of police or judicial
custody in relation to another criminal case which may be for
similar offence or for different offences.
27.    Accordingly,  it  would       be     appropriate        that  in  all  bail
applications moved under Section 438 Cr.P.C., a footnote is added
mentioning that concerned petitioner has not been arrested and is
not in custody in any other case.
28.    In the present case, as the petitioner stands already arrested
in another case, the present bail application moved under Section
438 Cr.P.C. would not lie and is accordingly dismissed.