The Karnataka High Court has directed the Karnataka State Mental Health Authority to take appropriate and necessary steps for providing proper medical treatment to the mentally ill inmates of rehabilitation centres, aged homes, destitute centres, reception centres, asylums, orphanages centres, etc.A division bench of Chief Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi and Justice Suraj Govindaraj... The Karnataka High Court has directed the Karnataka State Mental Health Authority to take appropriate and necessary steps for providing proper medical treatment to the mentally ill inmates of rehabilitation centres, aged homes, destitute centres, reception centres, asylums, orphanages centres, etc. A division bench of Chief Justice Ritu Raj Awasthi and Justice Suraj Govindaraj while disposing of a petition filed by the Member Secretary, High Court Legal Services Committee said, "We deem it appropriate to direct the 9th respondent - Karnataka State Mental Health Authority to take appropriate and necessary steps for providing proper medical treatment to the mentally ill inmates of the aforementioned centres within period of one month from today." The direction was given after the counsel for the legal services authority informed the court that the inmates of rehabilitation centres are not receiving proper medical treatment. Advocate B V Vidyulatha informed the court that from time to time several directions have been issued to the State authorities for improving the living conditions of the inmates and considerable improvements have been made. However, more than 30% of the inmates are mentally ill and no proper treatment is being given to them. The Court noted that the petition filed in 2010 had sought directions to the respondents to immediately extend proper treatment, medical care and aid to all the inmates, forthwith improve the living conditions, periodically inspect and report regarding the amenities provided in such institutes and monitor implementation of the welfare schemes meant for the socially deprived classes of the society. A direction was also sought to provide basic amenities and improve living conditions of inmates of all rehabilitation centres where beggars, destitutes and other under privileged classes of the society are lodged in different Institutions in the State. The court on going through the petition said, "The purpose for which the Writ Petition was filed in the year 2010 has been fulfilled. The learned counsel for the petitioner herself admits that the reason for which this petition was filed in the year 2010 no more exists. However, the mental condition of the inmates in the centres aforementioned still require medical attention and as such, directions be issued to the authorities concerned." It added that, "Considering the entire aspects of the matter and going through the records, we are of the view that we cannot keep this petition alive for an indefinite period, once the cause for which it was filed no more exists, the Writ Petition needs to be disposed of. However, while disposing of this petition, we deem it appropriate to direct the 9th respondent - Karnataka State Mental Health Authority to take appropriate and necessary steps for providing proper medical treatment to the mentally ill inmates of the aforementioned centres." 