       1.    This Public Interest Litigation petition was
filed in the year 2010 seeking following reliefs:
          1. Issue   a   writ   of  mandamus,     directing
             respondents 1 to 4, 7 and 8 to immediately
             extend proper treatment, medical care and aid
            to all the inmates who are affected by gastro
            enteritis, tuberculosis, pneumonia and other
            epidemic and endemic diseases.
         2. To    issue a writ of mandamus, directing
            Respondent No.1 to 4 to forthwith improve the
            living conditions       of the inmates of all
            rehabilitation centers, aged homes, destitute
            centers, reception centers, asylums, orphanages
            and such other institutions run by the
            Government and other Organizations in
            Karnataka.
         3. To   constitute a Committee to periodically
            inspect and report regarding the amenities
            provided in such institutes and also to
            periodically monitor implementation of the
            welfare schemes meant for the socially deprived
            classes of the society.
         4. To constitute a fact finding Committee to
            enquire into the disaster to known what led to
            loss of human life and misery and to suggest
            remedial measures to check recurrence of such
            incidents in future besides initiating appropriate
            action against those responsible for the
            incident.
         5. And to issue such other necessary directions as
            deems fit in the circumstances of the case
            directing the Respondents to provide basic
            amenities and improve living conditions of
            inmates of all rehabilitation centers where
            beggars, destitutes and other under privileged
            classes of the society are lodged in different
            Institutions in the State of Karnataka.
2.   The learned counsel for the petitioner informs
that from time to time several directions have been
issued by this Court to the State authorities for
improving the living conditions of the inmates of
rehabilitation centres, aged homes, destitute centres,
reception centres, asylums, orphanages centres and
etc. Thereafter considerable improvements have been
made in the living conditions of the inmates. However,
more than 30% of the inmates are mentally ill and no
proper treatment is being given to them.
       3.   We have considered the submissions made
by the learned counsel for the petitioner and gone
through the records.
       4.   The purpose for which the Writ Petition was
filed in the year 2010 has been fulfilled. The learned
counsel for the petitioner herself admits that the
reason for which this petition was filed in the year
2010 no more exists.     However, the mental condition
of the inmates in the centres aforementioned still
require medical attention and as such, direction be
issued to the authorities concerned.
       5.   Considering the entire aspects of the matter
and going through the records, we are of the view that
we cannot keep this petition alive for indefinite period,
once the cause for which it was filed no more exists,
the Writ Petition needs to be disposed of.     However,
while disposing of this petition, we deem it appropriate
to direct the 9th respondent - Karnataka State Mental
Health Authority to take appropriate and necessary
steps for providing proper medical treatment to the
mentally ill inmates of the aforementioned centres
within period of one month from today.
      6.   The counsel for the petitioner shall serve a
copy of this order on the 9th respondent.
      7.   The Writ Petition, with these observations,
is disposed of.
