Counsel for Appellant :- Satendra Kumar Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
Heard Sri Satendra Kumar Singh, learned counsel for the
appellant and Ms. Deepshikha learned Chief Standing Counsel
for the State-respondents.
By means of instant special appeal filed under Chapter VIII
Rule 5 of the Allahabad High Court Rules, the validity of the
judgment and order dated 27.04.2022 passed by the learned
Single Judge in Writ-C No.2378 of 2022, Tanishk Srivastava
Vs. State of U.P. & Others, dismissing the writ petition holding
the same as not maintainable has been assailed.
The precise facts and circumstances of the issue in question is
that the son of the deponent of the writ petition, namely master
Tanishk Srivastava appeared in the entrance test on 20.03.2022
held for the admission as Resident Scholar in the educational
institution in question i.e. La Martiniere Collage, Lucknow for
taking admission in Class-VIII. Result of the entrance test was
declared on 25.03.2022 and such candidate, namely, Tanishk
Srivastava bearing Form No.215 was declared successful to get
admission in Class-VIII as Resident Scholar. His name finds
place at serial no.5 of such list, which has been enclosed as
Annexure No.3 to the writ petition.
It appears that due to some compelling circumstances i.e.
serious illness of the mother of the candidate and his father
being out of town for the purposes of service, the student could
not get admission in Class-VIII as Resident Scholar, therefore,
an application was preferred by the father of the candidate to
the Principal of the Institution on 04.04.2022 through e-mail
(Annexure No.4 of the writ petition) that instead of treating his
son as a Resident Scholar, he may be given admission as Day
Scholar as he is ready to complete all required formalities
including the fees. Along with the aforesaid application, the
medical prescription of the mother of the candidate has been
provided. When the aforesaid application dated 04.04.2022 sent
through e-mail was not disposed of, the father of the candidate
preferred a representation dated 10.04.2022 (Annexure No.6)
through e-mail to the District Magistrate, Lucknow, who is
Member of the Governing Council of such institution making
the same request but to no avail. Further, on the same date i.e.
10.04.2022, same application was preferred through e-mail to
Lucknow (Annexure No.7) for the redressal of the same
grievance, but to no avail.
As per learned counsel for the appellant/writ petitioner, the
father of the candidate has not been informed about the fate of
the admission of his son till 18.04.2022, therefore, he filed a
writ petition before this Court bearing Writ-C No.2378 of 2022,
Tanishk Srivastava Vs. State of U.P. & Others, making the
prayers which have been reproduced in the order of learned
Single Judge dated 27.04.2022. For the convenience, such
prayers are being reproduced herein below:-
"(i) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus directing
the opposite parties to allow applicant admission as day scholar in Class-
VIII in place of resident scholar which has been qualified by entrance test
result declared on 25.03.2022 by the La Martiniere College for resident
scholars of Class 1 to IX as contained in Annexure No.1 with the petition.
(ii) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus directing
the opposite parties to collect required fees and other formalities from the
applicant for the admission of his son in Class-VIII as day scholar as per
condition of brochure provided by La Martiniere College after declaration
of the entrance test for admission.
(iii) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus directing
the opposite parties to decide the representation dated 04.04.2022 and
10.04.2022 through email by the applicant to the opposite parties as well
as govt. authorities such as District Magistrate, Principal Secretary of
Primary Education and others."
The aforesaid writ petition of the appellant/writ petitioner has
been dismissed on the ground that the said writ petition is not
maintainable for the reason that the issue of the same institution
has already been set at rest vide order dated 26.07.2016 passed
by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Civil Appeal No.7030 of 2016,
Committee of Management, La Martiniere College, Lucknow
and Anr Vs. Vatsal Gupta and Others, whereby the Hon'ble apex
Court has held that the institution being an unaided minority
private institution, therefore, the writ petition against such
institution may not be entertained. Before the Hon'ble Apex
Court, the judgment and order dated 23.12.2015 passed by the
Division Bench of this Court in Special Appeal No.5301 of
2015, Vatsal Gupta Vs. La Martiniere College was assailed.
Vide order dated 23.12.2015, the Division Bench of this Court
had modified the order of the learned Single Judge passed on
16.10.2015 in Writ Petition No.4229 of 2015, Vatsal Gupta Vs.
La Martiniere College and Ors., whereby the learned Single
Judge considering the various judgments of the constitutional
courts had observed that the writ petition against such
institution is not maintainable. However, the Division Bench
vide order dated 23.12.2015 modified the judgment of the
learned Single Judge dated 16.10.2015 in exercise of the extra-
ordinary jurisdiction of the Court considering the peculiar facts
and circumstances of the issue relating to the admission of one
student, namely, Vatsal Gupta clarifying that such judgment
may not be treated as precedence. However, the Apex Court
vide order dated 26.07.2016 was pleased to set aside the
judgment and order dated 23.12.2015 passed by the Division
Bench of this Court.
Learned Single Judge vide impugned order dated 27.04.2022
has considered aforesaid judgment of the Apex Court dated
26.07.2016 as well as some more judgments of the Hon'ble
Apex Court and came to the conclusion that since a writ
petition against La Martiniere College, Lucknow is not
maintainable, therefore, the reliefs prayed in the writ petition
may not be granted and the writ petition deserves to be
On being confronted learned counsel for the appellant/ writ
petitioner as to whether he is able to show any case law to the
effect that in spite of the facts, circumstances and legal position
so discussed above grievance of the appellant may be redressed
by invoking extra-ordinary jurisdiction of this Court, no proper
reply or case law has been cited to convince the Court that the
prayers of the writ petition could be allowed.
We have perused the entire judgment of the learned Single
Judge dated 27.04.2022 and we are in full agreement with the
observations and findings of such judgment, therefore, the
present special appeal is liable to be dismissed.
Accordingly, the special appeal is dismissed.
Before parting with, we find it appropriate to observe that if the
admission of the student-appellant Tanishk Srivastava for Class-
VIII for that he was admittedly qualified was not possible as
Day Scholar student as he had qualified such entrance
examination for Resident Scholar, at least specific information
to this effect must be provided to the parents of such student at
the earliest so that appropriate steps could be taken by the
parents of such student. As contended in the writ petition that
father of the student has preferred representation dated
04.04.2022 to the Principal of the institution through e-mail and
representations dated 10.04.2022 to the District Magistrate,
Lucknow and the Principal Secretary, Senior Secondary School
Board, Lucknow with the specific prayer that instead of
treating his son Tanishk Srivastava as Resident Scholar for
Class-VIII, he may be treated as Day Scholar for Class-VIII
apprising his compelling circumstances but such representations
have not been disposed of by the Principal of the institution or
other authorities inasmuch as the father of the student could not
receive any information.
This is not a case where the student has not qualified the
entrance examination for getting admission in particular class
i.e. Class-VIII but this is a case where such student has
qualified such entrance examination as Resident Scholar but
due to compelling and unavoidable circumstances he could not
be able to get admission as Resident Scholar. Therefore, in such
compelling circumstances, at least on the basis of principles of
equity, it was bare minimum required on the part of the
Principal of the institution to apprise the parents of the student
that the institution would be unable to provide admission to
their ward in Class-VIII as a Day Scholar student. This is a trite
law that where there is no statutory prescription to redress the
grievance of any aggrieved, the equitable principles would be
applied inasmuch as no one should be left remediless.
Therefore, in alike situation, at least the fate of the issue must
be communicated to the person aggrieved who has raised
his/her grievance before the competent authority. In the present
case, after declaring the result of the entrance test wherein the
student-appellant Tanishk Srivastava was permitted to get
admission in Class-VIII as a Resident Scholar but he could not
get admission as Resident Scholar and requested through his
parents to permit him to get admission in such Class as Day
Scholar, so if that request of the student/parents of the student
was not liable to be accepted, he/they should have been
immediately informed about such fact so that such student
could get his admission in any other institution for receiving
proper education inasmuch as to receive proper education is a
Fundamental Right enshrined under Article 21-A of the
Constitution of India.
Hence, to that extent we show our displeasure towards the
approach of the Principal of the institution. The competent
authorities/ educational authorities must also ensure that the
grievance relating to the admission in an institution is redressed
with promptness and does not remain unattended. Whatever is
possible under the law or under the principles of equities,
prompt decision should be taken and intimated to all aggrieved
so that the consequential steps could be taken well in time.
Let the copy of this order be provided to all the following
opposite parties by the Registry of this Court for information
and necessary action:-