Simarjeet Singh v. State of Punjab and others
Present:     Mr. Gurpreet Singh, Advocate for the petitioner.
             Ms. Anu Chatrath, Additional Advocate General, Punjab.
             Case has been heard through Video Conferencing on account of
COVID-19 Pandemic.
             This is an application for taking on record photographs as
Annexures P-8 and P-9.
             Application is allowed and the photographs are taken on
record.
             Notice of motion.
             Ms. Anu Chatrath, Additional Advocate General, Punjab
accepts notice on behalf of respondent No.1.
             On the last date of hearing, following order was passed:-
                    “Following queries have been put to learned counsel
                    representing the petitioner:-
                    i)    Whether the construction of the building is pillar
                          construction or based on foundation only?
                    ii)   The weight, height etc. of the tower/pole and how
                          much number of poles erected in the building in
                          question.
                    Learned counsel for the petitioner shall be at liberty to
                    move an application to clarify the aforesaid queries.
                    To be listed as and when appropriate application is
                    moved.”
              Today, learned counsel for the petitioner has informed us that
the construction of the building is a pillar based and height of the poles is 6
mts.and weight thereof is 200 kgs.
              An additional query has been put to learned counsel for the
petitioner whether there is a mandatory requirement for installing solar
panel for use.
              Learned State counsel shall be at liberty to file a short affidavit
regarding the query raised above. It shall also be made clear whether
uniform policy is being adopted all over the State of Punjab or a stand alone
instructions have been given for SAS Nagar. Another question that arises is
whether due to wind velocity at times, there can be a danger of the tower
being dislocated and endanger the lives of the people. It appears apart from
the tower, there are batteries on the roof which may not be able to bear the
              As a larger question has arisen before this court regarding
installation of towers on residential building, as an interim measure we
direct that State shall not allow installation of towers on the residential
buildings till further orders. As regards the building of the petitioner, status
quo shall be maintained till the next date of hearing. This order is being
passed in view of the fact that installation of towers in a haphazard manner
may endanger lives and property of the people and would violate their rights
under Article 21 of the Constitution.
              To come up on 10.3.2021.
