3.     While considering the application for leave to appeal,
Court is required to look the judgement and order of
acquittal prima facie and the record and proceedings so as
to reach to a subjective conclusion that       whether there is
any prima facie case or not. If there is prima facie case,
leave to appeal is required to be granted and if there is no
prima facie case and there is no merits in the appeal itself
and no error is committed by the trial court in acquitting
the accused, leave to appeal is not required to be granted.
Leave to appeal cannot be granted as a matter of right and
without subjective satisfaction, otherwise, it would increase
the appeals on the file of the High Court.
4.     Having heard the learned APP and considering the
records, it appears that the case hinges mainly on the
evidence of the complainant and the Doctor.               From the
deposition of the complainant that she had not informed
about the incident or she had not made any complaint
about her daughter to her husband on the date of incident.
She has admitted in her cross examination that she had
suspicion that the accused, who was conductor in the
school bus of the victim, has done something wrong with
her daughter          as she found some redness on the private
part of her daughter. She has further admitted that she had
not disclosed before Dr.Rakhi Apurva Patel, who examined
the victim, about the rape on her daughter. She admitted
that after lodgement of the FIR, she had gone to the Anand
Police Station on 2/5/2015 and on that day she had made
allegation against her husband. She had admitted that her
further statement was recorded on 2/5/2015 wherein she
had not made any allegation against the accused. She
admitted that she does not know the name of the driver of
the school bus. She has admitted that as she had doubt on
the respondent accused, she lodge the FIR. Even the
husband of the complainant and father of the victim has not
supported the case of the prosecution.
5.     As per the evidence of the Dr.Rakhi Apurva Patel, who
examined the victim, there was redness on the lebia minora
- private part of the victim and there was no injury on the
hymen and perineum and there was no bleeding. As per the
Doctor,      there was vaginal fingering. The victim was
examined twice on 29/4/2015 and 2/5/2015. The Doctor
in the cross examination has admitted that the complainant
– mother of the victim had disclosed suspicion against her
husband – father of the victim regarding commission of the
offence. The Doctor admitted that redness can be done by
more than one reason. She also admitted that she gave
opinion of vagina fingering on the basis of redness only. She
admitted that redness cannot be said to be conclusive proof
of vagina fingering. She further admitted that during her
examination she found no mark of rape. She had not given
specific opinion regarding rape. She admitted that mother of
the victim had given history before her wherein she had not
made allegation of rape. She admitted that she had not
given reasons about oldness of the redness. She specifically
admitted that in the Certificate Ex.10 she had given opinion
of fingering on the basis of history given by the mother of
the victim.
6.     In the present case most of the panchas have turned
hostile. Panchas of seizure of clothes of the accused and
panchas of examination of the person of the accused have
not supported the case of the prosecution and they are
declared hostile.
7.     In this case, one witness who is teacher of the school
where the victim was studying             namely Pratibhaben
Shaileshbhai is also examined who has also stated nothing
regarding incident alleged to have happened in the running
bus. She has admitted that she came to know about the
incident through police. Nothing has come out from her
deposition. She has also stated that no complaint has been
received from any of the parents regarding character of the
accused. It is also pertinent to note that the complainant
has denied that in the bus other lady teachers were also
doing updown like Rakhiben Chandniben, Rupanjanaben
and Karishmaben. She only remembered the name of
Rakhiben, whereas regarding other names, she has denied.
Here in this case, Rakhiben Manojbhai Kanabar, who is also
a teacher in the school, has been examined as a witness
and she has clearly stated that Rekhaben, Rupanjanaben,
Pratibhaben and Karishmaben were also doing updown in
the bus and in the cross examination she has admitted
that no complaint has been received against the accused
from any of the parents till today.
8.     Here in this case it is to be noted that on one side the
complainant has alleged against the respondent accused
regarding sexual assault upon her victim daughter and
merely after a span of 3 to 4 days she has alleged against
her own husband regarding sexual assault upon her victim
daughter. As such, two contradictory versions have been
stated by the complainant within a span of 4 days against
two persons and both the allegations are based on suspicion
and doubt, one against the present respondent accused and
another against her husband. As such, mere suspicion and
doubt cannot be considered to be cogent and convincing
proof to prove the allegations.
9.     The      version of the    complainant   in     her        chief-
examination is full of contradictions and additions as stated
hereinabove. Regarding version of the complainant in her
chief examination that on 28/4/2015 her daughter came
crying and she was not eating food and when she went for
changing clothes, the complainant found redness on the
private part of the victim and thereafter she took the victim
to the hospital but the Doctor has not taken the case on
hand and thereafter she went to the police station and
informed the police. This fact has not been mentioned in
the complaint, which is admitted by the investigating officer
in his deposition.
It is also to be noted that      the complainant had
informed her one friend regarding condition of the victim
but no such friend has been examined.
10.    The complainant has stated in her deposition that the
accused had given him phone number and they were talking
on the phone and the accused had called her at his house
and the complainant thought that the accused was not a
person who can be relied upon and the complainant while
taking on the phone felt that the conduct of the accused
was not good. However, all these aspects are not found in
the    complaint      nor in the      further statement          of      the
complainant, which is admitted by the investigating officer
in his cross-examination. As such, these are additions
which the complainant has made in her deposition. The
complainant has tried to create an impression that the
accused was of a loose character and the accused was not
reliable person. This aspect is also not mentioned in the
complaint. This type of improvement has been made by the
complainant in her deposition and the same is proved by
the deposition of the investigating officer. All the aforesaid
facts stated by the complainant in her deposition, have not
been mentioned by the complainant either in her the
complaint or in her statement. As such, the reliability and
credibility of the complainant is doubtful. Moreover, for the
sake of argument if the improvement made by the
complainant in her deposition that the accused was calling
her or accused has offer to send the complainant to Israel
and there was exchange of telephone number and they used
to call each other, are believed, it can be presumed that
there might be some relation between the complainant and
the accused and possibility of settling the score with the
accused by filing false complaint against the accused cannot
be ruled out.
11.    In the Cross examination, the investigating officer has
admitted that on 2/5/2015, the mother of the victim had
disclosed before him that the father of the victim has
committed. He admitted that in the Certificate Ex.10, there
is no mention of any offence. He admitted that as per the
allegation of the complainant, no evidence regarding offence
being committed in running bus was found on record. It is
an admitted fact that the driver of the bus has not
supported the allegations of prosecution in his evidence. It
is also admitted by the investigating officer that as per the
medical evidence, no evidence regarding sexual assault has
been found. It is also admitted by the investigating officer
that during the investigation the complainant and witnesses
have given their statements on suspicion.
12.    It is pertinent to note that as per the         allegations
levelled against the respondent accused by the complainant
is that the victim used to sit on the lap of the accused
whenever the complainant used to send her to the school in
the bus and she used to handover the custody of the victim
to the accused. But this aspect that on the date of the
incident the victim was sitting in the lap of the accused is
not supported by any of the witnesses. The teacher who was
doing up-down in the same bus daily has also not uttered a
word that the victim used to sit in the lap of the accused
during her journey from her home to the school. Even the
driver of the school bus, who is also one of the important
person who can throw light on the incident and say about
the say of the victim in the lap of the accused, has not been
13.    As noted hereinabove, the complainant filed the
complaint merely on suspicion. She has filed complaint
against the respondent accused and on the other hand she
has also made allegations of rape against her husband. As
per medical evidence, there is no rape committed and
Doctor opined fingering which is possible for more than one
14.    There       are material    contradictions,   additions           and
alterations in the statements of the complainant and
deposition of the victim. On the one hand, the complainant
had made allegations against the respondent accused and
on the other hand, she had made allegations against her
15.    Present complaint is filed merely on suspicion and
doubt. Suspicion, however strong, cannot take the place of
proof, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has said, stressing that
an accused is presumed to be innocent unless proved guilty
beyond a reasonable doubt.
16.    No doubt the alleged offence is a shocking one but the
gravity of the offence cannot by itself overweigh as far as
legal proof is concerned.
17.    It may not be necessary to refer to other decisions of
this Court except to bear in mind a caution that in cases
depending largely upon circumstantial evidence there is
always a danger that the conjecture or suspicion may take
the place of legal proof and such suspicion however so
strong cannot be allowed to take the place of proof. The
Court has to be watchful and ensure that conjectures and
suspicions do not take the place of legal proof. The Court
must satisfy that the various circumstances in the chain of
evidence should be established clearly and that the
completed chain must be such as to rule out a reasonable
likelihood of the innocence of the accused. Bearing these
principles in mind we shall now consider the reasoning of
the courts below in coming to the conclusion that the
accused along has committed the offence.
18.     A reasonable doubt has already been thoroughly
explained in the case of Latesh @ Dadu Baburao Karlekar
Versus The State of Maharashtra, (2018) 3 SCC 66
wherein ‘reasonable doubt’ has been enunciated by this
Court as “a mean between excessive caution and excessive
indifference to a doubt, further it has been elaborated that
reasonable doubt must be a practical one and not an
abstract theoretical hypothesis.” In this case at hand, the
imposter has not been found or investigated into by the
concerned officer. Law is well settled with regard to the fact
that however strong the suspicion may be, it cannot take
the place of proof. Strong suspicion, coincidence, grave
doubt cannot take the place of proof. Always a duty is cast
upon the Courts to ensure that suspicion does not take
place of the legal proof. The standard of proof in a criminal
trial is proof beyond reasonable doubt because the right to
personal liberty of a citizen can never be taken away by the
standard of preponderance of probability.
19.     The trial court, on appreciation has rightly acquitted
the accused – respondent herein and by no stretch of
imagination, the impugned judgement and order can be said
to be perverse and we are are of the opinion that no error or
illegality has been committed by the trial court and hence
no interference of this Court is called for. Hence to grant the
leave to appeal and thereafter to dismiss the appeal would
be futile exercise and hence we are of the opinion that no
leave is required to be granted.
20.      In the result, present application is rejected.
Order in Criminal Appeal:
In view of rejection of the application for leave to
appeal, present appeal is dismissed in limine.