3.     Learned         advocate    Mr.Shital       Patel,    appearing             for
Mr.Kishan Daiya, for the petitioner has submitted that the
aforesaid electric line passes from the final plot of the
petitioner and such electric line could not have been laid down
without his consent or without giving any notice to him. It is
submitted        by    him  that   in    case     of  other      citizens,        the
transmission line, which was going overhead, has been shifted
to underground, whereas in the case of the present petitioner
though he has requested the same but it is not shifted to
underground and by such an action of laying the transmission
line overhead, the value of the plot belonging to the petitioner
has been reduced considerably. It is submitted by him that the
respondents           may  be   directed       to  lay    the     transmission
underneath the final plot of the petitioner so that the value of
the petitioner land may not be deteriorated. It is further
submitted that since KV of transmission line is increased from
132 to 220 KV, the development / FSI margin set back affecting
drastically and virtually diminishing the value of the whole
property of the petitioner. He has submitted that because of
this, the plot has been divided in two half and other half has
become redundant.
4.     I have heard learned advocate for the petitioner. I have
also perused the documents placed by the learned advocate
for the petitioner.
5.     The grievance of the petitioner is with regard to laying
down the towers as well as the transmission lines overhead of
his plot, which has reduced the value of the plot.
6.    At this stage, it would be apposite to refer to the
judgment of the Division Bench of this Court passed in Letters
Patent Appeal No.534 of 2022 dated 06.11.2020, in the case
Ratilal Maganji Brahmbhatt, [(AIR 2021 CC 1044)] and in the
(Projects) Gujarat Energy Transmission and others              [(2011) 2
GLH 781. The Division Bench, while considering the analogous
issue, in case of Himmatbhai Vallabhbhai Patel, (supra)
“51. We are of the view that it cannot be said that the
land has been selected in breach of any of the
constitutional provisions. It is not even argued or urged
that any of the constitutional provisions have been
violated in selecting the land of the ownership of the
appellants. Therefore, no case for interference with the
decision of the statutory authorities in selecting the
land is made out by the appellants.
52.     In the aforesaid view of the matter, the impugned
action of the respondents cannot be held to be arbitrary,
illegal or contrary to the provisions of the Electricity
Act, 2003 on any ground whatsoever.Section 164 of the
Electricity Act, 2003 read with Section 10 of the Indian
Telegraphs Act, 1885 recognized the absolute power of the
respondent Company to proceed with laying high tension
electric lines or electric polls for the transmission of
electricity on or over the lands belonging to the
appellant herein subject to the right of the appellant to
claim compensation if any damage is sustained by him by
reason of laying such high tension electric lines. In
other words, neither the acquisition of lands is
necessary nor there is any need for consent of the
appellant. Hence, no mandamus can be issued restraining
the respondent Company from proceeding with the erection
of polls and transmission lines through the land of the
appellant. However, this shall not preclude the appellant
to claim compensation by working out the appropriate
remedy as available under law in case any damage is
sustained to his property.”
7.    In the case of Ratilal Maganji Bhrambhatt (supra),
the Division Bench, after considering the provisions of the
Electricity Act and the similar issue and contention, has held
“58.21 Even if any Court issues any directions to
consider the representation of any land owner or person
interested, such directions are required to be considered
only to the limited extent of payment of compensation, to
be given by the licencee or the competent authority and
the directions issued, if any, would not empower the
District Collector-cum-District Magistrate, to pass any
order, contrary to the orders, passed under Section 164
of the Act.
58.22. When the appropriate Government passes an order
under Section 164 of the Act, the Collector is bound by
the said order, and he is not superior to the Government,
to hold that the Government has erred in passing an
order, under Section 164 of the Act, authorising the
licencee or the competent authority to carry out the
work, in the route, which involves Techno- Economic
58.23 The Act confers powers to the Telegraph Authority
to determine the property over which the lines are to
pass or posts to be erected. The powers of the District
Magistrate under Section 16(1) of the Indian Telegraph
Act, 1885, does not extent to any adjudication, as to
from where and how, the line has to be drawn over any
specific item of the property or where posts have to be
erected or not, in any specific item of the property.
58.24 The Power of the District Magistrate is confined
only to the extent of exercising his discretion in
granting permission to the Telegraph Act, to execute the
work, when an application is made by the licencee or the
competent authority.
58.25. Section 10 of the Indian Telegraph Act gives legal
sanction to the licencing authority to enter into any
property, to lay poles or posts or draw electric lines.
But while doing so, the damage of the property should be
less. If there is any resistance, the licencee or the
authorised person may approach the District Magistrate-
cum-District Collector, to grant permission.
58.26. Once the power is conferred on the licencee or any
other competent authority, there can be no objection to
the implementation of the scheme, on the principles of
natural justice or on the ground of unauthorised use of
the land.
58.27.      The legislature    has    conferred   powers         on    the
appropriate Government to authorize a public officer or a
licencee, etc., under the Electricity Act to exercise the
specific powers of an authority under the Indian
Telegraph Act, 1885. The authorisation may be general in
favour of a transmission company or in a given case,
special. The route is decided by the transmission
company. The decision to mark a route for laying an
electric line is a highly specialized and technical. At
that time, it is unrelated to any specific land owner.
The route may be for over hundreds of kilometers passing
over Government lands, lands of local authorities and
private lands and it may not be practicable to hear the
land owners along the entire route.
58.28. Having regard to the specialized and technical
nature of the task, and the fact that the lines are laid
for distribution of electricity, it is the view of this
Court that, the Legislature has not provided for any
notice or hearing to the public at large, or to the land
owners. Therefore, when the appropriate Government
authorises a person or any body under the Electricity
Act, to exercise the powers of the Telegraph Authority,
all the powers under the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885, are
meant to be exercised.
58.29. The Electricity Act, 2003, is a progressive
enactment,      with   a    specific    purpose    of      providing
electricity to a large number of people, across the
country,       to   promote      industrial    and      sustainable
development in all walks of life. Right of a land owner
to possess and enjoy the property, though recognised as a
Constitutional      Right,    under    Article   300-A         of     the
Constitution of India, such right has to yield to the
Articles 14 and 21 respectively of the Constitution of
India, which strive to achieve the Constitutional Goals,
enshrined in the basic structure of the Constitution of
India. [see T. Bhuvaneswari vs. The District Collector
cum District Magistrate, Erode District, Erode, W.P.
No.18548 of 2013, decided on 19.11.2013]
59. In the overall view of the matter, we are convinced
that no case is made out by the writ applicant for grant
of any relief. The writ applicant, at any cost, wants to
stall a very important public project by unnecessarily
raising one objection or the other. If, ultimately, any
damage is caused to his land, he would be adequately
compensated in terms of money. However, it is difficult
for us to accept the argument of Mr. Dholaria that as
there is a statutory obligation cast upon the authority
to ensure that minimal damage is caused, his client, as
an affected person, has a right to ask the authority to
shift the alignment or the route. In our opinion, the
interpretation put forward by Mr. Dholariya of the
expression "do little damage to property" is not tenable
in law. By virtue of the same, Mr. Dholaria cannot
contend that as the value of the land may get diminished,
the authority should change the alignment and reallocate
the route. The expression "do little damage to property",
in our opinion, should be construed as to ensure that
while laying the pole at the place allocated, minimal
damage is caused at the time of erection. It is always
open for the writ applicant to raise dispute with respect
to the sufficiency of compensation under Section 16(4) of
the Telegraph Act before the District Judge in accordance
with law.”
8.    The Division Bench has specifically rejected similar
contention raised by the concerned person wherein such
property transmission line was passing through their land and
it was also contended that such laying of transmission line has
diminished the value of the property. The Division Bench has
held that at the most, the petitioner can raise the dispute with
respect of compensation under Section 16(4) of the Telegraph
Act before the District Judge in accordance with law. It is also
held that neither the consent of the owner land owner is
necessary nor he is required to be heard.
9.    In a recent decision, the Division Bench in the order
dated 23.12.2021 passed in Letters Patent Appeal No.823 of
2021 in an analogues issue has held thus : -
“9. In the background of the said stand taken by the
second respondent, the owners/ occupiers of the land
would have no choice about what should be the route of
the transmission line and where it should be placed,
since such a decision must always yield to the opinion of
technical experts, technical experts would have examined
the mode, manner and method in which the transmission
line is to be drawn by taking into consideration the
viability aspect also. In a given situation, where for
the public cause, a transmission line is drawn and in the
process, several towers are erected over the private
lands in the ownership of individuals are allowed to have
a say and object       either to the route or to the
alignment, in such circumstances, no transmission line
can be laid or erected. In other words, the individual
grievances even if any, in public projects, will have to
necessarily kneel before the public cause. At this
juncture itself, we have looked into the alignment map
which was also perused by the learned Single Judge, to
examine the contention of appellants to find out whether
conclusion arrived at for deviation of 14.42 decrees
which has been taken at location No.471 was for the
public good and find the answer in the affirmative. We
say so, for the simple reason if any other alignments are
to be adopted, it would have definitely affected the
habitats of the two villages and as such, the contention
raised by the petitioners' counsel before the learned
Single Judge and reiterated before this Court cannot be
accepted. The learned Single Judge has taken note of the
judgment of the Coordinate Bench rendered in the case of
Ltd. Vs. Ratilal Maganji Brahmbhatt (Barot) in Letters
Patent Appeal No.534 of 2020, rendered on 6.11.2020, also
to negative the contention of petitioners. Hence, we are
of the considered view that petitioners have no vested
right to seek either shifting of the alignment or
shifting of the route inasmuch as technical feasibility
report of the project having been approved by the
Government by issuing appropriate authorization in
exercise of the powers vested under Section 164 of the
Electricity Act, 2003, in no circumstance, can be held to
have been acted in a malafide manner. As such, contention
raised by Mr. Jaimin Gandhi, learned counsel appearing
for the appellants requires to be considered for the
purposes of out-right rejection and accordingly, we
reject the said contention.”
It is held by the Division Bench that such person has no
right to seek either shifting of the alignment or shifting of the
route of the transmission line.
10.    In view of the foregoing observations made by the
Division Bench of this Court, the issue raised in the writ
petition is no more res integra. Hence, the writ petition is
rejected summarily.