Counsel for Petitioner :- Surya Prakash Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 24508 of 2020
Counsel for Petitioner :- Vinod Kumar,Man Mohan
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Jaibind Singh Rathour,Ran Vijay
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 7676 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Virendra Kumar Dubey
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Prashant Arora,Ran Vijay Singh
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 7816 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Virendra Kumar Dubey
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ajay Kumar,Ran Vijay Singh
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 9149 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Deepak Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Rajiv Singh Chuahan,Ran Vijay
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 9333 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Deepak Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ajay Kumar,Ran Vijay Singh
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 10236 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Vishal Kumar Upadhyay
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ajay Kumar,Ran Vijay Singh
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 10456 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Abhishek Khare,Saumya
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ajay Kumar
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 10980 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Jitendra Prakash Mishra,Ajay Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- Ajay Kumar,Ran Vijai Singh
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 11306 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- O.P. Tiwari
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Rajeev Singh,Ran Vijay
Counsel for Petitioner :- Deepak Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ajay Kumar,Ran Vijay Singh
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 11900 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Suresh Kumar Singh,Seemant Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ran Vijay Singh,Sandeep
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 12454 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Abhishek Khare,Saumya
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ajay Kumar,Ran Vijay Singh
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 13168 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Namit Sharma,Abhishek
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ajay Kumar,Ran Vijay Singh
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 13205 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Sanjay Misra,Mrs. Anju
Counsel for Respondent :- Ajay Kumar,Ranvijay Singh
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 13210 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Abhishek Khare,Saumya
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ajay Kumar,Ran Vijay Singh
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 13211 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Abhishek Khare,Saumya
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ajay Kumar,Ran Vijay Singh
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 13212 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Abhishek Khare,Saumya
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,P.K. Singh Bisen,Ran Vijay
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 13848 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Suresh Kumar Singh,Seemant Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ajay Kumar,Ran Vijay Singh
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 14273 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Vishal Kumar Upadhyay,Amir Mohsin
Counsel for Respondent :- Ran Vijay Singh
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 14568 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Rakesh Chandra Tripathi,Rakesh Pathak
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ran Vijay Singh,Shivam Sharma
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 15525 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Vijay Kumar Srivastava,Shailendra Kumar
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ghaus Beg,Ran Vijay Singh
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 16122 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Amit Chaudhary
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ran Vijay Singh,Shivam Sharma
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 17844 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Abhishek Khare,Saumya
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Jaibind Singh Rathour,Ran Vijay
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 23482 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Abhishek Khare,Saumya
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Prashant Arora,Ran Vijay Singh
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 24783 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Rajit Ram
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Neeraj Chaurasiya,Ranvijay
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 25902 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Brijesh Kumar Kuldeep,P.K. Mishra
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ajay Kumar,Ran Vijay Singh
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 27459 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Abhishek Khare,Aahuti Agarwal,Saumya
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Prashant Arora,Ran Vijay Singh
Advocates as learned counsel for their respective petitioners
and Shri Ran Vijay Singh, learned Additional Chief Standing
Counsel for U.P. Basic Education Board and perused the
record.
2. The present bunch of writ petitions engaging the attention of
this Court has been filed by petitioners, whose candidature for
the post of Assistant Teachers in primary school in pursuance
of the advertisement issued by the State of Uttar Pradesh in the
year 2019 were either not found proper due to inaccuracy
and/or discrepancy between the online application and the
actual status of the said candidate, or, even if the candidature of
these petitioners were considered and these petitioner’s found
their way to the final selection list, however subsequently, the
department, finding disparity in the declaration made in the
online application and the actual status of the said candidate,
their recruitment were cancelled and consequent recovery were
directed by the respondent.
3. Both the sides have relied on various judgments/orders of this
court as well as the Hon’ble Apex Court to buttress their point
of submission and drive home their own respective cases and
each of them have tried to convey that the present case is a
covered matter and as such the same can be finally decided.
4. The common and germane background to the deciding of the
issues involved in these writ petitions lie in a narrow compass.
5. The state of Uttar Pradesh issued a notification to fill up 69000
posts of Assistant Teachers in Primary Schools in various
districts of the state, pursuant to which an Assistant Teacher
Recruitment Examination, 2019 was conducted by the
Examination Regulatory Authority, Prayagraj. As per the
recruitment process, candidates were to apply online, who were
allotted registration number and assigned roll number for
appearing in the examination, for which the results were
declared on 12.05.2020. After declaration of result, the U.P.
Basic Shiksha Parishad invited online applications from
successful candidates for counselling and appointment.
6. Pertinently, the aforesaid ambitious recruitment scheme of the
state of Uttar Pradesh was mired with litigations having been
filed before this Court as well as the Hon’ble Supreme Court,
which led to issuance of Government order dated 4 th of
December, 2020 in clarification and another letter dated
05.03.2021 issued by the Additional Chief Secretary,
Government of Uttar Pradesh, relating to the appointment of
assistant Teachers.
7. A harmonious reading of both the Government orders would
lead one to an impeccable conclusion that both these orders
have been issued with a purpose, which inter-alia state that no
candidate should be permitted to rectify any mistake committed
by him/her while filing up online application form so as to have
an impact on the smooth conducting of the selection process
and to avoid any alteration or change in the inter se merit of the
candidates which would eventually lead to a change in the final
merit/select list.
8. Although various orders and judgements of this Court have
been cited by both the parties, however this Court finds that
apparently there are two judgments of the Hon’ble Apex Court,
which holds the ground as on today. The communication dated
05.02.2021 was a subject matter of interpretation before the
Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Jyoti Yadav & Anr. V/s The
State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. (Writ Petition No. 322 of 2021)
decided along with 8 other writ petitions, wherein the Hon’ble
Court vide its order dated 8th of April, 2021 held as follows:
“14.    Wherever the mistakes committed by the candidates
purportedly gave additional marks or weightage greater
than what they actually deserved, according to the
Communication dated 05.03.2021, their candidature would
stand rejected. However, wherever mistakes committed by
the candidates actually put them at a disadvantage as
against their original entitlement or the variation could be
one attributable to the University or issuing authority, an
exception was made by said Communication. The reason
for treating these two categories of candidates differently
cannot thus be called irrational.
In the first case, going by the marks or information given
in the application form the candidate would secure undue
advantage whereas in the latter category of cases the
candidate would actually be at a disadvantage or where
the variation could not be attributed to them. The
candidates in the latter category have been given a respite
from the rigor of the declaration. The classification is
clear and precise. Those who could possibly walk away
with the undue advantage will continue to be governed by
the terms of the declaration, while the other category
would be given some relief
15.     Having considered all the rival submissions, in our view,
the Communication dated 05.03.2021 made a rational
distinction and was designed to achieve a purpose of
securing fairness while maintaining the integrity of the
entire process. If, at every juncture, any mistakes by the
candidates were to be addressed and considered at
individual level, the entire process of selection may stand
delayed and put to prejudice. In order to have definiteness
in the matter certain norms had to be prescribed and
prescription of such stipulations cannot be termed to be
arbitrary or irrational. Every candidate was put to notice
twice over, by the Guidelines and the Advertisement.
16.   Having found the Communication dated 05.03.2021 to be
correct, the cases of the petitioners must be held to be
governed fully by the rigors of the said Communication.
17.    We, therefore, see no reason to interfere in these petitions
and no opportunity beyond the confines of the
Communication dated 05.03.2021 can be afforded to the
petitioners to rectify the mistakes committed by them. We,
therefore, reject the submissions and dismiss all these
petitions.”
9. Thus, the Hon’ble Apex Court held that wherever a candidate
had put himself at a disadvantageous position, his candidature
is not to be cancelled but if the candidate had been placed at an
advantageous position which is beyond his right to claim, his
candidature is to be cancelled. To the same effect is the
judgment dated 29th of June, 2021 passed by the Hon’ble Apex
Court in the case of Rahul Kumar vs. State of Uttar Pradesh
and others, (Writ Petition No. 378 of 2021). It would be
profitable to quote the relevant paragraph nos. 7, 8 and 9 of the
aforesaid judgment, which read as under:
“7.    We need not consider individual fact situation as the
reading of the G.O. and the Circular as stated above is
quite clear that wherever a candidate had put himself in a
disadvantaged position as stated above, his candidature
shall not be cancelled but will be reckoned with such
disadvantage as projected; but if the candidate had
projected an advantaged position which was beyond his
rightful due or entitlement, his candidature will stand
cancelled. The rigour of the G.O. and the Circular is clear
that wherever undue advantage can enure to the candidate
if the discrepancy were to go unnoticed, regardless
whether the percentage of advantage was greater or lesser,
the candidature of such candidate must stand cancelled.
However, wherever the candidate was not claiming any
advantage and as a matter of fact, had put himself in a
disadvantaged position, his candidature will not stand
cancelled but the candidate will have to remain satisfied
with what was quoted or projected in the application form.
These petitions are, therefore, disposed of in the light of
what is stated above.
8.     It must however be stated here that the authorities are not
strictly following the intent of the G.O. and the Circular.
For example, the Office Order dated 28.03.2021 issued by
the Basic Teacher Education Officer, District Hardoi,
shows cancellation of the candidature of one Raghav
Sharan Singh at Serial No.4, though the projection of
marks by way of mistake by said candidate was to his
disadvantage. Logically, said candidate would be entitled
to have his candidature considered and reckoned at the
disadvantaged level. The record shows that even with such
disadvantage, the candidate was entitled to be selected.
9.    We have given this illustration only by way of an example.
The authorities shall do well to consider every such order
issued by them and cause appropriate corrections or
modifications in the light of conclusions stated above. ”
10.   From the facts of the bunch of cases listed before us and as
has been pointed by some of the counsels, it is evident that
the issue has not been examined by the competent authority
in terms of the observations made by the Supreme Court in
the aforesaid two judgments which relate to the selection
process in question. In fact, in some of the cases, the
rejection of the candidature, is prior to the aforesaid
judgments.”
10. Both the judgements, succinctly, denote that, in case a
candidate furnishes some information in his/her online
application form which, although not in commensurate to the
actual information, but does not put him/her to any
advantageous position, such misinformation, in seclusion, may
not be treated as a ground for rejecting the candidature. As a
matter of fact, the judgment passed by the Hon’ble Apex Court
in Archana Chauhan V/s State of Uttar Pradesh & ors. (Civil
Appeal No. 3068/2020) also directs the rectification of the
mistake keeping in view that the error on the part of the said
candidate did not, in any way, enure to her advantage but was
to her detriment.
11. The aforesaid judgments of the Hon’ble Supreme Court relate
to discrepancy in the marks mentioned in the online application
filled by the candidates and their urge to rectify the same,
which has been interpreted by the Apex Court in the aforesaid
terms. However, the controversy in these present writ petitions
is concerning some discrepancies/error mentioned in the
application form relating to “Shiksha Mitra”, wherein in some
petitions the weightage marks for working as shikha Mitra had
not been given appropriately, whereas in some cases the
petitioners have been erroneously considered as Shiksha Mitra
and were although initially given appointment, however,
subsequently       their  appointment    were    cancelled   and
consequential recovery orders were issued against them. These
discrepancies/error have crept either due to non-mentioning or
clicking the wrong key/code, leading to erroneous weightage
given for working as Shiksha Mitra or erroneously opting for
BTC through regular channel or BTC through correspondence.
12. This Court finds that the issue relating to any kind of
rectification of error in the application form by any candidate
of Assistant Teacher Recruitment Examination, 2019, stands
settled by the aforesaid judgments of the Hon’ble Apex Court.
The Hon’ble Apex Court have clearly interpreted the
Government orders and have drawn a Lachman Rekha for
considering any kind of error, by holding that the rigour of the
G.O. and the Circular made it clear that;
(a) wherever undue advantage can enure to the candidate
if the discrepancy were to go unnoticed, regardless
whether the percentage of advantage was greater or
lesser, the candidature of such candidate must stand
cancelled.
(b) However, wherever the candidate was not claiming
any advantage and as a matter of fact, had put himself
in a disadvantaged position, his candidature will not
stand cancelled but the candidate will have to remain
satisfied with what was quoted or projected in the
application form.
13. From the facts of the bunch of writ petitions, as has been
rightly pointed by some of the counsels, it is evident that the
issue has not been examined by the competent authority in
terms of the observations made by the Supreme Court in the
aforesaid two judgments which relate to the selection process
in question. In fact, in some of the cases, the rejection of the
candidature as in Writ Petition-A No. 16122/2021 (Shipra
Yadav v/s State of U.P), is prior to the aforesaid judgments.
14. This Court further finds that a Division Bench of this court in
similar circumstances, having arrived at a decision that the
candidature of the petitioners have been rejected without giving
due regard to the judgements of the Hon’ble Apex Court, the
Hon’ble Division Bench in a bunch of 24 matters, the lead case
being Ashutosh Kumar Srivastava & Others V/s State of Uttar
Pradesh & Ors. (Special Appeal Defective No. 302 of 2020),
has inter-alia given the following directions:
“11.   As we find that the issues have not been examined by the
competent authority in the light of the observations made
by the Supreme Court in the aforesaid judgments
interpreting the Government Orders dated 04.12.2020 and
05.03.2021, the matter needs to be re-examined.
12.    While setting aside the impugned orders rejecting the
candidature of the candidates on account of the error
committed by them, we remit the matter to the authority of
the district concerned for re-examination thereof in light of
the aforesaid judgment of the Supreme Court and to take a
final decision thereon.
13.    It is made clear that candidates, whose names do not find
place in the select list dated 12.5.2020, will not get any
benefit with the change of marks as their merit position
will not be changed for the reason that in case this is
allowed to happen at this stage, it will open the entire
selection process which is not the spirit of the order passed
by this Court.
14.   The entire process shall be completed by the competent
authority within a period of one month from the date of
receipt of a copy of this order
15.    It is further directed that in case any candidate is found
entitled for appointment and is offered appointment on
review of his/her case in terms of the aforesaid directions,
he/she shall get all the benefits from the date, he/she joins
the service.
16.    The order passed in this bunch of appeals/writ petitions
may not be treated to be an order in rem rather it is an
order in personam limited to the candidates before the
Court who were vigilant enough to place their grievance
before the Court.”
15. In view of the authoritative decision passed by the Hon’ble
Division Bench, this Court does not find any reasons as to why
the benefit extended by the Division Bench to the petitioners in
that matter, should not be extended to the petitioners of the
present bunch of matters.
16. In view of the above, the present bunch of matters are
disposed of with the following directions:
(i)    The issue relating to Shiksha Mitra be re-
examined by the competent authority in the light
of the observations made by the Supreme Court in
the aforesaid judgments;
(ii)   All impugned orders rejecting the candidature of
the candidates on account of the error committed
by them relating to Shiksha Mitra are set-aside;
(iii)  It is made clear that candidates, whose names do
not find place in the select list dated 12.5.2020,
will not get any benefit with the change of marks
as their merit position will not be changed for the
reason that in case this is allowed to happen at this
stage, it will open the entire selection process
which is not the spirit of the order passed by this
(iv)  These cases are remitted to the authority of the
district concerned for re-examination thereof
considering     the  aforesaid   judgment    of   the
Supreme Court and to take a final decision
thereon.
(v)   The entire process shall be completed by the
competent authority within a period of eight
weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this
order, considering the respective writ petition as
representation of the candidate concerned;
(vi)  It is further directed that in case any candidate is
found entitled for appointment and is offered
appointment on review of his/her case in terms of
the aforesaid directions, he/she shall get all the
benefits from the date, he/she joins the service.
(vii) Any recovery proceedings, initiated, by the
concerned authority shall be kept in abeyance and
shall be subject to the decision/outcome of
competent authority of the district concerned.
17. With the aforesaid directions, the writ petitions are disposed
of. It is made clear that this Court has not expressed its view on
the merits of any individual case and the competent authority of
the district concerned is at liberty to take an independent
decision within the parameters fixed by the Judgment of the
Hon’ble Apex Court as well as the Division Bench of this
18. In the peculiar facts of the present case, there shall be no order
as to cost.
Location: High Court of Judicature at