Case :- SPECIAL APPEAL DEFECTIVE No. - 2 of 2018
Counsel for Appellant :- Ramesh Chandra Saxena,Gaurav Saxena
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Jai Pratap Singh
Order on C.M.An.782 of 2018 (Application for Condonation of
1- This is an application seeking condonation of delay in filing appeal.
2- We have gone through the affidavit filed in support of the application.
3- The cause shown for the delay is sufficient.
4- The application is allowed.
5- Delay in filing appeal is hereby condoned.
Order On the Special Appeal
1-    By means of the instant intra court appeal, the appellant-petitioner has
sought to challenge the judgment and order dated 12.09.2017 passed
by an Hon'ble Single Judge dismissing Writ Petition No. 6630 (S/S)
of 1996, which was filed by the appellant challenging his removal
from a post of Lecturer in Christ Church College, Lucknow (which
will hereinafter be referred to as ‘the college’), on the ground that the
removal was done in violation of Section 16 G (3) of the U. P.
2-    Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that the appellant had filed the
Writ Petition pleading that he had been duly selected and was
appointed as a Lecturer in Physics in the College and he had joined
his duties on 07.10.1991. On 31.03.1992, the Principal of the College
had lodged a First Information report against the appellant, bearing
Case Crime No. 380 /92 under Sections 504/506 of the Indian Penal
Code in Police Station Hazaratganj, Lucknow, and the appellant was
arrested on 16.07.1992. The appellant was granted bail on the same
day but the Principal of the College did not permit him to resume his
duties and said that he would not permit the appellant to resume his
duties until he was acquitted of the charges. Ultimately the appellant
was acquitted by means of a judgment dated 24.05.1996, but when he
went to join his duties, the Principal of the college told him that
another person had been appointed in place of the appellant and the
appellant’s services had come to an end automatically with effect
from 17.07.1992.
3- The appellant challenged the oral termination of his services mainly
on the ground that before dispensing with his services, no approval
required under Section 16 G (3) of the U. P. Intermediate Education
Act was obtained.
4- The college filed a counter affidavit pleading that it is a minority
institution recognized by the Indian Council for Secondary Education.
It is a private institution which does not receive any financial
assistance from the State Government and the State Government has
no role to play in it. The provisions of the U. P. Intermediate
Education Act are not applicable to the college. It was also stated in
the counter affidavit that no selection was held for making
appointment on the post of Lecturer and the petitioner personally
made a request for his engagement and he was orally allowed to work
temporarily on his personal request. The petitioner worked only for
about four months and after he misbehaved with the Principal on
31.03.1992, he did not perform his duties even for a single day.
5- The Hon'ble Single Judge has relied upon the judgment of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in case of Committee of Management, St. John's
Inter College v. Girdhari Singh & Ors, (2001) 4 SCC 296 in which
the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that the provisions of Section 16
G (3) of the U. P. Intermediate Education Act, 1921 are not applicable
to the minority institutions. The Hon’ble Single Judge also relied upon
a decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Committee of
Management, La Martinere College, Lucknow v. Vatsal Gupta &
Ors., Civil Appeal No. 7030 of 2016 decided on 26.07.2016, wherein
the Hon’ble Supreme Court declined to interfere in a judgment passed
by this Court declining to entertain the writ petition filed against
unaided minority private institution.
6- The Hon’ble Single Judge dismissed the Writ Petition as not
maintainable, taking into consideration the plea taken in the counter
affidavit that the College, Lucknow is a private minority institution
recognized by Indian Council of Secondary Education and the writ
petition filed against a private minority institution is not maintainable.
7- Sri R. C. Saxena, Advocate, the learned Counsel for the appellant has
submitted that the College is engaged in imparting education to the
children, which is a public duty and the writ petition filed against such
an institution would be maintainable. In support of his contention, the
learned Counsel for the appellant has placed reliance upon the
following decisions: -
Mahotsava Smarak Trust & Ors. v. V.R. Rudani & Ors., (1989) 2 SCC 691
II - Abu Zaid and Ors. vs. Principal, Madrasa-Tul-Islah Saraimir,
Azamgarh and Ors. AIR 1999 All 64
III - Sandeep Chauhan and Ors. Vs. Respondent: State of U.P. and Ors.
IV – Harold James versus Union of India, (2004) 22 LCD 1649
V - Ramesh Ahluwalia v. State of Punjab, (2012) 12 SCC 331
VI – Roychan Abraham versus State of U. P., (2019) 2 UPLBES 1148 (FB)
VII –Marwari Balika Vidyalaya v. Asha Srivastava, (2020) 14 SCC 449,
VIII - St. Mary’s Educational Society and another versus Rajandra Prasad
Bhargava and others, 2022 Scc OnLine SC 1091
8- Per contra, Sri Jai Pratap Singh, the learned counsel representing the
college has submitted that the institution in question being a private
unaided minority institution, the Hon’ble Single Judge had rightly
held that the writ petition is not maintainable. He has placed reliance
upon the following judgments: -
I – Committee of Management, La Martiniere College, Lucknow versus
Vatsal Gupta and others, S.L.P. (Civil) NO. 3182 of 2016, decided on
II - Satimbla Sharma v. St Paul’s Senior Secondary School, (2011) 13 SCC
III - Dr. S. N. Tripathi versus State of U. P. 2010 SCC OnLine All 1965
IV - Committee of Management, St. John Inter College v. Girdhari Singh,
9-  We have considered the aforesaid submissions made by the learned
counsel for the parties.
10- In Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mill (P) Ltd., (2003) 2
SCC 111, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that: -
“A decision, as is well known, is an authority for which it is
decided and not what can logically be deduced therefrom. It
is also well settled that a little difference in facts or
additional facts may make a lot of difference in the
precedential value of a decision.”
11- In Escorts Ltd. v. CCE, (2004) 8 SCC 335 and Bharat Petroleum
Corpn. Ltd. v. N.R. Vairamani, (2004) 8 SCC 579, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court held that: -
“8. Courts should not place reliance on decisions without
discussing as to how the factual situation fits in with the fact
situation of the decision on which reliance is placed.
Observations of courts are neither to be read as Euclid’s
theorems nor as provisions of a statute and that too taken
out of their context. These observations must be read in the
context in which they appear to have been stated. Judgments
of courts are not to be construed as statutes. To interpret
words, phrases and provisions of a statute, it may become
necessary for Judges to embark into lengthy discussions but
the discussion is meant to explain and not to define. Judges
interpret statutes, they do not interpret judgments. They
interpret words of statutes; their words are not to be
interpreted as statutes. In London Graving Dock Co. Ltd. v.
observed: (All ER p. 14 C-D)
“The matter cannot, of course, be settled merely by treating
the ipsissima verba of Willes, J., as though they were part of
an Act of Parliament and applying the rules of
interpretation appropriate thereto. This is not to detract
from the great weight to be given to the language actually
used by that most distinguished judge,…”
9. In Home Office v. Dorset Yacht Co. (1970) 2 All ER 294,
Lord Reid said (All ER p. 297g-h),
“Lord Atkin’s speech … is not to be treated as if it were a
statutory definition. It will require qualification in new
circumstances.”
Megarry, J. in Shepherd Homes Ltd. v. Sandham (No. 2)4
observed: (All ER p. 1274d-e) “One must not, of course,
construe even a reserved judgment of even Russell, L.J. as if
it were an Act of Parliament;” And, in Herrington v. British
Railways Board5 Lord Morris said: (All ER p. 761c)
“There is always peril in treating the words of a speech or a
judgment as though they were words in a legislative
enactment, and it is to be remembered that judicial
utterances are made in the setting of the facts of a particular
case.”
10. Circumstantial flexibility, one additional or different
fact may make a world of difference between conclusions in
two cases. Disposal of cases by blindly placing reliance on
a decision is not proper.”
12- In the light of the aforesaid principles, we proceed to examine the
ratio of decisions relied upon by the learned Counsel for the parties in
light of the factual background in which the ratio was laid down.
Jayanti Mahotsav Smarak Trust v. V.R. Rudani, (1989) 2 SCC
691, the teachers of a private institution had filed a Writ Petition
claiming payment of their dues upon termination of their services
consequent to closure of the institution. The Hon’ble Supreme Court
proceeded to decide the questions involved after noting that: -
“5. As is obvious from these reliefs, the retrenched persons
were not agitating for their continuance in the service.
They seem to have made a trust with the destiny and
accepted the closure of the college. They demanded only the
arrears of salary, provident fund, gratuity and the closure
compensation which are legitimately due to them.
13. The decision in Vaish Degree College (1976) 2 SCC 58
was followed in Deepak Kumar Biswas case (1987) 2 SCC
252. There again a dismissed lecturer of a private college
was seeking reinstatement in service. The Court refused to
grant the relief although it was found that the dismissal was
wrongful. This Court instead granted substantial monetary
benefits to the lecturer. This appears to be the
preponderant judicial opinion because of the common law
principle that a service contract cannot be specifically
14. But here the facts are quite different and, therefore, we
need not go thus far. There is no plea for specific
performance of contractual service. The respondents are
not seeking a declaration that they be continued in service.
They are not asking for mandamus to put them back into
the college. They are claiming only the terminal benefits
and arrears of salary payable to them. The question is
whether the trust can be compelled to pay by a writ of
15. If the rights are purely of a private character no
mandamus can issue. If the management of the college is
purely a private body with no public duty mandamus will
not lie. These are two exceptions to mandamus. But once
these are absent and when the party has no other equally
convenient remedy, mandamus cannot be denied. It has to
be appreciated that the appellants trust was managing the
affiliated college to which public money is paid as
government aid. Public money paid as government aid
plays a major role in the control, maintenance and
working of educational institutions. The aided institutions
like government institutions discharge public function by
way of imparting education to students. They are subject to
the rules and regulations of the affiliating University.
Their activities are closely supervised by the University
authorities. Employment in such institutions, therefore, is
not devoid of any public character. So are the service
conditions of the academic staff. When the University
takes a decision regarding their pay scales, it will be
binding on the management. The service conditions of the
academic staff are, therefore, not purely of a private
character. It has super-added protection by University
decisions creating a legal right-duty relationship between
the staff and the management. When there is existence of
this relationship, mandamus cannot be refused to the
aggrieved party.
20. The term “authority” used in Article 226, in the context,
must receive a liberal meaning unlike the term in Article 12.
Article 12 is relevant only for the purpose of enforcement of
fundamental rights under Article 32. Article 226 confers
power on the High Courts to issue writs for enforcement of
the fundamental rights as well as non-fundamental rights.
The words “any person or authority” used in Article 226
are, therefore, not to be confined only to statutory
authorities and instrumentalities of the State. They may
cover any other person or body performing public duty. The
form of the body concerned is not very much relevant. What
is relevant is the nature of the duty imposed on the body.
The duty must be judged in the light of positive obligation
owed by the person or authority to the affected party. No
matter by what means the duty is imposed, if a positive
obligation exists mandamus cannot be denied.”
(Emphasis supplied)
14- It cannot be lost sight of that the aforesaid proposition was laid down
after taking note of the facts that the retrenched persons were not
agitating for their continuance in the service and They had demanded
only the arrears of salary, provident fund, gratuity and the closure
compensation which were legitimately due to them. There was no plea
for specific performance of contractual service. The respondents were
not seeking a declaration that they be continued in service. They were
not asking for mandamus to put them back into the college. They were
claiming only the terminal benefits and arrears of salary payable to
them and the question was whether the trust could be compelled to
pay by a writ of mandamus. The Court held that if the management of
the college is purely a private body with no public duty mandamus
will not lie. The appellant trust was managing an affiliated college to
which public money was paid as government aid and public money
paid as government aid plays a major role in the control, maintenance
and working of educational institutions. The aided institutions like
government institutions discharge public function by way of imparting
education to students. The Court held that employment in such
institutions is not devoid of any public character and so are the service
conditions of the academic staff. When the University takes a decision
regarding their pay scales, it will be binding on the management. The
service conditions of the academic staff are, therefore, not purely of a
private character.
15- In the present case, the college is a private minority institution which
does not receive any financial aid from the Government and the
grievance raised is against termination of services of a teacher and the
prayer made is for restitution of the appellant in service. Therefore,
the aforesaid principles laid down in Andi Mukta after specifically
highlighting that the petitioners in that case were not challenging the
termination of their services and they were not seeking restitution in
service, will not apply to the present case.
16- Abu Zaid and Ors. vs. Principal, Madrasa-Tul-Islah Saraimir,
Azamgarh and Ors. AIR 1999 All 64, was a petition filed by the
students who had been debarred from taking up their studies in the
institution on account of their involvement in a criminal case and it
was also not a case in which the legality of order of termination of
services of a minority institution was in issue. It was submitted before
the Court that “The respondents have illegally and without affording
any opportunity of hearing or of showing cause, prevented them from
attending their classes though no specific orders have been passed.
The petitioners have, of necessity, to file the present writ petition as
the respondents are bent upon to deprive the petitioners from their
lawful right to continue their studies In the respondent-institution”.
While deciding the Writ Petition, the Single Bench held that: -
“10. The respondent Madrasa-Tul-Islah, Saraimir,
Azamgarh admittedly is an institution duly recognised under
the Societies Registration Act and its affairs are regulated
by the approved bye-laws and scheme of administration.
The institution even though a minority one, is discharging a
public duty of imparting education, which has been held to
be a fundamental right. Therefore, in view of the law
discussed above, the petitioners are entitled to approach
this Court for issuing appropriate direction and orders in
the nature of writ.”
17- In Sandeep Chauhan and Ors. Vs. Respondent: State of U.P. and
Ors. 2001 (2) LBESR 644, a Division Bench of this Court held that
writ petition against Central Board of Secondary Education, Shiksha
Kendra. Preet Vihar, New Delhi, is maintainable.
18- In Ramesh Ahluwalia v. State of Punjab, (2012) 12 SCC 331, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court held that: -
“12. We have considered the submissions made by the
learned counsel for the parties. In our opinion, in view of
the judgment rendered by this Court in Andi Mukta Sadguru
Smarak Trust there can be no doubt that even a purely
private body, where the State has no control over its
internal affairs, would be amenable to the jurisdiction of the
High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution, for
issuance of a writ of mandamus. Provided, of course, the
private body is performing public functions which are
normally expected to be performed by the State authorities.
16. We are of the considered opinion that since the writ
petition clearly involves disputed questions of fact, it is
appropriate that the matter should be decided by an
appropriate tribunal/court.”
19- In Roychan Abraham versus State of U. P., (2019) 2 UPLBES 1148
(FB), a Full Bench of this Court held that: -
“Private Institutions imparting education to students from
the age of six years onwards, including higher education,
perform public duty primarily a State function, therefore are
amenable to judicial review of the High Court under Article
226 of the Constitution of India.”
20- In Marwari Balika Vidyalaya v. Asha Srivastava, (2020) 14 SCC
449, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that a writ application is
maintainable even as against the private unaided educational
institutions.
21- In Satimbla Sharma v. St Paul’s Senior Secondary School, (2011)
13 SCC 760 the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that: -
“unaided private minority schools over which the
Government has no administrative control because of their
autonomy under Article 30(1) of the Constitution are not
State within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution.
As the right to equality under Article 14 of the Constitution
is available against the State, it cannot be claimed against
unaided private minority schools.”
25. Where a statutory provision casts a duty on a private
unaided school to pay the same salary and allowances to its
teachers as are being paid to teachers of government-aided
schools, then a writ of mandamus to the school could be
issued to enforce such statutory duty. But in the present
case, there was no statutory provision requiring a private
unaided school to pay to its teachers the same salary and
allowances as were payable to teachers of government
schools and therefore a mandamus could not be issued to
pay to the teachers of private recognised unaided schools
the same salary and allowances as were payable to teachers
of government institutions.”
22- In Dr. S. N. Tripathi versus State of U. P. 2010 SCC OnLine All
1965, this Court held “that a Government aided private society
constituted under the Societies Registration Act, shall not be
‘State’ within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of
India. Hence the writ petition is not maintainable.” The Court
“15. However, it does not mean that the petitioner or the
employees of the Government added College are remediless.
In the event of Intermediate College, the District Inspectors
of Schools or Deputy Director of Region or the Director of
Education has got ample powers to interfere in accordance
with the provisions contained in the statute or under the
Payment of Salaries Act. In case a degree college is
affiliated to University, then under the U.P. Universities Act
and its statutes, the employees have got right to approach
the appropriate authority like Vice-Chancellor/Director of
Higher Education, to ventilate their grievance.
16. Accordingly, while holding that the present writ petition
as not maintainable, we give liberty to the petitioner to
approach the Director Higher Education with regard to
payment of salary in question or the Vice-Chancellor as the
case may be. In case the petitioner represents his cause, it
shall be considered and decided expeditiously say, within
three months from the date of receipt of a certified copy and
communicate the decision.”
23- In Committee of Management, La Martinere College, Lucknow v.
Vatsal Gupta & Ors., Civil Appeal No. 7030 of 2016 decided on
26.07.2016, the Hon’ble Supreme Court declined to interfere in a
judgment passed by this Court declining to entertain the writ petition
filed against unaided minority private institution and held that: -
“Appellant No.1 is an unaided minority private institution. We see
no reason how a writ petition against that institution could be
entertained. The High Court was clearly in error in entertaining the
writ petition and passing subsequent directions.”
24- After taking into consideration numerous previous decisions, in a
recent decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in St. Mary’s
Educational Society and another versus Rajandra Prasad
Bhargava and others, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 1091, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court has decided the following two questions: -
“(a) Whether a writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India is maintainable against a private
unaided minority institution?
(b) Whether a service dispute in the private realm involving
a private educational institution and its employee can be
adjudicated in a writ petition filed under Article 226 of the
Constitution? In other words, even if a body performing
public duty is amenable to writ jurisdiction, are all its
decisions subject to judicial review or only those decisions
which have public element therein can be judicially
reviewed under the writ jurisdiction?”
25- The Hon’ble Supreme Court has been pleased to answer the
questions in the following words: -
“69. We may sum up our final conclusions as under:—
(a)    An application under Article 226 of the Constitution is
maintainable against a person or a body discharging public
duties or public functions. The public duty cast may be
either statutory or otherwise and where it is otherwise, the
body or the person must be shown to owe that duty or
obligation to the public involving the public law element.
Similarly, for ascertaining the discharge of public function,
it must be established that the body or the person was
seeking to achieve the same for the collective benefit of the
public or a section of it and the authority to do so must be
accepted by the public.
(b)    Even if it be assumed that an educational institution is
imparting public duty, the act complained of must have a
direct nexus with the discharge of public duty. It is
indisputably a public law action which confers a right upon
the aggrieved to invoke the extraordinary writ jurisdiction
under Article 226 for a prerogative writ. Individual wrongs
or breach of mutual contracts without having any public
element as its integral part cannot be rectified through a
writ petition under Article 226. Wherever Courts have
intervened in their exercise of jurisdiction under Article
226, either the service conditions were regulated by the
statutory provisions or the employer had the status of
“State” within the expansive definition under Article 12 or
it was found that the action complained of has public law
element.
(c)  It must be consequently held that while a body may be
discharging a public function or performing a public duty
and thus its actions becoming amenable to judicial review
by a Constitutional Court, its employees would not have
the right to invoke the powers of the High Court conferred
by Article 226 in respect of matter relating to service where
they are not governed or controlled by the statutory
provisions. An educational institution may perform myriad
functions touching various facets of public life and in the
societal sphere. While such of those functions as would fall
within the domain of a “public function” or “public duty”
be undisputedly open to challenge and scrutiny under
Article 226 of the Constitution, the actions or decisions
taken solely within the confines of an ordinary contract of
service, having no statutory force or backing, cannot be
recognised as being amenable to challenge under Article
226 of the Constitution. In the absence of the service
conditions being controlled or governed by statutory
provisions, the matter would remain in the realm of an
ordinary contract of service.”
26- In Committee of Management, St. John Inter College v. Girdhari
Singh, (2001) 4 SCC 296, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that: -
“Since no appropriate guidelines have been provided for
exercise of power under Section 16-G(3)(a) of the Act, it
must be held that such an uncanalised power on the
Inspector or the Inspectress would tantamount to an inroad
into the power of disciplinary control of the Managing
Committee of the minority institution over its employees and
as such the said provision would not apply to the minority
institution, as was held by this Court in Frank Anthony case
The legislative intent is thus apparent that the legislature
never intended to subject the order of termination of an
employee      of     a    minority     institution   to    the
approval/disapproval of the Selection Board. In this view of
the matter, it is difficult for us to hold that an order of
termination of an employee of a minority institution cannot
be given effect to, unless approved by either the
Inspector/Inspectress, as provided in Section 16-G(3)(a) or
by the Selection Board, as provided under U.P. Act 5 of
1982. Under the provisions, as they stand, the conclusion is
irresistible that the question of prior approval of the
competent authority in case of an order of termination of an
employee of a minority institution does not arise.”
27- From a reading of the aforesaid judgments, the law as summarized in
St. Mary’s (Supra) is that the employees of a private educational
institution would not have the right to invoke the powers of the High
Court conferred by Article 226 in respect of matters relating to service
where they are not governed or controlled by the statutory provisions.
In light of St. John Inter College (Supra), the provisions of Section 16
G (3) of the U. P. Intermediate Education Act are not applicable to the
teachers employed in private minority institutions. There is no other
Statutory provision, which is alleged to have been violated in the
instant case. Therefore, we find ourselves in agreement with the view
taken by the Hon’ble Single Judge that the Writ Petition filed by a
former teacher against the private unaided minority institution
challenging the order of his termination and seeking restitution of his
service, is not maintainable.
28- The Writ Petition would not maintainable for one more reason that
there are several disputed questions of fact involved in the case. The
appellant claims that he had been duly selected and appointed, but he
has not filed a copy of the appointment letter or a contract of
appointment from which his service conditions may be ascertained.
The college has contended neither any advertisement had been issued
nor any selection was held and on a personal request made by the
appellant, he had been orally engaged to work and after he had
worked merely for about 4 months, he misbehaved with the Principal
of the college and the Principal had filed a First Information Report
against him on 31.03.1992. The appellant did not perform his duties
since thereafter. Whether or not the appellant was duly selected and
appointed, and what were his service conditions, are facts which are in
dispute and regarding which no material is available on record. For
this reason also, the Writ Petition would not be maintainable.
29-       In view of the aforesaid discussion, we find ourselves in agreement
with the view taken by the Hon’ble Single Judge that the Writ Petition
filed by the appellant was not maintainable and we do not find any
reason to interfere in the Judgment of the Hon’ble Single Judge.
30-       The Special Appeal lacks merits and, accordingly, it is dismissed.
31-       However, there will be no order as to costs.
Order date: 2.1.2023