Mr. Swapnil Ganguly, Deputy Advocate General for the State.
Mr. Anshuman Singh, Advocate for the IIigh Court of M.P.
Whether approved f;or reporting.. Yes.
+      As sccn from the language employed in the dcfinition clause of"Court"
in Section 2(1)(c) of the Arbitration Act and Conciliation Act,1996, the
I,cgislature intcndcd to confer power in rcspcct of the disputes
involving arbitration on the highest judicial Court of the District so as
to minimiyjc the supervisory role of the Courts in the arbitral process
and, thcrcforc, purposely cxcludcd any Civil Court of a grade inferior
to such Principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small Causes.
rlhus, in rcspcct of commercial disputes involving arbitration
only the Commercial Court of the status of District Judge or Additional
I)istrict Judge would bc the competent court to cntcrtain the matters
under Sections 9, 14, 34 & 36 of the Arbitration Act and Conciliation
Act,1996. 'Ihc impugned order to the extent of classifying the
commercial disputes having arbitration as subject matter on the basis of
mere valuation and conferring powers therefor on the Court of XX
Civil Judge Class-I, Bhopal, would bc violativc of relevant provisions
of law. I.Iowcvcr, it can bc sustained in so far as distribution of the work
of commercial disputes as per the value of the claim in cases other than
arbitration matters arc concerned.
+      The District Judge by virtue ofscctions 7 & 15 of the civil courtsAct
of 1958 would be entitled to distribute such work amongst any of the
Additional I)istrict Judges under his supervision, but not to any Court
of Civil Judge Class-I or Senior Civil Judge, or any Court of Small
+     The courtreferred..
•    Ess Kay Fincorp Limited and ors. vs. Suresh Choudhary and
a/#crs, AIR 2020 Raj 56.
•    FWH IV. Fwd tJs. Gfff4sLgoci.a/cs, 2019 SCC Online Guj 4236.
•    Vijay Cotton ancl Fiber Company Vs. Agarwal Cotton Spinning
Private Limited, R/Appeal No. 216 Of 2018 deofided on L1.02.20L9.
•    Kirtikumar Futarmal Jain vs. Valencia Corporation, .rr\20+9 SCC
•    Kandla Export Corporation and another vs. OCI Corporation and
•    State of Maharashtra, through Executive Engineer vs. Atlanta
Significant paragraphs: 11,12,13,14 & 15.
He;aLrd on ..11.02.2021 (IIearing Convened through Video Conferencing)
This writ petition has bccn filed by Yashwardhan Raghuwanshi, who is
an advocate practising law at Bhopal, assailing the validity of order dated 20`h
()ctober, 2020 passed by the I)istrict and Sessions Judge, 13hopal, in excrcisc
of powers confcrrcd upon him by Section 15(1) of the Madhya Pradesh Civil
Courts Act, 1958 (for short "the Civil Courts Act") read with Sections 194,
381(1) & 400 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,1973 (for short "Crpc"),
distributing civil and criminal business amongst the various Additional
District Judges and Subordinate Judges working under his supervision in the
I)istrict of Bhopal. Challcngc in particular is made to I:ntry No.45 of the
aforesaid order vide which the disputes/cases .filed under the provisions of
Sections 9, 14, 34 & 36 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (for
short "the Arbitration Act") involving commercial disputes under the
provisions of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 (further be called as "the
Commercial Courts Act") of spcciflcd value bctwccn Rs.31ac. to Rs.1 crorc,
have bccn assigned to the Court of xx Civil Judge Class-I, Bhopal.
2.       Mr. I)ccpcsh Joshi, lcamcd counsel for the petitioner submitted that
allocation/distribution of the judicial work by the I)istrict Judge with regard to
the commercial disputes filcd under Sections 9,14, 34 & 36 of the Arbitration
Act to the Court of XX Civil Judge Classnl is wholly incompctcnt inasmuch
as such allocation is based on wrongful interpretation of the legal provisions
of the Arbitration Act, the Commercial Courts Act as well as the Civil Courts
Act. It is contcndcd that the District Judge has passed the aforesaid order in
cxcrcisc of the powers conferred upon him under Sections 15(1) of the Civil
Courts Act read with Sections 194, 381(1) and 400 of Crpc. The work
distribution circular numbcrcd as Qfl-iK|01/2020 dated 20.10.2020 at ParasH
(C) & (I)) of I;ntry No.45 assigned power to undcrtakc trial of commercial
disputes for a specific category as per the Commercial Courts Act to the Court
of xx Civil Judge Class-I, Bhopal, having pecuniary jurisdiction over matters
valued between Rs. 31ac. and Rs.1 crorc, which also includes the matter that
comes under the purview of the Arbitration Act. I,earned counsel submitted
that the term "specified value" is dcfincd in Section 2(1)(i) of the Commercial
Courts Act. It is cvidcnt from the aforesaid provision that "spccificd value'° in
relation to a commercial dispute is dctcrmincd on the basis of the subject
matter of the rcspcctive suit, appeal or application. Sub-section (3) of Section
10 of the Commercial Courts Act provides that all applications or appeals
arising out of arbitration under the provisions of the Arbitration Act shall be
tried bcforc any Commercial Court having territorial jurisdiction. It is true
that the Court of XX Civil Judge Class-I, Bhopal has been designated as a
Commercial Court vide notification dated 02-03.04.2019 (Anncxure-P/2), but
the Arbitration Act is a consolidated statute for law relating to any form of
arbitration dispute. The I,cgislaturc in so providing, intended to strcamlinc the
commercial disputes arising out of arbitration in speedy marmcr, for which
purpose the Special Courts have bccn set up. With that cnd in view, the
Parliament has time and again made amcndmcnts in tune with modcm day
3.      Mr. I)ccpcsh Joshi, lcamcd counsel further argued that the term
"Court" for the purpose of Arbitration Act has been defined under Section
2(1 )(c) of the Arbitration Act which ;.73fer-cz/I.cz provides that "Court" means, in
cases of an arbitration other than intcmational commercial arbitration, the
Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a district, and includes the
IIigh Court in cxcrcisc of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having
jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject-matter of the
arbitration if the same had bccn the subject-matter of a suit, but does not
include any Civil Court of a grade inferior to such Principal Civil Court, or
any Court of Small Causes. In view of this provision, it is clear that any
commercial dispute involving arbitration shall bc tried only by Principal Civil
Court of the superior most jurisdiction in the I)istrict i.c. the Court of District
Judge or at the maximum, it could bc assigned to the Court of Additional
I)istrict Judge in a district as per Section 7 read with Section 15 of the Civil
Courts Act but it cannot bc assigned to a Court inferior thereto. It is contended
that a conjoint reading of two Acts, namely, Arbitration Act and Commercial
Courts Act, makes it clear that only such "commercial matters" which do not
involve the arbitration matters can bc assigned to a notified Commercial
Court of the status of a Senior Civil Judge but all matters involving both
Commercial Courts Act as well as Arbitration Act can only bc tried by the
Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction. The Court of XX Civil Judge
Class-I, Bhopal is thcrcforc wholly incompctcnt to cntcrtain, try and dccidc
the arbitration disputes.
4.       Mr. I)ccpcsh Joshi, lcamcd counsel for the petitioner invited attention
of the Court towards Section 11 of the Commercial Courts Act which I.#fer-
cz/I.cz provides that notwithstanding anything        contained    in this Act,     a
Commercial Court or a Commercial I)ivision, shall not cntcrtain or dccidc
any suit, application or proceedings relating to any commercial dispute in
respect of which the jurisdiction of Civil Court is cithcr cxprcssly or
implicdly barred under any other law for the time being in force. The
jurisdiction of Commercial Courts of the status of Senior Civil Judge to
entertain any suit, application or proceeding pertaining to Arbitration Act
involving commercial disputes is cxprcssly barred. Moreover, as per Section
13 of the Commercial Courts Act, an appeal against the order of Commercial
Court (XX Civil Judge Class-I) shall lie to the Commercial Appcllatc Court
(XIX Additional I)istrict Judge), which has bccn dcsignatcd as Commercial
Appellatc Court by notification of the Govcmment dated 26.10.2019 with
allocation of the work in sub-para (I)) and sub-para (1}) of Parah23 of the
order dated 04.02.2020 and then it has furrthcr provided appeal to the I-Iigh
Court. ()n the other hand, the Arbitration Act provides for only one appeal to
the I Iigh Court under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act against the order of the
Principal Civil Court. When the "commercial arbitration matters" arc clubbed
together, they create an ambiguity and conflict. It is howcvcr scttlcd law that
when thcrc is conflict betwccn two central enactments, the provision of
special law should prevail over the gcncral law. Thus on applying the doctrine
of harmonious construction on the provisions of both the statutes, it is clear
that they arc best harmonized by giving effect to the special statute i.e. the
Arbitration Act vis-aHvis the more gcncral statute i.c. the Commercial Courts
5.       Mr. I)ccpcsh Joshi, lcamcd counsel for the pctitioncr in support of his
arguments has rclicd on a I)ivision Bench judgment of Rajasthan I-Iigh Court
•mche case o[ ESs Kay Fincorp Limited and ors. vs. Suresh Choudhary and
offecrs, reported in AIR 2020 Raj 56; another I)ivision 13cnch judgment of
Gujarat I Iigh Court in the case of Jrw# IV. Fwd VLT. G£Kz4ssoci.&fes rcportcd` in
2019 SCC Online Guj 4236; judgments of Supreme Court in Jra#d/¢ Exporf
Corporation and another vs. OCI Corporoulon and another reported .in
(201&) 14 SCC 71S alnd State Of West Bengal and other vs. Associated
Co#/racforb` reported in (2015) 1 SCC 32; judgment of Uttarakhand IIigh
Court atNa:irhial passed .[n Appeal From Order No.378 Of 2019, [M/s. Dalip
Singh Adhikari vs. State of Uttarakhand and another] de[frod 2:3 .09 .2;019 aind
judgment of this Court in the case of Mo/d-rcA P¢ckngi.#g I/d. tJ§. I.D.
CoHf¢i.Hcrs, J#dorc rcportcd in 2020 (4) MPLJ 353.
6.       Mr. Swapnil Ganguly, lcarncd Deputy Advocate General for the state
relying upon the judgment o.f Suprcmc Court in the case of Jr¢#d/a Expor/
Corpor¢fi.o" /swpraJ submitted that the Suprcm,c Court in that case has held
that the Arbitration Act and the Commercial Court Act arc both speedy
resolution disputes bctwccn the parties. Thcsc statutes can be best harmoni7.ed
by giving cffcct to the special statue i.c. the Arbitration Act vis-a-vis the more
general statute i.c. the Commercial Courts Act, which shall bc left over to
opcratc in sphcrcs other than arbitration. It is argued that as per Section 7 of
the Civil Courts Act the Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a
I)istrict is the Court of I)istrict Judge. Sub-section (2) of Section 7 of the Civil
Courts Act provides that an Additional I)istrict Judge shall also discharge any
of the functions, of a I)istrict Judge, including the functions of a Principal
Civil Court of original jurisdiction which the I)istrict Judge may, by general
or special order, assign to him and in discharge of such functions, he shall
excrcisc the same powers as a I)istrict Judge. It is thus clear that it is the
Court of I)istrict Judge or the Court of Additional I)istrict Judge who both arc
compctcnt to cxcrcisc the powers of Principal Civil Court of an original
jurisdiction. Since the I-Iigh Court of Madhya Pradcsh does not have the
ordinary original civil jurisdiction as far as arbitration matters arc conccmcd,
it is the Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction which has been vested
with the powers to entertain disputes under Sections 9 & 34 of the Arbitration
Act. Lcamcd I)cputy Advocate General argued that as per Section 10(3) of
the Commercial Courts Act, applications or appeals under the Arbitration Act,
which wcrc carlicr filcd bcforc the Principal Civil Court of original
jurisdiction in a district, arc now being adjudicatcd by the Commercial Courts
exercising territorial jurisdiction over such arbitration inattcrs. It is only the
Court of I)istrict Judge or the Additional I)istrict Judge who have the power
to exercise the original jurisdiction of a Principal Civil Court. I,camed I)eputy
Advocate Gcncral in support of his arguments relied on the judgment of
Rajasthan I-Iigh Court in the case of JJi.rod#L5f¢ff Capper fi."i./ed vs. A4/s.
Bfe¢gw&/i. GT¢§eb` £fd, rcportcd in 2005 Vol. IV Wljc 251 and another
judgment of Rajasthan IIigh Court in Hi.ftd#s`f¢# Cbppcr ffd. tJs. P¢r¢mok"f
ffd. a#d ¢#ofrfecr rcportcd in 2018 SCC Online Raj 3055. As per Section 3
of the Commercial Courts Act thcrc can bc one or more Commercial Courts in
a district, one comprising of a I)istrict Judge or other of a Judge lesser than a
I)istrict Judge, depending upon the pecuniary limit of the matter involved.
I-Iowcvcr, when it comes to arbitration matters under the Commercial Courts
Act, the same arc cxclusivcly adjudicablc by the Principal Civil Court of
original jurisdiction, which is clearly the Court of I)istrict Judge or the Court
ofAdditional I)istrict Judge. Thcrcfore, the confcrmcnt of power on the Court
of civil Judge Class-I is contrary to law.
7.      Mr. Anshuman Singh, lcamcd counsel appearing for the Madhya
Pradcsh I-Iigh Court has argued that the question raised by the petitioner in the
prcscnt case stands already answered by the Supreme Court in Sf¢fe a/
Maharashtra, through Executive Engineer vs. Atlanta Limited raportod .Tn
(2014) 11 SCC 619, whcrcin, in the context of two Courts having concurrent
jurisdiction, it was held that appeal against the award in cases where the
I)istrict Court as the Principal Civil Court excrciscs original jurisdiction under
the Arbitration Act, would lie to the I-Iigh Court. It was held from the
definition of "Court" as provided under Section 2(1 )(c) of the Arbitration Act,
it is imperative that within the area of jurisdiction of the Principal District
Judge, only the IIigh Court of 13ombay is cxclusivcly the competent court
under its ordinary original civil jurisdiction to adjudicatc upon the matter. The
very inclusion of the IIigh Court "in excrcisc of its ordinary original civil
jurisdiction", within the definition of the "Court", will be rcndcred nugatory,
if the above conclusion is not to bc accepted. rrhis is bccausc, the "Principal
Civil Court of ()riginal Jurisdiction in a district", namely, the I)istrict Judge
conccmcd, being a court lower in grade than the I-Iigh Court, the I)istrict
Judge conccmcd would always cxcludc the IIigh Court from adjudicating
upon the matter. Accordingly, the principle cnshrincd in Section 15 of Code of
Civil Procedure cannot bc invoked whilst intcrprcting Section 2(1)(e) of the
Arbitration Act, held the Suprcmc Court.
8.      Wc have given our anxious consideration to the submissions made at
the Bar, studied the cited prccedcnts and perused the material available on
record.
9.     In order to apprcciatc the question of law raised in the matter, wc dccm
it appropriate to rcproducc the provision of Section 2(l)(c) of the Arbitration
"2. I)efinitions.-(1) In this Part, unless the contest otherwise requires,-
(c) "Court" means,n in the case of an arbitration other than international
commercial arbitration, the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction
in a district, and includes the I-Iigh Court in exercise of its ordinary
original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the questions
forming the subject-matter of the arbitration if the same had been the
subject-matter of a suit, but does not include any civil court of a grade
inferior to such principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small Causes."
Also rcproduccd hcrcundcr arc the provisions of Sections 2(1)(b), 2(1)
(e), 3,10 & 15(2) of the Commercial Courts Act, which read as under:-
"2. Definitions.-(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,-
(b) "Commercial Court" means the Commercial Court constituted under
(e) "District Judge" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in
clause (a) of article 236 of the Constitution of India;
3. Constitution of Commercial Courts.--(1) The State Goverrment,
may after consultation with the concerned I-Iigh Court, by notification,
constitute such number of Commercial Courts at District level, as it may
deem necessary for the purpose of exercising the jurisdiction and
Provided that with respect to the I-Iigh Courts having ordinary original
civil jurisdiction, the State Government may, after consultation with the
concerned I-Iigh Court, by notification, constitute Commercial Courts at
Provided further that with respect to a territory over which the High
Courts have ordinary original civil jurisdiction, the State Government
may, by notification, specify such pecuniary value which shall not be
less than three lakh rupees and not more than the pecuniary jurisdiction
exercisable by the District Courts, as it may consider necessary.
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the State
Government may, after consultation with the concerned I-Iigh Court, by
notification, specify such pecuniary value which shall not be less than
three lakh rupees or such higher value, for whole or part of the State, as
it may consider necessary.
(2) The State Government shall, after consultation with the concerned
High Court specify, by notification, the local limits of the area to which
the jurisdiction of a Commercial Court shall extend and may, from time
to time, increase, reduce or alter such limits.
(3) The State Government may, with the concurrence of the Chief
Justice of the I-Iigh Court appoint one or more persons having
expericncc in dealing with commercial disputes to be the Judge or
Judges, of a Commercial Court either at the level of District Judge or a
court below the level of a District Judge.
10. Jurisdiction in respect of arbitration matters.-Where the subject-
mattcr of an arbitration is a commercial dispute of a Specified Value
(1) If such arbitration is an international commercial arbitration, all
applications or appeals arising out of such arbitration under the
provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996)
that have been filed in a I-Iigh Court, shall be heard and disposed of by
the Commercial Division where such Commercial Division has been
constituted in such High Court.
(2) If such arbitration is other than an international commercial
arbitration, all applications or appeals arising out of such arbitration
under the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,1996 (26 of
1996) that have been filed on the original side of the High Court, shall
bc heard and disposed of by the Commercial Division where such
Commercial Division has been constituted in such High Court.
(3) If such arbitration is other than an international commercial
arbitration, all applications or appeals arising out of such arbitration
under the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of
1996) that would ordinarily lie before any principal civil court of
original jurisdiction in a district (not being a I-Iigh Court) shall be filed
in, and heard and disposed of by the Commercial Court exercising
territorial jurisdiction over such arbitration where such Commercial
Court has been constituted.
(2) All     suits  and   applications,   including   applications under the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996), relating to a
commercial dispute of a specified Value pending in any civil court in
any district or area in respect of which a Commercial Court has been
constituted, shall be transferred to such Commercial Court:
Provided that no suit or application where the final judgment has been
reserved by the Court prior to the constitution of the Commercial
Division or the Commercial Court shall be transferred either under sub-
10.     The Gujarat High Court in A4/s. Oar Corpor¢JJ.off tJs. ff¢#dJ¢ ExporJ
Coxpor¢fJ.o# reported in 2016 SCC Online Guj 5981 was dealing with a case
where M/s. OCI Corporation filed application under Section 15(5) of the
Commercial Courts Act read with Section 2(1)(e)(ii) and Section 47 of the
Arbitration Act, seeking clarification and appropriate direction for transfer of
execution petition pending before the District Court, Gandhidham-Kutch
either to the High Court of Gujarat or to                        appropriate Commercial
Court/Commercial Division. Gujarat High Court on analysis of provisions of
Sections 2(1)(e), 47 of the Arbitration Act and Section 2(1)(i), Sections 6,10,
15 of the Commercial Courts Act in Para-11 held as under:
" 11. The sum and substance of t.he above discussion would be,
(1) Where the subject matter of an arbitration is a commercial dispute of
a specified value and if such arbitration is international commercial
arbitration, all the applications or appeals arising out of such arbitration
under the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,1996 shall
be heard, decided and disposed of by the Commercial Division where
such commercial Division has been constituted in the High Court i.e. in
the present case High Court of Gujarat.
(2) Where the subject matter of an arbitration is a commercial dispute
but not of a specified value and if such arbitration is international
commercial arbitration, considering the provisions of Arbitration and
Conciliation (Amendment) Act, 2015 the same shall be heard, decided
and disposed of by the concerned High Court.
(3) Where the subject matter of an arbitration is a commercial dispute of
a specified value and if such arbitration is other than international
arbitration, all the applications or appeals arising out of such arbitration
under the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 shall
be filed in and heard, decided and disposed of by the Commercial Court
exercising territorial jurisdiction over such arbitration where such
commercial court has been constituted.
Considering    section   15   of the    Commercial    Courts Act,   all the
applications/appeals in question under the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996, therefore, are required to be transferred to the concerned
Commercial Division of the High Court of Gujarat or before the Gujarat
High Court or before the concerned commercial court and as observed
The aforesaid judgment was subjected to challenge before the Supreme
Court by Kandla Export Corporation, which was dismissed vide order dated
03.03.2017. Similar dispute again arose before Gujarat High Court at
Alhmeddtoed .Tn Wadodara Mahanag Seva Sadan Formaly known as
Application No. 13736 of 2018 decided on 06.09.2018) where:Tn T}IV.\ston
Bench of Gujarat High Court, relying upon its earlier judgment in A4/a. OCJ
Corpor¢fi.o# /sapr¢J, reiterated the same view. The question as to which
Court would be competent to exercise jurisdiction for execution of award
passed under the Arbitration Act was also answered by the Gujarat High
Court .in Vijay Cotton and Fiber Company Vs. Agarwal Cotton Spinning
Private Lindted, R/Appeal No. 216 of 2018 decided on 11.02.2019 Lwhding
that only the Commercial Court of competent jurisdiction would be the Court
to execute the decree and not the ordinary Civil Court constituted under
11.    The question that cropped up for consideration before the Division
Bench of the Rajasthan High Court in the case of Ess jK¢}; Fi.Hc.orp fi.mi./cd
rswpr¢J was as to which of the two Courts, namely, Principal Civil Court
having original jurisdiction in a district, as defined under Section 2(1)(e) of
the Arbitration Act, or the Commercial Court constituted under Section 3(1)
of the Commercial Courts Act, as defined under Section 2 (b) of that Act,
would be competent to execute arbitral award on a "commercial dispute"
passed under the Arbitration Act. The Rajasthan IIigh Court on analysis of
"17.        A conjoint reading of Section      10(3) and    15(2) of the
Commercial Courts Act makes it clear that an application under Section
36 of the Arbitration Act, seeking execution of award, satisfies the
requirement of "being application arising out of such arbitration under
the provisions of the Act of 1996". If such application is pending before
any Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a district, the same
shall   be  transferred  to   Commercial    Court   exercising    territorial
jurisdiction over such arbitration where such Commercial Court has
been constituted. In view of Section 10(3) of the Commercial Courts
Act, since the awards in the present set of cases have been rendered in
arbitral proceedings, their execution applications filed under Section 36
of the Arbitration Act having regard to provisions of Section 15(3) of
the Commercial Courts Act, which contemplates transfer of all such
pending applications to Commercial Court, as a legal corollary thereto,
would also be liable to be flled and maintained before the Commercial
Court and not the ordinary Civil Court/Principal Court of District Judge.
19.          In view of above, we answer the question of law formulated
in the beginning of this judgment in the terms that the Commercial
Court constituted under Section 3(i) of the Commercial Courts,
Commercial Division and Commercial Appellate Division of High
Courts Act, 2015, as defined in Section 2(b) of that Act, would be the
only competent Court to execute an arbitral award on a "commercial
dispute" passed under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 and
not the Principal Civil Court having the original jurisdiction in the
District i.e. the Court of District and Sessions Judge as defined under
Section 2(1)(e) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,1996."
12.    The Gujarat I-Iigh Court in the case of FWH IV/wd /§wpraJ was
examining the validity of the order passed by the 2nd Additional I)istrict
Judge, I)ahod by which it dcclincd to hear an application preferred by the
applicant thcrcin under Section 9 of the Arbitration Act on the ground that it
has no jurisdiction to hear and entertain such application and, therefore,
rcturncd the application to bc prcscntcd bcforc the Court of Principal Senior
Civil Judge. It was argued that Section 2(1)(c) of the Arbitration Act,
expressly cxcludcs any Civil Court of a grade inferior to such Principal Civil
Court, or any Court of Small Causes. In view of Section 11                           of the
Commercial Courts Act, which bars a Commercial Court from deciding any
suit, application or procccdings relating to any commercial dispute in respect
of which the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is cithcr expressly or implicdly
barred under any other law for the time being in force, the Commercial Court
which is a Civil Court of a grade inferior to such Principal Civil Court, or any
Court of small causes, would bc barred from exercising jurisdiction under
Section 9 or any provision of the Arbitration Act.
13.   Ln Kirtikumar Futarmal Jain vs. Valencia Corporation raportod in
2019 SCC Online Guj 3972 challcngc was made to the order passed by the
Principal I)istrict Judge, Surat in the Commercial Appeal preferred by the
respondents against the order passed by the Arbitral Tribunal on the
application made by the applicant under Section 17 of the Arbitration Act.
The Commercial Court allowed the application fllcd under Section 37(2) of
the Arbitration Act. The applicant in those facts approached the Commercial
Court at Vadodara by way of application under Section 9 of the Arbitration
Act with the prayer that the respondents bc rcstraincd from transferring or
alienating the properties of the l<`irm or creating any right in favour of any
third party. ()n behalf of the pctitioncr it was argued that the impugned order
passed by the Principal I)istrict Judge was without jurisdiction inasmuch as
the Principal I)istrict Judge had no power to cntcrtain an application under
Section 37 of the Arbitration Act. The Gujarat I Iigh Court in Paras- 16.1, 16.2
"16.1        Insofar as the jurisdiction of the learned principal District
Judge to entertain the appeal under section 37 of the Arbitration Act is
concerned, the learned counsel invited the attention of the court to sub-
section (2) of section 37 of the Arbitration Act to submit that the appeal
in the present case is preferred under clause (b) of sub-section (2) of
section 37, which provides for an appeal to a court from an order of an
Arbitral Tribunal granting or refusing to grant an interim measure under
section 17 of that Act. It was submitted that the expression employed in
sub-section (2) o.f section 37 is "court". Refercncc was made to clause
(e) of section 2 of the Arbitration Act, which defines "court" to mean, in
the case of an arbitration other than international comrfuercial arbitration,
the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a district, and
includes the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil
jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the question forming the
subject matter of the arbitration if the same had been the subject matter
of a suit, but does not include any civil court of a grade inferior to such
principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small Causes. It was submitted
that therefore clause (e) of section 2 of the Arbitration Act lays down
that "court"shall mean the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction
in a district, and specifically excludes any civil court of a grade inferior
to such principal Civil Court or any court of Small Causes.
16.2         Reference was made to section 12 of the Gujarat Civil
Courts Act, 2005, which provides for jurisdiction of a court of District
Judge and postulates that a court of District Judge shall be the principal
Civil Court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of its
jurisdiction. It was submitted that the word "court" used under section
37(2)(b) of the Arbitration Act is the District Court. Moreover, section
2(e) of the Arbitration Act, specifically excludes any court of a grade
inferior to such principal Civil Court or any Court of Small Causes from
the ambit of the expression "court". It was submitted that source of
appeal in this case is under section 37 of the Arbitration Act and the
right flows from section 37. It was submitted that access to such appeal
can be channelised through the concerned sect,ion of the Commercial
Courts Act, but the right to appeal does not flow from the Commercial
20.5          In this regard it may be noted that section 11          of the
Commercial Courts Act provides that a Commercial Court or a
Commercial Division shall not cntcrtain or decide any suit, application
or proceedings relating to any commercial dispute in respect of which
the jurisdiction of the civil court is either expressly or impliedly barred
under any law for the time being in force. Clause (i) of section 2(e) of
the Arbitration Act which defines the expression 'court' not only vests
jurisdiction in the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a
district, including the IIigh Court in cxcrcise of its ordinary original
civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to dccidc the questions forming the
subject matter of the arbitration if the same had been the subject matter
of a suit, but it expressly excludes any civil court of a grade inferior to
such principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small Causes.
20.6          Thus,   section 2(e)(i)     of the Arbitration Act expressly
excludes any civil court of a grade inferior to such principal Civil Court,
or any Court of Small Causes. Therefore, in view of section 11 of the
Commercial Courts Act, which bars a Commercial Court from deciding
any suit application or proceedings relating to any commercial dispute
in respect of which the jurisdiction of the civil court is either expressly
or impliedly barred under any other law for the time being in force; read
with the provisions of section 37(2)(b) of the Arbitration Act, any
Commercial Court which is a civil court of a grade inferior to such
principal Civil Court or any Court of Small causes, would be barred
from exercising jurisdiction under section 37(2) (b) of the Act. The
Supreme Court in State of West Bengal v. Associated Contractors
(supra), has held that section 2(1)(e) contains an exhaustive definition
marking out only the Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a
district or a I-Iigh Court having original civil jurisdiction in the State,
and no other court as 'court' for the purpose of Part 1 of the Arbitration
14.    It would be thus evident from the language employed by the
I,cgislaturc in the dcfinition clause of "Court" in Section 2(1)(c) of the
Arbitration Act that it intcndcd to confer power in respect of the disputes
involving arbitration on the highest judicial Court of a I)istrict so as to
minimize the supervisory role of the Courts in the arbitral process and,
therefore, purposely excluded any Civil Court of grade inferior to such
Principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small Causes. The Court of superior
most jurisdiction in a I)istrict is the Court of I)istrict Judge as interpreted by
the Supreme Court in the case of zl//¢ftf¢ £i.mi.Jcd /s#pr¢J. The jurisdiction in
rcspcct of arbitration matter is provided in Section 10 of the Commercial
Courts Act and Section 15 thcrcof contcmplatcs 1,ransfcr of all suits and
applications including the application under the Arbitration Act pending in
Civil Courts in any district or pcndi.ng in I-Iigh Court where Commercial
Division is constituted or area in respect of which the Commercial Courts
have bccn constituted. While Section 11 of the Commercial Courts Act bars
the jurisdiction of a Commercial Court or a Commercial Division to entertain
or decide any suit, application or procccdings relating to any commercial
dispute in rcspcct of which the jurisdiction of the Civil Court is cithcr
cxprcssly or impliedly barred under any other law for the time being in force,
Section 21 of the Commercial Courts Act stipulates that save as otherwise
provided, the provisions o.f this Act shall have cffcct, notwithstanding
anything inconsistent thcrewith contained in any other law .for the time being
in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law for the time
being in force other than this Act. Scgrcgation of an arbitration matters on the
basis of a pecuniary limit is not what the law provides for. All the arbitration
matters, irrcspcctivc of the value of claim, arc required to bc adjudicated by
Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction. Thcr6forc, it is clear that in
rcspcct o.f commercial disputes involving an arbitration dispute only the
Commercial Court of the status of I)istrict Judge or Additional I)istrict Judge
would bc the competent court to entertain the matters under Sections 9,14, 34
& 36 of the Arbitration Act. Although, the .impugned order can bc sustained in
so far as the distribution of the commercial disputes of the value of the claim
in cases other than arbitration matters arc conccmcd. The impugned order to
the cxtcnt of classifying the commercial disputes having subject matter of
arbitration on the basis of valuation and conferring powers therefor on the
Court of XX Civil Judge Class-I, Bhopal, would bc violative of relevant
provisions of law.
15.    In view of the above discussions, the prcscnt petition deserves to
succeed. The Entry No.45 of the impugned order dated 20.10.2020 is set
aside. It is hcrcby dcclarcd that the Court of District Judge as the Principal
Civil Court of original jurisdiction would bc compctcnt to dccidc the
matters/disputes filed under the provisions of Sections 9, 14, 34 & 36 of the
Arbitration Act and also under the provisions of the Commercial Courts Act
regardless of the value of claim. IIowcvcr, the I)istrict Judge by virtue of
Section 7 read with Section 15 of the Civil Courts Act would be entitled to
distribute such work amongst any of the Additional District Judges under his
supervision, but not to any Court of Civil Judge Class-I or Senior Civil Judge,
or any Court of Small Causes.
The writ petition is accordingly allowed. A copy of this order be
cndorscd to the Registrar General of the IIigh Court for being circulated
amongst all the District & Sessions Judges of the State.