22.07.2019 as handed down by learned Principal Judge, Family Court,
Panchkula (for short, ‘the trial Court’) whereby the petition preferred by
the appellant-petitioner-husband (here-in-after to be referred as ‘the
petitioner’) against the respondent-wife (here-in-after to be referred as ‘the
respondent’) under Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (for short,
‘the Act’) for seeking the dissolution of their marriage by way of a decree
of divorce, has been dismissed, the petitioner has filed this appeal.
2.            Shorn and short of unnecessary details, the facts, as canvassed
by the petitioner in the petition, are that the marriage between the parties
was solemnised on 26.09.2014 at Chandigarh according to Hindu rites and
ceremonies. No issue has born out of this wedlock. The respondent is quite
FAO No.6969 of 2019 (O&M)                  -2-
arrogant and rude person and she used to quarrel with him and his family
members over petty matters and to frequently threaten to commit suicide.
She did not attend the religious function of ‘Sai Sandhya’, arranged by his
family, on 11.01.2015. He, along-with the respondent as well as his mother
and sister, had gone to Mata Naina Devi Temple on 25.01.2015 to pay
obeisance and the respondent created a scene and even slapped him there in
the presence of the entire gathering and while returning from there, they
visited the Gurudwara at Anandpur Sahib and she created nuisance there
also. After returning to Panchkula, she left their home on 26.01.2015 and
took away her belongings. Then, on 27.01.2015, she and her parents came
to Panchkula and she (respondent) banged at the doors and windows of
their house and shouted loudly and also threatened to involve him in some
false complaint/case.
3.            The petitioner has also averred that on 01.02.2015, the
respondent called him and expressed her desire to end the relationship with
him. On 09.02.2015 and again on 15.02.2015, she had come to their house
at Delhi and had taken away all her belongings including her educational
qualification certificates and clothes etc. On 26.02.2015, the respondent
came there in the midnight at about 01.00 A.M. and started shouting. He
opened the door and she entered into the house but throughout the night
hours, she quarrelled with him and thus, mentally harassed him. On the
same date, she again created a scene in the evening hours and started crying
after deliberately locking the room of their house while he was in the office
and sent messages to him and his mother threatening therein that she would
FAO No.6969 of 2019 (O&M)                  -3-
commit suicide. In these circumstances, he got a DDR lodged at the Police
Station at Delhi to seek protection from her. Then, she returned to her
parental house at Ambala and again, visited his house at Panchkula along-
with her parents and tried to forcibly enter into the house. On 02.03.2015,
she lodged a complaint with the Crime Against Women Cell against him,
his mother and sister as well as his uncle but later-on, she made a statement
before the police authorities to the effect that she did not want to pursue her
complaint further and the same be filed and accordingly, the said complaint
was filed. However, during the pendency of this complaint, he and his
family members were called by the police authorities on 7th, 9th, 12th and
14th March, 2015 and the respondent and her parents misbehaved with them
on the said occasions.
4.           The petitioner has, further, averred that on 14.03.2015, the
concerned Assistant Commissioner of Police sent the parties to Baldev
Nagar Police Station. The respondent again submitted a complaint against
him and his family members there also and in pursuance of the same, the
police arrested him by invoking the provisions of Sections 107/151 Cr.PC
and prepared a Calendra against him and his mother. The respondent and
her parents had also been challaned under the said provisions. He appeared
before the Executive Magistrate, Ambala on six dates of hearing in respect
of the above-mentioned proceedings but the respondent did not make any
statement before the said Authority and finally, he was discharged in the
said proceedings on 18.08.2015. Even thereafter, the respondent kept on
moving false complaints against him and his family members at Crime
FAO No.6969 of 2019 (O&M)                     -4-
Against Women Cell, so as to harass and mentally torture them and she has
been maligning and tarnishing their image and reputation before their
relatives and all the concerned and has, thus, subjected him to cruelty and
in such circumstances, it would not be possible for the parties to live
5.            In her written statement, the respondent has contested the
claim of the petitioner by asserting that the petition was not maintainable
because the petitioner himself was guilty of deserting her at the instance of
his mother and sister who were adamant to oust her from her matrimonial
home. The petitioner had also disclosed to her that his mother and sister
had threatened to commit suicide in case he took her back to his house. Her
mother-in-law also demanded Skoda luxury car in dowry. She (respondent)
had sent the message qua committing suicide, in the extreme circumstances
when she had been left on the road in the late hours. Whenever she and her
parents tried to talk to the petitioner and his family members to settle the
dispute and visited their home at Panchkula for this purpose, they refused
for the same. The petitioner had levelled false and frivolous allegations in
the petition and therefore, the same deserved dismissal.
6.            The parties were put to the trial by framing the following
issues on 04.02.2017:-
“1.      Whether the petitioner is entitled for grant of
decree of divorce on the grounds of cruelty as
Both the parties led their evidence, oral as well as
FAO No.6969 of 2019 (O&M)                   -5-
documentary, in support of their respective contentions and after
appreciating and evaluating their evidence and hearing their learned
counsel, the trial Court settled issue No.1 against the petitioner and
accordingly, dismissed the divorce petition.
7.            We have heard learned counsel for both the parties and have
also perused the record thoroughly.
8.            Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the
respondent is a short-tempered person and she used to quarrel with the
petitioner and his family members over trivial matters and to frequently
threaten them that she would commit suicide and moreover, she has been
moving false complaints to the police against them and she even slapped
the petitioner in Mata Naina Devi Temple in the presence of the gathering
as well as at Gurudwara, Anandpur Sahib and also created a ruckus in the
rented accommodation at Delhi where she and the petitioner had resided
for some time after their marriage and the petitioner was constrained to
move an application to the SHO of the area for seeking protection in view
of her errant act and conduct and thus, the respondent has subjected the
petitioner to cruelty after their marriage and hence, it would not be possible
for the petitioner to live with the respondent and rather, their marriage has
irretrievably broken down and is a dead marriage but the trial Court did not
appreciate the evidence, as led on the record and the contentions as raised
by the petitioner, in the right perspective and has, erroneously, dismissed
the said petition vide the impugned judgment and decree and the same
deserve to be set-aside.
9.            Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent has argued that
the petitioner is under the influence of his mother and sister who started
feeling insecure after the marriage of the parties and they did not want the
petitioner to devote time and attention to the respondent and started
poisoning him against her (respondent) which resulted in the marital
discord between the parties and the petitioner and his family members had
turned the respondent out of her matrimonial home on 26.01.2015 and the
petitioner never reciprocated to the endeavours made by the respondent and
her parents to get the matter compromised between the parties and in these
circumstances, it is quite explicit that it is the petitioner himself who has
harassed and ill-treated the respondent and therefore, he cannot take the
benefit out of his own wrong by seeking the dissolution of his marriage
with the respondent. To buttress his contentions, he has placed reliance
(SC) and Savitri Pandey Versus Prem Chandra Pandey (2002) 1 R.C.R.
10.          Undisputedly, the marriage between the parties had been
solemnised on 26.09.2014 at Chandigarh and soon thereafter, the parties
went to Delhi in connection with their respective jobs and started residing
in a rented accommodation there. On 26.01.2015, the respondent was
allegedly turned out of her matrimonial home at Panchkula and she went to
her parental home at Ambala. However, Exhibit P-2 is the screen-shot of
the WhatsApp messages sent by the respondent to the petitioner on 28th and
30th January, 2015 wherein she has mentioned that she could not envisage
FAO No.6969 of 2019 (O&M)                  -7-
her life with him (petitioner). Exhibit P-3 is the transcript of the audio-chat
between the parties that took place on 01.02.2015 and a perusal of the same
also shows that the respondent had expressed therein that they would
proceed towards separation. Exhibit P-4 is another transcript of the audio-
chat of the same day between the parties wherein the respondent has
spoken about engaging a lawyer and qua the preparation of the divorce-
papers. Exhibit P-5 is, again, a screen-shot of the WhatsApp chat of that
very day wherein the respondent is shown to have made a request to the
petitioner to return her things on the next day.         The above-discussed
evidence renders the version of the respondent regarding her having been
ousted by the petitioner and his family members from her matrimonial
house at Panchkula, highly doubtful.
11.           Further, Exhibit P-13 is the copy of the messages (SMS) sent
by the respondent to the petitioner on 26.02.2015 threatening him therein
that she would either go to the police or commit suicide as she was on the
road because the petitioner had locked the house. Though the respondent
has alleged that on that day, the petitioner had locked their house at Delhi
and he also did not respond to her phone calls and she was on the road in
the late hours but it is worth-while to mention here that while appearing as
PW1, the petitioner has categorically deposed during his cross-examination
that the respondent was having a second set of keys of their house with her
and on the said day also, she came back in the evening and opened the
house and during the day, she had threatened him several times about her
committing suicide and his facing dire consequences of legal proceedings
FAO No.6969 of 2019 (O&M)                  -8-
and she had sent the similar messages to his mother and other relatives
also. During her cross-examination as RW2, the respondent has admitted
that there were two keys of the rented accommodation at Delhi and though
she has further stated that she lost her key when she went to U.S. in the first
week of December, 2014 but however, the fact remains that she has not led
any evidence on the file to show that she had ever asked the petitioner to
get the new lock for their home or to make some alternative arrangement in
such an eventuality. Then, Exhibit P-14 is the copy of the screen-shot of
the message, sent by her to the petitioner on the same day, threatening him
therein that she was going to commit suicide because he (petitioner) did not
pick her call and that he would be responsible for her death. Exhibit P-15 is
the copy of the application, moved by the petitioner to the SHO, Gobind
Puri Police Station, New Delhi on 26.02.2015, wherein he has stated that
the respondent came to their house on that day at about 01.00 A.M. and she
disturbed him throughout the night and he apprehended danger to his life
and property at her and her family members’ hands and hence, he needed
protection. Further, Exhibit P-16 is the transcript of the audio-chat which
took place between the parties on the very next day, i.e on 27.02.2015,
wherein the respondent is shown to have used the unparliamentary and
rather, abusive and filthy language for the petitioner.
12.           Though the respondent has examined SI Dharam Singh as
RW1 who has made depositions in his affidavit Exhibit RW1/A to the
effect that he had made efforts to get the matter reconciled between the
parties and that the petitioner had told him that his mother and sister would
FAO No.6969 of 2019 (O&M)                   -9-
commit suicide in case he took the respondent back to his home but
however, it is pertinent to mention here that Exhibit P-17 is the transcript of
the audio-chat that took place between this witness and the petitioner on
28.02.2015 wherein he (RW1) has clearly expressed that the petitioner was
a nice person but he (RW1) did not like the behaviour of the respondent as
she had talked over-cleverly and during his cross-examination, he (RW1)
has feigned ignorance regarding the said conversation and has not been
able to specifically deny the same. It being so, the testimony of this witness
does not inspire any confidence.
13.           To add to it, Exhibit P-18 is the copy of the complaint dated
02.03.2015 (shown to have been received in the office of D.C.P, Ambala
on 05.03.2015) as moved by the respondent against the petitioner and his
family members while levelling several allegations against them. However,
Exhibit P-19 is the copy of the statement made by the respondent before
the police on 28.03.2015 mentioning therein that she did not want any
action on the above-said complaint and the same be filed and Exhibit P-20
is the copy of the proceedings as carried out by the competent police
authorities to file the afore-said complaint. Though Exhibit P-32 is the copy
of another complaint moved by the respondent to the above-said Authority
with the allegations that her as well as her father’s signatures had been
procured on the blank papers on the pretext of marking their attendance
before the police authorities and the same had been misused by recording
her statement incorrectly thereon but however, vide Exhibit P-33, the afore-
mentioned complaint had also been recommended to be filed on the ground
FAO No.6969 of 2019 (O&M)                   -10-
that no cognizable offence was found to have been made out.
14.           Further, Exhibit P-22 is the copy of another complaint dated
14.03.2015 moved by the respondent against the petitioner and his family
members and Exhibit P-23 is the copy of the Calendra (report) as prepared
and presented against them under Sections 107, 151 and 150 Cr.PC. As per
Exhibit P-25, the petitioner had been arrested in connection with the said
proceedings but it would be relevant and necessary to point it out here that
in Para No.58 of his affidavit Exhibit PW1/A, the petitioner (PW1) has
categorically deposed that he was discharged in the above-said proceedings
on 18.08.2015 and that the respondent never came forward to make any
statement during these proceedings. To cap it all, Exhibit P-26 is the copy
of the Calendra as prepared against the respondent and her parents under
Sections 107 and 150 Cr.PC at the instance of ASI Om Parkash, who has
specifically recorded therein that the respondent and her parents got angry
and tried to hit the petitioner and his mother and then, he had to intervene
and but for his intervention, any cognizable offence could have been
committed. Again, Exhibit P-65 is the copy of the complaint preferred by
the respondent against the petitioner and his family members under various
provisions of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005
and the same is stated to be pending in the Court. During her cross-
examination as RW2, the respondent has made categoric depositions to the
effect that she had filed the afore-said complaint after the petitioner filed
the divorce petition and that she had also moved the petition under Section
9 of the Act and another petition under Section 125 Cr.PC against the
FAO No.6969 of 2019 (O&M)                    -11-
15.           The above-discussed facts and circumstances unequivocally
speak volumes of the fact that the respondent has incessantly been filing
the complaints against the petitioner as well as his family members and the
petitioner even had to go behind the bars in connection with one of those
complaints, resulting in harm/damage to his image and reputation in the
eyes of their relatives and the society at large. It has recently been observed
by a three Judges’ Bench of the Apex Court in Joydeep Majumdar Versus
Bharti Jaiswal Majumdar 2021 (2) R.C.R. (Civil) 289 that:-
“12. When the appellant has suffered adverse
consequences in his life and career on account of the
allegations made by the respondent, the legal
prevented only because, no Court has determined that
the allegations were false. The High Court however
felt that without any definite finding on the credibility
of the wife’s allegation, the wronged spouse would be
disentitled to relief. This is not found to be the correct
way to deal with the issue.
13.     Proceeding with the above understanding, the
question which requires to be answered here is
whether the conduct of the respondent would fall
within the realm of mental cruelty. Here the
allegations are levelled by a highly educated spouse
and they do have the propensity to irreparably
damage the character and reputation of the appellant.
When the reputation of the spouse is sullied amongst
his colleagues, his superiors and the society at large,
it would be difficult to expect condonation of such
FAO No.6969 of 2019 (O&M)                    -12-
The present case is squarely covered by the above-discussed
observations and in the light of the same, it is held that the respondent has
subjected the petitioner to cruelty after their marriage. Even otherwise, the
parties are living separately since 26.01.2015, i.e for the last more than 07
years and therefore, their marriage can safely be termed as a dead marriage.
16.           The observations, as made by Hon’ble the Supreme Court in
Ashok Kumar Jain (supra) and Savitri Pandey (supra), are of no avail to
the respondent because the facts and circumstances of the case in hand are
quite distinguishable from those of the cited above. In Ashok Kumar Jain
(supra), the appellant-husband had married earlier and a son had born out
of that wedlock but he had concealed this fact at the time of marrying the
respondent and even during the pendency of the appeal, he had placed the
matrimonial advertisement in the newspaper and thus, he wished to enter
into third marriage whereas it is no so in the present case. In Savitri
Pandey (supra) also, the Apex Court observed that the trial Court as well
as the High Court had found on the facts that the wife had failed to prove
the allegations of cruelty attributed to the respondent and the concurrent
findings of facts, arrived at by the Courts, could not be disturbed in
exercise of the powers under Article 136 of the Constitution of India
whereas, in the instant case, the petitioner has led cogent and sufficient
evidence on the record to prove the factum of his having been subjected to
cruelty by the respondent after their marriage.
17.           As a sequel to the fore-going discussion, the present appeal is
FAO No.6969 of 2019 (O&M)                  -13-
allowed and the impugned judgment and decree dated 22.07.2019 passed
by the trial Court are set-aside and the petition filed by the petitioner-
husband against the respondent under Section 13 of the Act is allowed and
the marriage, as solemnized between the parties, hereby stands dissolved
under Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.