Exemption is allowed subject to all just exceptions.
Application stands disposed of.
1.    The     present petition has been filed for seeking directions to the
Family Court, Rohini, North West, Delhi to follow (i) the orders of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, Delhi High Court and directions
issued by Principle Judge, Family Court (Headquarter), Dwarka, Delhi
regarding hearing of Mutual Divorce cases to be taken up via video
conferencing and (ii) to direct Family Courts of Delhi to follow the
CM(M) 486/2022                                                           Page 1 of 7
existing guidelines or issue appropriate guidelines as this Court may
deem fit, in relation to virtual system of hearings.
2.      It is stated that the petitioner and the respondent got married on 29th
November, 2017 at Delhi, in accordance with Hindu rites and
ceremonies and residing together within the jurisdiction of learned
Judge, Family Court, Rohini, North West, Delhi. The parties currently
work and reside in Portugal and thus, the parties signed and attested
their case file before the notary in Portugal. The parties also filed an
application to conduct the Court hearing through video conferencing.
3.     On 22nd April, 2022, when the case was taken up, the joint counsel of
the parties was physically present in the Court and both the parties were
logged in virtually through Cisco webex. However, the learned Judge,
Family Court, Rohini, North West, Delhi did not record the statement
of the parties and adjourned the matter for 3 rd August, 2022 ordering
that both the parties are residing and working for gain at Portugal and
are not within the jurisdiction of the Court today. It was further stated
that no SPA is on record to represent the parties.
4.     It is stated that the order passed by the learned Judge, Family Court,
Rohini, North West, Delhi dated 22nd April, 2022 is in complete
disregard to the directions issued by :
    Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in para no. 22 of Civil Appeal
No.11158/2017 titled as ‘Amardeep Singh Vs. Harveen Kaur’.
 Hon’ble Delhi High Court in MAT.APP (F.C.) No. 9/2021 titled
as ‘Mukesh More Versus Soni Kumari’.
 The Hon’ble Delhi High Court via notice No.34/RG/DHC/2022
dated 11th February, 2022
5.   It has further been stated that the order is also in violation of the
directions issued by this Court from time to time regarding conducting
Court proceedings through Video Conferencing. It is stated that there is
no requirement for the parties to be either physically present
themselves or any SPA to be physically present in Court, and the Court
should allow the first motion between the parties after recording their
statements via video conferencing.
6.    Sh. Prateek Maheshwari, learned counsel for the parties submits that
an application under Section 151 CPC was also moved to conduct the
Court proceedings virtually as both the parties were residing in
Portugal and thus, were unable to travel to India for physical hearing.
Learned counsel further submits that the reluctance of the Judge,
Family Court, Rohini, North West, Delhi in recording the
proceedings/statements of the parties virtually is not in accordance with
the directions issued by the Superior Courts from time to time.
7.   In recent past, the justice dispensation system has seen much
advancement in the use of technology in conducting the Court
proceedings. Courts have come forward to use the system of video
conferencing for efficient and expeditious conduct of proceedings for
the purpose of benefit of all stakeholders of the system.
8.    In ‘Amardeep Singh Vs. Harveen Kaur’ Supreme Court in Civil
Appeal No.11158/2017 arising out of Special Leave Petition (civil)
No. 20184 of 2017 while dealing with a petition relating to grant of
mutual divorce inter alia held as under;
“22. Needless to say that in conducting such proceedings the
Court can also use the medium of video conferencing and also
permit genuine representation of the parties through close
relations such as parents or siblings where the parties are unable
to appear in person for any just and valid reason as may satisfy
the Court, to advance the interest of justice.
9.     In Reena Chadha & Anr. V. Govt. Of NCT of Delhi 2021 SCC
OnLine Del 4336 in W.P.(C) 6653/2021, this Court was dealing with a
petition filed by an Indian Couple residing in the United States of
America (USA), seeking a direction to the concerned Sub-Divisional
Magistrate (SDM), New Delhi to register their marriage in accordance
with the provisions of the Delhi (Compulsory Registration of Marriage)
Order, 2014 without insisting on their physical appearance before him.
This Court after taking into account, the relevant law inter alia held as
“19. In light of the aforesaid, I am of the view that, in times
such as these, when technology has proven to be the bridge that
ensured uninterrupted communication, widespread dissemination
of information in public interest and the smooth functioning of
society, the Court cannot allow a rigid interpretation of the statute
to prevent citizens from exercising their rights.
20. In a little over half a decade, since the Registration Order was
notified, the universe has undergone a sea change but the
Registering Authority, while exercising its power and jurisdiction
under the Registration Order is refusing to recognize the reality
that with the technology as is available today, web portals and
Video Conferencing have become almost the norm.
21. In fact, if not for the acceptance of Video Conferencing as the
norm, this Court and the judicial system in this country would have
come to a grinding halt, and would not have been able to function
at a time, when there was the greatest need for the citizens of this
CM(M) 486/2022                                                         Page 4 of 7
country to have access to justice. These aspects appear to have
been simply overlooked by the Registering Authority, who's
continuing to insist on that the parties must remain present
physically before him.
22. At this stage, it may also be useful to refer to the observations
of the Supreme Court in paragraph 24 of the judgment in
Anuradha Bhasin v. Union of India, (2020) 3 SCC 637 in which
the Court emphasized the need to adapt technological
advancements while dispensing justice. The same reads as under:
“24. Law and technology seldom mix like oil and water.
There is a consistent criticism that the development of
technology is not met by equivalent movement in the law. In
this context, we need to note that the law should imbibe the
technological development and accordingly mould its rules
so as to cater to the needs of society. Non recognition of
technology within the sphere of law is only a disservice to
the inevitable. In this light, the importance of internet cannot
be underestimated, as from morning to night we are
encapsulated within the cyberspace and our most basic
activities are enabled by the use of internet.”
(Emphasis supplied)
10. In this case, this Court has also taken into consideration the decision of
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in State of Maharashtra V. Praful B.
Desai (Dr), (2003) 4 SCC 601 and in Charanjit Kaur Nagi V.Govt. Of
NCT of Delhi & Ors., 2007 SCC OnLine Del 1393.
11.   This Court in ‘Mukesh More Versus Soni Kumari’ MAT.APP (F.C.)
No. 9/2021 vide its order dated 22nd January, 2021 inter alia held as
“In the light of the aforesaid, we are of the view that the learned
Principal Judge ought to have allowed the appellant/husband to
verify the documents through video conferencing, especially when
CM(M) 486/2022                                                           Page 5 of 7
both his counsel as also the respondent/wife were physically
present in Court. We, therefore, dispose of this appeal, inter alia,
in exercise of our jurisdiction under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India, with a direction to the Principal Judge,
Family Court, Central Distt., Tis Hazari to deal with the petition
preferred by the parties in HMA No.473/2020 in terms of the
procedures laid down by the Principal Judge, Family Court
(Headquarters), Dwarka, Delhi on 01.05.2020(Annexure-A2).”
12. It is pertinent to mention that Annexure –A2 is the direction issued by
office of the Principle Judge, Family Court Headquarter, Dwarka, Delhi
whereby the procedure to be adopted for hearing of certain categories
of cases through video conferencing by the Principle Judges/Additional
Principle Judges/ Judges, Family Courts, Delhi were issued in
compliance with the directions issued by the High Court of Delhi vide
Letter No. R-123/RG/DHC/2020 dated 30th April, 2020.
13.   I consider that learned Judge, Family Court, Rohini, North West, Delhi
has fallen into an error by not recording the statement of the parties in
the first motion merely because they were residing at Portugal. The
Courts have to march in sync with the latest developments in
technology. The system of conducting Court proceedings through video
conferencing is being encouraged by the Apex Court and this Court. It
is thus, expected of the judges in the District Courts also to ensure that
such a system of conducting the proceedings through video
conferencing is put to usage. Virtual proceedings provide an
opportunity to modernise the system by making it more affordable and
citizen friendly, enabling the aggrieved and/or litigants to access justice
from remote parts of the country and the world. Reluctance of the
judges to conduct virtual proceedings is not in alignment with the
CM(M) 486/2022                                                         Page 6 of 7
technological advancements. Courts must keep in mind that the gap
between physical presence and virtual presence has been bridged.
14.    In view of this, the learned Judge, Family Court, Rohini, North West,
Delhi is directed to deal with the petition preferred by the parties in
HMA No. 744/22 under Section 13B (1) HMA in terms of the
procedure laid down by the Principle Judge, Family Court
(Headquarter), Dwarka, Delhi and other directions issued by this Court
from time to time as per law. This Court also expects that the learned
Judge, Family Court, Rohini, North West, Delhi shall fix an early date
as per the Calendar for recording the statements of the parties in first
motion in Petition bearing HMA No. 744/22 under Section 13B(1)
15. With these observations, the petition stands disposed of.