company rejecting his Second Appeal on the ground
that the statutory rule for preferring such an appeal
was effective from 16.09.2016, is bad.
3. Based on this prayer, what is also prayed is that the
petitioner is entitled to have his period of suspension
from 18.01.2003 to 23.10.2003 counted as regular
for all purposes and the action of the respondents in
treating such period as such, is bad.
4. Facts in brief would indicate that the petitioner was
working as a driver with the respondents. He was
issued a charge-sheet on 18.01.2003 and also by the
same order suspended from service. On a response
filed by the petitioner to the charge-sheet on
17.02.2003,     the     respondents       conducted                  a
departmental proceedings and an inquiry report was
submitted on 29.05.2003 holding the petitioner
guilty of the charge. A show cause notice was given
to the petitioner on 25.08.2004 asking the petitioner
to show cause as to why a penalty of stoppage of
three increments with future effect be not imposed
upon the petitioner for the misconduct in question.
The petitioner responded to such notice by filing a
detailed reply and by an order of 29.09.2004, a
penalty of stoppage of two increments with future
effect was imposed upon the petitioner. On a First
Appeal being preferred, the appeal was rejected by
an order dated 24.03.2005. Be it noted that in the
interregnum, the authority thought it fit to revoke
the order of suspension and reinstate the petitioner
by an order dated 23.10.2003. Against the order of
rejection of the First Appeal on 24.03.2005, the
petitioner preferred a Second Appeal on 28.03.2018
which was rejected on 02.05.2018.
5. Mr.Mankad learned counsel for the petitioner would
submit that after the departmental proceedings, a
show cause notice was issued as to why a penalty of
stoppage of three increments with future effect be
not imposed. On the authority being satisfied with
the response, the penalty that was imposed was a
lower one to that of stoppage of two increments with
future effect.    Moreover, no order was passed
denying the petitioner any benefits for the period of
suspension of 10 months. He also would submit that
when the petitioner was reinstated on revocation of
the       order  of  suspension         on    23.08.2003,               the
reinstatement was only till the departmental inquiry
is finally disposed of.       This has made it mandatory
for the employer to pass an order regularizing the
period of suspension and pay consequential pay and
allowances that could have an effect on his terminal
benefits      of  he    having        attained     the       age          of
superannuation       in   the       year   2018.         He        made
representations in the year 2018 and also addressed
a notice through the advocate on 03.10.2018.                              In
support of his submissions that the period of
suspension ought to be regularized, he relied on
several decisions.
(i)      Reliance was placed on the decision in case of
Chimanlal Virjibhai Bhalani v. Paschim Gujarat
Vij Company Limited reported in 2020 JX (Guj)
410. to submit that in a similar case, though the
penalty was imposed, a direction was issued to the
Vij Company to consider the case for regularization.
(ii)     Reliance was also placed on a decision in case
of Brahma Chandra Gupta v. Union of India
reported in 1984 (2) SCC 433, to submit that when
the suspension was held wholly unjustified, natural
consequences of treating the period for the purposes
of full salary should be awarded. Also reliance was
placed on the decision in case of State of U.P. v.
Ram Avtar Sharma reported in 2004 (13) SCC
6. Mr.Mankad would submit that the imputation of
charges contained five charges, of which, three were
held not to be proved against the petitioner and
therefore when the penalty order was passed in light
of the fact that three charges of the petitioner were
not proved, a decision with regard to the suspension
being treated as regular for pay and allowance ought
to have been considered.
7. Mr.Dipak Dave learned counsel appearing for the
company would submit that the order of penalty was
passed in the year 2004 to which an appeal was filed
and rejected on 24.03.2005.             Second Appeal was
preferred 15 years after the order of rejection of the
First Appeal and therefore only on the ground of
delay of 13 years, the petition challenging the order
should not be entertained.
8. That apart, inviting the attention of the Court to the
prayers made in the petition, he would submit that
having accepted the order of penalty and thereafter
even in the year 2003 when the order of suspension
was revoked and order of reinstatement was passed,
the petitioner did not think it fit to approach this
Court and did so post his superannuation in the year
2013. For this submission on the aspect of delay,
Mr.Dave would rely on the decision in case of C.
Jacob        v. Director    of      Geology     and        Mining
reported in 2008 (10) SCC 115.                  Para 6 of the
decision was pressed into service.
9. He would also invite the Court’s attention to
Regulation 241 of the service regulations and submit
that       the question    of      treating   the      period            of
suspension and awarding the benefits of full pay and
allowance can only be considered if an employee is
fully exonerated.        He would invite the Court’s
attention to provisions of sub-clauses (3) and (5) of
the regulation.
10. Considering the submissions made by the learned
counsel for the respective parties, the first issue
deserves attention of the Court is whether the order
rejecting      the    appeal         by     the        impugned
communication dated 02.05.2018 is just and proper.
Without getting into the question as to whether a
statutory appeal can be entertained in the present
case, a Second Appeal when at the point when the
order of penalty was passed, such a provision was
available or not. Even on the ground of delay, the
order deserves no interference.
11. Facts on hand would indicate that on an order of
penalty being passed against the petitioner that of
stoppage of two increments with future effect on
29.09.2004, which was confirmed in the First Appeal
on 24.03.2005, the petitioner did not approach the
authorities and the appeals were only filed after 13
years i.e. in the year 2018. Para 6 of the decision in
case of C. Jacob (supra) reads as under:
“6. Let us take the hypothetical case of an
employee who is terminated from service in
1980. He does not challenge the termination.
But nearly two decades later, say in the year
2000, he decides to challenge the termination.
He is aware that any such challenge would be
rejected at the threshold on the ground of delay
(if the application is made before Tribunal) or
on the ground of delay and laches (if a writ
petition is filed before a High Court).
Therefore,     instead        of     challenging               the
termination,     he       gives     a    representation
requesting that he may be taken back to
service. Normally, there will be considerable
delay in replying such representations relating
to old matters. Taking advantage of this
position,     the        ex-employee            files            an
application/writ          petition       before                the
Tribunal/High Court seeking a direction to the
employer to consider and dispose of his
representation. The Tribunals/High Courts
routinely allow or dispose of such applications/
petitions (many a time even without notice to
the other side), without examining the matter
on merits, with a direction to consider and
dispose     of      the       representation.                 The
courts/tribunals proceed on the assumption,
that every citizen deserves a reply to his
representation. Secondly they assume that a
mere direction to consider and dispose of the
representation does not involve any `decision'
on rights and obligations of parties. Little do
they realize the consequences of such a
direction to `consider'. If the representation is
considered and accepted, the ex-employee gets
a relief, which he would not have got on
account of the long delay, all by reason of the
direction to `consider'. If the representation is
considered and rejected, the ex-employee files
an application/writ petition, not with reference
to the original cause of action of 1982, but by
treating the rejection of the representation
given in 2000, as the cause of action. A prayer
is made for quashing the rejection of
representation and for grant of the relief
claimed     in     the       representation.               The
Tribunals/High Courts routinely entertain such
applications/petitions ignoring the huge delay
preceding the representation, and proceed to
examine the claim on merits and grant relief. In
this manner, the bar of limitation or the laches
gets obliterated or ignored.”
12. On that count alone, this Court would have ousted
the petition.
13. There are sufficient reasons other than the aspect of
delay which should make the case of the petitioner a
case not deserving consideration. Regulation 241 of
the service regulations reads as under:
“(1) When an employee of the Board who has been
dismissed, removed or suspended is reinstated, the
authority competent to order the reinstatement
shall consider and made a specific order. a)
Regarding pay and allowances to be paid to the
employees for the period of his absence from duty.
b) Whether or not the said period shall be treated
as period spent on duty.
(2) Where the authority mentioned in sub Rule (1)
is of opinion that the employee has been fully
exonerated or in the case suspension that it was
wholly unjustified the employee shall be given the
full pay and allowance to which he would have
been entitled had he not been dismissed, removed
or suspended as the case may be.
(3) In other case i.e. when the suspension is not
wholly unjustified or the employee has been
partially exonerated, he shall be given such
proportion of pay and allowance as the competent
authority prescribed by a specific order.
(4) In case failing under clause (2), the period of
absence from duty shall be treated as a period
spent on duty for all purpose.
(5) In case failing under clause (3) the period of
absence from duty shall not be treated as a period
spent on duty unless such competent authority
specifically directs that it shall be so treated for
any specific purpose provided if the employee so
desires, such authority may direct that the period
of absence from duty shall be converted into leave
of any kind due and admissible to the employee.
(6) If the employee is found to be guilty or partially
guilty he shall be liable to be punished according to
the gravity of charge against him.”
14. Reading of the resolution makes it apparent that
only when an employee is partially exonerated,
would the authority need to decide the question of
whether the suspension can be treated to be wholly
unjustified and whether he should therefore be given
such proportion of pay and allowance as the
competent authority would prescribe by a specific
order. Only then Clause-5 shall come into play. In
the facts of the present case, what is evident is that
though Mr.Mankad would submit that in light of the
revocation of the order of suspension by the order of
23.10.2003 and of passing a penalty lower than the
one which was contemplated in the show cause
notice would justify his case for pay and allowances,
that does not seem to be the case when the
regulation is read.       Here is a case where on a
charge-sheet being issued, the order of penalty was
passed.     Obviously therefore not exonerating the
petitioner from the charge. It was therefore, within
the right of the employer to treat the period of
suspension as such reinstating the petitioner in
service with a condition that orders of regularization
of suspension is kept in abeyance till the inquiry is
finally disposed of, can only mean that the same has
to be done in accordance with the provisions of the
regulation and not otherwise.
15. The decision of this Court in case of Chimanlal
(supra) would not be of any assistance to the learned
counsel for the petitioner inasmuch as it was a case
where an order of dismissal was set aside by the
employer on it being harsh.              The penalty was
modified by the Appellate Authority. It was in these
circumstances, that a direction was issued to the
authorities to consider the case of the petitioner in
light of the regulation.          No positive finding with
regard to the period being treated as regular was a
question that was decided.
16. The decision in case of Bramhachandra Gupta
(supra)      is a case    where      the   delinquent             was
suspended and thereafter removed from service on
he effected in a criminal case. When the delinquent
on an appeal to the higher Court was awarded an
acquittal, he was reinstated in service.             It was on
this count that the employer was bound to treat the
pension of suspension as justified as the suspension
was solely on the ground of pendency of a criminal
case.       Facts before the Supreme Court would
indicate that the employer had not initiated any
departmental proceedings and the suspension was
only on the ground that the criminal charge was laid
against him and pending the trial of the offense. It
was a case where it can be safely inferred that there
was       a complete exoneration    on    acquittal           and
therefore even this case decided by the Supreme
Court would not help the cause of the petitioner.
17. In the case cited that of Ram Avtar (supra) was
again on facts whether the Tribunal on a challenge
to the order of dismissal had moved the same to that
of withdrawal of all actual increments.
18. Here is a case where the petitioner was imposed a
penalty which was commensurate with the conduct
on the charge being proved and the suspension
therefore could not have been treated as wholly
unjustified when read in light of the Regulation 241.
19. No case is made out and therefore the petition is
accordingly dismissed.