The present writ petition had been filed for a mandamus directing the
first respondent to provide adequate compensation to a tune of Rs.1 crore to
(i).The petitioner is a Yoga Teacher and she hails from a reputed family.
In order to repair their old house, they have shifted their residence to a rental
house belonging to the 7th respondent herein after executing a lease deed on
29.09.2009. However, the possession of the rental house was not handed over
to the petitioner despite payment of Rs.25,000/- Due to the said dispute, the
7th respondent and his wife wanted to wreck vengeance and lodged a
complaint before the 6th respondent Police alleging that the petitioner and her
father have refused to vacate the house. Based upon the said complaint, the
respondents 8 to 10 who are the Police Officials had entered into the house in
the name of enquiry and instructed her to vacate the house immediately. The
petitioner and her father informed them that if the landlord had returned the
deposited amount and the jewels, they will vacate the premises. However on
16.02.2010, the 8th respondent who is the Police Constable had registered a
case in Crime No.91 of 2010 under various provisions of Immoral Traffic
Prevention Act 1956 on the basis of the complaint said to have been lodged
by one Sasikumar and on 11.04.2010, the case was taken on file as C.C.No.10
of 2011 and a charge sheet was filed before the Judicial Magistrate,
Padmanabhapuram. The petitioner was arrested by the 8th respondent in the
said false case and detained at Women Home, Madurai for a period of 13 days
and thereafter, enlarged on bail. The said news of arrest under the Immoral
Traffic Prevention Act 1956 was published in all the Newspapers and Media
that the petitioner was involved in prostitution in the house and was arrested
and detained by 13 days by the Police Personnel. It was published that they
have seized the car of the petitioner and her properties. Due to the said
publication of the news in various magazines and media, the name of the
petitioner and her family suffered irreparable loss.
(ii).The petitioner had further contended that the 5th respondent namely
the Deputy Superintendent of Police, District Crime Branch, Nagercoil,
Kanyakumari District had conducted a detailed enquiry and gave a report on
29.04.2011 with a finding that the case was registered as against the
petitioner under the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act 1956 is absolutely
wrong and the case was foisted as against the petitioner due to personal
tenancy disputes between the private respondents namely respondents 7 to
10. The petitioner recommended for withdrawal of the case foisted and also
gave a finding that the petitioner may initiate criminal case as against the said
persons who have defamed the petitioner. The petitioner had further
contended that on 26.04.2012 one Sasikumar who is the defacto complainant
in Crime No.91 of 2010 gave a statement under Section 164 of Cr.P.C before
the Judicial Magistrate, Eraniel stating that he was involved in a traffic
offence and he was taken to the Police Station and the Police Personnel got
his signature in a blank paper and he was not aware of the complaint.
Therefore, the petitioner had filed Crl.OP(MD).No.2087 of 2011 before the
High Court to quash the criminal complaint and the same was quashed in
C.C.No.10 of 2011 in Crime No.91 of 2010 on 26.06.2015.
(iii).According to the petitioner, the enquiry report of the 5th respondent
and the order of the High Court in Crl.OP(MD).No.2807 of 2011 dated
26.06.2015 will make it clear that the petitioner was not at all involved in any
offence arising out of Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act and a false case was
foisted against her due to personal animosity. Therefore, the petitioner had
sent a detailed representation on 08.10.2015 to the respondents 1 to 4
requesting them to provide compensation to a tune of about Rs.1 crore
towards the disrepute suffered by her and her family in view of foisting of the
false case and her arrest and detention in the rehabilitation home for a period
of 13 days.
3.The respondents 1 and 2 have filed a counter contending that the
Inspector of Police had abused the process of law which he was not
authorized to do so. Therefore, the petitioner cannot seek compensation from
the Government under vicarious liability as he was not in discharge of duty
authorized by law. When the Government came to know about the
un-authorized act of the Inspector of Police, it had appointed the Deputy
Superintendent of Police, District Crime Branch, Nagercoil, Kanyakumari
District and during the subsequent enquiry, there was discovery of the fact
that the petitioner has not committed the offence as alleged. Based upon the
report of the Deputy Superintendent of Police, DCB, Nagercoil, the Inspector
has submitted a petition before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Nagercoil
recording the statement of the defacto complainant under Section 164 Cr.P.C
on 26.04.2012. After proper investigation, a charge sheet was filed on
11.04.2010 and it was taken on file as C.C.No.10 of 2011 on the file of the
Judicial Magistrate Court, Padmanabhapuram. After nearly one year, the
petitioner has presented a petition on 20.01.2011 complaining about the 7th
respondent and in the said complaint, no particular allegation was made as
against the respondents 6,8, 9 and 10.
4.In the counter, it has been further contended that the 8th respondent
had received a complaint from the defacto complainant on 16.02.2010 and he
has registered a case in Crime No.91 of 2010 and an intimation was also
given to the Judicial Magistrate, Padmanabhapuram. However, on enquiry
before the Deputy Superintendent of Police, District Crime Branch,
Nagercoil, the defacto complainant has given a statement against the
complainant. On the basis of the report of the Deputy Superintendent of
Police, the Hon'ble High Court has quashed the case before trial. Therefore,
only due to the enquiry conducted by the Deputy Superintendent of Police,
(District Crime Branch), Kanyakumari District, which the petitioner got only
with the aid or assistance of the State, she was exonerated from the
proceedings. Therefore, the petitioner cannot claim compensation from the
State itself under pretext of vicarious liability. Even according to the
petitioner, only in the enquiry conducted by the police authorities, she was
found to be innocent.
5.The 6th respondent who is the Inspector of Police had filed a counter
contending that on receipt of complaint from one Sasikumar relating to the
cognizable offence, he had registered a case in Crime No.91 of 2010 under
the provisions of Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 on 16.06.2010.
After investigation, a charge sheet was also laid on 11.04.2010 and the case
was taken on file in C.C.No.10 of 2011 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate,
6.In view of the report of the Deputy Superintendent of Police,
(District Crime Branch), Nagercoil, the Hon'ble High Court was pleased to
quash the proceedings in C.C.No.10 of 2011 in Crl.O.P(MD).No.2087 of
2011. Since the officials have performed their duty without any bias, the
claim for compensation is not legally sustainable. The authorities have taken
serious and adequate steps to conduct enquiry into the allegations raised by
the petitioner. The Deputy Superintendent of Police, Nagercoil was appointed
as enquiry officer and the enquiry report has been accepted and the Hon'ble
High Court has quashed the criminal proceedings. Therefore, there is no lapse
on the part of the Police Officials so as to invoke the principles of vicarious
liability and seek for compensation from the State.
7. The 8th respondent herein has filed a counter contending that he has
no personal vengeance as against the petitioner in any manner and all the
allegations against him in the affidavit are false and motivated one. He is not
aware of any dispute between the petitioner and the 7th respondent namely the
owner of the premises. He had further contended that when cognizable
offences were made out, he is duty bound to register an F.I.R and conduct an
investigation. No malafides or bias can be attributed against him. If at all the
petitioner is aggrieved, she has to invoke the alternative remedy of
approaching the civil Court by filing a defamation suit after obtaining prior
sanction. The petitioner cannot take advantage of the order passed in
Crl.O.P(MD).No.2087 of 2011 wherein the charge sheet has been quashed
only based upon the enquiry report of the Deputy Superintendent of Police
Contentions on the side of the learned counsel appearing for the
8.In view of the civil disputes between the 7th respondent and the
petitioner and her family, a false case was foisted as against the petitioner
under the Immoral Traffic(Prevention) Act, 1956. She was arrested and
remanded and sent to rehabilitation home where she was lodged for nearly 13
days. The arrest of the petitioner under the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act
has been widely published in various Newspapers and Magazines during the
relevant point of time along with the name of the petitioner. Ultimately, based
upon the complaint lodged by the writ petitioner, an enquiry was conducted
by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, District Crime Branch, Nagercoil
who categorically found that only due to the personal animosity, a false case
has been foisted as against the petitioner. He had also recommended for
dropping of the case as against the petitioner. The Hon'ble High Court has
accepted the said enquiry report of the Deputy Superintendent of Police,
DCB, Nagerocil and has quashed the charge sheet filed by the police
authorities. Therefore, it is clear that the petitioner has been wrongly
implicated in a false criminal case which had affected not only the reputation
but also privacy of the petitioner, in view of the wide publication given by the
police authorities in various Newspapers and Magazines. The petitioner being
an unmarried lady living with her parents, she has been wrongly implicated
due to the rental dispute between her family and the police officer who was
the landlord.
9.The learned counsel for the petitioner had relied upon the judgement
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported in (1997) 1 SCC 416 (D.K.Basu Vs.
State of West Bengal), the judgements of our High Court reported in (2010)
8 MLJ 647 (Alarmelu Mangai Vs Secretary to the Government of Tamil
Inspector of Police) and the order made in W.P.No.2227 of 2012 dated
01.02.022 (Nallakaman (deceased) and another Vs. The Government of
Tamil and others) to contend that where the police authorities have violated
personal liberty and the reputation of the petitioner, the petitioner is entitled
to receive compensation.
10.The learned counsel for the petitioner had further contended that the
State is liable to pay compensation to the victim for the infringement of right
of privacy and public humiliation meted out to her by the action of the police
authorities in entering into the house at midnight and by implicating the
petitioner in a false complaint and that too under the Immoral Traffic
(Prevention) Act. He had further contended that whenever the breach of
fundamental right is being established, the Court is empowered to grant
compensation under the public law in addition to the private law for tortuous
action under the criminal law. Hence, he prayed for allowing the writ petition
for payment of compensation for violation of the fundamental rights and
privacy of the writ petitioner.
Contentions of the learned Additional Advocate General appearing for
11.The learned Additional Advocate General had contended that the
police have received information about the alleged offence on 16.02.2010
based upon the complaint made by one Sasikumar. The Police Authorities
rushed to the spot and when they have searched the house, they found that the
petitioner was along with her friend one Sathishkumar and found certain
incriminating materials and an F.I.R was registered on the same day at about
7.00 p.m. A request for house search was submitted before the Judicial
Magistrate, Padmanabhapuram and a consent letter was also obtained by the
petitioner to co-operate for the search. A search mahazer was prepared at
about 8.00 p.m on the same day. The petitioner was arrested at about 9.30 p.m
on the same day. 5 packets of condom, an Alto-car, Rs.5000/- notes were
seized from the said premises. The accused was sent to judicial custody after
recording of statement by the witnesses on 17.02.2010. A charge sheet was
laid on 11.04.2010 in C.C.No.10 of 2011. On 20.01.2011, the petitioner has
given a complaint to the Superintendent of Police after one year from the date
of occurrence alleging that a false criminal case has been lodged as against
her. The Superintendent of Police has forwarded a complaint to the Deputy
Superintendent of Police, District Crime Branch, Nagercoil to conduct an
enquiry and he conducted the enquiry and examined some of the persons and
filed a report on 29.04.2011. Even before the enquiry report was filed, the
petitioner had filed Crl.OP(MD).No.2087 of 2011 on 17.02.2011. The
Madurai Bench of Madras High Court had quashed C.C.No.10 of 2011 in
CrlOP(MD).No.2087 of 2011 as against the petitioner on 26.06.2015.
12.The co-accused namely Sathishkumar who was arrayed as Accused
No.1 had filed Crl.OP(MD).No.139 of 2019 to quash the proceedings and the
same was allowed by this Court on 12.06.2019.
13.According to the learned Additional Advocate General, the dates
and events narrated above will clearly indicate that the police authorities have
acted based upon a complaint lodged by the defacto complainant namely
Sasikumar. After obtaining a search warrant from the concerned Judicial
Magistrate, they have conducted a search in the premises of the petitioner and
had recovered incriminating materials. After proper investigation, a charge
sheet was also laid on 11.04.2010. 7 months after laying of charge sheet, the
petitioner has made a complaint to the Superintendent of Police alleging
foisting of false case. Therefore, it is clear that the petitioner had again
approached the police authorities only with a complaint of foisting of police
case without approaching the competent Court for quashing the charge sheet.
Thereafter, an enquiry was conducted by the Deputy Superintendent of
Police, DCB, Nagercoil who had submitted a report after examining a few
persons connecting with the incident. The report was placed before this Court
in the quash proceedings and thereafter, the charge sheet as against the
petitioner was quashed on 26.05.2015.
14.The main allegation of the petitioner is that she was having some
private quarrel with regard to the tenancy with the 7th respondent. However,
no record has been placed before the Court to establish that the 7th respondent
was responsible for initiation of the criminal proceedings. Once Sasikumar
had lodged a complaint and when the complaint disclosed cognizable
offence, the police authorities were duty bound to register a criminal case.
After proper investigation, they have also filed a final report which was taken
on file by a concerned Judicial Magistrate. Unless the petitioner is able to
connect the 7th respondent with the initiation of the criminal proceedings,
malafides cannot be attributed as against the police officials who registered
the case, investigated the same and filed the charge sheet. The present
registration of F.I.R and filing of the charge sheet are based upon the
complaint lodged by one Sasikumar and therefore, the allegation of the
petitioner that due to malafide intention this complaint has been lodged is not
legally sustainable. The petitioner has not made out any case against the
police officials that they had any malafide intention as against the petitioner.
The petitioner has not even pleaded any malafide intention as against the
police officials who have registered the case or investigated the crime or filed
the charge sheet. The petitioner is attempting to link her personal dispute with
the 7th respondent with the criminal proceedings without any iota of evidence
in order to claim the sympathy of the Court and prayed for a compensation.
Merely because a criminal case was quashed, the police authorities cannot be
considered to have registered a case and conducted the investigation with a
malafide intention unless all the ingredients of malicious prosecution are
proved. When the petitioner is not able to establish that with malafide
intention they have acted, the State cannot be held vicariously liable.
Therefore, he prayed for dismissal of the writ petition.
15.I have considered the submissions made on either side and perused
the materials available on record.
16.It is not in dispute that the petitioner was arrested in Crime No.91 of
2010 for the offences under the various provisions of Immoral Traffic
(Prevention) Act about 09.30 p.m on 16.02.2010. After investigation, a charge
sheet has been laid on 11.04.2010 and it has been taken on file in C.C.No.10
of 2011 on the file of Judicial Magistrate, Padmanabhapuram. The said
charge sheet was quashed by this Court in Crl.OP(MD).No.2087 of 2011 on
26.06.2015 based upon the enquiry report submitted by the Deputy
Superintendent of Police, DCB, Nagercoil dated 29.04.2011. The above said
facts are not in dispute.
17.The petitioner had sent a representation to the respondents 1 to 4 on
08.10.2015 seeking compensation for foisting of a false case and for violation
of the privacy and lost her reputation in the society. The petitioner had also
enclosed in the typed set certain newspaper reports in which the name of the
petitioner is reflected and it is alleged that she         was arrested under the
Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act. From the records, it could be seen that a
search was conducted in the house of the petitioner at about 8.00 p.m on
16.02.2010 and a search mahazer was also prepared. The remand report of the
Judicial Magistrate indicates that the petitioner was remanded at about
09.30 p.m on 16.02.2010. The arrest memo indicates that the petitioner was
arrested at 9.30 p.m on 16.02.2010 and the arrest was informed to her brother
and she was remanded to the judicial custody on the same day. A charge sheet
was filed on 11.04.2010 and after filing of charge sheet, the petitioner had
lodged a complaint before the Superintendent of Police on 20.01.2011
alleging foisting of false case. A report was submitted by the Deputy
Superintendent of Police on 29.04.2011 to the effect that a police case was
lodged through the defacto complainant Sasikumar and he had recommended
for withdrawal of the said case. The said enquiry of the Deputy
Superintendent of Police, DCB, Nagercoil has been accepted by this Court
and the charge sheet has been quashed.
18.The police authorities have not chosen to proceed further and
therefore, it is clear that they have accepted the enquiry report.
19.In view of the above said facts, it is clear that a person who was
involved in a traffic offence namely Sasikumar was called to the police
station and he was directed to sign in some blank papers which was utilised
by the police officials as a complaint to register an F.I.R in Crime No.91 of
2010 under Immoral Traffic (Prevention)Act. The report also discloses that
without proper enquiry, based upon some telephonic information, a traffic
offender was used as a defacto complainant to register a case under the
20.It is not in dispute that the name of the petitioner along with her
involvement of the offence under the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act have
been widely published in various newspapers and magazines. Later the police
officials have ordered for re-enquiry on the complaint lodged by the writ
petitioner which has resulted in discovery of the fact that the original
complaint is a false one. The privacy and reputation of the writ petitioner
have been sullied due to foisting of the false case and arrest of the petitioner
at about 09.30 p.m on 16.02.2010 and the paper publication thereafter.
21.The State cannot take advantage of the fact that their own officials
had conducted an enquiry and had found that the case to be a foisted one.
When the State has accepted the report of the Deputy Superintendent of
Police, District Crime Branch, Nagercoil, they should have initiated action as
against the person who has filed the false case. However, the State has not
proceeded in the said direction. The entire criminal case has been lodged
based upon some telephonic information by anonymous person which was
later converted into a complaint through a person who was brought to the
police station for a traffic offence. Therefore, the State cannot shirk their
responsibility or its vicarious liability for the acts of its officials which have
resulted in violation of the privacy and loss of reputation of an unmarried
women.
22.The Hon'ble Supreme Court in a judgement reported in (2017) 10
SCC Page 1 ( K.S.Puttaswamy Vs. Union of India) has held that right to
privacy is a basic fundamental right and it forms an intrinsic part of Article 21
and freedoms guarantee in Pt.III in Constitution of India.
23.The learned Single Judge of our High Court in a judgement reported
in (2010) 8 MLJ 647 ( Alarmelu Mangai Vs. Secretary to the Government
of Tamil Nadu) has held that the State is liable to pay compensation to the
victim for infringement of right to privacy and public humiliation meted out
to her by the action of the police authorities in entering into the house at
midnight and forcibly taking away to the police station. The learned Single
Judge was pleased to award Rs.5 lakhs as compensation.
24.In a judgement reported in 2019 (1) CTC 385 (Kadek Dwi Ani
Rasmini Vs. K.Natrajan, Inspector of Police), a learned Single Judge was
pleased to award compensation for the infringement of personal liberty and
reputation of a victim who was erroneously implicated under the provisions
of Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act 1956. In the present case, the writ
petitioner has been falsely implicated under the provisions of              Immoral
Traffic (Prevention) Act 1956 and she was arrested and remanded at 9.30 p.m.
She was detained in a detention home for a period of 13 days. Later in an
enquiry conducted by a higher police official, it was found that a false case
has been lodged against her and based upon the report, this Court quashed the
charge sheet.
25.In view of the above said undisputed facts, it is clear that the right
of privacy and reputation of the writ petitioner have been sullied by the act of
the police officials for which the State is certainly responsible. The State
cannot escape from contending that the officials at the station level have
unauthorisedly done the said act and hence, the State is not liable for the
same. Though the Deputy Superintendent of Police, DCB, Nagercoil had filed
a report on 29.04.2011, the authorities have not proceeded upon the said
report till the High Court was pleased to quash the charge sheet on
26.06.2015. Therefore, it is clear that even after the report of the Deputy
Superintendent of Police, DCB, Nagercoil, for nearly 4 years, the police
authorities have continued with the prosecution. The State has not initiated
any action as against the police officials who were found to be guilty in the
report of the Deputy Superintendent of Police, DCB, Nagercoil dated
29.04.2011. Therefore, the contention of the learned Additional Advocate
General that only because of the report of the police officials, the petitioner
was found innocent and therefore, the State is not liable to pay compensation
26.In view of the above said facts and the judgement referred supra,
this Court is of the view that the official respondents have violated the
privacy and harmed the reputation of the writ petitioner. Therefore, the State
is liable to pay compensation. The first respondent is directed to pay a
compensation of Rs.2,00,000/- to the writ petitioner within a period of 8
weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order and the State is at
liberty to recover the same from the erring police officials if they are advised
to do so.
27.The writ petition is allowed to the extent as stated above. No costs.
Consequently, connected miscellaneous petition is closed.