Present:     Mr. Ashish Chopra, Senior Advocate with
Mr. Satya Pal Jain, Additional Solicitor General of India with
Petition herein filed by a Government of India entity against
the State Government, is, inter alia, for issuance of a writ in the nature of
certiorari for quashing an order dated 19.01.2021 (Annexure P-10),
whereby, allegedly, an additional obligation unacceptable            to     the
petitioner-corporation, for providing jobs to the land oustees, has been
imposed under Haryana State Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy,
2.            Given the nature of controversy, at the outset, on the oral
request of private respondents (land oustees), Union of India through
Secretary, Ministry of Power and New & Renewable Energy, Govt. of
India, Shram Shakti Bhawan, Rafi Marg, New Delhi is arrayed as a party
i.e., respondent No.47. Registry to carry out necessary changes in Memo
2.1.          Notice is also issued to respondent No.47.
2.2.          On the asking of Court, Ms. Alisha Arora, present in Court
accepts notice on behalf of respondent No.47. She is led by Senior
Advocate Mr. Satya Pal Jain, learned Additional Solicitor General of
3.            Before adverting to the rival contentions on merits, pertinent
it is to mention that in a welfare State it does not augur well on the part of
one Government to be in lis with another Government, by invoking
provisions of Article 226 of Constitution of India. It goes against the very
grain of Westminster module of governance, wherein an independent and
non-partisan civil service of executive wing advises on and implements
the policy and decisions of democratically elected governments, but at the
same time ensures to maintain institutional continuity as well as
administrative propriety.      Lack of institutional continuity as well as
administrative propriety also shakes the confidence of the electorate in
the Government, which on one hand makes a promise and on the other,
when it comes to implementation thereof, shifts the burden from federal to
State Government or vice-versa, as seems to be the case herein. A Central
government entity is before this Court, assailing the decision of State
government contending that the same is in violation of the administrative
arrangement, which was inter se arrived at before acquiring the land of
the private respondents.
4.            Due tosheer callousness, if one may call it, of tossing the
responsibility back and forth between Centre and State, the oustees have
been left high and dry qua the reciprocal assurances given to them, while
acquiring their land. No doubt, one time compensation has though been
paid to them, but rest of the benefits, including that of providing job to
one family member of each oustee land owner, remain unfulfilled, though
the land was acquired way back 10-12 years ago.
5.            Livelihood is integral part of right to live and life, and is thus
a fundamental right envisaged under Article 21 of Constitution of India.
Compensation remains a poor substitute of loss of livelihood. As already
stated, it does not reflect well ona Welfare State to indulge in such harsh
and capricious practice to deprive fundamental rights of a citizen.
6.            While issuing notice of motion on 14.10.2021, following
order was passed wherein inter-se controversy was succinctly summed up
“        Inter alia contends that, so far as the provision of
providing employment to the land oustees qua the land
acquired by State Government on behalf of the petitioner, the
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, 2010 is not
applicable to the petitioner. Further argues that the
obligation of the petitioner under the Land Acquisition
Scheme is confined only to provide monetary compensation
and certain other incentives. Further argues that, in any
case, responsibility of providing jobs to the land oustees by
petitioner, can be fastened on petitioner corporation only in
case an undertaking qua the same was given by it, before
initiation of acquisition proceedings. Learned Senior counsel
submits that no such undertaking was given by the petitioner-
Nuclear Power Corporation, a Government of India entity.
Given the specialized nature of work undertaken by the
Nuclear Power Corporation, it has its own norms of
employing human resource depending upon the expertise
involved therein.
On advance service, learned State counsel joins
proceedings and accepts notice on behalf of the respondent-
State of Haryana and seeks time to file return.
Adjourned to 15.02.2022.
Meanwhile, implementation of impugned order dated
19.01.2021 (Annexure P-10) shall be kept at abeyance till the
next date of hearing.”
7.           This Court as well as, Apex Court in past, on numerous
occasions, has deprecated the practice of PSUs of State/Central
governments to lock horns in court room at the public expense and loss of
time, in what is otherwise avoidable and inappropriate litigation, only if
prior exercise is undertaken, by holding high level meetings amongst the
competent officers to take the necessary corrective measures. Pertinently,
for such like stalemates a special machinery has also been set up i.e.
Administrative Mechanism for Resolution of CPSES Disputes (AMRCD).
8.           In somewhat similar circumstances, when one of a State
Public Sector Undertaking was pitted against the Central Government,
earlier I had an occasion to deal with CWP No. 17212 of 2012 & other
connected cases titled as Haryana State Warehousing Corporation vs.
Union of India and others and the same was disposed of making
following observations:
“By this common order, the above mentioned 3 CWPs are
being disposed of as the point in issue involved in all these
petitions is identical.
2.)            Learned Senior counsel appearing for
respondent Nos.2 and 3 points out that vide Annexure R-2/1
dated 22.5.2018 which is office memorandum issued by
Government of India in respect of settlement of Commercial
Disputes between Central Public Enterprises (CPSES) inter
se and also between CPSES and Government
Departments/Organizations. All such disputes inter se are to
be referred to Administrative Mechanism for Resolution of
CPSES Disputes (AMRCD). Learned Senior counsel
contends that in view of Clauses 4, 5 and 6 thereof wherein it
has been clearly stated that at the first level such commercial
dispute shall be referred to committee comprising of
Secretaries of Administrative Ministries followed by
referring the same to the second tier constituted by the
Cabinet Secretary, in the event of dispute remains unresolved
by the first tier.
3.)            In view thereof, after hearing the rival
contentions of both sides, I am of the view that in view of
Circular dated 22.05.2018 Annexure R-2/1, the petitioners
ought to have pursued their remedy according to the
mechanism provided.
4.)            Accordingly, present writ petitions are disposed
of with a direction to the Committee Secretaries of
Administrative Ministries, constituted/to be constituted as
per office Memo dated 22.05.2018 (R-2/1), to pass a
speaking order on merits adjudicating the disputes between
the parties herein. It is made clear that all the rival
contentions of the respective parties are kept open to be
raised before the first tier Committee of Secretaries. The said
Committee of Secretaries is directed to pass a speaking order
after taking into consideration the rival contentions within
the time frame as prescribed in the Circular dated
9.            I see no reason why in the present case as well, similar
exercise be not carried out, as aforesaid.
10.           In the premise, the writ petition is disposed of with a
direction to respondent no.47 in particular, but equally applicable to
petitioner Corporation as well as all the official respondents i.e. No.1 to 3,
to take effective measures to constitute a High Powered Committee (HPC)
headed by the Secretary, Government of India, Ministry of Power and
New and Renewable Energy, as its Chairman and of which the necessary
constituents shall be Additional Chief Secretary to Government of
Haryana, Power Department (respondent No.2), Managing Director of the
petitioner-Nuclear Power Corporation as well as Managing Director,
Secretary to Government of India shall be at liberty to include a fifth
member of his choice, who shall also act as Member Secretary of the
Committee for carrying out the necessary procedural/administrative
formalities of convening of the meeting as well as maintain its records etc.
11.           The HPC shall look into the inter se disputes between the
petitioner-Corporation vis-à-vis respondent No.4-Corporation.It shall also
formulate the issues to be resolved inseriatim. After holding threadbare
discussions and going through the relevant record, it shall also give a
conclusive report as to which R&R policy is applicable and who is to be
held responsible for implementation thereof. Committee’s report/opinion,
needless to say, shall be binding on both Government of India as well as
12.           As regards rights of the private respondents/landowners,if
still aggrieved on the report of the Committee, they shall be at liberty to
challenge the same by seeking appropriate legal remedy.
13.           Necessary exercise shall be carried out as expeditiously as
possible, but not later than six months from today, since the landowners
have already been waiting inordinately. Process of acquisition of their
land began/was carried out somewhere in the year 2010. Thus, for the
past 12 years they have been sanguine that one of their family members
would be provided with a compensatory job against the loss of livelihood.
14.           On a Court query, learned counsel for respondent No.4-
HPGCL fairly states that it will be in fitness of the scheme that till a final
decision is taken by HPC and/or a report is rendered by it, the order
impugned herein shall be put on hold.
15.           At this stage, learned Senior counsel for the petitioner
Corporation expresses concern and urges that order impugned herein must
necessarily be set aside, in view of the direction issued for setting up of an
HPC. I do not really subscribe to his concerns, but it is expected of
respondents No.1 to 4 not to give effect to the same in view of the
statement made by the learned counsel for the respondent no.4. In any
case, they shall have to pass fresh orders after the HPC report is rendered,
unless of course, the HPC subscribes to the same view as has been taken
in the order assailed in instant proceedings.
16.           In the parting, I may also hasten to add here that those of the
eligible family members of the landowners, who were entitled/desirous of
seeking a job, but in the interregnum have become overage, they shall not
be later debarred on the ground of eligibility age bar for applying for the
job, commensurate of course with their education. Delay herein is since
entirely attributable on the part of the official respondents/petitioner
Corporation herein.