By way of instant petition filed under S. 439 CrPC, prayer has been
made on behalf the bail petitioner namely Ankit Ashok Kumar, who is behind
the bars for grant of regular bail in case FIR No. 315, dated 20.12.2020, under
Sections 20 & 29 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act (in
short “the Act”) registered at Police Station Bhuntar, District Kullu, Himachal
2.      Respondent-State has filed status report and ASI Vij Ram, Police
record. Record perused and returned.
Station Bhuntar, District Kullu, Himachal Pradesh has also come Present with
Close scrutiny of the record as well as status report made available
to this Court reveals that on 19.12.2020, police party present at TCP Bajaura
in connection with traffic checking, stopped Volvo Bus bearing registration No.
HR38Z- 0003 for checking. Allegedly, police party after having associated two
independent witnesses, i.e. driver and conductor of the bus namely Pawan
Kumar and Suresh Kumar, started checking of the luggage of the passengers.
Since, person sitting on seat No.3, got perplexed after having seen police and
passed over one rucksack/Pithu bag to his co-passenger sitting on seat No.4,
i.e. Mihi Ojha; and passenger sitting on seat No.4, tried to hide the same
below his seat, police deemed it necessary to cause personal search of the
passengers sitting on seat Nos. 3 & 4 as well as rucksack kept by them under
their seats. On checking police allegedly recovered commercial quantity of
contraband, i.e. 1.816 grams charas from the bag. Since, no plausible
explanation came to be rendered on record qua the possession of aforesaid
H   commercial quantity of contraband from the passengers sitting on seat Nos. 3
& 4, police after having de-boarded them from bus and after completion of
necessary codal formalities, lodged FIR, detailed hereinabove against both
the accused namely Mihir Oza and Ankit i.e. present bail petitioner and since
then, present bail petitioner is behind the bars and co-accused Mihir Ojha
stands enlarged on bail. Allegedly, both the above-named persons
disclosed to the police during investigation that some unknown persons had
handed over rucksack/Pithu to them for further delivering the same to
somebody at Delhi and they were told that in lieu of that, they would get
Rs.40,000/-. Since, police was not satisfied with the aforesaid disclosure
made by above-named persons, it deemed necessary to investigate the .P.
matter with regard to financial transactions, if any, from the bank accounts of
the persons named hereinabove. During investigation, police found that both
the above-named persons sent Rs. 49,000/- each on 18.12.2020 to person
namely Sonam Dorje, owner of Shanti Cafe situate at Kasol Manikaran.
Apprehending that aforesaid transaction was made with regard to illegal trade
of narcotics, police also interrogated Sonam Dorje, owner of the Shanti Cafe,
who allegedly admitted that the aforesaid amount was received by him for
sale/purchase of contraband allegedly recovered from the conscious
possession of the persons, namely Mihir Ojha and Ankit, i.e. the present bail
petitioner. Since investigation in the case is complete and nothing remains to
be recovered from the present bail petitioner, he has approached this Court in
the instant proceedings, for grant of regular bail
ig   h 4.     It may be noticed that prior to filing of petition at hand, petitioner
had earlier approached this Court by way of CrMP(M) No. 2469 of 2021, but
the same was dismissed as withdrawn on 5.1.2022, reserving liberty to the
H   petitioner to file appropriate proceedings in appropriate court of law at an
appropriator stage.
5.     Mr. Sudhir Bhatnagar, learned Additional Advocate General while
fairly admitting the factum with regard to filing of challan in the competent
court of law, contends that though nothing remains to be recovered from the
present bail petitioner, but keeping in view the gravity of the offences alleged
to have been committed by him, he does not deserve any leniency. Mr.
Bhatnagar further states that there is overwhelming evidence adduced on
record by respondent-State suggestive of the fact that the bail petitioner
transferred money in the account of person namely Sonam Dorje, who in turn
provided them commercial quantity of Charas and as such, it cannot be said
that they have been falsely implicated. While making this Court to peruse the
record made available by investigating agency, Mr. Bhatnagar, also states
that the commercial quantity of contraband was recovered from the bag of the
present bail petitioner and co-accused Mihir Ojha in the presence of
independent witnesses. He states that though independent witnesses were
declared hostile, but if cross-examination conducted upon these witnesses is
perused in its entirety, it clearly establishes the case of the prosecution and as
such, prayer made on behalf of the petitioner deserves outright rejection.
Having heard learned counsel representing the parties and perused
the material available on record, this Court finds that the case of the
prosecution is that on 19.12.2020, police officials present at TCP Bajaura
stopped Volvo Bus bearing No. HR-38Z-0003 for checking and allegedly
recovered one bag kept under seats Nos. 3 and 4 occupied by present bail
petitioner and co-accused Mihir Ojha in the presence of two independent
witnesses namely Suresh Kumar and Pawan Kumar, i.e. driver and conductor
H   of the bus, but if the statements made by these witnesses in the trial court are
perused juxtaposing each other, it creates serious doubt with regard to
recovery of contraband that too, from the bag/luggage of present bail
petitioner and co-accused Mihir Ojha. As per police, person sitting on seat No.
3, got perplexed after having seen the police and handed /passed over bag to
his co-passenger sitting on seat No.4 i.e. Mihir Ojha, who in turn tried to hide
the same below his seat, but such claim of the police is otherwise contrary to
the fard/recovery memo, which reveals that the police officials pulled out the
bag from below the seat of passengers sitting on seat Nos. 3 and 4 in the
presence of independent witnesses. Both the above named independent
witnesses have categorically stated that the bus was stopped for checking by
Narco officials and bag was recovered from the rack over the seats No.3 & 4.
PW-10 Suresh Kumar, stated that the officials searched the bus
along with Pawan Kumar, i.e. Conductor of the Bus and recovered one bag
kept on the rack above seat Nos. 3 & 4. He further deposed that police
inquired the passengers as well as conductor about the bag, but they
disowned the same and thereafter officials took out black colour bag inside
TCP Bajaura and on opening the same, black colour substance was found in
the polythene packet. He deposed that police officials came after one and half
hour on the spot and thereafter, papers were prepared by them. Police also
procured our signatures on the papers and cloth. Since the passengers sitting
in the bus were pressurizing them to take the bus, as such, they were allowed
to take the bus. Though this witness was declared hostile, but cross-
examination conducted upon this witnesses nowhere suggests that the
prosecution was able to extract anything contrary to what this witness stated
in his cross-examination. Though learned Public Prosecutor made a serious
H   effort to get it extracted from this witness that bus was got stopped for
checking by police officials, but repeatedly he voluntarily stated that the bus
was stopped by Narco officials and after one and half hour police came on the
spot.
8.     PW-11 Pawan Kumar, conductor of bus, deposed that when bus
reached at TCP Bajaura, officials signalled the bus to stop and told that they
are Narco officials. This witness stated that they parked the bus on the side of
the road and he and driver of bus got down from the bus; and 3-4 officials
entered the bus. They checked the bus and found one bag in the bus. They
inquired from the passengers about the bag and passengers disowned the
bag. This witness further stated that thereafter officials of Narco asked him
about the bag, then he again asked the passengers about the bag and they
again disowned the same. He deposed that since the bag was found above
seats Nos. 3 and 4, the officials suspected the passengers sitting on seat
Nos. 3 and 4 and thereafter they took both the passengers alongwith bag to
the room of TCP Bajaura. It is deposed by this witness that the officials
opened the bag and found black coloured substance in a polythene bag and
thereafter, the officials telephonically called the police officials, who came on
the spot after one and half hour. Police officials interrogated the accused and
thereafter, this witness was asked about their luggage. He took out the
luggage of both the passengers, sitting on seat Nos. 3 and 4 and thereafter,
police checked the same. He deposed that on personal search of both the
passengers, police recovered their PAN cards, DL and Adhaar cards etc.
ig  h  9.     If the statements made by the aforesaid independent witnesses are
read in conjunction, it cannot be said that there are any inconsistencies and
contradictions, rather both these witnesses in unison have stated that the bus
H   was stopped by Narco officials and on checking contraband was recovered
from the bag kept on rack above the passengers sitting on seats Nos. 3 and
4, not from below the seats Nos. 3 and 4. Most importantly, PW-11 Pawan
categorically stated that on personal search of both the passengers, police
recovered their DL, Pan Cards, Adhaar Cards etc.
10.    Interestingly, the case of the prosecution is that DL, PAN Cards and
Adhaar Cards of both the accused were recovered from the bag containing
the contraband, which fact is totally contradictory to the statements made by
independent witnesses. Record reveals that the police officials after having
effected personal search of the accused prepared Fard/Jama Talashi and
allegedly recovered wallet, watch, currency notes, one ATM card and One
Mobile Phone. Once, the bail petitioner was found carrying the wallet, it is not
understood, rather is highly unbelievable that a person would keep his driving
licence and Adhaar card in a bag containing the contraband. Had one of the
accused kept his DL /Adhaar card in bag containing contraband, this court
may have accepted that version, but it is highly unbelievable that both the
accused had kept their Adhaar Card and DL card in the bag, allegedly
recovered by the police, containing commercial quantity of the contraband.
Leaving everything aside, independent witnesses namely Pawan
Kumar PW-11 has categorically stated that DL, PAN Cards and Adhaar Cards
were recovered on personal search of the accused persons. Similarly, PW-10
has categorically stated in his examination-in-chief that the documents
referred to hereinabove, were recovered by the Police during personal search
of the accused persons. As per both the above said independent witnesses,
bus for checking was stopped at the first instance by Narco officials, who in
H   turn, after one and half hour of seizure of the contraband, telephonically
informed the police. It is not understood that why such facts are totally missing
in the status report as well as record made available to this court, rather,
specific case of the prosecution as has been canvassed before this Court is
that the Police party at TCP Bajaura, stopped the vehicle for checking and
allegedly recovered the commercial quantity of contraband, from the bag kept
by the passengers sitting on Seats Nos. 3 and 4 below their seats. Both the
independent witnesses have categorically stated that the bag was recovered
from the rack above seats Nos. 3 and 4 and none of the passengers sitting in
the bus owned the bag and as such, same was taken to TCP Bajaura and
after some time, the police made the passengers sitting on seat Nos. 3 and 4
alight from the bus. No doubt, both these witnesses have admitted their
signatures on recovery memo, but they have also stated that their signatures
were obtained on blank papers and since the passengers sitting in the bus
were pressurizing them to take the bus, as such, they were allowed to take
the bus. These witnesses have also stated that since some of the passengers
had to take flight from Chandigarh and were to appear in examination, police
permitted them to take the bus and as such, they left the place. There is no
cross-examination qua aforesaid aspect of the matter conducted by the
prosecution upon these two witnesses, who nowhere supported the case of
the prosecution.
Learned Additional Advocate General, while inviting attention of this
court to the visitors’ register of Shanti Cafe, contended that present bail
petitioner alongwith co-accused Mihir Ojha not only visited Shanti Cafe with a
purpose to purchase contraband from Sonam Dorje, owner of Shanti Coffee
House, but in that regard, they also transferred money on-line. However,
H   having carefully perused the visitors’ register, this court finds that all the
entries except at Sr. No.71 have been made by one person, having specific
handwriting, but entry made at Sr. No.71 is altogether different from the
entries made at other serial numbers. Aforesaid fact gains significance
because of statement given by PW-9, Pawan, Cook working in the Shanti
Coffee House. This witness deposed that on 17.12.2020, Ankit Kumar son of
Ashok resident of Santosh Naggar, i.e. present bail petitioner, alongwith co-
accused Mihir Ojha visited the Cafe and during evening at 7.00 p.m made
entry in the register in this regard and they departed from the Cafe on next
day at 9/10 A.M. In his cross-examination, this witness admitted that there is
cutting in the column of date and time of arrival (Ext. PW- 9/A) at Sr. Nos. 69,
71 & 72. He also admitted that in the column of date and time of arrival in Ext.
PW-9/A, date “15” has been written over figure “19”, similarly, “18” has been
converted into “16” at Sr. No. 70 and date “18” has been written by cutting
date “28”. Most importantly, this witness in his cross-examination self stated
that three police personnel had come to Cafe and asked him to make entry at
Sr. No. 71 in the register and he has done so at their instance.
No doubt, financial transactions placed on record by the
prosecution reveals that the present bail petitioner and co-accused Ashok
Ankit, transferred some amount in the name of Sonam Dorje, but that may not
be sufficient to conclude complicity, if any, of the bail petitioner in the case,
especially, when they specifically set up a case that they do tour, travelling
and event management business.
ig   h 14.     Though the case at hand is to be decided by learned trial court in
the totality of the facts and evidence led on record by prosecution, but keeping
in view aforesaid glaring aspects of the matter, especially with regard to mode
H   and manner of recovery coupled with the fact that both the independent
witnesses have nowhere supported the case of the prosecution that the bag
containing contraband was recovered from below the seats Nos. 3 and 4, this
Court sees no reason to let bail petitioner incarcerate in jail for an indefinite
period during trial.
15.    Leaving everything aside, as has been taken note herein above, it
is highly unbelievable that the persons carrying/transporting commercial
quantity of contraband, would keep documents relating to his/her identity in
the bag containing contraband, which itself creates suspicion with regard to
or pocket not in bag.
correctness of the prosecution story, as normally, Adhaar card is kept in purse
Since, in the case at hand, commercial quantity of contraband came
to be recovered, rigors of Section 37 are attracted, but bare perusal of Section
37 of the Act, nowhere suggests that there is complete bar for this Court to
grant bail in cases involving commercial quantity, rather, in such like cases,
court after having afforded an opportunity of being heard to the public
prosecutor can proceed to grant bail in cases involving commercial quantity, if
it is satisfied that the accused has been falsely implicated and there is no
likelihood of his indulging in such activities again during trial. In the case at
hand, for the facts/reasons noted/stated hereinabove, this Court has a reason
to presume and believe that recovery is doubtful and perusal of status report
clearly reveals that at present no other case save and except the case at
hand stands registered against the bail petitioner under Narcotic Drugs &
17.    Hon'ble Apex Court as well as this Court in catena of cases have
H   repeatedly held that till the time, guilt of a person is proved in accordance with
law, he/she is deemed to be innocent and as such, no fruitful purpose would
be served by keeping the bail petitioner behind the bars for an indefinite
period during trial, especially when nothing remains to be recovered from him.
Apprehension expressed by learned Additional Advocate General that in the
event of bail petitioner being enlarged on bail, he may flee from justice, can be
best met by putting him to the stringent conditions.
18.    Hon'ble Apex Court in Criminal Appeal No. 227/2018, Dataram
Singh vs. State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr decided on 6.2.2018 has held
that freedom of an individual can not be curtailed for indefinite period,
especially when his/her guilt is yet to be proved. It has been further held by
the Hon'ble Apex Court in the aforesaid judgment that a person is believed
to be innocent until found guilty.
Hon’ble Apex Court in Sanjay Chandra versus Central Bureau
of Investigation (2012)1 Supreme Court Cases 49 has held that gravity
alone cannot be a decisive ground to deny bail, rather competing factors
are required to be balanced by the court while exercising its discretion. It
has been repeatedly held by the Hon’ble Apex Court that object of bail is to
secure the appearance of the accused person at his trial by reasonable
amount of bail. The object of bail is neither punitive nor preventative.
In Manoranjana Sinh alias Gupta versus CBI, (2017) 5 SCC
218, Hon'ble Apex Court has held that the object of the bail is to secure
the attendance of the accused in the trial and the proper test to be applied
in the solution of the question whether bail should be granted or refused is
H   whether it is probable that the party will appear to take his trial. Otherwise
also, normal rule is of bail and not jail. Apart from above, Court has to keep
in mind nature of accusations, nature of evidence in support                thereof,
severity of the punishment, which conviction will entail, character of the
accused, circumstances which are peculiar to the accused involved in that
crime.
21.         The Apex Court in Prasanta Kumar Sarkar versus Ashis
Chatterjee and another (2010) 14 SCC 496, has laid down various
principles to be kept in mind, while deciding petition for bail viz. prima
facie case, nature and gravity of accusation, punishment involved,
apprehension of repetition of offence and witnesses being influenced.
In view of above, bail petitioner has carved out a case for
himself, as such, present petition is allowed.
of     Bail petitioner is ordered to
be enlarged on bail, subject to furnishing bail bonds in the sum of Rs.2.00
Lakh with one local surety in the like amount, to the satisfaction of the
learned trial Court, besides the following conditions:
He shall make himself available for the purpose of
interrogation, if so required and regularly attend the trial Court
on each and every date of hearing and if prevented by any
reason to do so, seek exemption from appearance by filing
appropriate application;
C He shall not tamper with the prosecution evidence nor
hamper the investigation of the case in any manner
ig  h        (c)     He shall not make any inducement, threat or promises to any
person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to
dissuade him/her from disclosing such facts to the Court or
the Police Officer; and
H            (d)     He shall not leave the territory of India without the prior
permission of the Court.
23.         It is clarified that if the petitioner misuses the liberty or violates
any of the conditions imposed upon him, the investigating agency shall be
free to move this Court for cancellation of the bail.
24.    Any observations made hereinabove shall not be construed to be
a reflection on the merits of the case and shall remain confined to the
disposal of this petition alone. The petition stands accordingly disposed of.