1. Appellant herein feeling aggrieved of the judgment and order
dated 30.07.2019 passed by learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Anantnag in the case No.76/ASJ, whereby he has been convicted for
the commission of offence punishable under Section 376(2)(i) RPC
and sentenced to rigorous imprisonment for ten years and a fine of
Rs.50,000/-, and in default of payment of fine, to undergo further
imprisonment for a period of six months.
2. The judgment and order impugned have been assailed on the ground
that the appellant had been falsely implicated in the case by the
father of the prosecutrix for dispute over some payments between
them; that the trial court has relied upon the statement of prosecutrix,
though her statement did not inspire confidence to base conviction;
that the prosecution had examined most of the witnesses from the
family of the prosecutrix only, and their statements are of no
corroboration with that of the statement of prosecutrix; that the
evidence of medical examination suggested that there was no
evidence of fresh sexual intercourse when the prosecutrix was
examined on 07.01.2017 though she was alleged to have sexually
ravished during previous night and also there was absence of
spermatozoa which remains alive within 72 hours of the incident.
3. The factual matrix of the case is that one Azad Ali Khan S/O Gul
Ali Khan R/O Gulistan Mohalla Kehribal lodged a written report at
the Police Station, Mattan on 07.01.2017 alleging therein that during
the intervening night of 6th-7th January, 2017, appellant came to his
house and after having dinner stayed there, and that during night he
forcibly raped his daughter who was aged about nine years only. On
the basis of this report, a case was registered vide FIR No. 03/2017
for the commission of offence punishable under Section 376 RPC,
and the investigation was set in motion. After recording the
statement of witnesses and conducting the medical examination of
the victim, the investigation was concluded for the commission of
offence punishable under Section 376 RPC against the appellant.
4. On completion of the investigation, charge-sheet was laid against the
accused-appellant before the court of learned Chief Judicial
Magistrate Anantnag who, vide his order dated 14.03.2017,
committed the case to the Sessions Court Anantnag, wherefrom the
case was assigned for disposal under law to the Fast Track Court for
trial of rape cases (Additional Sessions Court) Anantnag. The
appellant was charge sheeted by the trial court on 03.05.2017, who
while pleading innocence, denied the charge and claimed trial.
5. Prosecution, in order to bring home the charge against the appellant,
examined 10 out of 11 listed prosecution witnesses, whereas the
defence had admitted the statement of PW-7 Dr. Tariq Ahmad
recorded in terms of Section 161 CrPC. The appellant was examined
in terms of Section 342 CrPC, disclosing him the incriminating
evidence on 17.07.2018, who again while pleading innocence,
denied the prosecution version and besides himself as his own
witness, examined two other witnesses in his defence. The trial court
vide impugned judgment and order, held the appellant guilty,
recorded conviction for the commission of offence punishable under
Section 376 (2)(i) RPC and sentenced him to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for 10 years and a fine of Rs.50,000/- and in default of
payment of fine to undergo further imprisonment for a period of six
months.
6. Heard learned counsel for both the sides, perused trial court record
and considered.
7. Learned counsel for the appellant argued that this is a case where
the appellant for some payment due to him from the complainant,
was falsely implicated and that the minor daughter of the
complainant was used to settle the scores with the appellant by
involving him in the commission of such heinous offence. He has
further argued that having examined the statement of prosecution
witnesses recorded by the court below, it is clear that no witness
other than the prosecutrix stated to have witnessed the alleged crime,
though as per the prosecution story the offence had been committed
during the dead of the night, when three more witnesses other than
the prosecutrix, were also in the same room where the alleged
incident occurred. It has also been argued that there was delay in
lodging FIR as the same was lodged in the evening of 7 th January
2017, while-as the offence was alleged to have been committed
during the previous night. It is also argued that the expert evidence
of doctor does not support the prosecution story inasmuch as the
doctor examining the prosecutrix has stated that there was no injury
on the private parts of the prosecutrix who was stated to be of tender
age, as such, the case is of false implication and the court below
while convicting and sentencing the appellant has not rightly
appreciated the evidence led by the prosecution and seems to have
been swayed by the charge of rape having been committed against
the child, without appreciating the evidence in its proper perspective.
It was finally prayed that the impugned judgment and order be set
aside and the appellant be acquitted of the charge.
8. Learned counsel for the respondents, on the other hand, vehemently
argued that the appellant had ravished and sexually assaulted a child
of nine years of age, and that there is sufficient evidence to connect
the accused with the commission of offence, particularly so in view
of the statement of the prosecutrix who has vividly described the
sequence of occurrence and very clearly stated that the appellant had
overpowered her during night hours when they were sleeping in the
same room, so much so that she could not raise alarm as her mouth
was gagged. He further argued that it cannot be said that the
prosecutrix, who was the child of tender age of nine years only,
would implicate and involve the innocent person at the risk of her
honour and that there was no reason for her to have falsely
implicated the appellant for the commission of such a heinous
offence. He further argued that though the sole statement of
prosecutrix was sufficient to record conviction of the appellant,
however, there was corroboration of evidence and the statement of
medical expert which cannot be ruled out for possibility of
commission of rape. It was prayed that the appeal having no merit be
dismissed and the conviction and sentence recorded by the trial
court, be maintained and upheld.
9. The prosecution story, as briefly put, is that on Friday 06.01.2017,
the appellant came to the house of the complainant PW-1 Azad Ali
Khan as his friend and stayed there; that during the night hours, the
appellant committed rape against one of the daughters aged about
nine years of the complainant. On the basis of this complaint filed by
the complainant, an FIR No.03/2017 was lodged at the local police
station for the commission of offence punishable under Section 376
RPC. Prosecution, besides examining PW-1 Azad Ali Khan
(complainant), the prosecutrix (name withheld to hide her identity),
PW-3 wife of the complainant namely Yaseema Begum, PW-4 Bilal
Ahmad Khan , PW-5 Riyaz Ali Khan had also examined the medical
expert PW-6 Dr. Rehana Hassan and the police officials including
I.O as prosecution witnesses. The court during the trial also
examined Mariya and Shahid Ali Khan, siblings of the prosecutrix
who were stated to be present in the same room where the
prosecutrix was allegedly raped, whereas the appellant examined
Mushtaq Ahmad Khan, Mohammad Afzal Khan and also himself
crossed the witness box as defence witnesses.
10.The stand of prosecution is that it is proved that during the
investigation and also during the trial, the accused on 07.01.2017
stayed in the house of the complainant and during the night hours,
when the complainant and his wife went to sleep in the 1 st floor of
the house, the appellant was given the bedding to sleep in the room
located in the ground floor, where two daughters of the complainant
including the prosecutrix, his son and brother-in-law also slept; that
in the morning, the appellant and other persons woke up as usual,
had tea, left for their respective jobs. The prosecutrix along-with her
sister went for tuition; the appellant also left for his home and the
complainant had also gone for his job. In the evening, after coming
back from the tuitions, the prosecutrix was stated to have told her
younger sister with regard to this incident that she had been raped by
the appellant during the night when she was sleeping next to the
appellant in the room; and that she had experienced pain in her
private part, besides bleeding. The younger sister of the prosecutrix
narrated the same incident to their mother and in turn the mother
informed her husband who lodged complaint before the police.
During the course of investigation, it was concluded that the
appellant had raped the prosecutrix by overpowering her. The
prosecution had not cited all the persons who were present in the
room where the incident took place including the maternal uncle of
the prosecutrix namely Bilal Ahmad Khan, who was aged about 22
years and brother of the prosecutrix Shahid Ali Khan, who was aged
about 15 years, as prosecution witnesses and both these witnesses
had been examined by the court as court witnesses.
11. The prosecutrix during the trial stated that the appellant who was
friend of her father used to come to their home and on the fateful
night her maternal uncle was sleeping in separate bedding near one
wall and in the 2nd bedding she and her younger sister were sleeping,
whereas in the 3rd bedding accused was sleeping. Her bedding was in
between that of the maternal uncle and the accused. She further
deposed that during the night hours appellant molested her younger
sister, who told her about this incident and she shifted her younger
sister towards other side and slept herself on the side of the
appellant; thereafter the accused/appellant focused torch on her, took
her to his bedding, gagged her mouth with a muffler and took off his
and her lowers with the help of his legs and arms. That the accused
had sexual intercourse with her three times and thereafter she went
back to her bedding. The accused had threatened her not to disclose
this incident to anybody otherwise he would repeat this act and
threatened to kill her. That after waking up in the morning she took
tea, went to the bathroom where she found blood with her urine.
During the day time, she was alone in her home, her mother had
gone to the vegetable garden, her father drove to his job, her brother
went to the tuitions and her younger sister had gone to fetch milk,
and during this time the accused had threatened her. Thereafter she
stayed at home with her sister for whole day playing carom and both
the sisters went to the tuitions at 4.00 pm. She felt uncomfortable
while walking and narrated whole episode to her sister and thereafter
her sister narrated the same to their mother after arriving home from
tuitions. Her mother took her to the doctor. They lodged report at the
police station and the police also took her to the doctor. Her mother
made phone call to her husband for coming to the police station. The
occurrence had taken place during the previous night and on the next
evening she had been taken for medical examination. The other
witnesses, who were stated to be present in the same room where the
offence of alleged rape was committed, were the maternal uncle of
the prosecutrix, brother and younger sister of the prosecutrix, but
were not cited as prosecution witnesses by the prosecution. The trial
court however, exercising the power under Section 540 CrPC
directed these witnesses to be examined as court witnesses.
12. CW-Mariya stated that the accused used to come to her house and
sometimes stayed there for a night. Last time when the accused
stayed in their house, four beddings were laid in the room at ground
floor; her parents were in the upper storey. In the room, on the 1st
bedding accused was sleeping, she along-with her sister were in the
2nd bedding whereas their maternal uncle-Bilal Ahmad was sleeping
in the 3rd bedding and her brother Shahid Ali Khan was sleeping in
the 4th bedding. During the night hours the accused caught hold of
her arms and her sister (prosecutrix) shifted her to the side of her
maternal uncle and she of her own slept on the side of the accused.
She however, stated that she did not wake up from her sleep during
this incident and had not heard anything till 4.00 pm, when she and
her sister had gone for tuitions and had not made any complaint. The
victim had told that she was bleeding with the urine and then she
narrated the episode that the accused had caught hold of her, gagged
her mouth, caught hold of her private parts and dragged her due to
which she felt pain and that the accused had also threatened her. She
narrated this story to her mother who telephonically asked her
husband as to whether the accused was with him, who replied in
affirmative. The accused came to their house. She does not know
what happened afterwards when the accused had come to their
house. The case was registered against him and he was taken to the
police station.
13. CW-Shahid Ali Khan stated that the accused was known to him as
he was visiting their house for last 2-3 years as there were friendly
relations between his father and the accused. He further stated that
four beddings had been laid, three in one line and 4th bedding was
laid towards the feet side. Bedding of the accused and his maternal
uncle was laid towards the walls, whereas bedding of his sisters was
in their middle. He had not heard anything during the night. The
episode had been shared to him by his uncle at 6.00 pm.
14. The statements of complainant and his wife Yasmeena Begum, at
the most, can be said to be hearsay with regard to the occurrence
though they are witnesses to the complaint and other factors during
the investigation.
15. PW-4 Bilal Ahmad Khan (maternal uncle of the prosecutrix) who
was sleeping in the same room where the prosecutrix was allegedly
raped, stated about the beddings laid for different persons in the
room, but he had not come to know about anything till 5.00 pm next
day, when her sister told her about the occurrence. He denied having
personal knowledge about the said occurrence.
16. PW-5 Riyaz Ali Khan brother of the complainant is also a hearsay
witness as he had stated to have been informed by his brother
telephonically about the incident and had no personal knowledge
about the occurrence.
17. On the basis of the statements of the witnesses present in the room,
it can be safely stated that though being in a small room and having
laid beddings adjacent to each other, the maternal uncle of the
prosecutrix who was stated to be of the age of 22 years, brother of
the prosecutrix who was stated to be of the age of 15 years and the
younger sister of the prosecutrix who was 7 years old, had not come
to know anything with regard the commission of rape on the
prosecutrix being in the same room.
18. So far as the statement of PW-6 Dr. Rehana Hassan, who examined
the prosecutrix is concerned, she had stated that on her vaginal
examination, hymen of the prosecutrix was found ruptured, sample
for sperm detection had been taken, wherein no sperm was detected.
The prosecutrix had not achieved menarche. On examination, she
was of the opinion that though sexual intercourse had taken place but
there was no incident of fresh intercourse. She further deposed that
there were neither bruises on her body nor any foreign body was
found on examination of the prosecutrix. Her gait was normal. The
rupture of the hymen can be possible even by cycling, horse-riding
or by inserting any foreign body in the vagina. The fresh intercourse
can be examined on conducting local examination of genital area,
besides presence or absence of spermatozoa. In the instant case,
spermatozoa was absent so she gave her opinion of no fresh
intercourse signs. The prosecutrix had been brought to her within 12
hours of alleged occurrence. She had not found any traces of semen
on any part of the body of the prosecutrix. From naked eye she could
found the hymen ruptured with old tear. In fresh rupture there can be
congestion of local parts and adena also. In old cases there can be no
such signs. From the statement of this witness it comes out that as
per the medical opinion, which is though not conclusive proof but is
of corroborative nature, that the prosecutrix had not been subjected
to sexual intercourse in the recent past as alleged and that her hymen
had old tears and its rupture cannot be connected to any recent
incident.
19. PW-7 Dr. Tariq Ahmad had examined the appellant-accused with
regard to his potency and stated to have found him potent. PW-8 HC
Gul Mohammad and PW-9 SI Adil Ahmad are formal witnesses to
the seizure memos.
20. PW-10 ASI Mohammad Ayoub had investigated the case and had
stated that in his investigation it was proved that the accused had
committed rape on the prosecutrix, as such, he concluded the
investigation in the form of the charge-sheet for the commission of
offence punishable under Section 376 RPC and laid charge sheet.
21.On consideration of whole of the gamut of the prosecution evidence,
the case mainly revolves around the deposition of the prosecutrix
who was only 9 years of age. Her statement has to be considered in
the light of the observations of the superior courts as to whether
whole statement of prosecutrix should be taken into account to base
conviction. The prosecutrix was stated to be the child, whose
statement is, otherwise, to be taken into account with all
circumspection to rule out as to whether the child had not been
deposed having been tutored.
22. Hon’ble Apex Court in the case ‘Krishna Kumar Malik Vs. State
of Haryana reported as (2011) 7 SCC 130’ held that no-doubt it is
true that to hold accused guilty for the commission of offence of rape
the solitary evidence of the prosecutrix is sufficient provided the
same inspires confidence and appears to be absolutely trustworthy,
unblemished and should be of sterling quality.
23. The Supreme Court in another case titled ‘Rai Sandeep alias
Deepu Vs. State (NCT of Delhi) reported as (2012) 8 SCC 21’ had
observed that the sterling witness should be of a very high quality
and calibre whose version should, therefore, be unassailable.
Paragraph- 15 of the said judgment is reproduced hereunder:-
“15. In our considered opinion, the ‘sterling witness’
should be of a very high quality and caliber whose
version should, therefore, be unassailable. The
Court considering the version of such witness should
be in a position to accept it for its face value without
any hesitation. To test the quality of such a witness,
the status of the witness would be immaterial and
what would be relevant is the truthfulness of the
statement made by such a witness. What would be
statement right from the starting point till the end,
namely, at the time when the witness makes the
initial statement and ultimately before the Court. It
should be natural and consistent with the case of the
prosecution qua the accused. There should not be
any prevarication in the version of such a witness.
The witness should be in a position to withstand the
cross- examination of any length and howsoever
strenuous it may be and under no circumstance
should give room for any doubt as to the factum of
the occurrence, the persons involved, as well as, the
sequence of it. Such a version should have co-
relation with each and everyone of other supporting
material such as the recoveries made, the weapons
used, the manner of offence committed, the scientific
evidence and the expert opinion. The said version
should consistently match with the version of every
other witness. It can even be stated that it should be
akin to the test applied in the case of circumstantial
evidence where there should not be any missing link
in the chain of circumstances to hold the accused
guilty of the offence alleged against him. Only if the
version of such a witness qualifies the above test as
well as all other similar such tests to be applied, it
can be held that such a witness can be called as a
‘sterling witness’ whose version can be accepted by
the Court without any corroboration and based on
which the guilty can be punished. To be more
precise, the version of the said witness on the core
spectrum of the crime should remain intact while all
other      attendant    materials,      namely,     oral,
documentary and material objects should match the
said version in material particulars in order to
enable the Court trying the offence to rely on the
core version to sieve the other supporting materials
for holding the offender guilty of the charge
24. Under Section 118 of the Indian Evidence Act, every individual is
competent to be a witness in a court of law, unless incapable of
understanding the question placed before him/her. Capability to
understand at a young age is more likely to be dependant and to be
formed at the opinion and perception of what others say and portray,
due to which the testimony of a child is more likely to be modified
or altered. Hence dealing with a child witness is of key importance.
Testimony of such a witness must be scrutinised to ensure that it was
not given under duress or undue influence and that it must also
corroborate other evidence. The main concern is the inclination of
the child witness to be tutored by some other party who has an
interest in the matter and which hampers the testimony. Though the
‘voir dire’ test was undertaken by the trial court, to assure that the
prosecutrix was capable of understanding and answering question,
nonetheless, whether the child is tutored or not can be deduced from
the contents of her statement.
25. On the anvil of the principles, when the version of the prosecutrix is
tested, it is unfortunate that the said witness has failed to pass any of
the tests mentioned above. There is total variation in her version
from what was stated in the complaint and what was deposed before
the court at the time of trial. There are material variations as regards
that the prosecutrix had shifted her younger sister, on being molested
by the appellant, to the side of her maternal uncle, whereas she
herself came to the side of the appellant and that the accused took
her to his bedding, removed his and her lowers, had sexual
intercourse three times, advised her to put on her trouser and then
she went back to her own bedding to sleep.
26. It is not understandable as to how the prosecutrix, who was
apprehensive with regard to her sister who was younger to her being
molested who in her own statement had not said anything with
regard to her alleged molestation, and instead of informing her
younger sister about the incident the prosecutrix should have
informed her maternal uncle or her brother who too were sleeping in
the same room, and how without any protest she was shifted to the
bedding of the appellant by the appellant and then after having
sexual activity went back to her own bedding. Her statement is also
hard to be believed to the extent that she had been raped thrice by the
appellant. It cannot be possible that the child of the age of only 9
years, who even had not reached the age of menarche could be
ravished three times repeatedly without any pain, protest or
resistance which may not have been noticed by the other persons
sleeping in the same room.
27. The contention of the prosecutrix is also belied to the extent that the
statement of the medical expert who has clearly stated that there was
no injury on the private parts of the prosecutrix. The repeated sexual
activity on such a person of tender age cannot be possible without
any injury in the vaginal /genital area.
28. Applying the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court for
appreciation of statement of such witness, it appears that the
statement of prosecutrix was not trustworthy particularly on the face
of it, as the prosecutrix had not disclosed anything for being ravished
repeatedly in the night to her mother in the morning and reluctantly
disclosed the same on the next day in the evening. In such a situation
of the matter, on the basis of the evidence led by the prosecution, the
sole statement of the prosecutrix which can be relied upon to record
conviction, is found not to be trustworthy and reliable, as such, the
prosecution cannot be said to have proved its case beyond doubt to
bring home the charge of rape, to record conviction and sentence of
the appellant.
29. In such a situation, it appears that the prosecutrix, who was the
child, may have been tutored to make the statement for implicating
the appellant falsely, who was stated to have some dispute with
regard to some payments. It is also trite that the statement of the
child witness had to be considered with all circumspection to rule
out the child being tutored for false implication of some person.
30. Having regard to all the facts emerging out of the prosecution
evidence that the sole statement of the prosecutrix is to be
considered in absence of any eye witness, the prosecutrix’s statement
cannot be stated to be sterling and her version cannot be said to be
unassailable.
31. Looking at the facts of the case, it is clear that presence of almost all
the witnesses- parents, maternal uncle and siblings- elder brother and
younger sister, was in the house and except parents all others in the
room, where the prosecutrix is alleged to have been raped by the
appellant, conduct of the parents to sleep in the upper floor, leaving
the children including prosecutrix in the ground floor, where the
beddings of the daughters were claimed to have been laid just
besides that of appellant who was a stranger, is not understandable.
32. Mother of the prosecutrix stated that she had seen blood stains on
the legs of the prosecutrix that she had washed, besides rashness and
inflammation had been noticed on the private parts of the
prosecutrix. PW-Dr. Rehana, who had examined the prosecution as
medical expert, however, ruled out any rashes or inflammation.
33. In the considered opinion of this Court for the afore-stated reasons,
the charge against the appellant has not been proved beyond any
shadow of reasonable doubt, as such, the trial court has misdirected
itself to appreciate the evidence so as to record conviction on the
basis of the prosecution evidence.
34. In view of the discussions made hereinabove and applying the legal
principles to the factual background of the case and the evidence
brought on record during trial, the appeal is allowed and the
impugned judgment and order dated 30.07.2019 passed by learned
Additional Sessions Judge, Anantnag in case No.76/ASJ, recording
conviction and sentencing the appellant under Section 376(2)(i)
RPC, is set aside. Appellant/convict is ordered to be released
forthwith, in case he is not required in any other case(s).
35. Appeal is disposed of along-with connected CrlM.
36. Registry to sent back the trial court record.
Whether the order is reportable:        Yes / No