Deepak Tomar Vs. State of MP and anr.
Shri Rajiv Shrivastava, Counsel for the applicant.
Shri R.K. Awasthi, Counsel for the State.
Case diary is available.
This first application under Section 439 of CrPC has been filed
for grant of bail.
The applicant has been arrested on 06.10.2020 in connection
with Crime No.337/2020 registered by Police Station Hazira Distt.
Gwalior for offence punishable under Sections 363, 376 of IPC,
Section 3/4 of POCSO Act and Section 3(1)(w)(ii) and 3(2)(v) of the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities)
It is submitted by the counsel for the applicant that the
prosecutrix has turned hostile and she has not supported the
prosecution case.
By order dated 26.08.2021 State counsel was directed to obtain
the DNA test report and the case was adjourned to 14.09.2021. On
14.09.2021 also, the DNA test report was not available. On
27.09.2021 this criminal appeal was converted into a miscellaneous
criminal case in the light of the judgment passed by the Division
Bench of this Court in the case of Pramod Vs. State of MP on
22.04.2021 in Cr.A. No.5189/2020. Today also, counsel for the State
Deepak Tomar Vs. State of MP and anr.
submits that DNA test report has not been received and a letter has
been received from FSL, Sagar that “consumables and the standard
kit” which is used for conducting DNA test report is not available.
It is really unfortunate that the prosecution is not serious
towards the criminal trial. It is true that the prosecutrix has turned
hostile, but the Supreme Court in the case of Hemudan Nanbha
Gadhvi vs. State of Gujarat, passed on 28.09.2018 in Criminal
Appeal No.913/2016 has held that even if the prosecutrix has turned
hostile, still an accused can be convicted on the basis of scientific /
forensic evidence. DNA rest report is one of the crucial circumstance
which may prove the guilt of an accused. Even otherwise, under
Section 53-A of Cr.P.C., DNA test is compulsory. Under these
circumstances, it is the primary responsibility of the State to ensure
uninterrupted supply of “consumables and standard kit” to the RFSL
so that DNA test can be conducted without any difficulty. However,
unfortunately RFSL, Sagar is short of “consumables and standard
kit” and on account of said shortage, DNA test has come to a halt.
Under these circumstances, the Director General of Police is
directed to immediately look into the matter and to ensure
uninterrupted supply of “consumables and standard kit” to RFSL,
Sagar so that DNA test can be conducted as early as possible.
Deepak Tomar Vs. State of MP and anr.
Now the only question which remains to be adjudicated is that
when the prosecution itself is not in a position to provide DNA test
report then whether the accused can be allowed to languish in jail or
not. In the present case, complete fault lies with the prosecution. An
accused cannot be allowed to languish in jail for the fault of the
Since the prosecution itself is unable to provide DNA test
report as required in the light of the judgment passed in the case of
Hemudan Nanbha Gadhvi (supra), therefore, this Court is left with
no other option but to direct for release the applicant on bail.
The Supreme Court by order dated 23-3-2020 passed in the
case of IN RE : CONTAGION OF COVID 19 VIRUS IN
PRISONS in SUO MOTU W.P. (C) No. 1/2020 has directed all the
States to constitute a High Powered Committee to consider the
release of prisoners in order to decongest the prisons. The Supreme
“The issue of overcrowding of prisons is a matter
of serious concern particularly in the present
context of the pandemic of Corona Virus
Having regard to the provisions of Article 21 of
the Constitution of India, it has become
imperative to ensure that the spread of the
Corona Virus within the prisons is controlled.
We direct that each State/Union Territory shall
constitute a High Powered Committee
comprising of (i) Chairman of the State Legal
Deepak Tomar Vs. State of MP and anr.
Services Committee, (ii) the Principal Secretary
(Home/Prison) by whatever designation is known
as, (ii) Director General of Prison(s), to
determine which class of prisoners can be
released on parole or an interim bail for such
period as may be thought appropriate. For
instance, the State/Union Territory could
consider the release of prisoners who have been
convicted or are undertrial for offences for which
prescribed punishment is up to 7 years or less,
with or without fine and the prisoner has been
convicted for a lesser number of years than the
maximum.
It is made clear that we leave it open for the High
Powered Committee to determine the category of
prisoners who should be released as aforesaid,
depending upon the nature of offence, the
number of years to which he or she has been
sentenced or the severity of the offence with
which he/she is charged with and is facing trial
or any other relevant factor, which the
Committee may consider appropriate.”
Considering the above facts and circumstances as well as
considering the fact that in view of second wave of Covid19
pandemic, it is also necessary to decongest the jail, and without
commenting on the merits of the case, it is directed that the applicant
be released on bail, on furnishing a personal bond in the sum of
Rs.1,00,000/- (Rs. One Lac) with one surety in the like amount to
the satisfaction of the Trial Court or C.J.M. or Remand Magistrate
(Whosoever is available). The applicant shall also furnish an
undertaking that he shall follow all the instructions which may be
issued by the Central Govt./State Govt. or Local Administration
Deepak Tomar Vs. State of MP and anr.
(General or Specific) from time to time for combating Covid19.
The Supreme Court in the case of IN RE : CONTAGION OF
COVID 19 VIRUS IN PRISONS by order dated 7-4-2020 has
In these circumstances, we consider it
appropriate to direct that Union of India shall
ensure that all the prisoners having been released
by the States/Union Territories are not left
stranded and they are provided transportation to
reach their homes or given the option to stay in
temporary shelter homes for the period of
lockdown.
For this purpose, the Union of India may issue
appropriate directions under the Disaster
Management Act, 2005 or any other law for the
time being in force. We further direct that the
States/Union Territories shall ensure through
Directors General of Police to provide safe
transit to the prisoners who have been released so
that they may reach their homes. They shall also
be given an option for staying in temporary
shelter homes during the period of lockdown.
Accordingly, it is directed that before releasing the
applicant, the jail authorities shall get the applicant examined by
a competent Doctor and if the Doctor is of the opinion that his
Corona Virus test is necessary, then the same shall be conducted.
If the applicant is not found suspected of Covid19 infection or if
his   test   report     is   negative,  then   the   concerned local
administration shall make necessary arrangements for sending
the applicant to his house as per the directions issued by the
Deepak Tomar Vs. State of MP and anr.
Supreme Court in the case of IN RE : CONTAGION OF COVID
19 VIRUS IN PRISONS (Supra), and if he is found positive then
the applicant shall be immediately sent to concerning hospital for
his treatment as per medical norms. The applicant is further
directed to strictly follow all the instructions which may be issued
by the Central Govt./State Govt. or Local Administration for
combating Covid19. If it is found that the applicant has violated
any of the instructions (whether general or specific) issued by the
Central Govt./State Govt. or Local Administration, then this
order shall automatically lose its effect, and the Local
Administration/Police Authorities shall immediately take him in
custody and would send him to the same jail from where he was
released. The applicant is further directed to supply a copy of
this bail order to the police station having jurisdiction over his
place of residence.
The other conditions of Section 437, 439 Cr.P.C. shall remain
the same.
This order shall remain in force, till the conclusion of Trial. In
case of bail jump, or violation of any of the condition(s) mentioned
above, this order shall automatically lose its effect.
In the light of the judgment passed by the Supreme Court in
Deepak Tomar Vs. State of MP and anr.
the case of Aparna Bhat and others Vs. State of M.P. Passed on
18.03.2021 in Criminal Appeal No. 329/2021, the intimation
regarding grant of bail be sent to the complainant.
With aforesaid observations, this application is Allowed.
Let a copy of this order be sent to Director General of Police
for necessary information and compliance.