(Under Article 32 of the Constitution of India)
1.          This writ petition is being filed challenging the
constitutional validity of section 124-A of the Indian Penal Code,
1860, which penalises the crime of “sedition”. The impugned
section clearly infringes the fundamental right under Article
19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India which guarantees that “all
citizens shall have the right to freedom of speech and
expression”. Further, the restriction imposed by the section is an
unreasonable one, and therefore does not constitute a
permissible restriction in terms of Article 19(2) of the
Constitution. Hence this petition is filed to humbly pray that
Section 124-A be declared unconstitutional and void by this
Hon’ble Court and be struck out of the Indian Penal Code.
1A. It is respectfully submitted that the Petitioners have not
approached the authorities concerned seeking similar relief, in
view of the nature of the issues involved and the relief sough in
the instant Writ Petition.
2.          The Petitioners acknowledge that this issue has come
before this Hon’ble Court in 1962; where the validity of the
section was upheld. This Hon’ble Court in Kedar Nath Singh v.
State of Bihar (1962) held that Section 124-A imposed a
reasonable restriction on Article 19(1)(a), falling within the
ambit of Article 19(2). The central tenet of the Petitioners’
argument is that while the Hon’ble Supreme Court may have
been correct in its finding nearly sixty years ago, Section 124-A
no longer passes constitutional muster today. This is described
in detail later in the instant Writ Petition.
3.          Petitioners No. 1 and 2 are journalists working in the
states of Manipur and Chhattisgarh. As outspoken and
responsible journalists they have been raising questions against
their respective state governments as well as the Central
Government. They have been charged with sedition under
section 124A of IPC in various FIRs for comments and cartoons
shared by them on the social networking website Facebook.
Charged with sedition for criticising political leaders
4.          Petitioner No. 1 has been a journalist working in
Manipur for 7 years. Before that, he worked as a teacher, and
continues to teach students even now. In 2014, he joined as a
News Anchor at Impact TV. In 2015, he was appointed as the
sub-editor at Impact TV. In 2017, he joined ISTV as a News
Anchor and Desk Editor. Several FIRs have been registered
against him since 2018 with a view to silence him and to
suppress his journalism. He has spent a total of 210 days in
custody regarding different FIRs under Section 124A IPC since
2018. He also lost his job when he was arrested under Section
124A in November 2018.
5.          The first FIR registered against Petitioner No. 1 was FIR
No. 173 (8) 2018 IPC under Section 505(2)/500 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 dated 9.8.2018. The FIR was registered
pertaining to his criticism of the Government through his
Facebook post regarding a crisis at the Manipur University and
the students’ hue and cry against the Vice-Chancellor for alleged
embezzlement of funds and suppression of the students’ union.
He was arrested on 10.8.2018. He was in police lock-up for one
day and for three days in judicial custody. He was finally
granted bail on 13.8.2018.
True copy of FIR No. 173 (8) 2018 IPS dated 9.8.2018
registered at Imphal West is attached herewith as Annexure
P-1 at page no. _91-92.
6.           The second FIR registered against Petitioner No. 1 was
FIR No. 286(11) 2018 IPC under Section 124A/194/500 IPC
dated 19.11.2018. The FIR was registered pertaining to certain
comments he had made in a video he posted on his Facebook
account criticising certain political leaders. A reading of the FIR
makes it clear that there was absolutely nothing made out in the
FIR which would constitute a case of sedition, and yet Petitioner
No. 1 spent over 140 days in custody based on this FIR.
True copy of FIR No. 286 (11) 2018 IPS dated 19.11.2018
registered    at   Imphal   West.      is  attached   herewith   as
Annexure P-2 at page no. 93-94.
7. Initially, he was arrested on 20.11.2018, and was in police
custody for 6 days. He was released on bail on 26.11.2018. The
Hon’ble CJM, Imphal West, in the bail order dated 26.11.2018
“From the materials of the prosecution, it is seen that
the accused had made videos and posted them on his
timeline using derogatory words against the Chief
Minister of Manipur calling them as agent of the Prime
Minister and had used many vulgar and undiplomatic
words. The said video appears to be made regarding
the Chief Minister attending a Birth anniversary of Rani
Jhanshi Bai where the Chief Minister had given a
speech. On perusal of the said materials, I am satisfied
there exist materials against the accused person for
expressing his opinion in very undiplomatic words and
terms and gesture. However, I find the said words,
terms and gesture used by the accused and the context
in which they are used, and the comment made by the
accused person cannot be termed seditious to attract
offence u/s 124-A IPC.          It appears to be more
expression of opinion against the public conduct of a
public figure in a street language. It does not appear to
me to such which is intended to create enmity between
different groups of people community, sections etc. nor
does it appear to be one which attempts to bring
hatred,     contempt,      dissatisfaction against   the
government of India or of the State. It is mere
expression of opinion against the Prime Minister of
India and Chief Minister of Manipur, which cannot be
equated with an attack to invite people to violence
against the Govt. of India or Manipur to topple it. The
same is the view of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Kedar
Nath case. In giving the speech, the accused person
transgressed beyond decent human conduct but it
cannot be termed seditious. The government, especially
its functionary like Prime Minister or Chief Minister
cannot be so sensitive as to take offence upon
expression of opinion by its citizen which may be given
every nicely by using proper words or indecently by
using some vulgar terms.
In the result, I am of the considered opinion the
offence u/s. 124-A IPC is not attracted at all by the
video made and published by the accused in social
media.”
True copy of Order dated 26.11.2018 passed by Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Imphal West, Manipur, in Cril. Misc.
(B) Case No. 283 of 2018, is attached herewith as
Annexure P-3 at page no. 95-97_.
8. However, after Petitioner No. 1 was released on bail on
27.11.2018, he was detained on the same day under a detention
order bearing No. Cril/NSA/No. 4 of 18 passed by the District
Magistrate, Imphal West. The reason for this detention also was
his critical comments against the political leaders.
9.            Petitioner No. 1 remained in detention for over 134
days, till the Hon’ble High Court of Manipur quashed the set aside
the detention order vide its order 8.4.2019. He was finally
released on 10.4.2019. True copy of the order dated 8.4.2019
passed by the Hon’ble High Court of Manipur at Imphal in Writ
Petition (Cril) No. 18 of 2018 is attached herewith as
Annexure P-4 at page no. 98-115.
10.           The third FIR registered against Petitioner No. 1 is FIR
No. 14(9) 2020 Sen-PS under Section 124A/153A/503 IPC &
3(1)(r) SC & ST POA Act, 1989. This FIR, dated 11.9.2020,
pertains to a statement made by the Petitioner No. 1 on
Facebook regarding certain derogatory remarks made by the
partner of a prominent politician against the wife of said the
politician who belongs to the Scheduled Tribe community. There
was nothing seditious in his comments. Yet Petitioner No. 1 was
arrested on 29.9.2020 and was in custody for 70 days until he
was released on bail vide order dated 7.12.2020.
True copy of FIR No. 14(9) 2020 Sen-PS dated 11.9.2020
registered at Senapati is attached herewith as Annexure P-5 at
page no. 116-117.
Petitioner No.1 was initially granted interim order from arrest in
the said FIR.    True copy of order dated 14.9.2020 passed by
Sessions Judge, Senapati in Cril. Misc. (AB) Case No. 3 of 2020 is
annexed herewith and marked as Annexure P-6 at page no.
The said order passed by Session Judge, Senapati, whereby the
Interim anticipatory bail granted to Petitioner No. 1 was cancelled
as the FIR included provisions of the SC/ST (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act, 1989 under which anticipatory bail is statutorily
barred. True copy of order dated 28.9.2020 passed by Sessions
Judge,    Senapati   in   Crl  Misc    (AB)   No.    3    of  2020 is
annexed herewith and marked as Annexure P-7 at page no.
True copy of Order dated 7.12.2020 passed by the Special
Judge for SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocity) Act, Senapati, in Crl.
Misc. (B) Case No. 16 of 2020 is attached herewith as
11.       Therefore, Petitioner No. 1 has spent a total of over 210
days in custody due to FIRs registered under section 124A of IPC
simply for his statements critical of certain political leaders.
Charged with sedition for sharing a cartoon
12.          Petitioner No. 2 has been working as a journalist in
Chhattisgarh for many years. He is a well-recognised journalist
and has written hundreds of articles in various publications. He is
keeping a compilation of his articles ready to be shown to the
Court at the time of arguments. A perusal of these articles will
show that many of them are in respect of fake encounters. An
FIR was registered against him on 28.4.2018 with FIR No.
156/2018 registered at P.S. Kanker, Chhattisgarh under section
124-A IPC and Section 66D of Information Technology Act, 2000.
The said FIR was registered pertaining to certain cartoons that
Petitioner No. 2 had shared on Facebook. Petitioner No. 2 states
that the FIR was lodged against him under section 124A by the
State to take revenge against him because of his work as a
human rights activist and journalist. True copy of FIR No.
156/2018 dated 28.4.2018 registered at Kanker is attached
herewith as Annexure P-9 at page no. _148-151).
13.       Petitioner No. 2 was granted anticipatory bail regarding the
said FIR by the Hon’ble High Court of Chhattisgarh, Bilaspur, vide
order dated 26.7.2018. True copy of order dated 26.7.2018
passed by the Hon’ble High Court of Chhattisgarh in M.CR.C(A)
No. 719 of 2018, Bilaspur is attached herewith as
Annexure P-10 at page no. 152-155.
14.            The submissions of the State Government in the above
case were recorded in the order dated 26.7.2018 as under:
“It is submitted that posting of objectionable cartoons in
facebook depicting senior leaders and other persons and
adding comment by the applicant of his own is complete
to constitute commission of offence under Section 124A
of the IPC.”
15.            Rejecting the State Government’s submissions noted
above, the Hon’ble High Court granted anticipatory bail to
16.            It is submitted that these FIRs have an unacceptable
‘chilling’ effect on the Petitioners as well as on other journalists
and threatens their work and their right to freedom of expression.
Asserting their constitutional right under Article 19(1)(a), the
Petitioners respectfully request that the Supreme Court review its
1962 ruling where it found Section 124-A to be a constitutionally
permissible restriction on Article 19(1)(a).
17.    Section 124-A of the India Penal Code is as follows:
“Whoever, by words, either spoken or written, or by
signs, or by visible representation, or otherwise, brings or
attempts to bring into hatred or contempt, or excites or
attempts to excite disaffection towards, the Government
established by law in India, shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, to which fine may be added, or with
imprisonment which may extend to three years, to which
fine may be added, or with fine.”
Explanation 1— The expression “disaffection” includes
disloyalty and all feelings of enmity.
Explanation 2— Comments expressing disapprobation of
the measures of the Government with a view to obtain
their alteration by lawful means, without inciting or
attempting to incite hatred, contempt or disaffection, do
not constitute an offence under this section.
Explanation 3 — Comments expressing disapprobation of
the administrative or other action of the Government
without exciting or attempting to excite hatred, contempt
or disaffection, do not constitute an offence under this
section.
18.    In case of   Kedar Nath Singh v. State of Bihar       the
Supreme Court of India decided on the scope of Section 124-A.
The Court read down the section; holding that acts involving
intention or tendency to create disorder, or disturbance of law
and order, or incitement to violence would be made penal by
section 124-A. (Kedar Nath Singh v. State of Bihar 1962 Supp (2)
SCR 767: AIR 1962 SC 955: (1962) 2 Cri LJ 103 at para 26).
19.           In reading down the section, and endorsing the stricter
interpretation give to the section by the Federal Court in 1942,
the court rejected the very wide interpretations of early cases
and that of the Privy Council in 1944 which brought far more acts
within the scope of the offence of the section and made it very
easy for the colonial government to class any criticism of the
state seditious.
20.           It is respectfully submitted that the Supreme Court in
Kedar Nath’s case did not go far enough in reading down the
section. Retaining ‘intention’ and ‘tendency’ as basis for criminal
liability means that these inherently subjective terms can be used
(and abused) to penalise those who have not caused any violence
or public disorder.
21.         It is submitted that when this interpretation, as defined
by Kadar Nath’s case is applied, there are two “scenarios” where
a) “Scenario A” is the obvious one; person A take an
action (makes a speech or publishes a pamphlet, etc,
etc) which actually results in violence or public disorder.
“A” is guilty of sedition.
b) In “Scenario B” the words or acts of person B do not
actually result in any violence or public disorder,
however the authorities feel that the words or acts had
this “tendency”, or person B had had the subjective
“intention” to cause this mischief. “B” is also guilty of
sedition.
22.         It is submitted that the use of sedition in Scenario B is
not use, but rather misuse – it is most frequently employed in
India to supress democratic debate, criticism of the government
and the advocacy of new ideas.
23.           Section 124-A of the IPC clearly infringes Article
19(1)(a) of the Constitution. It is submitted that the question of
whether Article 19(1)(a) is infringed by the impugned section this
should not form part of the matters in dispute; The Constitutional
bench of the Supreme Court held in Kedar Nath’s case that
“[t]here can be no doubt that apart from the provisions of clause
(2)    of   Art. 19,    Sections 124A…[is]  clearly   violative  of
Art. 19(1)(a) of the Constitution.” (Kedar Nath Singh v. State of
Bihar, para 26).
24.      It is submitted that the question in dispute is whether the
section constitutes a reasonable restriction falling within the
ambit of Article 19(2), thereby saving the section from
constitutional invalidity.
25.      As per accepted constitutional principles, in considering the
reasonableness of laws imposing restrictions on fundamental
right, a court should take into account various factors, these are:
the nature of the right alleged to have been infringed; the
underlying purpose of the restrictions imposed; the extent and
urgency of the evil sought to be remedied thereby; the
disproportion of the imposition; and the prevailing conditions at
the time. (State of Madras v. V. G. Row 952 AIR 196, 1952 SCR
597 at Pg 607).
26.       It is submitted that the situation with regard to these
factors has materially changed, both legally and factually, since
the Supreme Court’s adjudication of this issue in 1962. This
petition will show how, given these material changes, sedition
now constitutes an unreasonable restriction on Article 19(1)(a).
27.           This petition will fully address each of these factors and
considerations in turn (broadly under the headings I – V below);
it will be shown that Section 124-A is an unreasonable restriction
on freedom of expression, and how consequently Section 124-A
is unconstitutional.
28.           It is submitted by the Petitioners that it is necessary
that this issue be re-adjudicated by this Hon’ble Court in 2021.
International law requires that established restrictions on freedom
of expression should be reassessed and reviewed periodically.
International law places the onus the governments to prove that
any restrictions on the freedom of expression are valid. India is
thus obligated to review of this restriction.
29.          Freedom of expression is widely accepted to be the
“cornerstone of democracy”. Without freedom of expression
democracy cannot exist. In 2010 this Hon’ble Court expressed
that “change through free speech is basic to our democracy, and
to prevent change through criticism is to petrify the organs of
democratic Government.” It was held that freedom of expression
is not only politically useful “but that it is indispensable to the
operation of a democratic system”. (Indirect Tax Practitioners
Assn. v. R. K. Jain (2010) 8 SCC 281).
30.          The democratic system necessarily involves an advocacy
of the replacement of one government by another. World-wide,
the media and free speech are recognised as essential
accountability checks on governments. Citizens cannot exercise
their right to vote effectively or take part in public decision-
making if they do not have free access to information and ideas
and are not able to express their views freely. The Supreme Court
has expressed that “the freedom of expression is a preferred
right which is always very zealously guarded by the Supreme
Court” (The Secretary, Ministry Of Information and Broadcasting
v. Cricket Association Of Bengal (1995) 2 SCC 161 at Para 14).
31.          Freedom of expression has various important functions;
The supreme court held in Bennett Coleman              that “Free
expression is necessary: (1) for individual fulfillment, (2) for
attainment of truth, (3) for participation by members of the
society in political or social decision making and (4) for
maintaining the balance ‘between stability and change in society.”
Freedom of expression importantly, allows the political discourse
which is necessary in any country which aspires to democracy.
(Bennett Coleman & Co. v. Union of India (1972) SCC 788 at pg
32.           In 2010, giving approval to its 1972 dicta in Bennett
Coleman, the Supreme Court again asserted the importance of
freedom of expression for democracy in Indirect Tax Practitioners
“In a democracy the theory is that all men are entitled
to participate in the process of formulating- common
decisions…The crucial point is not that freedom of
expression   is  politically useful  but   that   it  is
indispensable to the operation of a democratic system.
In a democracy the basic premise is that the people are
both the governors and the governed. In order that
governed may form intelligent and wise judgment it is
necessary that they must be appraised of all the
aspects of a question on which a decision has to be
taken so that they might arrive at the truth.” (Bennett
Coleman & Co vs Union of India (1972) SCC 788 at pg
33.           It has been explicitly recognized by the Human Rights
Council of the United Nations General Assembly that Freedom of
expression is a cornerstone of democratic rights and freedoms
and the exercise of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression is one of the essential foundations of a democratic
society. The Human Rights Council has also recognized that the
effective exercise of the right to freedom of opinion and
expression is an important indicator of the level of protection of
other human rights and freedoms in member states. When other
human rights violations occur in states, typically freedom of
expression is restricted by governments in a bid to cover up other
atrocities and governmental failures.
34.          Freedom     of    expression   is  essential   in  enabling
democracy to work and public participation in decision-making.
Citizens cannot exercise their right to vote effectively or take part
in public decision-making if they do not have free access to
information and ideas and are not able to express their views
freely. Freedom of expression is thus not only important for
individual dignity but also to participation, accountability and
democracy. Freedom of speech is the soul of a democratic
society. It is the basis for all of the individual rights and for the
protection of the democratic regime and social order. Repression
of free speech and of open criticism of government undermines
the very foundations of this order.
35.          In the case of Javed Habib vs The State , the Delhi High
Court aptly described criticism of the government as the ‘hallmark
“The criticism of the government is the hallmark of
democracy. As a matter of fact the essence of
democracy     is  criticism  of  the   Government.    The
democratic system which necessarily involves an
advocacy of the replacement of one government by
another, gives the right to the people to criticize the
government.”
36.          The nature of this fundamental right is clearly that it is
of paramount importance in a democratic society.                The
Petitioners do not dispute that this Hon’ble Court gave due
recognition to the fundamental nature of this right when in Kedar
Nath’s case, in fact the court expressed that ”freedom of
expression is the sine quo non of democracy.” The right is, and
has always been of an essential nature and of paramount
importance. Hence the situation with regard to the nature of this
fundamental right has not changed, save for the anticipation that
India’s democracy has matured in the last sixty years, to the
extent that this right should be even more zealously guarded
today. The Supreme Court, as the custodian and guarantor of
the fundamental rights of the citizens, has the duty cast upon it
of striking down any law which unduly restricts the freedom of
speech and expression.
37.          People   in India have     the   right to   criticize the
government, and this is a right that needs to be zealously
guarded if India wants to maintain its status as a democracy.
38.      The next point of consideration is the underlying purpose of
the restriction. It is submitted that when the section was
originally inserted into the IPC, its purpose was to protect the
British colonial power from any expressions of contempt, hatred
or discontent; it was liberally employed to silent political dissent
and supress India Nationalist sentiments. Post-independence,
however, the underlying purposes of Section 124-A, the
restriction imposed on Article 19(1)(a) are accepted to be
preventing ‘public violence’ and ‘public disorder’. The Supreme
Court in Kedar Nath’s case, reading down the section, held these
to be legitimate purposes, falling within the interests of “security
of the State” and of “public order”, two of the grounds
enumerated under article 19(2) of the Constitution.
39.      The Petitioners do not in any way dispute the importance
and necessity of preventing public violence and public disorder.
Indisputably, state security and public order important interests,
deserving of protection. What is disputed by the Petitioners is the
necessity and proportionality of the use of Section 124-A in this
regard.
40.       It is submitted that in 1962 there may have a need to use
Section 124A as a means to prevent the public violence and
public disorder that fell short of waging war against the state.
Section 124-A, was, at the time a necessary tool in crime control.
It is conceivable that if sedition had been held unconstitutional in
1962, there may have been a lacuna in the law, the mischief –
public disorder and violence – going unpunished. Contrastingly, in
2021, this is not the case.
41.            Freedom of expression is not absolute; it can be limited
for the protection of various interests. The Supreme Court in
1962 held that sedition fell within the ambit of the interests of
‘security of the State’ and ‘public order,’ permissible in terms of
clause (2) of Article 19.
42.            Indisputably, security in India is an important issue. A
common response to criticism of Section 124-A and calls for the
repeal of sedition is “it is necessary for national safety and
security”. It will be shown in this petition that this is not so. (See
below: “NEW LEGISALATION”).
43.           The Petitioners wish to emphasise that they are not a
threat to national security or the public order in India. It is very
important at this stage to make clear exactly whose interests
declaring sedition unconstitutional would protect.
44.           Declaring Section 124-A unconstitutional will stop the
prosecution of individuals who want to air their legitimate
(possibly controversial) views, start debates, write articles or
make films about controversial issues and possess literature
discussing various ideologies. These people are not terrorists, but
right-thinking members of Indian society those who want to
excise their democratic and constitutional right to free speech
and expression.
45.           It must be emphasized that preventing the prosecution
of terrorists or others who pose actual security threats is not the
aim, nor will it be the consequence.          Other laws in India can
sufficiently deal with security threats without having to employ
section 124-A. Terrorists would not go free if sedition is done
away with.
46.           India’s criminal law sufficiently ‘covers the field’ when an
action creates violence or public disorder. As well as the actual
violence and public disorder, Indian law already criminalises
incitement to violence and abetting an offence.
47.          If a person wages war, attempts to wage war or
conspires to wage war against the government of India here will
punished under sections 121, 121A and 122 of the IPC,
respectively. New legislation (fully expounded upon below) serves
to penalise conduct which falls short of the conduct made penal
by these sections of the IPC.
48.          Therefore sedition is not necessary for the protection of
national security or the public order. All the overt acts that
Section 124-A it seeks to punish are covered by other penal
sections.
49.           Whenever someone is guilty of waging war against the
government or terrorism, frequently he may be simultaneously
held him guilty of sedition. Sedition is a lesser step than treason;
and generally if one is guilty of the greater offence then one
typically also would be seditious. This situation seems rather
unproblematic given the importance of security in India, and does
not seem to offend anyone’s sense of justice. On the other hand,
the problematic scenario arises where an individual makes a
controversial statement on air, merely possesses communist
literature, speaks out against police atrocities or makes a film that
highlights issues in India. They are not terrorists, the words or
actions fail to excite any violence or public disorder, however this
person is arrested for sedition on the basis that the authorities
subjectively assess that the person had a ‘seditious intention’ or
the conduct had a ‘seditious tendency’.
50.           Here we are not dealing which people who pose actual,
direct threats to India’s integrity or security, but rather those who
are merely excising their democratic right to freedom of
expression.     Once charged with sedition, these people face
possible life imprisonment.
51.           It is submitted that this imposes an unacceptable
chilling effect on freedom of expression and is markedly
detrimental to democracy. If a person is under a fear of being
arrested, they may not express themselves freely on public issues
and this would chill public debate on important issues.
52.           The Supreme Court has said, “In a free democratic
society it is almost too obvious to need stating that those who
hold office in Government and who are responsible for public
administration must always be open to criticism. Any attempt to
stifle or fetter such criticism amounts to political censorship of the
most insidious and objectionable kind.” (R. Rajagopal v. State Of
T.N. 1995 AIR 264, 1994 SCC (6) 632 at Para 20).
53.           The Supreme Court has held that “The law should not
be used in a manner that has chilling effects on the `freedom of
speech and expression’.” (S. Khushboo v. Kanniammal (2010) 5
SCC 600 at Para 47). It is submitted that sedition is being used in
this way in the current instance. It is submitted that the use of
sedition against those who criticize the government is not ‘use’
but rather inevitability ‘misuse’.
54.           It is submitted that the Supreme Court in Kedar Nath
did not engage in an extensive enquiry into the ‘necessity’ of
Section 124-A in order to justify it. The necessity and
effectiveness of the offence of sedition as a means to ensure
public    order   and   state   security   seem   to    have     been
unquestioningly assumed by the court. In 1962 there may have a
need to use Section 124A in order to prevent the public violence
and disorder that fell short of waging war against the state.
Conceivably, if sedition had been held unconstitutional in 1962,
there may have been a lacuna in the law. The lack of alternative
legislation made sedition a necessity in crime control. In the last
sixty years, however new legislation has been passed dealing
directly with the overt conduct that sedition seeks to make penal
– inciting violence and public disorder.
55.           In 1969, the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act (ACT
NO.37 of 1969) was passed to provide for the more effective
prevention of certain unlawful activities. ‘Unlawful activity’ is very
broadly defined as ‘any action including acts, words, either
spoken or written, signs or any visible representation which is
intended, or supports any claim to bring about on any ground
whatsoever… the cession or succession of any part of India… or
which incites any individual or group of individuals to bring about
such cession or succession or which disclaims, questions, disrupts
or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
56.          ‘Unlawful association’ is also broadly defined by s 1 (g)
as anyone who encourages or aids persons to undertake
‘unlawful activities’, or encourages or aids persons to undertake
any activity punishable under Section 153A or Section 153B of the
57.          Section 13 of UAPA provided punishment for ‘whoever:
(a) takes part in or commits, or (b) advocates abets, advises or
incites the commission of, any unlawful activity. It also provides a
punishment for whoever, in any way, assists association declared
unlawful. The 2004 (Act No. 29 OF 2004) and 2008 (Act No. 35
OF 2008) amendments to this Act broadened its scope to deal
extensively with terrorism. The definition of unlawful activity was
broadened further to include any activity ‘which causes or is
intended to cause disaffection against India.’ (Section 2 (o) (iii)).
58.          Not only actual terrorism is covered by the Act, but also
“whoever conspires or attempts to commit, or advocates, abets,
advises or incites or knowingly facilitates the commission of, a
terrorist act or any act preparatory to the commission of a
terrorist act” is liable for punishment for conspiracy.
59.           It can be seen that various acts which would fall under
sedition, causing or inciting public disorder or violence, would
simultaneously be covered by this Act.
60.           In 1978 the Jammu and Kashmir Public Safety Act (Act
No. 6 of 1978) was passed to provide measures for dealing with
acts with threatened the interests of the State and the public
order. This Act gives the government, once satisfied that a
person is acting in a manner prejudicial to the ‘security of the
state of the maintenance of public order’, the power to detain
that person (Section 8 (1)).
61.            Acting in a manner prejudicial to the ‘the maintenance
of public order” is broadly defined, and included “making
preparations for using, or attempting its use, or using, or
instigating, inciting, or otherwise abetting the use of force where
such    preparation,      using,  attempting,  instigating,  inciting,
provoking or abetting, disturbs or is likely to disturb public order”
(Section 3(b)(ii)). Again it can be seen that conduct meeting the
requirements for sedition would fall within the purview of this Act.
62.           The National Security Act (Act No. 6 of 1978) was
passed in 1980. Section 8 (1) gives the Central Government or
the State Governments the power to detain persons if satisfied
that it was necessary to do so to prevent him from ‘acting in any
manner prejudicial to the defence of India … or the security of
India’ (Section 3 (1)(a)), or to ‘prevent him from acting in any
manner prejudicial to the security of the State or from acting in
any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of Public order’
(Section 3 (2)) This legislation would clearly also cover the same
material offences as section 124A.
63.           It is submitted that these Acts, together with a myriad
of state level safety and security legislation now “cover the field”
in dealing with public order and violence. If sedition was done
away with, bone fide terrorists and security threats would clearly
not go unpunished.
64.            It is trite that the actions of an individual can be
simultaneously unlawful under multiple penal sections, this
multiplicity in itself does not invalidate the legislation. However
the fact that the criminal conduct is already sufficiently dealt with
effects ‘proportionality’ in terms of the constitutionality enquiry
under Indian law, which affects the reasonableness of the
restriction.
65.       The last nearly sixty years have seen the extensive
enactment of new legislation dealing directly with safety and
security, public disorder and terrorism. Prominent among these
legislative enactments are the Unlawful Activities Act, the Public
Safety Act and the National Security Act. Various sections of
these Acts deal directly with the overt conduct that sedition seeks
to make penal – inciting violence and public disorder.
66.           It is submitted that the existence of alternative
legislation penalising the ‘mischief’ bears on the consideration of
the “extent and urgency of the evil sought to be remedied” by
the restriction. Alternative legislation eliminates the need to
employ Section 124-A to deal with public disorder and violence.
Further, it cannot be argued that the use of sedition is a
justifiable restriction on the basis of an urgent need to deal with
the disruption of the public order or for safety and security
reasons.
67.           The Petitioners would like to emphasise that, while
Section 124-A may indeed penalise those individuals who are
actually bona fide threats to the public order and national
security, these are not the only individuals who it penalises.
Currently in India Section 124-A also penalises individuals who
merely air their legitimate grievances and attempt to excise their
democratic right to freedom of expression peacefully. Accepting
that Section 124-A was read down by the constitutional bench in
Kedar Nath’s case, it is respectfully submitted that the Hon’ble did
not go far enough in reading down the section. Retaining
‘intention’ and ‘tendency’ to cause public disorder and violence as
basis for criminal liability has meant that these inherently
subjective terms can be (and have been) used (and abused) to
penalise those who have not caused any violence or public
disorder.
68.      Individuals have been arrested for, charged with, and
convicted of Section 124-A for merely publicly criticizing
governmental action and inaction, speaking out against army
atrocities, possessing maoist literature and merely interviewing
people seen as threats by the state. Penalising these individuals
is not in line with the purpose of the legislation, yet it is the
effect. It is the democratic rights of these individuals that the
Petitioners seek protection for.
69.       The existence of alternative legislation penalising the public
disorder   and   public   violence,   importantly   bears    on  the
determination of the ‘proportionality enquiry’ undertaken in the
constitutional analysis. The Court in Kedar Nath’s case opined
that sedition “strikes the correct balance between individual
fundamental rights and the interest of public order”. It is
submitted that the fact that no less restrictive means’ to protect
the interest of public order were available in 1962, was
instrumental in the reasoning leading to this conclusion.
70.      In stark contrast to the situation in 1962, in 2021, various
relevant sections of the Unlawful Activities Act, Public Safety Act
and the National Security Act constitute less restrictive means’ to
protect state security and public order. These sections punish
only bona fide threats to public disorder and violence, whereas
the over-inclusive Section 124-A covers both real threats and
right-minded individuals attempting to exercise their democratic
and constitutional right to freedom of speech and expression.
Consequently Section 124-A is an excessive, unnecessary and
disproportionate tool to protect the interests of state security and
public disorder.
71.           The existence of alternative legislation penalising the
mischief bears on the consideration of the “extent and urgency of
the evil sought to be remedied” by the restriction. Alternative
legislation completely eliminates the need to employ Section 124-
A to deal with public disorder and violence, and it cannot be
argued that the use of sedition is a justifiable restriction on the
basis of an urgent need to deal with the mischief.
72.           The Supreme Court has held that restrictions on this
fundamental freedom must “be justified on the anvil of necessity
and not the quicksand of convenience or expediency”. Open
criticism of government policies and operations is not a ground
for restricting expression. (The Secretary, Ministry Of Information
and Broadcasting v. Cricket Association Of Bengal (1995) 2 SCC
161 at Para 17).
73.          When a court decides whether a limitation on Article 19
is a reasonable restriction, it must enquire into the proportionality
of the restriction. In this regard the Supreme Court has
“Ever since 1950, the principle of ‘proportionality’ has
indeed been applied vigorously to legislative (and
administrative action) in India. While dealing with the
validity of legislation infringing fundamental freedoms
enumerated in Article 19(1) of the Constitution of India,
- such as freedom of speech and expression, freedom
to assessable peacably, freedom to form associations
and unions, freedom to move freely throughout the
territory of India, freedom to reside and settle in any
part of India, - this Court had occasion to consider
whether the restrictions imposed by legislation were
disproportionate to the situation and were not the least
restrictive of the choices. The burden of proof to show
that the restriction was reasonable lay on the State.
‘Reasonable restrictions’ under Article 19(2) to (6) could
be imposed on these freedoms only by legislation and
Courts had occasion throughout to consider the
proportionality    of    the  restrictions.   In numerous
judgments     of   this    Court,  the   extent  to  which
‘reasonable     restrictions’  could    be   imposed  was
considered… In Chintaman Rao v. State of UP. (1950
SCR 759), Mahajan J (as he then was) observed that
‘reasonable restrictions’ which the State could impose
on the fundamental rights ‘should not be arbitrary or of
an excessive nature, beyond what is required for
achieving the objects of the legislation.’ ‘Reasonable’
implied intelligent care and deliberations, that is, the
choice of a course which reason dictated. Legislation
which arbitrarily or excessively invaded the right could
not be said to contain the quality of reasonableness
unless it struck a proper balance between the rights
guaranteed and the control permissible under Articles
19(2) to (6). Otherwise, it must be held to be wanting
in that quality. Patanjali Sastri CJ in State of Madras v.
VS. Row (1952 SCR 597), observed that the Court must
keep in mind the ‘nature of the right alleged to have
been     infringed, the    underlying    purpose  of  the
restrictions imposed, the extent and urgency of the evil
sought to be remedied thereby, the disproportion of the
imposition, the prevailing conditions of the time.” (Om
Kumar & Others v. Union Of India 2000 (7) SCALE 524,
2000 Supp 4 SCR 693 at Paras 30).
74.         In 1962, when the Supreme Court in Kedar Nath had to
balance the freedom of expression and interests of public order
and state security, Section 124-A was held a proportional
measure. At the time there were no less restrictive means’ to
protect the relevant interests under Article 19(2).
75.           It is submitted, in 2021 with the introduction of new
legislation protecting the interests of public order and state
security, sedition is a disproportionate infringement on the
freedom of expression. The Unlawful Activities Acts and similar
legislation constitute less restrictive means’ to protect the
interests under Article 19(2), consequently Section 124-A an
excessive measure, and an unjustifiable infringement of Article
76.           It is submitted that the current situation; where the
democratic freedom of expression of right-thinking individual’s
who may face life imprisonment, is limited on the basis of
security interests already protected by other means, is an
unacceptable state of affairs in a democratic country.
77.           In the next section it will be shown that, in order to
meet international guidelines, limitations on the freedom of
expression must to be ‘necessary’ for the protection of the
interests of national security and public order. As the criminal
content of sedition is effectively duplicated by subsequent specific
legislation means it fails to meet this necessity requirement of
International law under the ICCPR.
78.           The constitutional enquiry involves the consideration of
the “prevailing conditions at the time”. In this regard it is
submitted that there are three relevant circumstances in this
regard.
79.           The first of these relevant considerations is the fact that
India now has obligations under International Law. India has
ratified, and is bound by the International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (“ICCPR”). Article 19 of the ICCPR protects the
freedom of expression as a right of all individuals in the world.
Although this right is not absolute, and can be restricted,
international law sets stringent standards which need to be met
in order for States to validly restrict this right. Various
international instruments guild the interpretation of the ICCRP, of
these the Johannesburg Principles and the principles set out by
the United Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion
and Expression are of particular importance. International law
provides that in order for a restriction on freedom of expression
to be permissible, the government must discharge the onus of
c) in pursuit of one of the legitimate aims set forth in the
article (is for the respect of the rights or reputations of
others; for the protection of national security or of
public order, or of public health or morals.)
80.      It is submission of the Petitioners that Section 124-A as a
restriction of freedom of expression falls short of these
requirements in that it is neither “necessary” nor sufficiently
“provided by law”. “Necessity” entails that the limitation must be
proportionate, the least restrictive means available, and in line
with democratic principles. For similar to the reasons that make
Section 124-A is an unreasonable restriction on Article 19(1)(a) in
terms of Indian domestic law, Section 124-A fails to meet this
International law standard of ‘necessity’.
81.      The requirement that any restriction on the freedom of
expression be “provided by law” means that Section 124-A not
only needs to be national legislation, but that it must meet the
standards of “legality”. Therefore for Section 124-A to meet this
requirement it needs to be drawn narrowly, and with adequate
precision to make clear exactly what is prohibited; it must not be
vague; and it cannot be uncertain. It is the submission of the
Petitioners that Section 124-A fails to meet this International law
standard of legality.
82.      The terms “intention” and “tendency” are inherently
subjective terms with no ascertainable objective criterion for
assessment; they are susceptible to wide and discretionary
interpretation, by both authorities and those subject to the law. A
person may speak at a rally or write a controversial article, their
words fail to excite any violence or disorder, yet the authorities
have a wide measure of discretion in assessing whether their
words had a ‘seditious intention’ or ‘tendency’. Hence this law
becomes the perfect tool for suppression of criticism. After the
authority makes their subjective assessment of the situation, the
consequence for the ‘offender’ is a potential life sentence in
prison. The vague and uncertain nature of the provision also fails
to provide sufficient notice to citizens of exactly what conduct is
prohibited. As a result, it exerts an unacceptable “chilling effect”
on freedom of expression. Citizens steer well clear of the
potential zone of application to avoid censure. When individuals
stop exercising their democratic rights for fear life imprisonment,
the entire democratic enterprise is gravely undermined. It is
submitted that these International law obligations, not in
existence in 1962, should bear on the constitutional enquiry
undertaken today.
83.      The   second    relevant    circumstance    is  the   frequent
phenomenon of misuse, misapplication and abuse of Section 124-
A since 1962. Tendency and intention have been so widely
interpreted and employed in such a discretionary manner that
those merely exercising their democratic rights have faced penal
sanction under the section. While abuse of a law, in itself, does
not bear on the validity of that law, this phenomenon clearly
points to the vagueness and uncertainty of the current law.
Additionally, it is submitted that the abuse and the inherent
“political association” of this abuse, should be a relevant
“prevailing circumstance of the time.”
84.           It is trite that the abuse, misuse or misapplication of
legislation does not, in itself affect its constitutionality. However,
it is submitted that it is the vagueness, ambiguity and uncertainty
of Section 124-A that has led to the situation where it is so
frequently misused. The heavily subjective ‘intention’ and
‘tendency’ allow for a wide and discretionary scope for
interpretation by authorities, both the police and the courts.
85.           Many cases have recently made headlines in the regard.
In examples of authorities employing the uncertain ‘intention’ or
‘tendency’ elements of sedition, people have been arrested and
charged     for   merely    possessing    maoist   literature,  merely
interviewing people seen as threats, publically criticizing the
governmental and speaking out against army atrocities. When
sedition is read together with conspiracy, it is virtually possible to
make a case against anyone who expresses themselves.
86.           It is submitted that the vagueness and discretionary
nature of the offence of sedition is what has allowed this abuse.
87.          According to the data compiled by the National Crime
Records Bureau (NCRB), the number of sedition cases registered
across the country doubled from 35 in 2016 to 75 in 2018.
However, no chargesheets were filed by the police in over 70%
of the cases, and only four of the 43 cases where trial has been
completed resulted in convictions. The abysmally low conviction
rate is evidence that the police never had any evidence against
individuals facing sedition charges to begin with.
88.          In the recent past many citizens have been booked
under sedition for exercising their legitimate constitutional right
to freedom of speech. For instance, in Jharkhand, 10,000 tribals
were    booked    under    sedition  for  protesting against    the
government for issuing an order allowing commercial use of tribal
land. In another case, a single mother of an 11-year-old was
charged with sedition after her daughter participated in a
purportedly anti-CAA play in Bidar, Karnataka. One JNU student
was charged with sedition for a speech he gave during an anti-
CAA protest. More than 50 people were booked for sedition in
Mumbai for raising slogan in favour of the JNU student.
89.           As per a database prepared by the online portal “Article-
14.com”, a count and analysis of all sedition cases since 2010
reveals that a total of 149 cases of sedition have been registered
for making “critical” and/or “derogatory” remarks against the
Prime Minister, and 144 cases registered for remarks against the
Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh.
90.           In another example, the editor of a Gujarati Eveninger,
Mr. Manoj Shinde, was arrested on sedition charges in 2006 for
using “abusive words” against the Chief Minister of Gujarat in an
editorial. The editorial alleged an administrative failure in tackling
the flood situation in Surat, his comments held the government
responsible for an outbreak of an epidemic in the city.
91.           It is submitted that highlighting a failure of government
falls  squarely     within   one’s  democratic   rights;   given   the
importance of the media in ensuring the accountability of
government to the electorate, such action should not attract
sedition charges.
92.           In    2010,   Piyush    Manush,  a   human     rights  and
environmental justice defender from Salem, was arrested and
charged with Sedition. He had attempted to circulate a pamphlet,
for the Campaign for Justice and Peace. The pamphlet
announced that people will undertake a cycle yatra across
Tamilnadu to highlight the Indian and Chhattisgarh government’s
brutal and inhuman treatment of the Adivasis. This was to be a
peaceful protest.
93.          The pamphlet asked why the State is denying the
guarantees under the Constitution by the Republic of India to
adivasis, and why the State Government has refused to obey the
Supreme Court order directing them to rehabilitate the 644
evicted villages, and their residents. The cycle rally through the
villages of Tamilnadu was intended to build public awareness and
opinion.
94.          This clearly constitutes a democratic form of protest. A
very broad interpretation of ‘seditious tendency’ needs to be
adopted here in order to justify the charges in this circumstance.
It is submitted that these are but a two of hundreds of examples
in India.
95.           In cases where “seditious tendency” and “intention”
have been liberally interpreted as to be anything which may
result in public disorder, for example public unrest or protests
when governmental action or inaction is exposed, it is submitted
that legal standards of causation need to be scrutinized.
96.           If an editorial published excited any unrest, or public
disorder, it is arguable that this unrest would be attributable to
the failure of government rather than the exposure of such.
Similarly any mischief transpiring as a result of the cycle rally
would be caused by the government’s failures rather than the
rally per se.
97.           It is submitted that if a government is allowed suppress
criticism on the basis that public disorder may result as a
consequence of the electorate finding out about certain a certain
state of affairs or governmental action, transparency and
accountability are so severely undermined that India will lose its
democratic status.
98.             If a peaceful protest to raise awareness is classed as
seditious, on the basis that awareness may result in public
disorder, the interpretation of Section 124-A becomes as broad as
it was during colonial times in India.
99.             Unlike in defamation cases, truth is not a defence, as
the more truth in words that highlight governments actions are,
the more likely they are to result in public disorder. Therefore
riticize ing such exposure is democratically unsound given the
public interest.
100.            Reading causation broadly in ‘tendency’ together with
conspiracy, can lead to other unjust results. If an individual does
something which itself would not be seditious, such as passing
information between Naxilites. It is submitted that the causation
between the individual’s actions and any acts eventually
committed        by  bone fide criticize, should be extensively
questioned. Just because criticize generally threaten security,
cause public disorder and cause violence, a person who gives
them some assistance cannot automatically be attributed
responsibility for all criticize actions. If sedition is employed in
this way, people can become guilty of sedition through mere
association.
101.          It should be noted that the crime of conspiracy, even
when causation is proven, generally carries a lesser penalty than
the primary crime.
102.           As sedition carries the potential penalty of life
imprisonment, it is thus submitted that in order to be guilty of
sedition it must be proven that actually and directly caused the
violence or public disorder.
103.          It is submitted that the abuse and the inherent “political
association” of this abuse, should be a relevant consideration in
the constitutional enquiry.
104.          It is submitted that when sedition is done away with,
terrorists will still be punished by other laws, while social activists
and right-thinking members of society will be able to exercise
their democratic and constitutional rights without the threat of life
imprisonment.
105.     The third relevant circumstance is the repeal of sedition
sections in comparative post-colonial democratic jurisdictions
around the world. The United Kingdom, the author of sedition
laws in India and globally, has recently repealed the offence of
sedition in its own jurisdiction in 2009. New Zealand and Ghana
have already passed legislation repealing sedition, while the Law
Commissions       of    Canada,   Ireland  and    Australia    have
recommended repeal to their respective parliaments. In both
Uganda and Nigeria sedition has been declared unconstitutional.
It is submitted that experience of comparative jurisdictions should
be persuasive in this courts enquiry. Comparative jurisprudence
becomes more significant given the fact that Section 124-A
suffers the same vices as comparative sedition offences. These
vices led to the repeal and abolition of sedition offences; these
sections were done away with based on the fact that sedition
a)      unnecessary in light of more modern criminal
offences, such as incitement and other public order
b)     undesirable in light of their political nature and
c)      inappropriate in modern liberal democracies; where it
is accepted that it is a fundamental right of citizens
to criticize and challenge government structures and
processes.
106.          India has ratified and is thus bound by the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). Article 19 of which
(1) Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without
interference.
(2) Everyone shall have the right to            freedom of
expression; this right shall include freedom to seek,
receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds,
regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in
print, in the form of art, or through any other media of
his choice.
(3) The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2
of this article carries with it special duties and
responsibilities. It may therefore be subject to certain
restrictions, but these shall only be such as are
provided by law and are necessary: (a) For respect of
the rights or reputations of others; (b) For the
protection of national security or of public order (ordre
public), or of public health or morals.
107.          Similarly to in India, the right to freedom of expression
is not absolute and may be restricted. There are three
requirements that need to be met for restrictions are permissible;
© they must pursue one of the legitimate aims set
forth in the article.
108.          The General Assembly of the United Nations has
emphasised that any restrictions must adhere strictly to this
criteria. (CCPR General Comment No. 10: Article 19 (Freedom of
Opinion) Adopted at the Nineteenth Session of the Human Rights
Committee, on 29 June 1983, at para 4). True copy of CCPR
General Comment No. 10 dated 29.6.1983 is attached herewith
109.          To aid the interpretation of the ICCPR, various
international instruments set out guidelines and principles which
state must adhere to in order to comply with their international
obligations, of these the Johannesburg Principles on National
Security, Freedom of Expression and Access to Information ;
these were drafted and adopted by a group of experts in
international law, and have been endorsed by the UNHRC and the
UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Opinion and Expression.
True copy of the Johannesburg Principles on National Security,
Freedom of Expression and Access to Information dated
November 1996 is attached herewith as ANNEXURE P-12 at
page no. 157-177.
110.          The established standards and principles of international
law relating to the restrictions on freedom of expression have
been set out for convenience and reiterated by the United
Nations     Special  Rapporteur   on   Freedom    of  Opinion    and
Expression in his 2010 annual report, these standards and
principles are of particular importance. True copy of the 2010
Annual report of the Special Reporter (A/HRC/14/23) is attached
herewith as ANNEXURE P-13 at page no. _178-197.
111.          The UN Special Rapporteur, in his 2010 Annual report,
stated that, despite the provisions of Article 19 0f the ICCPR,
States frequently     limit or   restrict freedom    of expression
arbitrarily, sometimes by recourse to criminal legislation, in order
to silence dissent or criticism.(A/HRC/14/23 at para 75.) In view
of such practices, Special Reporter has set out, for convenience,
the established standards and principles of International law for
the determination of whether or not a limitation or restriction to
the right of freedom of expression is legitimate. These
established principles are reiterated the importance these is
stressed; It is emphasized that these principles are of an
exceptional nature; thus should be applied in a comprehensive
manner. (A/HRC/14/23 at para 75-80).
112.          It is submitted that these two sets of ‘principles’ are
very important in the interpretation of international laws and
should act as guidelines to India in adhering to its international
obligations. It is submitted that if Section 124-A is to be a
permissible restriction it must conform to these principles.
113.          The general principle is that permissible limitations and
restrictions must constitute an exception to the rule and must be
kept to the minimum necessary. (A/HRC/14/23 at para 77).
114.          The requirement, “provided by law” means that, in
addition to constituting national legislation, laws restricting
freedom of expression must be “accessible, clear, concrete,
unambiguous, drawn narrowly and with precision so as to enable
individuals to foresee whether a particular action is unlawful”.
The law needs to be understood by everyone and applied to
everyone. (Johannesburg Principles; 1(a))
115.          Essentially section 124-A cannot be vague or uncertain
is it is to pass this standard. It is submitted that it fails in this
regard.
116.          Sedition punishes not only those acts that actually lead
to violence or public disorder, but also those which this ‘tendency’
or ‘intention’. These are entirely subjective terms; different
people may assess them differently, they provide no concrete
standards that everyone similarly understands.
117.      Vague provisions are susceptible to wide interpretation, by
both authorities and those subject to the law. Vague law and
subjective terms are an invitation to abuse by authorities. A
person may speak at a rally or writes a controversial article, their
words fail to excite any violence or disorder, yet the authorities
have a wide measure of discretion in assessing whether their
words had a ‘seditious intention’ or ‘tendency’. Who can correct a
policeman who claims that in their opinion certain actions had a
‘tendency’ to cause public disorder? Hence this law becomes the
perfect tool for suppression or criticism. After the authority makes
their subjective assessment of the situation, the consequence for
the ‘offender’ is a potential life sentence in prison.
118.         Vague and uncertain provisions also fail to provide
sufficient notice to citizens of exactly what conduct is prohibited.
As a result, they exert an unacceptable chilling effect on freedom
of expression as citizens steer well clear of the potential zone of
application to avoid censure.
119.         As per the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
Kartar Singh v. State of Punjab, (1994) 3 SCC 569,an enactment
can be declared as void on the grounds of vagueness. The Court
“It is the basic principle of legal jurisprudence that an
enactment is void for vagueness if its prohibitions are
not clearly defined. Vague laws offend several important
values.    Laws should give the person of ordinary
intelligence a reasonable opportunity to know what is
prohibited, so that he may act accordingly. Vague laws
may     trap   the   innocent   by   not    providing   fair
warning. Such a law impermissibly delegates basic policy
matters to policemen and also judges for resolution on
an ad hoc and subjective basis, with the attendant
dangers of arbitrary and discriminatory application.”
120.         The Supreme Court further held in Shreya Singhal v.
“Where no reasonable standards are laid down to define
guilt in a Section which creates an offense, and where no
clear guidance is given to either law abiding citizens or to
authorities and courts, a Section which creates an
offense and which is vague must be struck down as
being arbitrary and unreasonable”.
121.        As observed by the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka, “laws
that trench on the area of speech and expression must be
narrowly and precisely drawn to deal with precise ends. Over-
breadth in the area has a peculiar evil – the evil of creating
chilling effects which deter the exercise of that freedom. The
threat of sanctions may deter its exercise as patently as
application of the sanctions. The State may regulate in that area
only with narrow specificity.” (Perera v. Attorney General & Ors,
[1992] 1 Sri L.R. 199, pp. 215, pp. 228).
122.      A person in India may therefore avoid releasing their film
or publish their articles for fear of being arrested for sedition;
they do not actually intend any violence or public disorder, but
fears that the authorities may see the situation differently.
Citizens are not provided with any ascertainable standard of what
is unlawful and what will attract penal sanction; and are thus
unable to guide their conduct in accordance with the law. This
unreasonably deters democratic expression and debate.
123.          A Constitution bench of the Supreme Court has held
“where the persons applying the law are in a boundless
sea of uncertainty and the law prima facie takes away a
guaranteed freedom, the law must be held to offend the
Constitution” (K. A. Abbas v. Union of India, AIR 1971 SC
481 at pg 447).
It was also observed that the “invalidity arises from the
probability of the misuse of the law to the detriment of
the individual.” (K. A. Abbas v. Union of India, AIR 1971
SC 481 at pg 447).
124.          Section 124-A fails to define the scope of the offence
sufficiently clearly and narrowly to prevent abuse by the
authorities and the serious chilling effect that it currently exerts.
125.          Given   that    Section  124-A    does    not   meet    the
international requirement of legality, Sedition is not a legitimate
restriction on the freedom of expression protected by the ICCPR.
India thus falls foul of international standards in this regard.
126.          A counter argument in this regard is that sedition not
only applies to ‘intentions’ or ‘tendencies’ but also in the situation
where actual violence of public disorder actually transpires,
obviously this this does not suffer from the objection of
vagueness or uncertainty; the requirements of actual violence
and public disorder make it clear what is prohibited. However, it
will be shown in the next section that, in this instance, section
124A fails to meet the international law requirement of
127.         International law requires that any restrictions imposed
on the exercise freedom of expression must be “necessary”. The
various ‘principles’ set guidelines in this regard.
128.         International law places onus on the state governments
to prove the validity of the any restriction on freedom of
expression, this emphasises the importance placed on protecting
the freedom given to the individual in IICPR. (Johannesburg
129.         To    discharge     this   onus,    a   government   must
a) the expression or information at issue poses a serious
threat to a legitimate national security interest;
b) the restriction imposed is the least restrictive means
possible for protecting that interest; and
c) the     restriction    is  compatible     with   democratic
principles.”
130.          The restriction needs to address a pressing public or
social need which must be met in order to prevent the violation
of a legal right that is protected to an even greater extent (here
national security or public order), importantly, the restriction
must be proportionate to that aim and be no more restrictive
than is required for the achievement of the desired purpose.
(Johannesburg Principles, Para 79, principle (g)).
131.          If a restriction is ‘necessary’, it is entailed that but for
the restriction the undesirable social or criminal conduct would
not be prohibited or sufficiently punished. It is submitted that in
India, section 124-A would not meet this “but for” test.
132.          In India, if an individual causes violence and public
disorder, they would simultaneously be liable for other offences
under various other legislative provisions, including those in the
legislation detailed above. India’s criminal law sufficiently ‘covers
the field’ when an action creates violence or public disorder. As
well as the actual violence and public disorder, Indian law already
criminalises incitement to violence and abetting an offence. If a
person wages war, attempts to wage war or conspires to wage
war against the government of India, she will punished under
sections 121, 121A and 122 of the IPC, respectively.
133.          Therefore sedition is not necessary for the protection of
national security or the public order. All the overt acts that
Section 124-A it seeks to punish are covered by other penal
sections. The protection of State security and public order are
important, it is merely disputed that sedition is a necessary, or
even appropriate, tool in this regard.
134.    Necessity entails proportionality. Perhaps the most serious
defect of Section 124 A is that it represents a disproportionately
serious interference with democratic debate. Any benefits in
terms of protecting public order (which is already protected) are
far outweighed by the harm done to freedom of expression, the
‘cornerstone of democracy’. Doubly punishing terrorists is done at
the price of the democratic rights of those members of society
who are not threats; ultimately this is to the detriment of Indian
society as a whole as democracy is seriously undermined.
135.          International   law    requires  that    laws   imposing
restrictions or limitations must not be arbitrary or unreasonable
and must not be used as a means of political censorship or of
silencing     criticism  of   public    officials or  public    policies.
(A/HRC/14/23 at para 79(f)).
136.     It is submitted that it is clear that Section 124-A fails to meet
international standards, and cannot be said to constitute a valid
restriction on the rights guaranteed by the ICCPR. India is has an
international law obligations in this regard. It is submitted that,
given the advent of international law in the determination of the
constitutional enquiry, international law standards, specifically
necessity, legality and proportionality should be read into
‘reasonableness’. When this criterion is read in, it is submitted
that Section 124-A no longer constitutes a reasonable restriction.
On this basis section 124-A should be declared unconstitutional.
137.           In Kedar Nath’s case the Supreme Court stated that “the
first and most fundamental duty of every Government is the
preservation of order, since order is the condition precedent to all
civilisation and the advance of human happiness.” The court,
however, did not elaborate on why Section 124-A was a
necessary or rational tool in this regard. This can be explained by
the fact that at the time in England, as well as in numerous other
countries penalising sedition, this was taken for granted. Hence,
at the time, the court had no apparent cause to question the
effectiveness or desirability of sedition in ensuring the stability of
the state.
138.     In 1962 the Supreme Court judgment depended upon the
British use and experience of sedition laws to justify the
continuation of the section in India. It claimed that this law was
not merely a creation of the colonial state but that it was also in
“This species of offence against the State was not an
invention of the British Government in India, but has
been known in England for centuries. Every State,
whatever its form of Government, has to be armed with
the power to punish those who, by their conduct,
jeopardise the safety and stability of the State, or
disseminate such feelings of disloyalty as have the
tendency to lead to the disruption of the State or to
public disorder.”
139.    This statement does not hold true today. The Coroners and
Justice Act 2009 has been passed in the United Kingdom, this act
repeals sedition laws in the UK. Sedition was repealed on the
recommendations of the Law Commission, who cited various
factors that made repeal necessary. A copy of working paper of
the Law Commission will be made available and referred to by
the Petitioners at time of argument.
140.    Notably, sedition in the UK was even more narrowly drawn
than the present law in India; nothing short of a direct incitement
to disorder and violence was ‘seditious libel’. Someone was only
guilty of seditious libel if it is satisfied that the defendant; “meant
that the people should make use of physical force as their own
resource to obtain justice, and meant to excite the people to take
the power in to their own hands, and meant to excite them to
tumult and disorder.” Clearly this is narrower than a mere
subjective “tendency”. (Littledale J. in the case of Collin; The Law
Commission, 1977, Codification of the Criminal Law Treason,
Sedition and Allied Offences Working Paper No. 72).
141.     Vagueness was cited as a fundamental flaw of sedition; the
UK Law Commission endorsed the dicta of Kellock J in the
Canadian case of Boucher v. E, holding that that "probably no
crime has been left in such vagueness of definition as that with
which we are here concerned [sedition], and its legal meaning
has changed with the years.” (Boucher v. E. [1951] 2 D.L.R. 369
at p.382; The Law Commission, 1977, Working Paper No. 72, at
para 7).
142.    The commission also cited Boucher             v. E, regarding
“Before a person can be convicted of publishing seditious
words, or a seditious libel or of seditious conspiracy he
must be shown to have intended to incite to violence, or
to public disorder or disturbance, with the intention
thereby of disturbing constituted authority. Importantly,
in order to satisfy such a test it would, therefore, have to
be shown that the defendant had incited or conspired to
commit either offences against the person, or offences
against property or urged others to riot or to assemble
unlawfully. He would, therefore, be guilty, depending on
the circumstances, of incitement or conspiracy to commit
the   appropriate    offence   or   offences.”   (The   Law
Commission, 1977, Working Paper No. 72, at para 77).
143.    This very importantly shows that when an individual meets
the   requirements      for the   charge    of  sedition, they  will
simultaneously be guilty of other offences, making the charge of
sedition redundant and somewhat unnecessary.
144.         Accepting that the UK had a “sufficient range of other
offences covering conduct amounting to sedition already”, the
Commission emphasized that these ordinary statutory and
common law offences should be preferred; sedition should not be
relied on because of the fact that sedition carries with it the
undesirable implication that the conduct in question is ‘political’.
(Law Commission, 1977, Working Paper No. 72, at para 78).
145.         The Commission had highlighted the undesirable fact
that, historically, in cases of sedition, “prosecutions were usually
brought with overtly political motives.” (Law Commission, 1977,
Working Paper No. 72, at para 68).
146.         As there was no need for an offence of sedition, it was
recommended that it should be done away with. It is submitted
that the same reasoning is applicable in India today given the
myriad of other legislation covering the material undesirable
conduct and adequately protecting national security, vagueness
and political associations.
147.         New Zealand, also a former British Colony, passed the
Crimes (Repeal of Seditious Offences) Amendment Act in 2007,
repealing sedition. This implemented the recommendations of the
Law Commission (NZLC). The NZLC concluded that seditious
offences were overly broad and uncertain. Similarly to in India,
these suffered from the problem of vagueness. A copy of the
report of the NZLC will be made available and referred to by the
Petitioners at the time of argument.
148.         According to the NZLC sedition infringed on the principle
of freedom of expression, and had the potential for abuse – a
potential that had been realised in some periods in New Zealand’s
history, as the offences were frequently being used to stifle or
punish political speech. (The New Zealand Law Commission,
2007, Reforming the Law of Sedition, NZLC R96, Wellington, at
para 3).
149.           ‘Seditious intention’ was the key requirement to the
offence in New Zealand. An individual could be guilty of sedition
even if their actions failed to incite violence or public disorder; as
long as they had ‘seditious intention’. The definition of ‘seditious
intention’ was extremely wide, and was in breach of freedom of
expression. The point was made that such provisions could have
an “undesirable chilling effect on speech and writing, particularly
if the material was critical of government policy.” (NZLC 96. At
150.          It was concluded that Sedition law in New Zealand
flowed from words not actions. (NZLC R96 at para 5). It is
submitted that this is true of India’s current law.
151.          The NZLC emphasized ‘the ancient and unsatisfactory
history’ of sedition, government having employed it to silence any
political dissent, as a “political muzzle”. Sedition was misused,
inappropriately being employed in New Zealand in times of
political unrest and perceived threats to established authority.
(NZLC R96 at para 4). It is submitted that this is the situation in
India currently.
152. Recommending the repeal of the seditious offences, the NZLC
showed that inciting offences of public disorder and revolt against
lawful authority were already sufficiently provided for by other
offences. This was strongly emphasized that sedition was an
inappropriate and undesirable tool to deal with terrorism and
‘unnecessarily duplicated’ other criminal offences. It is submitted
that the same reasoning would apply in India.
153.         The NZLC noted that in a free and democratic society,
defaming the government is the right of every citizen. (NZLR 96
at page 6). Importantly this would apply in India.
154.         In 2001, Ghana's parliament unanimously repealed
sedition laws, passing the Criminal Code (Repeal of the Criminal
and Seditious Laws)(Amendment) Act 2001. The memorandum
issued by Ghanaian Attorney-General and Minister for Justice
explained that sedition laws were “meant to be weapons in the
armory of British imperialism in its attempt to stifle and suppress
the growth of Ghanaian nationalism”’. This memorandum will be
made available and referred to by the Petitioners at the time of
argument.
155.         The memorandum explains that these laws, having
been on the statute books since colonial times, had fallen largely
into disuse, until recently when they had been systematically
employed to harass and prosecute journalists.       Repealing the
laws, it was pointed out that laws are “unworthy of a society
seeking to develop on democratic principles, on the basis of
transparency and accountability in public life.”
156.         In 2010 the Ugandan Constitutional Court declared the
offence of sedition unconstitutional. (Andrew Mujuni Mwenda &
Anor v Attorney General (Consolidated Constitutional Petitions
No.12 of 2005 & No.3 of 2006) [2010] UGCC 5 (25 August 2010).
This case will be made available and referred to by the Petitioners
at the time of argument.
157.         The sedition sections of the Penal Code were held to
unduly restrict the constitutional right to freedom of expression.
The state failed to discharge the onus of proving that this was
justified on the basis of the public interest, and more specifically,
national security.
158.          The sections were also challenged on the basis of
vagueness; accepting the submission that the law is vague and
discretionally, the court held that a person may not be able to
know whether an utterance may attract prosecution or not. The
court held that “the section does not define what sedition is. It is
so wide and it catches everybody to the extent that it
incriminates a person in the enjoyment of one’s right of
expression of thought…We find that, the way impugned sections
were worded have an endless catchment area”. (Andrew Mujuni
Mwenda & Anor v Attorney General at pp 23).
159.          The Constitutional Court noted of the history of sedition,
originating from England and Colonial rule; the section presumed
wisdom of a ruler and mistakes of that ruler were not to be
pointed out openly. The colonialists did not want to be criticized.
This was contrasted with democracy, it was held that, In Uganda
where the President is elected and not born, the actions of the
President and activities of the State, administration and justice
offices must undergo criticism of the citizens. It was held that a
leader should not cease to tolerate those who elect him, only
because they have been elected. (Andrew Mujuni Mwenda & Anor
160.          In 1983 the Federal Court of Nigeria found that sedition
laws were unconstitutional. Acquitting the appellant in the instant
case, the Court went on to discuss the validity of the sedition
laws in light of the 1979 Constitution. (Chief Arthur Nwankwo v.
The State , 27 July 1983 (Federal Court of Appeal, Enugu,
Nigeria)) This case will be made available and will be referred to
by the Petitioners at the time of argument.
161.          The court emphasized that sedition was a colonial law,
inconsistent with modern democracy. Chief Justice Belgore
commented that the “whole idea of sedition is the protection of
the person of the sovereign.’ Contrastingly, ‘the present President
is a politician and was elected after canvassing for universal votes
of the electorate.” (Chief Arthur Nwankwo v. The State at p.237).
162.          In concurrence, Justice Olatawura went on to declare
the law of sedition inconsistent with the 1979 Constitution. He
commented that “we are no longer the illiterates or the mob
society our colonial masters had in mind when the law was
promulgated …Criticism is indispensable in a free society.” (Chief
Arthur Nwankwo v. The State at p.237).
163.        The Law reform commissions in Australia, Canada and
Ireland have recommended the abolition of existing sedition
a) unnecessary    in   light  of   more     modern    criminal
offences, such as incitement and other public order
b) undesirable in light of their political nature and history;
c) inappropriate in modern liberal democracies, where it
is accepted that it is a fundamental right of citizens to
criticise and challenge government structures and
processes.
164.        The Irish Law Reform Commission emphasised that
seditious libel had “an unsavoury history of suppression of
Government criticism and has been used as a political muzzle.”
(The Law Reform Commission, Ireland; Report on the crime of
libel; (LRC 41–1991) At p. 9). A copy of this report will be made
available and will be referred to by the Petitioners at the time of
argument.
165.         Questioning its constitutionality, it was concluded that
the offence was unnecessary, as the subject of the offence is
now punishable in accordance with provisions of Irish legislation.
(LRC 41–1991 at p.165).
166.         The Law Reform Commission of Canada concluded that
the offences of sedition should be repealed on the basis that they
were out-dated and unprincipled. The commission emphasised
the role of freedom of expression in democracy. (Law Reform
Commission of Canada Crimes Against the State (Working Paper
49, Ottawa, 1986) at p. 35.).
167.         The Commission emphasized that material conduct of
seditious offences were already covered by incitement to commit
public order type offences. On this basis the commission
recommended that the crime of sedition be repealed.
168.          Recommending repeal, The Australian Law Reform
Commission said that “sedition is a quintessentially ‘political’
crime”. The Commission highlighted that prosecutions in Australia
in the 20th century revealed cases in which the law of sedition
has been used to stifle political dissent in a manner that many
would      consider   “incompatible    with   modern    democratic
processes”. (ALRC, 2006, Fighting Words, A Review of Sedition
Laws in Australia, Report 104, Para [2.7]) This report will be
referred to by the Petitioners at the time of argument.
169.     It is submitted that the trend in the democratic world, to
repeal sedition laws, should bear on this court’s mind as a
prevailing circumstance of the time, in consideration of this
petition.
170.          In India, section 124A can be condemned for the same
vices as sedition law in comparative jurisdiction; vagueness and
uncertainty as well as being unnecessary. Similarly to in other
jurisdictions, in India the ‘political nature,’ of sedition is
something well established, both in the colonial period and today.
171.         The offence of sedition in colonial India was much
broader. The British colonial power needed to protect itself from
expressions of contempt, hatred or discontent; and liberally
employed sedition to silent any dissent and suppress India
Nationalist sentiments.
172.          A famous case was that of Queen-Empress v. Bal
Gangadhar Tilak (I.L.R. (1898) 22 Bom. 112). Mr Tilak, a famous
figure in India’s struggle for freedom, was arrested for sedition
for his nationalist writings. In Talik’s case sedition was very
broadly defined by the court, leading to his conviction.
173.         The    colonial government     then   utilised a  broad
interpretation throughout the years to suppress nationalist
sentiments. It is apt to recall what Mahatma Gandhi said during
“Section 124 A under which I am happily charged is
perhaps the prince among the political sections of the
IPC designed to suppress the liberty of the citizen.
Affection cannot be manufactured or regulated by the
law… What in law is a deliberate crime appears to me
to be the highest duty of a citizen.”
174.         Despite the post-independence reading down of the
section, it is undeniable that Section 124A retains this ‘political’
association;    many    recent   cases      highlight    the  frequent
phenomenon of activists being arrested and charged with
sedition.
175.         It is submitted that this ‘political history’ should bear on
this court’s mind in consideration of this petition.
176.         It is further stated that a careful observation of the
Constituent Assembly debars show that there had been a serious
opposition for inclusion of sedition as a restriction on freedom of
speech and expression under the then Article 13 of the Indian
Constitution. Such a provision was termed as a shadow of
colonial times that should not see the light of the day in free
India. The Constituent Assembly was unanimous in having the
word ‘sedition’ deleted from Article 13 of the draft Constitution.
While speaking on the issue, Mr. Ayyangar opined:
“If we find that the government for the time being has
a knack of entrenching itself, however bad its
administration might be it must be the fundamental
right of every citizen in the country to overthrow that
government without violence, by persuading people,
by exposing its faults in the administration, its method
of working and so on. The word ‘sedition’ has been
obnoxious in the previous regime. We had therefore
approved of the amendment that the word ‘sedition’
ought to be removed, except in cases where the entire
state itself is sought to be overthrown or undermined
by force or otherwise, leading to public disorder, but
any attack on the government itself ought not to be
made an offence under the law. We have gained that
freedom and we have ensured that no government
could possibly entrench itself, unless the speeches
lead to an overthrow of the State altogether.”
177.          Mr. K. M. Munshi, while speaking on his motion to
delete the word ‘sedition’ from Article 13, quoted the following
words of the then Chief Justice of India, in Niharendu Dutt
Majumdar v. King wherein a distinction was made between “what
‘sedition’ meant when the Indian Penal Code was enacted and
“This sedition is not made an offence in order to
minister to the wounded vanity of Governments but
because where Government and the law ceases to be
obeyed because no respect is felt any longer for them,
only anarchy can follow. Public disorder, or the
reasonable anticipation or likelihood of public disorder
is thus the gist of the offence. The acts or words
complained of must either incite to disorder or must
be such as to satisfy reasonable men that that is their
intention or tendency.”
178.          As a result of the vehement opposition in the
Constituent assembly, the word ‘sedition’ does not find mention
in Article 19 (2) of the Constitution of India, 1950.
179.          In light of the above circumstances the Petitioners are
filing the present Writ Petition on the following amoungst other
A.     Because Section 124-A violates Article 19(1)(a) of the
Indian Constitution, the fundamental, Constitutional and
democratic right to freedom of speech and expression,
which is the ‘cornerstone’ and the sine quo non of
B. Because Section 124-A is unnecessary to protect the
interests of state security and public disorder, and is
duplicated by more recent     legislation which directly and
sufficiently prevents and deals with the mischief of public
C. Because there exists no urgency justifying the employment
of Section 124-A, given that the interests of state security
and the public order are sufficiently protected elsewhere in
D. Because Section 124-A is a disproportionate imposition on
the freedom of expression, and fails to constitute the least
restrictive means to protect state security and public
E. Because Section 124-A fails to meet the international
standard of ‘necessity’ which India is under the obligation
F. Because Section 124-A fails to meet the international
standard of ‘legality’ which India is under the obligation
G. Because the terms ‘intention’ and ‘tendency’ in the
interpretation of Section 124-A are so subjective that the
law is uncertain and unascertainable and are an invitation to
H. Because the vagueness of Section 124-A exerts an
unacceptable chilling effect on the democratic freedoms of
individuals who cannot enjoy there legitimate democratic
rights and freedoms for fear of life imprisonment;
I. Because Section 124-A is frequently abused and misapplied
J. Because India calls itself a ‘democracy’, and throughout the
democratic world; in the United Kingdom, Ireland, Australia,
Canada, Ghana, Nigeria and Uganda, the offence of sedition
has been condemned as undemocratic, undesirable and
K.    Because     Section   124-A    unreasonably restricts Article
19(1)(a) of the Indian Constitution and Article 19(2) of the
180.      The Petitioners crave leave of this Hon’ble Court to add,
alter or amend any of the above grounds and to file additional
affidavits at a later stage if so advised.
181.      It is submitted that the Petitioners have filed no other
petition of a similar nature in this Hon’ble Court or any High
182.      In the abovementioned facts and circumstances, it is most
respectfully prayed that this Hon’ble Court may be pleased to:
a) Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ,
order or direction declaring section 124-A of the Indian
Penal Code 1860 to be unconstitutional and void.
b) And to pass such other order/s as this Hon’ble Court may
deem fit.