Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 26037 of 2022
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Bhanu Prakash
1. Heard Sri Sunil Kumar, learned counsel for the applicant, Sri
Pankaj Kumar Tripathi, learned AGA for the State and Sri
Bhanu Prakash Singh, learned counsel for opposite party no.2.
2. This application has been moved under Section 482 CrPC to
set aside the order dated 25.07.2022 passed by ACJM-I,
Gautam Budh Nagar in Criminal Misc. Application No.462 of
2021 (old No.343 of 2021, Smt. Ruchi Mittal Vs. Amit Mittal
and others), under Section 156(3) CrPC treating the application
under Section 156(3) CrPC to be a complaint case. It is also
prayed that after setting aside the impugned order, a fresh order
directing the police to register the case and start investigation
and to submit investigation report. Alternatively, a prayer is also
made to direct the ACJM-I, Gautam Budh Nagar to hear and
decide the aforementioned application under Section 156(3)
CrPC within a stipulated period of time.
3. At the very outset before entering into merit it would be
proper to mention that Sri Bhanu Prakash Singh, learned
counsel appeared on behalf of opposite party no.2 without any
notice about which it is argued by the learned counsel for the
applicant that he has no locus to appear and argue in the matter.
He also pointed out the ordersheet in which earlier on
17.10.2022 it is observed by a co-ordinate Bench of this Court
that it is not a revision and Sri Vijay Prakash Mishra, learned
counsel (who appeared on behalf of opposite party no.2) has no
locus. However, after closer of the argument the learned
counsel for the applicant had not opposed the presence,
appearance and argument of Sri Bhanu Prakash Singh, learned
counsel who appeared on behalf of opposite party no.2.
4. Learned AGA and the learned counsel appearing for opposite
party no.2 argued that an application under Section 482 CrPC is
not maintainable. Instead of filing a criminal revision the
applicant has filed an application under Section 482 CrPC i.e.
the present application which is not maintainable.
5. In the connected affidavit the applicant has given the
description of the whole episode and about the cases pending
between the parties. Admittedly, the applicant is the legally
wedded wife of opposite party no.2, Amit Mittal. Opposite
party nos.3 and 4 are the father-in-law and mother-in-law of the
applicant. Opposite party no.5 is brother of applicant's husband
and opposite party no.6 is the wife of opposite party no.5.
6. On the basis of argument of the parties it transpires that
instead of this complaint a divorce petition by opposite party
no.2 in Bulandshahr and two criminal cases, one under Section
406 IPC and another under Section 420 IPC are also pending. A
case under the Guardians and Wards Act and a case under
Section 125 CrPC are also pending between the parties and the
proceeding of cases under Sections 406 and 420 IPC were
stayed by this Court. It is also argued by the learned counsel for
the applicant that without any right an application under Section
340 CrPC has been moved by the respondent and till now no
payment of interim maintenance has been made by the opposite
parties. According to him since opposite parties are advocate in
civil courts at Bulandshahar and Gautam Budh Nagar, therefore,
the applicant in unable to prosecute the complaint and since
commission of a cognizable offence has been alleged, hence
instead of treating the application as complaint, the concerned
Magistrate should have allowed the application and should have
passed an order to register and investigate the case. Learned
counsel for the applicant also argued that first of all the
application under Section 156(3) CrPC was moved in the Court
of ACJM-II but the PO found it difficult to decide the
application as the opposite party no.1 is the practicing lawyer in
Gautam Budh Nagar, therefore, on the request of ACJM-II the
case was transferred to the Court of ACJM-I but the PO of
Court of ACJM-I also found it difficult and wrote a letter to
CJM, Gautam Budh Nagar showing his unwillingness to hear
and decide the proceeding of application under Section 156(3)
declined to transfer the same. Being helpless, the ACJM-I
converted the application under Section 156(3) CrPC into a
complaint which would not meet the ends of justice and in the
attending circumstances the applicant being a lady would not be
able to prosecute the complaint.
7. Learned counsel for the applicant pointing out Section 397(2)
CrPC argued that the impugned order is an interlocutory order
about which no revision lies.
8. Contrary to that learned AGA relied on the citation in Atul
Pandey @ Param Pragyan Pandey Vs. State of UP and
another, 2021 LawSuiut (All) 603 decided by a co-ordinate
Bench of this Court and argued that the circumstances
expressed by the applicant would not change the form. In
aforementioned case the Court citing the judgment in
Jagannath Verma and others Vs. State of UP and another,
Pradesh, 2014 (84) All CriC 719, Sukhwai Vs. State of Uttar
Pradesh, 2008 CrLJ 472, Sakiri Vasu Vs. State of Uttar
Jahan, 2006 (54) AllCriC 530 and in Gopal Das Sindi Vs.
State of Assam, AIR 1961 SC 986 concluded that if an
application under Section 156(3) CrPC has been rejected or it
has been converted into a complaint, the aggrieved party can
prefer revision under Section 397 CrPC. It has also been held
that an order regarding rejection of such application or
conversion of application under Section 156(3) CrPC into a
complaint is not an interlocutory order and it can only be
challenged by the aggrieved party by filing revision.
9. The facts of this case and the said case are similar in nature.
In Atul Pandey (supra) an application under Section 156(3)
CrPC was moved by Ali Hasan, which was allowed and it was
treated as a complaint. Being aggrieved an application under
Section 482 CrPC had been moved about which a question
regarding its maintainability was raised. Learned Single Judge
referring the aforementioned judicial precedents held that in
such circumstances an application under Section 482 CrPC is
not maintainable. Relevant part of the judgment is as under:-
"16. In the light of the law laid down by the Full Bench of this Court in
Jagannath Verma (supra), I find that the impugned order is revisable in
nature. The appropriate remedy against the impugned order available to
the applicant is to file a revision under Section 397 Cr.P.C. instead of
approaching this Court in its extraordinary jurisdiction by commencing
an application under section 482 Cr.P.C. The prospective accused in the
case is entitled to be heard.
17. In the wake of the preceding narrative, I find that the law laid down by
the Full Bench in Jagannath Verma (supra) is fully applicable to the facts
of this case. Judicial discipline prohibits me from entering into the merits
of the case made by learned counsel for the applicant.
18. The application under section 482 Cr.P.C. is accordingly dismissed on
the ground of existence of alternative remedy of filing a revision under
section 397 Cr.P.C. available to the applicant."
10. On the basis of aforementioned discussion, this Court is also
in conformity with the principles laid down by the learned
Single Judge and is of the opinion that a proceeding under
Section 482 CrPC against the impugned order is not
maintainable and the applicant should have preferred a revision
before the revisional court.
11. Accordingly, this application is dismissed as not
maintainable. The applicant is at liberty to institute a revision in
the concerned revisional court.
12. Office is directed to return the certified copy of the
impugned order to the counsel for the applicant.