Date of decision: 14th November, 2022
+                   CS(COMM) 364/2021 and I.A. 9865/2021
for D-43. (M:7727660808)
Ms. Shweta Sahu, Advocate for D-46.
1.     This hearing has been done through hybrid mode.
2.     The present suit has been filed by Plaintiff No. 1- Star India Pvt. Ltd.
and Plaintiff No.2- Novi Digital Entertainment Pvt. Ltd. against various
rogue websites arrayed as Defendant Nos.1 to 42 in the plaint. In the suit,
the Plaintiffs seek a permanent injunction restraining the said websites from
retransmitting, broadcasting, streaming or in any manner communicating to
the public the cinematograph film „Bhuj: The Pride of India‟.
3.     The Plaintiffs are producers and owners of various television channels
as also ‘Disney + Hotstar’ mobile application and OTT platform. The case
of the Plaintiffs is that they are a leading production house and own
exclusive copyrights in respect of a large number of cinematograph films as
Digitally Signed        CS(COMM) 364/2021                                                         Page 1 of 8
also other copyrighted content. The present suit relates to a cinematograph
film titled „Bhuj: The Pride of India‟ which was set for release in 2021-22.
It is a film related to the Indo-Pak war of 1971 and inspired from persons
involved in the said war. The rights in the said cinematograph film are
exclusively owned by the Plaintiffs.
4.     The Plaintiffs had apprehensions, owing to various facts pleaded in
the plaint, that the Defendant rogue websites were likely to indulge in
unlawful streaming of pirated copies of the said film which would have had
adverse monetary impact on the Plaintiffs. Accordingly, the Plaintiffs filed
the present suit seeking the following reliefs against rogue websites as also
the Domain Name Registrars (hereinafter „DNRs‟) of some of the domain
names, ISPs and DoT & MeitY:
“i. Pass an order and decree of permanent injunction
restraining the Defendants No. 1 to 42 on both 'http'
and 'https' (and such other websites / entities which are
discovered during the course of the proceedings to
have been engaging in infringing the Plaintiffs'
exclusive rights and Copyrights), their owners,
partners, proprietors, officers, servants, employees,
and all others in capacity of principal or agent acting
for and on their behalf, or anyone claiming through, by
or under it, from in any manner communicating,
hosting, streaming, and/or making available for
viewing and downloading, without authorization, on
their websites or other platforms, through the internet
in any manner whatsoever, the Film and content
related thereto, so as to infringe the Plaintiffs exclusive
rights and Copyrights;
ii. Pass an order and decree directing the Defendant
No. 46, its directors, partners, proprietors, officers,
affiliates, servants, employees, and all others in
capacity of principal or agent acting for and, on its
Digitally Signed        CS(COMM) 364/2021                                                       Page 2 of 8
behalf, or anyone claiming through, by or under it, to
suspend the domain name registration of domain
names of Defendant Nos. 41 and 42 by Defendant No.
46 (GoDaddy) as already identified by the Plaintiffs in
the instant suit in Memo of Parties or such other
domain names that may subsequently be notified by the
Plaintiff to be Rogue Websites which infringe its
exclusive rights;
iii. Pass an order and decree directing the Defendant
Nos. 47 to 55, their directors, partners, proprietors,
officers, affiliates, servants, employees, and all others
in capacity of principal or agent acting for and on
their behalf, or anyone claiming through, by or under
it, to block access to the various websites identified by
the Plaintiff in the instant suit at S. No. 1 of the
Documents or such other websites that may
subsequently be notified by the Plaintiff to be
infringing of its exclusive rights;
iv. Pass an order and decree directing the Defendant
Nos. 56 and 57 to issue a notification calling upon the
various internet and telecom service providers
registered under it to block access to the various
websites identified by the Plaintiff in the instant suit at
S. No. I of the Documents or such other websites that
may subsequently be notified by the Plaintiff to be
infringing of its exclusive rights;
v. An order for damages of Rs. 2,00,01,000/- to be paid
by the Defendant Nos. 1 to 42 and such other websites
/ entities which are discovered during the course of the
proceedings to have been engaging in infringing the
Plaintiffs' exclusive rights, to the Plaintiff on account
of . their illegal and infringing activities and a decree
for the said amount be passed in favour of the Plaintiff
(the Plaintiff reserves its right to claim additional
damages and amend the pleadings accordingly once
the magnitude of the Defendants' illegal / infringing
activities and the revenues earned by the Defendants'
Digitally Signed        CS(COMM) 364/2021                                                     Page 3 of 8
in pursuance to such illegal / infringing activities is
ascertained upon discovery in the instant action);
vi. An order for delivery of all the apparatus and/or
material that the Defendant Nos. 1 to 42 use or may be
using to infringe the Plaintiffs' exclusive rights, to the
authorized representatives of the Plaintiffs for the
purposes of destruction;
viii. An order for rendition of accounts of profits
illegally earned by the Defendant Nos. 1 to 42, (and
such other websites / entities which are discovered
during the course of the proceedings to have been
engaging in infringing the Plaintiffs' exclusive rights),
on account of their illegal hosting, streaming,
publishing, exhibiting, making available and/or
communicating to the public of the Plaintiffs' Channels
including the internet and telecom service providers
registered under it;
vii. An order for costs in the present proceedings in
favour of the Plaintiff; and”
5.    Vide order dated 9th August, 2021, the Court had considered the
matter and had issued the following directions:
“5. It is the case of the plaintiffs that the said film
'Bhuj: The Pride of India' is likely to be released on
13.08.2021 and the plaintiffs apprehend that the said
defendants No. 1 to 42 would violate the copyright and
other rights of the plaintiffs by broadcasting or in any
other manner dealing with the aforesaid film which
would cause irreparable harm and damage to the
plaintiffs.
6. The plaintiffs have made out a prima facie case. The
defendants No. 1 to 42 and any other website
identified subsequently by the plaintiffs on an
affidavit to be filed in court, their owners, partners,
proprietors, etc. are restrained from in any manner
communicating to the public, hosting, storing,
Digitally Signed        CS(COMM) 364/2021                                                     Page 4 of 8
reproducing, streaming, broadcasting, etc. the
aforesaid film of the plaintiffs which would
tentamount to infringement of the plaintiffs copyright
and broadcast reproduction rights. A direction is
passed against defendant No. 46 directing defendant
No. 46 to suspend the domain registration of
defendants No. 41 and 42 and any other domain names
identified subsequently by the plaintiffs on an affidavit
to be filed in court. An interim injunction is also passed
directing defendants No. 47 to 55, their partners,
owners, etc. to take steps to block access to the various
domains identified by the plaintiffs at Serial No. 1 of
the documents list filed by the plaintiffs who are said to
be responsible for hosting, reproducing, streaming,
etc. and any other domain names identified
subsequently by the plaintiffs on an affidavit to be filed
in court, the aforesaid film of the plaintiffs amounting
to infringement of the plaintiffs' copyright. A direction
is also passed to defendants No. 56 and 57 to issue a
notification calling upon the various internet and
telecom service providers registered under it to block
access to the various domains identified by the
plaintiffs in the instant suit at Serial No. 1 of the
documents as noted above or any other domain names
which are identified subsequently by the plaintiffs on
an affidavit to be filed in court. The defendants will
take immediate steps on the orders passed today by this
court which will be uploaded on the website.”
6.    Pursuant to the said order, further additional URLs / domain names
were also found to be illegally streaming the cinematograph film.
Accordingly, the Plaintiffs have brought on record the following infringing
domain names/ websites by way of affidavits:
Digitally Signed        CS(COMM) 364/2021                                                     Page 5 of 8
S.No.     No. of Additional Websites     Date of Filing
7.     Parallelly, Defendant No.56 and 57, namely, DoT & MeitY are stated
to have blocked all the infringing websites upon being intimated about the
same by the Plaintiffs. The ISPs are also stated to have given effect to the
said orders.
8.     Today, ld. Counsel for the Plaintiffs submits that the cinematograph
film subject of the present suit has already been released on various online
platforms and OTT platforms.
9.     Despite being served, none of the rogue websites have entered
Digitally Signed        CS(COMM) 364/2021                                                   Page 6 of 8
appearance. On behalf of Defendant No.46- GoDaddy.com, LLC, it is
submitted by Ms. Sahu, ld. Counsel that Defendant No.42- khatrimaza.casa
was not under the control of GoDaddy at the time of the passing of the
injunction order and the same was moved to another DNR just prior to the
injunction order dated 9th August, 2021. It is further submitted by Ms.
Sahu, ld. Counsel that the domain name of Defendant No.41- btcmovies.xyz
was put under suspension by GoDaddy after the injunction order. However,
since no locking order was passed, the said domain name has moved out of
the control of GoDaddy. In respect of btcmovies.xyz, she confirms that
blocking orders issued by the DoT/MeitY have been given effect to and the
said domain name continues to remain suspended. Mr. Siddharth Varshney,
ld.Counsel has appeared for Defendant No.43- Super Cassettes Industries
10.    Heard. All the Defendant rogue websites have been served or are
aware of the orders passed by this Court. However, none of the Defendant-
domain names or further domain names which have been added have
appeared before the Court. Vide order dated 1st September, 2022, ld. Joint
Registrar has closed the right of the Defendant rogue websites to file written
statement. The movie has already been released on various platforms
including the OTT platforms and other online platforms. In view thereof,
since the rights of the Plaintiffs are not in question, a permanent injunction
is liable to be granted in terms of paragraph 66(i) of the plaint against all the
rogue websites i.e., Defendant Nos. 1 to 42 and the other domain names
added by subsequent affidavits totalling 689 additional websites/ domain
names.
11.    Insofar as the other Defendants who are Domain Name Registrars are
Digitally Signed        CS(COMM) 364/2021                                                      Page 7 of 8
concerned, they shall ensure that the impugned domain names are
suspended, locked and status quo is maintained in respect of the same. The
same shall not be permitted to be transferred to any third party. The orders
of blocking shall also stand confirmed permanently in respect of all the
impugned domain names / websites.
12.   In view of the above, the Plaintiffs do not press for any further reliefs
of damages or rendition of accounts.
13.   The suit is decreed in the above terms.        Decree sheet be drawn
accordingly.
14.   All pending applications are disposed of.
Digitally Signed        CS(COMM) 364/2021                                                     Page 8 of 8