Respondent :- State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Medical Health And Ors.
Counsel for Petitioner :- Shreya Chaudhary,Nishi Chaudhary,Rinku
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
1. Heard Ms. Shreya Chaudhary, learned counsel for petitioner
and learned Standing Counsel for the State.
2. Petitioner, by the present writ petition has challenged the
order of transfer dated 12.07.2021 as well as order dated
12.08.2021 whereby representation of petitioner is rejected.
3. Learned counsel for petitioner submits that petitioner, who is
Class-IV employee has been transferred from Lucknow to
Kanpur by transfer order dated 12.07.2021 on administrative
ground. The said order does not give any reason whatsoever for
transferring the petitioner. Petitioner has approached this Court
on ground that Class-IV employee cannot be transferred so far
away. This Court directed the representation of petitioner to be
considered and decided on merits. While deciding the
representation, large number of allegations were leveled against
the petitioner which includes that she remains on leave, she acts
in whimsical manner which causes disturbances in the work,
she is careless in attending insured persons/patients. Reference
is made to certain letters written by some officers concerned.
Learned counsel for petitioner submits that in the given
circumstances the transfer amounts to transfer on punishment
which could not be made except following due process.
Learned counsel for petitioner further submits that even
presuming Class-IV employee is to be transferred                      on
                                   punishment, the same cannot be to a far away place and has to
                                   be within the same district. Further submission is that the
                                   impugned order is also passed without providing any
                                   opportunity of hearing to the petitioner.
                                   4. Learned Standing Counsel submits that looking into the
                                   conduct of petitioner, the transfer order is rightly passed.
                                   5. In the given facts and circumstances of the case where
                                   allegations are being made against petitioner in rejecting her
                                   representation against the impugned transfer order, the transfer
                                   order becomes punitive in nature. No punishment can be
                                   awarded to the petitioner without giving any opportunity of
                                   hearing. Therefore, the impugned order cannot stand. It is
                                   further to be noted that no Class-IV employee should normally
                                   be transferred out of district. The department itself follows the
                                   said policy as is reflected in the transfer order dated 12.07.2021
                                   itself, by which five Class-IV employees are transferred, three
                                   of them on personal request out of district, the fourth in public
                                   interest within the district and fifth, petitioner, is transferred out
                                   of district on administrative grounds. When the department is
                                   making out of district transfer only on request and otherwise
                                   accommodating persons within the district, there was no reason
                                   to transfer the petitioner out of district.
                                   6. In view therefore, the impugned orders dated 12.07.2021 and
                                   12.08.2021 cannot stand and are set aside.
                                   7. The writ petition is allowed.
