(FOR ADMISSION and IA No.138988/2021­EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)
(FOR ADMISSION and IA No.138428/2021­EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T.)
Date : 24­11­2021 These matters were called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
This  Court  on   10­8­2021  inter  alia  passed  the following
“In the meanwhile, to ensure expeditious disposal of
pending cases, it is necessary for this Court to direct the
officers presiding over Special Courts or CBI Courts
involving prosecution of MPs or MLAs to continue in their
present posts until further orders.
This direction, barring transfer of judicial officers,
will be subject to their superannuation or death. If any
further necessity or emergency arises, the Registrar General
of the High Courts are at liberty to make an application
before us for retention or to relieve those officers ".
The   Rajasthan  High   Court   has  filed  an   application  on
17­11­2021 seeking facilitative directions for the transfer of four
judicial officers.
The application is allowed.
Interlocutory Application stands allowed in the afore­stated
1  While invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 32
of the Constitution in three petitions, the petitioners seek the
transfer of their trials from the Court of the Special Judge and
Additional Sessions Judge, MP/MLA Court, Rampur to the Magistrate
having jurisdiction. Details of the Case Crimes from which the
trials arise are set out below:
(i) Case Crime No.4/2019 registered at Police Station Ganj,
Rampur for offences punishable under Sections 420, 467, 468
(ii) Case Crime No.980/2019 registered at Police Station
Civil Lines, Rampur for offences punishable under Sections
420, 467, 468, 471 and Section 120­B of the Penal Code;
(iii) Case Crime No.594/2019 registered at Police Station
Civil Lines, Rampur for offences punishable under Sections
420, 467, 468 and 471 of the Penal Code, and Section 12
(1A) of the Passport Act, 1967.
2 On 16 August 2019, the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad
issued   a  Notification  by  which   Special  Courts  of  Additional
District and Sessions Judges were constituted for sixty­two out of
the seventy­four districts in the State of Uttar Pradesh.
3 The text of the Notification (in so far as is relevant) reads
“In pursuance of orders dated 04.12.2018 of the Hon’ble
Supreme court of India passed in Writ Petition (Civil)
No(S) 699 of 2016 Ashwini Kumar Upadhyay Vs Union of India
& Anr Hon’ble court has been pleased to constitute/
Designate the Special Court of Additional District &
Sessions Judge mentioned in Column 3 for local area in the
district specified in column 2 of the said schedule
excluding   the   jurisdiction   of   12   districts   namely
Azamgarh, Mau, Ghazipur, Bhadohi at Gyanpur, Kaushambi,
Ballia and Jaupur, which lies with the Special Court at
Allahabad created vide Government letter dated 29.06.2018
for   baying   criminal   cases   pending   against   elected
The above Notification purports to have been issued in pursuance of
the order dated 4.12.2018 of this Court in Ashwani Kumar      Upadhyay
and Union of India & Another. (Writ Petition (Civil) No.699 of
4 Initially, on 14 December 2017, this Court issued     directions for
setting up Fast Track Courts for the trial of cases pending against
elected MPs/MLAs. The order clarified that the        directions were
“tentative at this stage” so as to get the Court(s) operational and
functional. The Court indicated that as and when necessary changes
were required to be made in those directions, or if any additional
directions were required, they would be issued from time to time.
5  On 4.12.2018 this Court issued the following directions :­
“1. Instead of designating one Sessions Court and one
Magisterial   Court in each District we request each
High Court   to assign/allocate criminal cases involving
former and    sitting legislators to as many Sessions
Courts and   Magisterial Courts as the each High Court
may   consider    proper,   fit   and  expedient.   This,
according to us, would be a more effective step
instead of concentrating all the cases involving
former and sitting legislators in a Special Court(s)
in the district.
2. The procedural steps indicated by the learned
Amicus Curiae, narrated above, will be followed by each
of the designated Court to whom work would be
allocated in terms of the directions above except that
offences punishable with imprisonment for life/death
against   sitting   M.Ps./M.L.As.   as  well  as   former
M.Ps./M.L.As. would be taken up on first priority
followed by sequential order indicated above without
creating any distinction between cases involving sitting
legislators and former legislators.
3. At this stage, we are of the view that the above
directions should be made applicable to cases involving
former and sitting legis1ators in the States of Bihar and
The National Capital Territory of Delhi where the
position is somewhat different and the difficulties of
distance and territories do not come in the way the
trial of cases by the Special Courts (both Sessions
Court and Magisterial Court) will continue.
4. So far us the cases involving States of Kerala and
Bihar are concerned, such of the case records which have
been transmitted to the Special Courts in the two States
will be re­transmitted to the jurisdictional courts
wherefrom the records have been sent for being dealt
with in the manner indicated above. This will be done
5. The registry of the High Courts of Kerala (State of
Kerala) and Patna (State of Bihar) will initiate
necessary action in this matter without any delay.
6. Rest of the Special Courts already set up shall
continue to work and try cases assigned to it until
further orders are passed in this regard by this Court.
7.  The designated Courts in the districts in the
aforesaid two States of Kerala and Bihar will submit
monthly report to the High Court with regard to the
cases where charge­sheets have not yet been filed; cases
where charges have not yet been framed giving reasons
therefor; and the progress of the trial where the cases
are ready. The High Courts, in turn, will forward the
said reports to the registry of this Court with a copy
to Shri Vijay Hansaria, learned Amicus Curiae who is
requested to go through the said reports and assist the
Court by placing the information conveyed before this
Court in an appropriate manner on the next date/dates of
hearing.”
6  On 16.9.2020 further directions were issued by this Court by
which the Chief Justices of the High Courts were to submit an
action  plan    for  rationalizing    the number  of  Special  Courts
required.  In    so  far  as  is  material,   relevant  part  of  the
directions is extracted below:
“With respect to increasing the number of Special Courts
and rationalizing the pending criminal cases, we deem it
appropriate that, before passing any specific direction in
respect thereto, it would be appropriate to direct the
learned Chief Justice of each High Court to formulate and
submit an action plan for rationalization of the number of
Special Courts necessary, with respect to the following
a. Total number of pending cases in each district
b. Required number of proportionate Special Courts
c. Number of Courts that are currently available
d. Number of Judges and the subject categories of the
e. Tenure of the Judges to be designated
f. Number of cases to be assigned to each Judge
g. Expected time for disposal of the cases
h. Distance of the Courts to be designated
i.  Adequacy of infrastructure
The learned Chief Justices while preparing the action plan
should also consider, in the event the trials are already
ongoing in an expeditious manner, whether transferring the
same to a different Court would be necessary and
appropriate.”
7   We have heard Mr Kapil Sibal, learned senior counsel for the
petitioners, Mr S V Raju, learned Additional Solicitor General for
the Union Government, Ms Garima Prasad, learned Additional Advocate
General  or  the  State   of  UP  and   Mr   Sunny  Chaudhary,   learned
Advocate­on­Record for the High Court of Judicature at Allahabad.
8   The Order of this Court dated 4.12.2018 makes it abundantly
clear  that  instead  of   designating   one  Sessions   Court  and  one
Magisterial Court in each District, the High Courts were requested
to assign and allocate criminal cases involving former and sitting
legislatures to as many Sessions Courts and Magisterial Courts as
each High Court would consider appropriate fit and expedient.
9  The above directions do not mandate the High Courts to transfer
cases which are triable by Magistrates to Sessions Courts. The
directions contained in the Order dated 4 December 2018 do not
supplant the jurisdictional provisions contained either in the Code
of  Criminal   Procedure,   1973  or   in   other  special    enactments
governing the trial of offences governed by those enactments. The
directions of this Court mandate the assigning and allocation of
criminal cases involving former and sitting legislators to Sessions
Courts or, as the case may be, Magisterial Courts. This has to be
in  accordance   with  the   governing    provisions   of  the   law  as
applicable. Consequently, where a case is triable by a Magistrate
under the Penal Code, the case would have to be assigned/allocated
to a Court of a Magistrate vested with jurisdiction and the Order
of  this Court dated 4 December 2018 cannot be construed as            a
direction requiring the trial of the case by a Sessions Court. In
the   State   of  Uttar   Pradesh,  no  Magisterial   Courts  have  been
designated as Special Courts for the trial of cases triable by
Magistrates    in  terms   of the  directions  of  this  Court  dated  4
December   2018.   The   Notification  issued  by   the  High  Court  of
Judicature at Allahabad on 16 August 2019 is based on an evident
misconstruction of the directions contained in the Order of this
10 The High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall accordingly
ensure allocation of criminal cases involving former and sitting
legislatures to as many Sessions Courts and Magisterial Courts as
required, in order that cases which are triable by a Magistrate are
assigned to a designated Court of a Magistrate, while cases triable
by a Sessions Court are assigned to a designated Court of Sessions.
11   We further direct that cases triable by Magistrates which are
pending before the Sessions Court in view of the Circular dated 16
August   2019   shall  stand  transferred  to  the  Court  of  competent
jurisdiction. However, the entire record and proceedings shall be
transferred    to  the  Court  of  the  designated  Magistrate  and  the
proceedings shall commence from the stage which has been reached
prior to the transfer of the proceedings, as a consequence of which
the trial shall not have to commence afresh.
12    The above directions shall govern the generality of cases
involving former and sitting legislators in the State of U.P. which
are to    be tried by Special Courts by the Sessions Courts or, as
the case may be, Magistrates’ Courts in terms of the provisions of
the   Code  of  Criminal  procedure,  1973  or  a  special   enactment
governing   the  trial of  the  offence  with  which  the  accused  is
charged. The High Court shall issue a fresh circular in conformity
of the present order.
13      The Writ Petitions shall accordingly stand disposed of in
terms of the above directions.