1.    The Circulation is taken by the learned counsel for the
applicant. Though by earlier order dated 18.11.2022, this Tribunal
has directed the Home Department that the third option for
transgender in their on-line application is to be made available to
enable the transgenders to apply for the post of Police Constable by
23.11.2022, however, till today neither the order of this Tribunal
has been complied with nor it is challenged before the Hon'ble
High Court. Thus, the order of the Tribunal is frustrated. Learned
counsel for the applicant submits that the last date of acceptance
of the application form is 30.11.2022 and at least the department
should be directed to accept the application form and the website
should be operative.
2.     In reply, learned C.P.O submitted that the Respondent,
Home Department wants to challenge the order of this Tribunal
before the Hon'ble High Court, mainly on the ground of
administrative difficulties faced by the Respondent-State and she
also relied on the directions given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of Shanavi Ponnusamy Vs. Ministry of Civil Aviation &
Anr, W.P (C) No. 1033/2017 dated 8.9.2022.             She submitted
that it is the Central Government and not the State Government
who has to take the policy decision first, pursuant to the decision
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of NATIONAL LEGAL
3.    Learned counsel for the applicant while opposing the non-
compliance of the order of the Tribunal and considering the order
and directions given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court dated 8.9.2022
in the case of Shanavi Ponnusamy's case submitted that the
Central Government way back on 20.4.2020 by Office
Memorandum on the subject of inclusion of third gender in other
category in the application form in recruitment to various posts
under the Central Government has directed all the Ministries,
Department of Government of India to modify the relevant
recruitment rules providing for inclusion of transgender as a
separate category of gender so as to make the said rules in
conformity with the provisions of The Transgender Persons
(Protection of Rights) Act, 2019. Learned counsel for the applicant
further submitted that the Government of India has made it
applicable not only to a particular wherein also include physical
standards are also mentioned.
4.      Learned counsel for the applicant relied on the following case
(i)     Judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in National Legal
Services Authority Vs. Union of India 86 Anr, (2014) 5 SCC
(ii)    Judgment of the Hon'ble High Court of Judicature at Madras
in K. Prithika Yashini (Transgender) Vs. The Chairman,
(iii)   Learned counsel for the applicant relied on the Recruitment
Rules dated 12.11.2022 for appointment to the post of Police
Constable of State of Bihar. He relied on clause no 4.4 (g) of
the said Rules, wherein the physical standard for
transgender or third gender are of the same like female.
5.      The State has right to challenge the order of the Tribunal.
However, in view of the very specific directions given by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in NATIONAL LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITY's
case (supra), and as pointed out by the learned counsel for the
applicant certain paragraphs from the judgment of NALSA are
required to be highlighted to reiterate the point of gender as well as
sex discrimination which in fact is prohibited in the Constitution of
"66. Articles 15 and 16 sought to prohibit discrimination
on the basis of sex, recognizing that sex discrimination is a
historical fact and needs to be addressed. Constitution
makers, it can be gathered, gave emphasis to the
fundamental right against sex discrimination so as to
prevent the direct or indirect attitude to treat people
differently, for the reason of not being in conformity with
stereotypical generalizations of binary genders. Both gender
and biological attributes constitute distinct components of
sex. Biological characteristics, of course, include genitals,
chromosomes and secondary sexual features, but gender
attributes include one's self image, the deep psychological or
emotional sense of sexual identity and character. The
discrimination on the ground of 'sex' under Articles 15 and
16, therefore, includes discrimination on the ground of
gender identity. The expression 'sex' used in Articles 15 and
16 is not just limited to biological sex of male or female, but
intended to include people who consider themselves to be
neither male or female.
67. TGs have been systematically denied the rights under
Article 15(2) that is not to be subjected to any disability,
liability, restriction or condition in regard to access to public
places. TGs have also not been afforded special provisions
envisaged under Article 15(4) for the advancement of the
socially and educationally backward classes (SEBC) of
citizens, which they are, and hence legally entitled and
eligible to get the benefits of SEBC. State is bound to take
some affirmative action for their advancement so that the
injustice done to them for centuries could be remedied. TGs
are also entitled to enjoy economic, social, cultural and
political rights without discrimination, because forms of
discrimination on the ground of gender are violative of
fundamental freedoms and human rights. TGs have also
been denied rights under Article 16(2) and discriminated
against in respect of employment or office under the State on
the ground of sex. TGs are also entitled to reservation in the
matter of appointment, as envisaged under Article 16(4) of
the Constitution. State is bound to take affirmative action to
give them due representation in public services.
68. Articles 15(2) to (4) and Article 16(4) read with the
Directive Principles of State Policy and various international
instruments to which Indian is a party, call for social
equality, which the TGs could realize, only if facilities and
opportunities are extended to them so that they can also live
with dignity and equal status with other genders
81. Articles 14, 15, 16, 19 and 21, above discussion,
would indicate, do not exclude Hijras/Transgenders from its
ambit, but Indian law on the whole recognize the paradigm
of binary genders of male and female, based on one's
biological sex. As already indicated, we cannot accept the
Corbett principle of "Biological Test", rather we prefer to
follow the psyche of the person in determining sex and
gender and prefer the "Psychological Test" instead of
"Biological Test". Binary notion of gender reflects in the
Indian Penal Code, for example, Section 8, 10, etc. and
Page 85 85 also in the laws related to marriage, adoption,
divorce, inheritance, succession and other welfare
legislations like NAREGA, 2005, etc. Non-recognition of the
identity of Hijras/Transgenders in the various legislations
denies them equal protection of law and they face wide-
spread discrimination.
83. We, therefore, conclude that discrimination on the basis
of sexual orientation or gender identity includes any
discrimination, exclusion, restriction or preference, which
has the effect of nullifying or transposing equality by the law
or the equal protection of laws guaranteed under our
Constitution, and hence we are inclined to give various
directions to safeguard the constitutional rights of the
members of the TG community.
6.     In the judgment of Shanavi Ponnusamy Vs. Ministry of
Civil Aviation as Anr, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has directed
that the provisions of the 2019 Act need to be implemented in
letter and spirit by formulating appropriate policies. The Union
Government must take the lead in this behalf and provide clear
guidance and enforceable standards to all other entities, including,
those of the Union Government, State Governments and
establishments governed by the 2019 Act. It is further stated that
the Union Government shall adopt suitable measures after
collaborating with the National Council and place a policy on the
record before the next date of listing, which is now fixed on
6.12.2022. I rely on the Central Government's Office Memorandum
dated 20.4.2020 has directed all the Government Offices to allow
transgenders/other sex to participate in all the process of
recruitment. It is necessary to point out that the directions were
given in NALSA (supra) independently to the Central Government
as well as the State Government. The Respondents in Shanvai
Ponnusamy's case is the Ministry of Civil Aviation, which come
under the Central Government. However, 'Police' is the subject in
the State List in Seventh Schedule (VII) of the Constitution of India
at Serial no. 2 and so also Sr. No. 41, is the State Public Service
Commission. Thus, the State Government is fully empowered to
draw its own policy and take decisions in such matters.
7.    It is further to be noted that the Government of Bihar has
carried out the necessary modification in the Recruitment Rules
and issued the advertisement for the post of Constables on
12.11.2022, wherein the relevant clause 4.4 (g) is reproduced
4.4      31              5T 21.41g- i diNqug -           31*1- ciatat fMLJ c 3T 5 4Z1
aigt 4)11 I r-Fq f‘cii-‘5ci 3itc-il0.              313-742113i.aibei EITEra fscou ‘7111A
(Er)                                /        (ad         z) 319-ztfaait
8.    In the case of K. Prithika Yashini (Transgender) (supra), the
option was not given to the third gender for the recruitment to the
post of Sub-Inspector. The Hon'ble Madras High Court has relied
on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
ORS. Though the judgment was pronounced in April, 2014, wheys
there was no policy for the transgendeAramed by the Government
of Tamil Nadu. The Hon'ble Madras High Court held that the
petitioner is entitled to be recruited to the post of Sub-Inspector
and allowed the Writ Petition with the following ratio:-
"9. On examination of the case of the petitioner qua the
category she would be required to be recruited as there being
no separate category, it was found that the petitioner
qualified the horizontal reservation minimum bench mark of
OC Women of Ministerial quota, which is 25.50 against
which the petitioner had obtained 28.50 marks. It was this
which persuaded the Court to grant interim orders in favour
of the Petitioner. The physical efficiency test had been taken
by the petitioner with the bench mark as that for a female."
It was further observed as under:-
"12. We have given our thought to the matter. The
discrimination suffered by the transgenders would be
difficult for any of the other two genders to realize. The
present case is one where the petitioner was categorized as
man, though she was a female. She had undergone
sufferance of an exit from her house without parental
protection. It is in these difficult circumstances that the
petitioner has been endeavouring to eke out a living.
13. There can be various physical chances and mental
effects arising from the situation in which the petitioner
finds herself. The respondent failed to provide for the third
gender in the application Form and thus, the petitioner had
to rush to the Court to assert her rights. The next stage was
to find out as to what bench mark should apply to the
petitioner and thus, benefit was given to the petitioner
accordingly, in which she was successful. We do not think
that in the physical endurance test, a difference of 1.11
seconds should come in the say of the petitioner in being
considered for recruitment. We hasten to add that she will
have to meet the bench mark of the recruitment process, but
the case cannot be knocked out in the middle, as was sought
to be done by the respondent."
9.     Learned C.P.O, at the end of dictation of the order has
requested to mention that this Court has passed this order sitting
Singly in this matter of Division Bench. The Member (Admin) is on
leave and hence not available. It is very unprecedented request
made by the learned C.P.O which is never made so in other
matters when the Division Bench matters are decided sitting Singly
at the interim stage. However, it is my duty to satisfy the State
questioning the powers of the Member (J) in passing interim orders
under the Administrative Tribunals Act. Section 5(6) of the
Administrative Tribunals Act pertains to the composition of the
Tribunal and its Benches thereof. There is always assignment of
the matters to the Single Bench and Division Bench. The
Chairperson has the power to decide which subjects are to be
assigned to the Single Bench or Division Bench. Accordingly, I
have issued the order on 25.5.2021 after consultation with my
brother Member (J) 86 Member (A) and have assigned the subjects.
10. In the of Shri Parasram Thakur (supra), the Hon'ble Bombay
High Court has referred to relevant portion as follows:-
"2. The Joint Registrar of the Tribunal has submitted a
report dated November 23, 2021. In such report, after
quoting paragraph 5 of our order dated November 17, 2021,
the Joint Registrar says as follows:-
"In this regard, I am to state that as per Order No.
1/32/87-JA dated 20.1.1992, passed by Hon'ble Mr
Justice V.S Malimath the then Chairman, Central
Administrative Tribunal, in situations when a Division
Bench is not available for dealing with urgent cases for
`Admission' and 'Grant of Interim Orders', and the
urgency is such that, the matter cannot be deferred
until a Division Bench become available, the Single
Member is authorized to take up such urgent cases for
`Admission' and 'Grant of Interim Orders' subject to
the condition that if the Single Member is not inclined
to admit the matter, he/she shall refer the matter, for
being placed before the appropriate Division Bench as
soon as the same becomes available. It is further
submitted that on 13.10.2021, Division Bench was not
available. A copy of the aforesaid order and the Cause
List dated 13.10.2021 is enclosed herewith for ready
reference."
14. Thus, in the present case interim order was already passed
on 18.11.2022. This is another interim order in that order.
1t Learned counsel for the applicant has produced copy of the
Notification dated 6.7.2021 issued by the Government of
Karnataka, whereby the Recruitment Rule is amended by providing
reservation to transgender candidate. I have gone through Rule 9
of the said Recruitment Rules and it shows that not only the
transgenders are allowed to participate in the process of
recruitment in the Police Department, but they are provided
reservation in all the services of the State of Karnataka.
13, Learned counsel for the applicant has also produced the
advertisement dated 27.11.2022 issued by the Tamil Nadu
Uniformed Services Recruitment Board, wherein specifically a class
is created for transgender thereby allowing them to participate and
the physical standard for physical test for female and transgender
are the same.
Considering the submissions of the learned counsel for the
applicant and the learned C.P.O, I am inclined to extend the date
of acceptance of the Application Form for transgendel5' till
D: \ Anil Nair \Judgments \ 2022 \ 01.11.2022 \ 0.A 1121. 22, Receruirtment challenged, Int. Order, Chairperson.doc