Present :     Mr. B.S. Jaswal, Advocate for the petitioner.
The present civil revision petition has been preferred by the
decree-holder/wife against the order dated 11.10.2021 passed by the Family
Court, Panchkula dismissing her execution petition as unsatisfied with
liberty to file a fresh execution petition on the same cause of action as and
when any particulars of the judgement-debtor/husband regarding his address
in India or any property in India comes in the notice of the decree-
holder/wife.
The parties to the lis were married on 16.01.2011. However, the
marriage did not work out for them and vide judgement dated 20.05.2014
(Annexure P-1) the Additional District Judge, Panchkula allowed the
divorce petition filed by the decree-holder/wife under Section 13(1)(i)(a) of
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. The Court dissolved the marriage of the
parties and also directed the judgement-debtor/husband to pay permanent
alimony and maintenance of Rs.60 lakhs to the decree-holder/wife.
The decree-holder/wife filed an execution petition (Annexure P-3) for
recovery of the amount of permanent alimony and maintenance. The
execution petition was sent to the Civil Court at Balachaur, District SBS
I attest to the accuracy and
Nagar for attachment of the properties of the judgement-debtor/husband.
Third party objections were filed by one Inderjit Singh contending that the
properties sought to be attached were owned by him and not by the
judgement-debtor/husband. The said third party objections were dismissed
by the Civil Court at Balachaur vide order dated 06.09.2021 (Annexure P-6).
On the same date, vide a separate order (Annexure P-7), the Civil Court at
Balachaur held that the judgement-debtor/husband was not owner in
possession of any property mentioned in the list of property supplied by the
decree-holder/wife and therefore the file be sent back to the Court of the
District Judge, Panchkula. After receipt of the file by the Family Court,
Panchkula the impugned order dated 11.10.2021 was passed dismissing the
execution petition as unsatisfied with liberty to file a fresh execution petition
on the same cause of action as and when any particulars of the judgement-
debtor/husband regarding his address in India or any property in India comes
in the notice of the decree-holder/wife. Hence, the present civil revision
petition.
Learned counsel for the decree-holder/wife has contended that
both the Civil Court at Balachaur and the Family Court, Panchkula have
erred in passing the impugned orders dated 06.09.2021 and 11.10.2021.
According to counsel the decree-holder/wife has not received a penny as
alimony and permanent maintenance despite there being a judgement and
decree in her favour.
While passing the impugned order dated 11.10.2021 the Family
Court, Panchkula inter-alia held that “As per record on the case file the
judgement-debtor is living in United Kingdom and therefore, it has been
I attest to the accuracy and
concluded by the court at Balachaur that he has no property in his name at
Balachaur as per the list of properties furnished by the decree-holder.
Moreover, he has no property at Panchkula and he does not reside at
Panchkula. Therefore, at this stage it is not possible to execute the
judgement and decree in question and the present execution petition is
dismissed as unsatisfied. However, as and when any particulars of the
judgement-debtor regarding his address in India or any property in India
comes in the notice of the decree-holder, she shall be at liberty to file fresh
execution petition on the same cause of action”. Learned counsel for the
decree-holder/wife has been unable to point out how the said order suffers
from any illegality. Once the judgement-debtor/husband is not the owner of
the properties whose list was furnished to the Executing Court, the same
cannot be attached. Even before this Court the counsel for the decree-
holder/wife has not been able to show anything to link the ownership of the
properties with the judgement-debtor/husband. In any event the Family
Court, Panchkula has given liberty to the decree-holder/wife to file a fresh
execution petition as and when any particulars of the judgement-
debtor/husband regarding his address in India or any property in India comes
to the notice of the decree-holder/wife.
It is often said that the travails of a decree-holder commence
after he has obtained a decree in his favour. In the present case the decree-
holder/wife is still to recover the permanent alimony and maintenance
awarded to her in 2014. The Court can sympathize with the decree-
holder/wife for the delay but it finds no illegality or error in the exercise of
jurisdiction by the Civil Court at Balachaur or the Family Court, Panchkula.
The interest of the decree-holder/wife has been safe-guarded and the decree-
I attest to the accuracy and
holder/wife can approach the Court with a fresh execution petition once the
relevant details are available with her.
The civil revision petition is, accordingly, dismissed. Pending
applications, if any, also stand disposed off.