Heard Mr. T Deuri, learned counsel for the petitioner, who submits that the
petitioner has not been allowed to participate in the Advertisement No.
DP/5/5(Open) dated 21.07.2022 issued by the Indian Oil Corporation, for filling
up of 9 (nine) posts of Senior Law Officer, on account of Clause 2(g) of the
Advertisement, which requires a candidate to have the following details on the
(iv) Score obtained in CLAT 2022 (up to two places of decimal
The Advertisement further states that the portal will allow the candidates
to proceed further only when the entries made against the above queries match
with the CLAT 2022 database.
2)         The petitioner’s counsel submits that the advertisement has restricted
the number of candidates, who can appear in the selection process, in violation
of the equality of opportunity clause, as provided in Articles 14 and 16 of the
Constitution of India. He further submits that only a miniscule proportion of
candidates who have connections with elite Law institutions are eligible to apply,
thereby depriving the petitioner, who is less fortunate than those who have
studied in the law colleges that are not a part of the CLAT consortium.
3)          The petitioner has relied upon the judgment of the Kerela High Court
in WP(C) No. 30638/2021, (Aishwarya Mohan vs. Union of India & 5 Ors.) which
was disposed of vide judgment dated 06.06.2022, in support of his submission
that the petitioner should also be allowed to take part in the selection process.
The petitioner’s counsel submits that there has been no appeal filed
against the judgment dated 06.06.2022 passed by the Single Judge of the
Kerala High Court in WP(C) No. 30638/2021.
4)           The petitioner’s counsel also submits that by restraining the
participation of candidates, such as the petitioner who do not have the above
criteria, the respondents have invoked the idea of indirect discrimination. The
petitioner’s counsel submits that advance copies of the writ petition cannot be
served upon the learned Standing Counsel for the Indian Oil Corporation
Limited, as they are refusing to accept the same, on the ground that in cases of
this nature, the cases would have to be allotted to them by the Indian Oil
Corporation. He accordingly submits that notices will have to be issued to the
respondents. At the same time, the learned counsel for the petitioner submits
that an interim order is required to be issued, to enable the petitioner to
participate in the selection process and as the last date for submission of an
application is 14.08.2022.
5)         The question that would have to be decided is whether the essential
qualifications for appointment to a post, is the prerogative of an employer to
decide and whether this Court under the garb of judicial review can delve into
the issue, with regard to the employer’s right to lay down essential qualifications
and eligibility criteria for appointment to a post.
6)          Though the learned counsel for the petitioner had stated that the
judgment of the learned Single Judge of the Kerala High Court in WP(C) No.
30638/2021 has not been challenged by way of an appeal, the facts are
otherwise. The Judgment of the Single Judge of the Kerala High Court passed in
WP(C) No. 30638/2021 (Aishwarya Mohan Vs. Union of India & 5 Ors.) , which
was decided on 06.06.2022, has been set aside by the Division Bench of the
Kerala High Court in W.A No. 793/2022 and W.A No. 742/2022, vide judgment
dated 25.07.2022. In the judgment dated 06.06.2022 passed in WP(C) No.
30638/2021, the Single Bench of the Kerala High Court was to decide whether
the eligibility criteria for recruitment to the post of Assistant Law Officer,
requiring a candidate to have an LLB Degree and to have appeared for CLAT-
2021, Post-graduate Program conducted by the Consortium of National Law
Universities, was discriminatory. The learned Single Judge on considering the
matter held that as the eligibility criteria confined candidates to those who only
appeared for CLAT-2021 PG Program, which would be a minuscule minority
among law graduates, the same amounted to indirect discrimination. The
learned Single Judge allowed the writ petition holding that the petitioner
therein, who had not appeared for CLAT-2021 PG Program, could not be denied
a level playing field in being denied participation from the selection process.
7)          The Division Bench of the Kerala High Court held that the eligibility
criteria is the discretion of the employer and the practice of insisting on an
appearance at the CLAT-PG Examination, as a requirement for applying for the
post of Law Officer in the National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd., does not
impose any restrictions as regards the law graduate, who can appear before it.
The Division Bench also held that the guarantee of equality under Article 14 of
the Constitution cannot imply qualifications should be prescribed to make
everyone eligible, without conceding the right to the employer to choose what it
considers as the best qualification, given the nature of the job to be undertaken.
It further held that Article 16 of the Constitution only speaks of equality of
opportunity and not opportunity to achieve equality and is also different from
equality of the results. The operative portion of the judgment passed by the
Division Bench of the Kerala High Court in W.A Nos. 742/2022 and 793/2022,
which is at paragraph No. 18 is reproduced below:-
“18. The basic principle underlying Article 14 is only to ensure that law
must operate equally on all persons under the like circumstances and a
discretionary power conferred on the employer to fix the eligibility
standards or qualification cannot be held to be discriminatory. Guarantee
for equality cannot imply that qualifications should be prescribed to make
every one eligible without conceding the right to the employer to choose
what he considers as the best qualification given the nature of the job to
be undertaken. Article 16 only speaks of equality of opportunity and not
opportunity to achieve equality and is also different from equality of the
results. We have to concede the power of the State to frame rules of
classification to secure the standard of efficiency they aspire for and
classifications always need not be arithmetically exact or to suit the
majority. We have no doubt that the selection process in the instant case
does not suffer from the více of discrimination or arbitrariness and we
uphold the selection process. For the view we have taken, we are of the
opinion that it is not necessary for us to advert to the other contentions
urged by the learned counsel. The contention that the majority of the
total population of India earns less that Rs.150/- per day and
therefore, the clause in the notification will throw out huge number
of eligible candidates from the zone of consideration, is also to
be rejected as far fetched.”
8)          In the case of Chief Manager, Punjab National Bank & Anr. Vs.
Anit Kumar Das, Civil Appeal No. 3602/2020, the Apex Court has held that it is
for an employer to determine and decide the relevancy and suitability of the
qualifications for any post and it is not for the Courts to consider and assess. A
greater latitude is permitted by the Courts for the employer to prescribe
qualifications for any post. There is a rationale behind it. Qualifications are
prescribed keeping in view the need and interest of an Institution or an Industry
or an establishment as the case may be. The Courts are not fit instruments to
assess expediency or advisability or utility of such prescription of qualifications.
However, at the same time, the employer cannot act arbitrarily or fancifully in
prescribing qualifications for posts.
9)          In the case of Maharashtra Public Service Commission, through
its Secretary Vs. Sandeep Shriram Warade & Ors. , reported in (2019) 6
SCC 362, the Apex Court has held that the essential qualifications for
appointment to a post is for an employer to decide, according to the needs and
nature of work. Paragraph No. 9 of the judgment of the Apex Court in
Maharashtra Public Service Commission, through its Secretary (supra)
“9. The essential qualifications for appointment to a post are for the
employer to decide. The employer may prescribe additional or desirable
qualifications, including any grant of preference. It is the employer who is
best suited to decide the requirements a candidate must possess
according to the needs of the employer and the nature of work. The court
cannot lay down the conditions of eligibility, much less can it delve into
the issue with regard to desirable qualifications being at par with the
essential eligibility by an interpretive rewriting of the advertisement.
Questions of equivalence will also fall outside the domain of judicial
review. If the language of the advertisement and the rules are clear, the
Court cannot sit in judgment over the same. If there is an ambiguity in
the advertisement or it is contrary to any rules or law the matter has to go
back to the appointing authority after appropriate orders, to proceed in
accordance with law. In no case can the Court, in the garb of judicial
review, sit in the chair of the appointing authority to decide what is best
for the employer and interpret the conditions of the advertisement
contrary to the plain language of the same.”
10)     In case of Union of India Vs. Pushpa Rani & Ors., reported in
(2008) 9 SCC 242, the Apex Court has held at paragraph No. 37 as follows:-
“37.  Before parting with this aspect of the case, we consider it
necessary to reiterate the settled legal position that matters relating to
creation and abolition of posts, formation and structuring/restructuring of
cadres, prescribing the source/mode of recruitment and qualifications,
criteria of selection, evaluation of service records of the employees fall
within the exclusive domain of the employer. What steps should be taken
for improving efficiency of the administration is also the preserve of the
employer. The power of judicial review can be exercised in such matters
only if it is shown that the action of the employer is contrary to any
constitutional or statutory provision or is patently arbitrary or is vitiated
due to mala fides. The Court cannot sit in appeal over the Judgment of
the employer and ordain that a particular post be filled by direct
recruitment or promotion or by transfer. The Court has no role in
determining the methodology of recruitment or laying down the criteria of
selection. It is also not open to the Court to make comparative evaluation
of the merit of the candidates. The Court cannot suggest the manner in
which the employer should structure or restructure the cadres for the
purpose of improving efficiency of administration.”
11)     On considering the judgments of the Apex Court and the Division Bench
judgment of the Kerala High Court, this Court is of the view that there is no
discrimination or arbitrariness in the respondents prescribing the essential
qualifications required of a candidate, for the post of Law Officer, as the
respondents, as an employer, would know best the type of candidate they
require. Further, this Court does not find the action of the respondents to be
arbitrary by not opening the field for all persons who have passed LLB or gone
through CLAT in times gone by.
12)      In view of the reasons stated above, this Court does not find any
ground to allow the writ petition and the same is dismissed.