The present criminal revision has been filed under Section 397 read
with Section 401 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 being aggrieved
by the order dated 10.03.2021 passed by learned Special Judge, Prevention
of Corruption Act, 1988, whereby he has denied the protection to the
present applicant under Judges Protection Act, 1884 (hereinafter referred
to as the 'Act of 1884').
By the impugned order, the charges for offences under Section 13(1)
(d) and 13(2) of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 and Section 120-B
and 169 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 have been framed against the present
applicant and further the applicant has also challenged the sanction order
dated 26.12.2018 passed by the State Government.
As per prosecution story, one Nathulal S/o Rugga Ji Balai
(hereinafter, the borrower) had taken a loan of Rs.4.95 lakhs for purchasing
a tractor against his agricultural land at Village-Bhamora, District - Ujjain
(MP) bearing survey no.216 admeasuring 5.92 hectare from Punjab
National Bank, Branch Kanthal, Ujjain (hereinafter, the lending bank) in the
year 2004. The said borrower was unable to repay the loan amount and
hence the lending bank on account of non-payment initiated proceeding
under the Madhya Pradesh Lok Dhan (Shodhya Rashiyon Ki Vasuli)
Adhiniyam, 1987. Since the borrower was not able to comply with the
demands of the lending bank, the lending bank initiated RRC proceeding
and the same was forwarded to Collector, Ujjain on 11.07.2012.
The Collector, Ujjain, further delegated the RRC to the present
applicant who was working as 'Tehsildar' ordered for public auction of the
said property. Thereafter the results of the auction were declared and one
Prem Kumar Dangi was declared the highest bidder for Rs.12,11,000/-.
The lending bank agreed to the bidding amount on 12.09.2013. Thereafter,
letters were issued to the borrower and served the borrower regarding the
said bid and upon non-appearance of the borrower, the said auction land
was given to the highest bidder on 03.10.2013 and the loan amount was
accordingly set off by the lending bank. A cheque was accordingly issued
by the lending bank in the name of borrower of the amount left after settling
the dues which was accordingly received by the borrower.
Being aggrieved by the said auction, a complaint was filed by one
Basant Shrivastav, Inspector, Special Police Establishment, wherein it was
alleged that the applicant by misusing her post had auctioned the subject
property at a price much lower than the guideline value and has declared
Prem Kumar Dangi as the highest bidder. Thereafter, based on the
complaint filed by Basant Shrivastav, Special Police Establishment,
Bhopal vide order dated 27.03.2014 allotted the case to Special Police
Establishment, Ujjain for preliminary inquiry. The said case was registered
for the preliminary inquiry by the Special Police Establishment on the
ground that the present applicant while conducting the RRC had auctioned
the land of the borrower bearing survey no.216 admeasuring 3.21 hectare
in an arbitrary manner and colluding with one Prem Kumar Dangi, the land
was sold at Rs.12.11 lakhs a price lower than the guideline value due to
which the borrower had to bear loss of Rs.33 lakhs. The applicant has been
made accused of misusing her post and auctioning the subject property at a
price lower than the guideline value.
On the basis of above mentioned complaint, a case was registered
against the present applicant bearing Crime No.177/2014 by the Special
Police Establishment, Ujjain, under Sections 169 and 120 of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 and Sections 13(1)(d) and 13(2) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988. After committal of the case to Special Judge,
Prevention of Corruption Act, Ujjain, Special Case Lokayukt No.01/2020
was registered under the PC Act. Vide impugned order, the learned Special
Judge has framed the charges against the present applicant and has also
rejected the plea of the present applicant that she is entitled for the
protection under Judges Protection Act.
Senior Advocate for the applicant while assailing the impugned
order submits that the applicant was working as Tehsildar in the Revenue
Court and therefore the applicant was entitled for protection under the
Judges Protection Act. In support of his contention, he relied upon certain
provisions of the Act whose relevant excerpts are as under:
2. Definition - In this act, "Judge" means not only
proceeding, a definitive judgment, or a judgment
which, if not appealed against, would be definitive,
judgment as is referred to in clause(a).
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
provisions of sub-section (2), no court shall entertain
or continue any civil or criminal proceeding against
any person who is or was a Judge for any act, thing
or word committed, done or spoken by him when, or
in the course of, acting or purporting to act in the
discharge of his official or judicial duty or function.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall debar or affect
in any manner the power of the Central Government
India or any High Court or any other authority under
any law for the time being in force to take such action
(whether by way of civil, criminal, or departmental
proceedings or otherwise) against any person who is
The aforesaid provisions of the Act, 1985, makes it clear that what is
provided under the Act is an additional protection afforded to a Judge apart
from that in other institutions. Judicial Officers Protection Act, 1850 was
intended to provide greater protection to the Magistrates and the others
acting judicially. The Act also provides protection only in the matter of
civil actions.
Counsel for the applicant submitted that the applicant being a
Revenue Officer holds status of Judge as defined in Section 2 of the Act by
virtue of Section 31 of MPLR Code. While making reference to Section 2
of the Act he submitted that the definition of Judge as given in section 2
thereof is wide enough to include Revenue Officer upon him status of the
court has been conferred by Section 31 of the MPLR Code. He has further
proceeding a definitive judgment and, therefore, he was entitled to
additional protection under Section 3(1) of the Act.
The provisions of the Act goes to show that for the purpose to seek
protection of Judges Protection Act, the person concerned has to show that
the cause of action for filing prosecution against him relates to something
done by him while exercising adjudicatory jurisdiction i.e. to show that he
is deciding the lis as Judicial Officer.
Senior counsel for the applicant did not argue in respect of the
challenge to framing of charge and order of sanction. The only submission
was made that the application filed by the applicant seeking protection
under the Judges Protection Act being a Judge has been erroneously
No other point was argued before us.
Counsel for the State supported the order impugned passed by the
trial Court and submitted that there is no illegality in the order passed by
the Court below.
The question of protection has to be examined from two different
angles. Provisions of section 3(1) not only protects Judges as defined in
Section 2 from civil or criminal proceedings for any act, thing or word
committed, done or spoken by him when, or in the course of, acting in the
discharge of his official duty or function but also extends the protection to
them for any act, thing or word committed, done or spoken by him while
purporting to act in the discharge of his official or judicial duty or function.
Obviously, the protection does not extend to acts purely
administrative/ministerial/extra-judicial/alien to the judicial duty. Any act,
which is not done in the discharge of his judicial duty, is therefore, not
covered by the sub-Section.
In the present case, the allegation against the applicant is that she had
misused her post or position by auctioning the subject property in a much
lower price than the guideline value. Further, it has been found that the
property in question has been sold on a very lower price to one Prem
Kumar Dangi who was her servant and the witness was her husband
namely Ranjit Karnal. Thus, the allegation against the present applicant
pertains to misuse of her post.
The Supreme Court in the case of Union of India vs. K.K. Dhawan
reported in (1993) 2 SCC 56 has enumerated following guidelines in
regard to initiation of proceedings against an officer who had performed
(i) Whether the officer had acted in a manner as would reflect on his
reputation for integrity or good faith or devotion to duty.
(ii) If there is prima facie material to show recklessness or
misconduct in the discharge of his duty.
(iii) If he has acted in a manner which is unbecoming of a Government
servant.
(iv) If he had acted negligently or that he omitted the prescribed
conditions which are essential for the service of the statutory powers.
A coordinate Bench of this Court in the case of Meena Mehra
(Smt.) vs. The Lokayukt Organization and Another reported in ILR
[2011] MP 3019          has held that the petitioner who was working as
Tehsildar entertained application under Section 113 of MP Land Revenue
Code, 1959, although she has no jurisdiction to entertain the same, the
protection does not extend to acts purely administrative/ministerial/extra
judicial/alien to judicial duty. Any act, which is not done in the discharge
of official duty, is not covered by Section 3(1) of the Act.
In the present case, the allegation against the present applicant is for
misusing of her post and office by extending undue benefit to her husband
as well as to her servant, we are of the considered opinion that Trial Court
rightly held that the present applicant was not entitled for protection under
the Judges Protection Act, 1985.
In view of the aforesaid, we do not find any illegality in the order
impugned passed by the Trial Court warranting any interference in the
revisional jurisdiction. Accordingly the present criminal revision stands
dismissed. No order as to costs.