Through: Shri Ajay Singh Bisht, learned Addl. CSC
for the State of Uttarakhand.
1.    By filing this writ petition, the petitioner, an acid attack
victim, has prayed for compensation of Rs. 50,00,000/- for losses,
she suffered due to acid attack on her. She has also prayed for
issuance of a writ Mandamus for making comprehensive
rehabilitation scheme and to pay directly to the Hospitals for
future expenses to be incurred by her in medical procedures that
might be taken. She has also certain other ancillary prayers in the
writ petition.
2.    The facts are not disputed at this stage. Petitioner was
attacked with acid on 29.11.2014 in which petitioner received
third degree burn injuries on her face and chest. She sustained
60% burn injuries on her upper body and knee and she has lost
her right ear. The accused, who attacked the petitioner with acid,
was convicted and sentenced to undergo 10 years rigorous
imprisonment along with a fine of Rs. 20,000/- under Section 326-
A IPC by the learned Sessions Judge, Udham Singh Nagar and
while convicting the accused for the aforesaid offences, the
learned Session Judge, Udham Singh Nagar referred the matter to
District Legal Services Authority for payment of compensation. A
sum of Rs. 1,60,000/- was given by District Programme Officer,
Udham Singh Nagar in compliance of order passed by Criminal
Injury Compensation Board under the Uttarakhand Victim from
Crime Assistance Scheme, 2013. By virtue of interim order dated
24.09.2019 passed by Coordinate Bench of this Court, an
additional compensation of Rs. 1,50,000/- was granted to her.
3.     Learned Addl. CSC for the State would submit that since
the petitioner had already paid the compensation by the District
Legal Service Authority, as per the Scheme and still if petitioner
has any grievance, then she should have filed an appeal before
referred to as “UKSLSA” for brevity), the writ petition is not
maintainable, in view of availability of efficacious alternative
remedy to her. In support of his contention, he has placed
reliance upon the judgement of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the
case of Titaghur Paper Mills Vs. State of Orissa, (1983) 2 SCC
4.     However, this Court has taken recourse of judgment of
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Whirlpool Corporation Vs.
Registrar of Trade Marks, (1998) 8 SCC 1, wherein the Hon’ble
Supreme Court has held that under Article 226 of the Constitution,
the High Court, having regard to the facts of the case, has a discretion to
entertain or not to entertain a writ petition. But the High Court has
imposed upon itself certain restrictions one of which is that if an
effective and efficacious remedy is available, the High Court would not
normally exercise its jurisdiction. But the alternative remedy has been
consistently held by this Court not to operate as a bar in at least four
contingencies, namely, where the writ petition has been filed for the
enforcement of any of the Fundamental Rights or where there has been a
violation of the principle of natural justice or where the order or
proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction or the vires of an Act is
challenged. There is a plethora of case-law on this point ….xxxx.”
5.     No statue book provides for such a bar for entertaining the
writ petition by the High Court. The powers of High Court for
issuing writs under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is very
wide. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid case has held
that a writ petition is maintainable without relegating the poor
litigant to avail alternative efficacious remedy available to him.
Even if, efficacious alternative remedy is available, if there is
breach of fundamental right; or if there is violation of principle of
natural justice and if order or proceedings are wholly without
jurisdiction or the vires of an Act is challenged, the High Court
has power to entertain the writ petition.
6.     In this case, the Court takes into consideration that there is
a breach of fundamental right of the victim petitioner, who is acid
attack survivor. The right to live life with dignity has been
breached in this case. The preamble of the Constitution of India
provides that India is constituted into a sovereign, socialist,
secular, democratic republic and shall provide to its citizen
justice, social, economic and political; liberty of thought,
expression, belief, faith and worship; equality of status and of
opportunity; promoting among them all fraternity assuring the
dignity of the individual and unity and integrity of the Nation.
Dignity of individuals and unity and integrity of the Nation is
kept in the same high pedestal.
7.     Thus, it is clear that the Constitution itself envisages that
dignity of the individual, who is residing in this country, cannot
be breached. The Article 21 of the Constitution provides that no
person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except
according to procedure established by law.
8.    By interpreting Article 21 of the Constitution of India, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court of India held that right to lead a life with
dignity springs from Article 21. In the case of Nipun Saxena Vs.
Union of India (2019) 2 SCC 703, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has
further held that right to education is a fundamental right. By
extending the same principle to this case, this Court is of the firm
opinion that since the petitioner, being an acid attack victim,
whose right to live with dignity protected by the Constitution of
India has definitely been infringed. Hence, the writ petition is
9.     By virtue of order dated 10.01.2020, the Member Secretary,
UKSLSA has submitted that a proposal for compensation as well
as for social and economic rehabilitation. Learned State Counsel
would submit that petitioner should be given compensation
under the Old Scheme and not under the New Scheme which is
implemented from 2018. However, the report submitted by the
Member Secretary, UKSLSA would suggest that the Scheme is
beneficiary scheme and if cause of action survives on the date of
implementation scheme i.e. on 02.10.2018, then benefit of the
scheme should go to the victim. The incident took place on
29.11.2014 much before 2018. But the process of determination of
compensation still continues and the effects of acid is still live as
the victim had to undergo so many reconstructive surgeries of
face, reconstruction of right ear and other medical procedures
and treatment. Thus, for all purposes the cause of action
continues even on 02.10.2018, the enforceability date of scheme in
compliance of the order passed by Hon’ble Supreme Court
passed in the case of Nipun Saxena’s case. Considering this fact,
learned Member Secretary, UKSLSA has also suggested that a
sum of Rs. 23,00,000/- be paid to the petitioner. He has also
suggested that in the light of Section 19 of the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities Act, 2016, the Government may provide some
vocational training programme to the acid attack victims and
may motivate with all possible logistic support to start a business
by the victim, as self employment. We are in the agreement with
the opinion of the learned Member Secretary, SLSA, as regard the
applicability of the new Scheme.
10.   Learned counsel for the petitioner would submit that
amount so suggested by Member Secretary, UKSLSA, is for
medical intervention for the injuries sustained by her but he does
take into consideration the trauma and agony she suffered.
11.   Keeping in view all the aspects, this Court comes to the
conclusion that a sum of Rs. 35,00,000/- would be just, proper
and adequate compensation to the petitioner in addition to the
amount already paid to her. Petitioner should also be given some
vocational training if she is willing to undertake, as it is brought
to the notice of this Court that in the meantime, the petitioner has
completed     her   Post   Graduation    and   Diploma     in   Mass
Communication and now doing a job with Flipkart. In addition to
the aforesaid amount of compensation and vocational training,
the State Government shall also provide free medical treatment to
the petitioner, as it is also brought to our notice that petitioner
has to undergo further surgeries, which require skin grafting. In
case, hospitals situated and operating in the State of Uttarakhand,
do not have proper technology, equipments or doctors to carry
out the surgeries that is require to be meted out to her, then the
State of Uttarakhand shall be under an obligation to get her
treated in any hospital at New Delhi or in PGI, Chandigarh. The
entire expenses of petitioner for operation, travelling and stay
shall be borne by the State of Uttarakhand. Travelling and stay
expenses of an attendant of petitioner shall also be borne by the
State of Uttarakhand. The Member Secretary, UKSLSA is directed
to release and transfer a sum of Rs. 35,00,000/- (Rupees Thirty
Five Lakh only) in the name of petitioner through RTGS / NEFT
after expiry of the limitation for filling the intra court appeal.
With the aforesaid observations, the writ petition is allowed.
(Grant urgent certified copy of this judgment, as per Rules)