2.     The appellant – claimants are aggrieved by the order dated 24.09.2019 passed by the
High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh whereby the compensation of
Rs.43,75,000/-, awarded by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Karnal (for short, `the
Tribunal’), has been substantially reduced to Rs.16,57,600/-.
3.     The deceased – Pyara Singh was the husband of appellant No.1, father of appellant
Nos.2 to 3 i.e. the minor children, and son of appellant Nos.4 to 5 i.e. his mother and father.
4.     On 12.11.2014, when Pyara Singh was driving his motorcycle bearing No.PB-39E-
2372 along with his friend Mukhtiar Singh (pillion rider), a JCB bearing registration No.HR-
45A-1630, driven by respondent No.2 – Sanjay came from the opposite side of the road and
crashed into the motorcycle. As a result of the accident, Pyara Singh sustained multiple
injuries which led to his instant death. His friend Mukhtiar Singh was also severely injured.
5.     It is not in dispute that the deceased was 25 years’ old and was hale and hearty. He
was stated to be working as a contractor for lifting of earth and was earning Rs.50,000/- per
month. It has also come on record that the deceased had purchased a Tractor bearing
registration No.HR-05-AL-3294 for which he had taken a loan of Rs.3,90,533/- from Kotak
Mahindra Bank. The deceased was regularly paying the monthly instalment of
Rs.11,550/towards the tractor’s loan from 10.03.2014 onwards and the entire loan liability
was discharged by 24.03.2015 with payment being made even after his death.
6.     Keeping in mind the rate at which EMI was being paid, the Tribunal held that the
deceased must be earning at least Rs.25,000/- per month prior to his death in the accident.
After taking ¼th of monthly income of the deceased towards personal expenses, the Tribunal
applied multiplier of 18 and assessed the total compensation as Rs.43,75,000/-. The High
Court, unfortunately, overlooked the factors relied upon by the Tribunal to assess the
monthly income of the deceased at Rs.25,000/- per month. The High Court came to the
conclusion that the mere fact that the deceased had paid instalments of the loan could not
itself be an evidence that the money actually represented his income or can form the basis
for assessment of income of the deceased at Rs.25,000/- per month. Taking into
consideration the Notification issued by the State of Haryana, fixing minimum wage at the
relevant time, the High Court assessed the income of the deceased at Rs.7,000/- per month,
and on this premise, as stated above, the compensation was reduced.
7.      We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the parties and carefully
perused the material placed on record.
8.      Though, there is no evidence on record regarding the income of deceased Pyara
Singh, however, from the testimony of P.W.4 - Amar Kumar, Assistant Manager, Kotak
Mahindra Bank Limited, it is clear that the deceased - Pyara Singh was regularly making the
payment of Rs.11,550/- as instalment to discharge his loan liability towards the tractor. At
this rate, the entire loan was paid back within a year or so. That clearly establishes the
earning capacity of the deceased. It is also the case of the appellants-claimants that the
deceased was working as a contractor and was earning Rs.50,000/- per month. The Tribunal
adopted a balanced approach and keeping in view factors like : (i) the payment of monthly
instalment of Rs.11,550/- towards loan of the tractor; (ii) Maintaining a family comprising of
wife, two minor children and parents; (iii) Affording tractor and motorcycle; (iv) that the
deceased was working as a contractor; assessed his income at Rs.25,000/- per month.
9.      In our considered view, the Tribunal’s approach is quite justified in law as well as on
facts. In the summary proceedings where the approach of the Tribunal’s determination must
be in conformity with the object of the welfare legislation, it was rightly held that the monthly
income of the deceased could not be less than Rs.25,000/-. The reason assigned by the
High Court to reduce the monthly income of the deceased is totally cryptic and has no
rationale. The Notification of Minimum Wages Act can be a guiding factor only in a case
where there is no clue available to evaluate monthly income of the deceased. Where positive
evidence has been led, no reliance on the Notification could be placed, particularly when it
was nobody’s case that the deceased was a labourer as presumed by the High Court.
10.     For the reasons aforestated, we are inclined to allow these appeals. Ordered
11.     Consequently, the judgment and order dated 24.09.2019 passed by the High Court of
Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh is set aside and the Award dated 12.01.2016 passed by
the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Karnal is restored. The appellants are held to be entitled
to the compensation in accordance with the Tribunal’s Award. The balance amount, after
adjusting the amount which has already been paid, shall be deposited along with interest
before the Tribunal, within a period of two months from the date of receipt/production of a
copy of this order. The Tribunal shall disburse the said compensation amount to the
appellants as per its Award.
12.     As a sequel to the above, pending interlocutory application also stands disposed of.