Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988 (for short “NDPS Act”) by
detaining the petitioner – detenu under the powers conferred
under Section 3(1) of the NDPS Act.
2.     Heard learned senior advocate Mr.Asim Pandya assisted
by the learned advocate Mr.Kirit Chaudhari for the detenue and
learned AGP Ms.Moxa Thakkar for the respondent State and
perused the materials placed on record.
3.     Learned senior advocate Mr.Asim Pandya for the detenu
has vehemently submitted that the detenu was arrested in
connection with the offence registered under the NDPS Act
solely on the basis of the statement of the co-accused. It is
submitted that the detenu is holding a Medical License and a
Medical Store. He has submitted that the detenu was released
on anticipatory bail by this Court, considering the facts that
there was no connecting materials available against the
detenu for the alleged offence under the NDPS Act. He has
further submitted that the alleged offence is a solitary offence
and the offence alleged against the detenu is regarding selling
of cough syrup in huge quantity to the other accused. He has
submitted that the documents supplied to the detenu is not
legible one and no proper document was supplied to the
detenu. He has also vehemently submitted that the provisions
contained in the prevention of Prevention of Illicit Trafficking in
NDPS Act has not been followed. He has also submitted that
the FIR was filed on 04.10.2020 and the detention order has
been passed on 29.11.2021. He has also submitted that there
is no subjective satisfaction of the authority. He has also
submitted that since insufficient material was was found by
this Court, this Court has enlarged the detenu on anticipatory
bail. He has submitted that the entire act is technical one and
therefore it needs to be strictly interpreted. He has also
submitted that there is no liveline between the alleged offence
with the detenu. He has also submitted that this is not a case
of affecting the public order. He has submitted that the
preventive detention must fall within the four corners of Article
21 read with Article 22 and the Statute in question. He has
submitted that the entire exercise undertaken by the detaining
authority is merit less and since there is no strict compliance
with the provisions of the act in question, the detention order
itself is illegal ab initio. He has prayed to allow the petition. He
has relied upon the order of the Division Bench of this Court
dated 31.08.2020 passed in Letters Patent Appeal No.454 of
2020 in Special Civil Application No.8091 of 2020 in case of
Vijay alias Ballu Bharatbhai Ramanbhai Patani (Kaptiywala) V.s
State of Gujarat. He has relied upon the following decisions:-
(1) In case of Rajesh Nagoraj Parate Through Wife
Lalitaben Rajesh Parate Vs. State of Gujarat reported in
(2) In case of Banka Sneha Sheela Vs. State of Telangana
reported in [2021] 0 AIR(SC) 3656.
4.     Per contra, learned AGP Ms.Moxa Thakkar has supported
the impugned order passed by the authority and submitted
that the offence against the detenu is under the NDPS Act and
considering the effect of the Narcotic Drugs, the authority has
properly passed the impugned order and which deserves to be
upheld by this Court.
5.     In case of Banka Sneha Sheela (Supra) the Apex Court
in para 14 has observed as under:-
“14. There can be no doubt that what is alleged in the five FIRs
pertain to the realm of ‘law and order’ in that various acts of
cheating are ascribed to the Detenu which are punishable
under the three sections of the Indian Penal Code set out in the
five FIRs. A close reading of the Detention Order would make it
clear that the reason for the said Order is not any
apprehension of widespread public harm, danger or alarm but
is only because the Detenu was successful in obtaining
anticipatory bail/bail from the Courts in each of the five FIRs. If
a person is granted anticipatory bail/bail wrongly, there are
well-known remedies in the ordinary law to take care of the
situation. The State can always appeal against the bail order
granted and/or apply for cancellation of bail. The mere
successful obtaining of anticipatory bail/bail orders being the
real ground for detaining the Detenu, there can be no doubt
that the harm, danger or alarm or feeling of security among
the general public spoken of in Section 2(a) of the Telangana
Prevention of Dangerous Activities Act is make believe and
totally absent in the facts of the present case.”
6.     Admittedly in this case, the FIR came to be lodged
against the present detenu on the basis of the statement of co-
accused to the effect that they have bought this cough syrup
from the shop of the detenu. It is also admitted fact that in the
alleged offence, this Court has granted anticipatory bail to the
detnu on the basis that no connecting material was available
against the present detenu. The order of this Court granting
the bail to the detenu no appeal has been filed by the State
nor any application for cancellation thereof has been filed by
the State. It also appears from the record that except the sole
instance of alleged selling of cough syrup to the other co-
accused, there is no other offence alleged to be committed by
the detenu in respect of NDPS Act. Of-course, even there is no
material placed on record to suggest that in reality such cough
syrups were sold by the detenu to the other accused.
7. At this juncture, it is worthwhile to refer to the provisions of
Prevention of Illicit Trafficking in NDPS Act, 1988 especially
Section 2(e) which reads as under:
“(e) “illicit traffic”, in relation to narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, means—
(i) cultivating any coca plant or gathering any portion of
(ii) cultivating the opium poppy or any cannabis plant;
(iii) engaging in the production, manufacture, possession,
sale, purchase, transportation,
warehousing, concealment, use or consumption, import inter-
State, export inter-State, import into
India, export from India or transhipment, of narcotic drugs or
psychotropic substances;
(iv) dealing in any activities in narcotic drugs or
psychotropic substances other than those
provided in sub-clauses (i) to (iii); or
(v) handling or letting any premises for the carrying on of
any of the activities referred to in sub-clauses (i) to (iv), other
than those permitted under the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985), or any rule or
order made, or any condition of any licence, term or
authorisation issued, thereunder and includes—
(1) financing, directly or indirectly, any of the aforementioned
(2) abetting or conspiring in the furtherance of or in support of
doing any of the aforementioned activities; and
(3) harbouring persons engaged in any of the aforementioned
Under Section 3 of the Illicit Trafficking in NDPS Act, 1988,
powers have been vested to the Central Government and State
Government or any officer of the State Government not below
the rank of a Joint Secretary to that Government and specially
empowered for that purposes by the Central Government or
not below the rank of Secretary of the State Government.
Under Sub-section 2 of Section 3, if any order is passed by the
State Government or by its officer then the State Government
shall have to, within 10 days, forward the report to the Central
Government in this respect. There is also provisions of
constitution of any advisory board under Section 9 thereof.
However, in the present case, prima facie doubtful as to the
involvement of the detenu which may fall under the definition
of Illicit Trafficking in NDPS Act under Section 2(e).
8.      Having heard learned advocates for the parties and
considering the facts and circumstances of the case, it appears
that the subjective satisfaction arrived at by the detaining
authority cannot be said to be legal, valid and in accordance
with law, inasmuch as the offences alleged in the FIR cannot
have any baring on the public order as required under the Act
and other relevant penal laws are sufficient enough to take
care of the situation and that the allegations as have been
levelled against the detenu cannot be said to be germane for
the purpose of bringing the detenu within the meaning of
section 3(1) of the Act. Unless and until, the material is there
to make out a case that the person has become a threat and
menace to the Society so as to disturb the whole tempo of the
society and that all social apparatus is in peril disturbing public
order at the instance of such person, it cannot be said that the
detenue is a person within the meaning of section 3(1) of the
Act. Except general statements, there is no material on record
which shows that the detenu is acting in such a manner, which
is dangerous to the public order. In this connection, it will be
fruitful to refer to a decision of the Supreme Court in Pushker
Mukherjee v/s. State of West Bengal [AIR 1970 SC 852],
where the distinction between 'law and order' and 'public
order' has been clearly laid down. The Court observed as
“Does the expression "public order" take in every kind of
infraction of order or only some categories thereof ? It is
manifest that every act of assault or injury to specific
persons does not lead to public disorder. When two
people quarrel and fight and assault each other inside a
house or in a street, it may be said that there is disorder
but not public disorder. Such cases are dealt with under
the powers vested in the executive authorities under the
provisions of ordinary criminal law but the culprits
cannot be detained on the ground that they were
disturbing public order. The contravention of any law
always affects order but before it can be said to affect
public order, it must affect the community or the public
at large. In this connection we must draw a line of
demarcation between serious and aggravated forms of
disorder which directly affect the community or injure
the public interest and the relatively minor breaches of
peace of a purely local significance which primarily
injure specific individuals and only in a secondary sense
public interest. A mere disturbance of law and order
leading to disorder is thus not necessarily sufficient for
action under the Preventive Detention Act but a
disturbance which will affect public order comes within
the scope of the Act.”
9.      In the case of Rekha Versus State of Tamilnadu
reported in (2011) 5 SCC 244, the Hon’ble Supreme
Court has observed in paragraph No.30 as under:-
“30. Whenever          an    order      under    a      preventive
detention law is challenged one of the questions
the court must ask in deciding its legality is :
Was the ordinary law of the land sufficient to
deal with the situation ? If the answer is in
the affirmative, the detention order will be
illegal. In the present case, the charge against
the detenu was of selling expired drugs after
changing their labels. Surely the relevant
provisions in the Indian Penal Code and the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act were sufficient to deal
with this situation. Hence, in our opinion, for
this reason also the detention order in question
was illegal.”
10.     In view of above, I am inclined to allow this petition,
because simplicitor registration of FIR by itself cannot have
any nexus with the breach of maintenance of public order and
the authority cannot have recourse under the Act and no other
relevant and cogent material exists for invoking power under
section 3(1) of the Act. In the result, the present petition is
hereby allowed and the impugned order of detention dated
29.11.2021 passed by the respondent – detaining authority is
hereby quashed and set aside. The detenu is ordered to be set
at liberty forthwith if not required in any other case. Direct
service is permitted.