A registered Trade Union having its registered office near
subsequently shifted to Bipani Bitan Complex, Room No. 344 (2nd
represented by its Secretary- Sri Durgesh Ranjan Choudhury
1.    The State of Tripura, represented by the Secretary, Finance
Department to the Government of Tripura, Civil Secretariat, P.O.
2.    Tripura Road Transport Corporation Limited,(A Govt. of
District- West Tripura, represented by its Managing Director
All Tripura EPS Pensioners’ and Employees’ Association,
A registered Trade Union having its registered office near
subsequently shifted to Bipani Bitan Complex, Room No. 344 (2 nd
represented by its Secretary- Sri Durgesh Ranjan Choudhury
1.    The State of Tripura,represented by the Secretary, Finance
Department to the Government of Tripura, Civil Secretariat, P.O.
West Tripura, represented by its Managing Director
All Tripura EPS Pensioners’ and Employees’ Association,
A registered Trade Union having its registered office near
subsequently shifted to Bipani Bitan Complex, Room No. 344 (2 nd
represented by its Secretary- Sri Durgesh Ranjan Choudhury
1.    The State of Tripura, represented by the Secretary, Finance
Department to the Government of Tripura, Civil Secretariat, P.O.
2.    Tripura Rehabilitation and Plantation Corporation Ltd.,
(A Govt. of Tripura Undertaking), Gurkhabasti-799002, Agartala,
District- West Tripura, represented by its Managing Director
All Tripura EPS Pensioners’ and Employees’ Association,
A registered Trade Union having its registered office near
subsequently shifted to Bipani Bitan Complex, Room No. 344 (2 nd
represented by its Secretary- Sri Durgesh Ranjan Choudhury
1.    The State of Tripura, represented by the Secretary, Finance
Department to the Government of Tripura, Civil Secretariat, P.O.
2.    Tripura    Handloom      and    Handicrafts     Development
Corporation Limited (A Govt. of Tripura Undertaking), MBB
Sarani-799007, Agartala, District- West Tripura, represented by its
All Tripura EPS Pensioners’ and Employees’ Association,
A registered Trade Union having its registered office near
subsequently shifted to Bipani Bitan Complex, Room No. 344 (2 nd
represented by its Secretary- Sri Durgesh Ranjan Choudhury
1.    The State of Tripura, represented by the Secretary, Finance
Department to the Government of Tripura, Civil Secretariat, P.O.
Corporation Limited (A Govt. of Tripura Undertaking), Lake
Tripura, represented by its Managing Director
All Tripura EPS Pensioners’ and Employees’ Association,
A registered Trade Union having its registered office near
subsequently shifted to Bipani Bitan Complex, Room No. 344 (2 nd
represented by its Secretary- Sri Durgesh Ranjan Choudhury
1.    The State of Tripura, represented by the Secretary, Finance
Department to the Government of Tripura, Civil Secretariat, P.O.
2.    Tripura Small Industries Corporation Limited (A Govt. of
Agartala, District- West Tripura, represented by its Managing
All Tripura EPS Pensioners’ and Employees’ Association,
A registered Trade Union having its registered office near
subsequently shifted to Bipani Bitan Complex, Room No. 344 (2 nd
represented by its Secretary- Sri Durgesh Ranjan Choudhury
1.    The State of Tripura,
represented by the Secretary, Finance Department to the
Government of Tripura, Civil Secretariat, P.O. New Capital Complex,
2.    Tripura Jute Mills Limited, (A Govt. of Tripura Undertaking),
represented by its Managing Director
All Tripura EPS Pensioners’ and Employees’ Association,
A registered Trade Union having its registered office near
subsequently shifted to Bipani Bitan Complex, Room No. 344 (2 nd
represented by its Secretary- Sri Durgesh Ranjan Choudhury
1.    The State of Tripura, represented by the Secretary, Finance
Department to the Government of Tripura, Civil Secretariat, P.O.
Govt. of Tripura Undertaking), represented by its Managing Director
All Tripura EPS Pensioners’ and Employees’ Association,
A registered Trade Union having its registered office near
subsequently shifted to Bipani Bitan Complex, Room No. 344 (2 nd
represented by its Secretary- Sri Durgesh Ranjan Choudhury
1.    The State of Tripura, represented by the Secretary, Finance
Department to the Government of Tripura, Civil Secretariat, P.O.
represented by its Managing Director
All Tripura EPS Pensioners’ and Employees’ Association,
A registered Trade Union having its registered office near
subsequently shifted to Bipani Bitan Complex, Room No. 344 (2 nd
represented by its Secretary- Sri Durgesh Ranjan Choudhury
1.    The State of Tripura, represented by the Secretary, Finance
Department to the Government of Tripura, Civil Secretariat, P.O.
2.    Tripura Khadi and Village Industries Board, (A Govt. of
Tripura Undertaking), near Colonel Chowmuhani, P.O. Agartala-
799001, District- West Tripura, represented by its Managing
This batch of writ petitions are based on similar set of facts and involve
common question of law, to avoid rigmarole are decided by this common
judgment with the consent of learned counsel appearing for the parties.
2.    By way of filing the above batch of writ petitions, the petitioner i.e. All
Tripura EPS Pensioners’ and Employees’ Association, registered under Trade
Act, 1926, represented by its Secretary has claimed the following reliefs:
“(i) Admit the petition of the Petitioner;
(iii) Call for records relevant to the subject matter;
(iv) Issue writ setting aside/quash the Order F.No. 8(2)-FIN(G)/2015 (P-
II)/846-874, dated 28.08.2020 (Annexure-6) forthwith;
(v)     Issue Writ directing the respondent no. 1 to provide similar Pension
benefit as granted to the other similarly situated Tripura Govt. Undertakings
namely Tripura Board of Secondary Education, Tripura Govt. aided private
(vi) Issue Writ directing the respondent to grant minimum pension of Rs.
8,000/- (Eight Thousand) only to 4 retired pensioners including 2 Family
Pensioners of TRTCL who are the members of petitioner Association;
(vii) Pass such further order or orders, direction or directions as the
Hon’ble Court may deem fit and proper having regards to the circumstances
of the case.”
3.     Background fact is that, the petitioner had approached this court by filing
a writ petition no. WP(C) 1084 of 2019 claiming above quoted similar reliefs.
While disposing of the said writ petition vide order dated 13.09.2019 a Division
Bench of this court had passed the following directions upon the respondents as
well as to the petitioner-organization:-
“Without going into the technicalities and the prayer made by the learned
counsel being innocuous in nature, which the State in any case is duty
bound to decide, we dispose of the instant writ petition with the following
(a) The petitioners shall submit their fresh representation(s) before the
appropriate authority(s).
(b) Upon receipt thereof, the authority shall consider and decide the
same, expeditiously, in accordance with law.
(c) Preferably, such representation shall be considered and decided
within a period of six months from the date of receipt thereof.
(d) Needless to add, if the petitioners are still aggrieved, it shall be open
for them to take recourse to such remedies as are otherwise available in
accordance with law.
(e) All issues including the maintainability of the writ petition in its
present form, are left open.
With these observations and directions, the present writ petition stands
disposed of. Pending application(s), if any, also stands disposed of.”
4.     Consequent to above directions, the State-respondents had constituted an
expert committee. The expert committee had taken personal hearing of the
petitioners through their representative i.e. the Secretary of the petitioners’
organization. The committee had considered the case of each of the
5.     Having gone through the report, it appears that the expert body of the
State-respondents took note of the financial status of each of the Corporation.
The committee also had taken into account the circumstances under which some
of the autonomous bodies like Tripura Board of Secondary Education, the
government aided school and educational institutions, the Agartala Municipal
Corporation and Tripura Social Welfare Advisory Board are being paid pension
benefit at par with the retired government employees. It is found that provision
of providing pension benefit to these organizations has been made either by
adopting the Civil Services (Pension)Rules, 1972 or introducing separate
pension scheme.
6.     It further comes to fore that these autonomous bodies had created
separate scheme and had been able to generate own funds from their own
contribution and opened subscriber accounts with specified schemes of the
organization like LICI, banks etc. On the other hand, the constituted expert
body finds that the petitioners have already retired from service, and are
drawing pension under EPF scheme. After taking into consideration of various
factors, the committee ultimately came to the following conclusion, which has
been reproduced here-in-below in verbatim, for convenience:
“Whereas, after examination of the information provided by the concerned organisation, the
Committee found that in case of majority of the organisations the State Government provides
financial support in the form of “Grants to PSUs or Share Capital or Other grants”. These
organisations are utilizing 90% of those financial support towards meeting up the expenses on
salaries and other retirement benefits of their employees and retirees. Some organisations
are utilizing even upto 100% of the fund they receive from State Government. The committee
also observed that most organisations were supposed to be profit-making but instead they
have been incurring loss since long years. The accumulated loss of many organisations is huge
and such loss have been increasing with each passing day. In such situation, most of the
organisations have informed that they are not in a position to bear the burden of additional
expenditure, consequent upon consideration of the claim of the petitioners, if any, unless the
State Government provides them additional financial support for the purpose. The Committee
also examined the details of financial resources of the State based on the State budget of
2020-21. The observation of Committee are as follows:-
      For the financial year 2020-21, the total budget of Rs. 19891.60 crores.
      During financial year 2020-21, the tentative earnings from State Own Revenue is
Rs. 2743.00 crores.
      The total expenditure on State Head for payment of salary, pension etc., is Rs.
15120.29 crores. The deficit of the expenditure is to be met up from Central
Government assistance.
      Out of the total expenditure on State Head, the expenditure on pension and other
retirement benefits is Rs. 2740.44 crores which is about 18% of the total expenditure of
      The pension expenditure itself is almost equal to the State Own Revenue
predicted during the financial year.
      The Budget deficit for the year 2020-21 is Rs. 511.41 crores.
      The Fiscal Deficit of the Budget for the year 2020-21 is Rs. 2149.07 Crores.
In such a situation, any further increase in the pension liabilities would further degrade
the economy of the State. Hence it is neither possible to consider the claim of the petitioners
nor to bear any additional liabilities on the pensionary matters.
Whereas, in addition to the above, the Committee also observed that pension of the retirees
of the aforesaid organisations is dependent on pension scheme subscribed by the each of
them during his/ her service tenure in the respective organisation. During the service tenure,
an employee has to subscribe to Pension Fund as per the Scheme as in force in the
organisation. Therefore, a pensioner is basically a subscriber of pension benefit. Upon his/her
retirement, a retiree is entitled to quantum of pension based on the fund accumulated by
him/her in the Subscriber account. Since the pension of the employees other than State
Government organisation is primarily controlled by EPFO, therefore, the quantum of the
pension cannot be altered by the State Government. It has to be at par with the rules/
guidelines as laid down by EPFO. Hence, the Committee observed that the State Govt. cannot
be directed to provide additional fund for retrospective revision of pension under EPFO. So,
there is no question of revising EPF pension at higher rates on retrospective basis.
Whereas, the Committee further observed that till June, 2018 the State Government followed
the policy of “Defined benefit” mode of pension payment under erstwhile CCS (Pension) Rules
1972 as adopted in Tripura. Under that mode, there had been substantial increase in pension
expenditure over last several financial years as compared to decline of revenue receipts. To
cope up with this expenditure scenario, the State Government opted to introduce New
Pension Scheme with effect from 1st July, 2018. The New Pension Scheme is based on “Defined
Contributition” mode which is synonymous with pension system under the EPS. The
Committee observed that it would neither be logical nor possible to revert back to the policy
of “Defined Benefit” mode of pension for already retired employees of PSUs etc., alike the
Whereas, the Committee also considered the legal concerns associated with the claim of the
petitioners. In this regard, Supreme Court judgement dated 25.04.2003 in A.K. Bindal vs Union
of India has been perused by the Committee. The Committee observed that the Hon’ble Apex
Court has observed that the legal status of a Govt. Company is not different from any other
company registered under the Act. The fact that the majority of shares of a Govt. company are
held by the State Govt. does not make any difference. As such employees of Government
company are not employees of the State Govt. Being employees of the company it is the
responsibility of the company to pay them salary and if the company is sustaining losses
continuously over a period and does not have the financial capacity to revise or enhance the
pay scale, the employees cannot claim any legal right to ask for a direction to the Govt. to
meet the additional expenditure which may be incurred on account of revision of pay scales.
The Committee observed that pension being a derivative of pay, it is not feasible to allow
revised pension to the retirees of PSUs etc. retrospectively in violation of the guidelines laid
down by EPFO.
The Committee also observed that in a similar matter relating to WP(C) 160/2019 filed by
Sri Hiranmoy Bagchi, an employee retired from TRTC, the Hon’ble High Court has observed
“…. though the committee did suggest framing of the pension scheme for the
employees of TRTC, it was clearly provided that the corporation is not in a position to
weigh to burden of any such pension liability. In other words the surplus funds
required for making such additional responsibility must come from the Government.
The Finance Department examined the scheme and made two pertinent
observations. Firstly, it was pointed out that even in the existing condition nearly 90%
of the funds of the corporation come from Government and only 10% is generated
through its own revenue. Any further responsibility to pay pension would put burden
on the Government exchequer which the Government is unwilling to carry. Second
pertinent observation was that the Government of Tripura itself had replaced old
pension scheme by new pension scheme envisaging contribution from the employer as
well as employee.
It was therefore, not found feasible to introduce the pension scheme in the
original format for the employees of the TRTC. Reasons cited by the Government for
not been able to frame a pension scheme for the petitioners and other employees of
TRTC cannot be faulted. In absence of some other valid reasons directions contrary to
such informed consideration and decision making process cannot issued.
Thus, the Committee does not consider the claim of the petitioners.
Now, therefore, in compliance to Order dated 13-09-2019 of the Ld. Division Bench of the
Hon’ble High Court in WP(C) 1084/2019 followed by the representation submitted by the
petitioners and basing on the Report of the 5-Member Committee as constituted by the State
Government, the claim of the petitioner(s) in the writ petition vide No. WP(C) 1084/2019
cannot be agreed to.”
7.     I have perused the entire report of the committee. I have also heard
learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and the learned counsel appearing
on behalf of the corporation as well as the State-respondents.
8.     Considering the submissions and the reliefs claimed by the petitioners, in
the opinion of this court, two questions emerge for discussion and
determination, (i) whether the court can direct the State government to provide
necessary fund to the corporation; (ii) whether the court can determine the
amount of pension an employee may be entitled.
9.     It reveals that all the corporations are government undertakings. The
service conditions including pension scheme of the employees of these
corporations are governed by their respective statutes. According to reports of
the expert committee all the corporations are utilizing the funds provided by the
State government even to the extent of 100%, and have been running in loss,
though, these organizations are supposed to be profit making as observed by the
expert committee.
10. In this situation, in my opinion, the employees of these statutory
organizations cannot claim, as a matter of right, the pensionary benefits, as
provided to few of the corporations who have been able to generate their own
funds with one-time support from the state government. Furthermore, the
employees of the present batch of writ petitions cannot be treated equally to the
employees of those organizations whose pension schemes have been introduced
under different schemes with the assistance of some other organizations like
LICI, bank, etc., while the pension of the members of the petitioner’s
organization is determined on the basis of the pension scheme subscribed by
each of them during his/her service tenure in the respective organization and are
primarily controlled and regulated by EPFO. As such, the petitioners cannot
complain of discrimination having regard to the equity clause enshrined under
Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
11. Providing grants or other benefits to any of the organizations is a matter
of policy decision of the government, and in the opinion of this court, the court
cannot direct the State or its instrumentalities to formulate certain policy
because it would have a scaring effect having huge financial implication. For
this reason, it should be left to the expert body, which, in this case was duly
constituted in compliance with a direction of this court, as stated above, and
accordingly, the committee submitted its report after taking due hearing from
the petitioners.
12. Needless to say, grant of pensionary benefit is not a one-time payment.
Extension of such benefit is a recurring expenditure and liability would be
continuous involving huge government exchequer. In this scenario, it is
ultimately the state government and the corporation to take a policy decision as
to whether such benefits should be provided to its employees or not. It is
outside the court’s jurisdiction to make a roving enquiry as regards the fund
status of the respective corporation or to chose a scheme suitable to the
employees of such corporation without the aid and advice of the expert body. It
is settled proposition of law that the interference of the judiciary to such a
policy matter having serious financial implication and/or having a cascading
effect is not at all warranted and justified.
13. Added to it, the writ court while exercising the power of judicial review
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India will not as a court of appeal sit
over the well-reasoned report of the expert body following the well-neigh
principle of self-restraint in the matter of policy decisions of the government.
As a logical corollary, both the questions set out here-in-above for decision
have been answered in negative.
14. In the light of above discussion and the reasons thereof, this court is
unable to accept the contentions raised and reliefs claimed by the petitioner, and
accordingly, all these batch of writ petitions stand dismissed. However, there
shall be no order as to costs. Pending application(s), if any, also stands