The Court is convened through Video Conferencing.
Heard learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, learned
counsel appearing for the State of Telangana and carefully perused
the material available on record.
The main grievance of the petitioner in this Special Leave
Petition is that the High Court while allowing an application filed
by him under Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
granting anticipatory bail, directed the Petitioner to comply with
the  Condition    No.(iii)  with  regard   to  cancellation  of   the
registered sale deed executed by him and return the money received
from the complainant. The said condition is reproduced below:­
(iii) “The petitioner/accused shall cooperate in the
investigation and shall furnish all the registered
documents before the investigating authorities and he
shall take steps to cancel the registered sale deeds
executed in favour of the vendees within two months from
today, and shall also return the consideration amount
received through the said registered sale deeds within two
months from today, failing which, liberty granted to the
petitioner shall stand cancelled automatically and he
shall be taken into custody forthwith.”
We are, prima facie, of the considered view that the High
Court ought not to have imposed the said Condition No.(iii), while
granting  anticipatory   bail  to   the petitioner,   as  it   would
tantamount to adversely affect the rights of the parties to the
registered documents, which can be adjudicated upon by a Civil
Court only.
In addition to the above, in our opinion, a registered sale
deed cannot be cancelled unilaterally by one party to the said
document in purported compliance of the direction given by the High
Court and thereby adversely affecting the rights of the purchasers,
who are not a party before the High Court.
In view of the above, in our considered opinion, ends of
justice would be met if the said condition is deleted from the
impugned order.
Accordingly, we delete the said condition.
The impugned Order of the High Court is modified to the extent
indicated above.
We make it clear that the remaining conditions as contained in
the impugned Order dated 8­6­2021 shall remain intact.
The Special Leave Petition is disposed of in the afore­stated
terms.