An open letter to the Hon’ble Chief Justice of India calling for setting aside Order
dated 31.01.2021 bearing no. 22016/12/2019-CIS-IV of MHA and to restrain
further suspension of internet access at four border points- Singhu, Ghazipur,
Tikri, and their adjoining areas in National Capital Territory of Delhi.
in short, the period was so far like the present period,
that some of its noisiest authorities insisted on its being received,
for good or for evil, in the superlative degree of comparison only.”
On January 10, 2020, the whole nation rejoiced when the Hon’ble Supreme Court
of India in the exercise of its power expanded the scope of Article 19 (1) (a) of our
Indian Constitution and held that the Right to Internet access is a Fundamental
Right of citizens of India.1 Theoretically, the Right to Internet access exists in the
“new India”, however, practically we are still thriving in the dungeon of the past
where the demand for existence of the Right to Internet access should label us
non compos mentis.
The “state-of-the-art” political scenario of the year 2021 is witnessing a paradigm
shift wherein there has been incessant vilification and ostracization of the Farmers
protesting against the Three Farm Laws for over 6 months. Aggravating the issue
further, many mainstream media channels are determined to change their names
from “Farmers” or “Ann-daatas” to “Terrorists” or “Khalistanis”2.
The Farmers protest simmering since the past sixty-four days at the three protest
venues have easily become the nation’s biggest protest with Singhu Border being
its focal point alongside Tikri and Ghazipur Border. On 26th January, 2021, the
whole country was shaken as they witnessed the clash between the farmer
protestors and the Delhi police. Who knew this would entail into opening the
flood gate of disproportionate action against the farmers!
On 29th January for the first time, the protest venue faced the brunt of violence
from the local hoodlums who turned the site into a soft spot for violence and there
followed a series of unfortunate events.3 Around 200 men claiming to be local
residents barged into the protest site at Singhu Border to vacate the area as has
been reported by Hindustan Times and several other online and print media.
They pelted stones, damaged properties, and attacked the protestors (men,
women, elderly- no bar) despite the presence of heavy security of the police.4 The
outcome was the arrest of 44 people5, and various criminal cases including an
attempt to murder being registered in Alipur police station. The outcome was
also an Internet shutdown- much to our dismay!
The state of fear and absolute shock has aggravated and further intensified with
the Home Ministry’s order of Internet shut down dated 29.01.2021 from 11pm
29.01.2021 till 11pm- 31.01.2021 (First Order of shutdown) which eventually got
extended by the order dated 31.01.2021 bearing no. 22016/12/2019-CIS-IV,
approved by Union Home Secretary and passed by Deputy Secretary, Ministry of
Home Affairs, as Reference Letter bearing no. 3304/X-Spl. Cell from C.P. Delhi,
Anuradha Bhasin v. Union of India and Ors. WP (Civil) No. 1031 of 2019
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/an-insult-that-farmers-treated-as-terrorists-called-khalistani-says-sanjay-
raut/articleshow/79474242.cms; https://www.newindianexpress.com/thesundaystandard/2020/nov/29/my-son-is-
3 https://www.thequint.com/news/india/farmers-protest-singhu-border-scuffle-with-locals
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/delhi/delhi-mayhem-at-singhu-protest-site-as-locals-clash-with-
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/44-arrested-in-singhu-border-violence/articleshow/80592909.cms
in the exercise of powers conferred under Section 2(1) of Temporary Suspension
of Telecom Services (Public Emergency or Safety Rules, 2017 which states: ‘in
interest of maintaining Public Safety and averting public emergency, it is
necessary and expedient to order, the temporary suspension of Internet Services
in the Areas of Singhu Border, Ghazipur and Tikri, and their adjoining areas in
the NCT of Delhi from 23:00 Hours on January 31, 2021 to 23: Hours on February
Internet is a basic human right that aids the citizen in expressing their opinions
on global platforms. The internet has a more extensive degree and is an unfilled
jar into which individuals pour its substance in the light. United Nations has even
suggested that Internet be made a Fundamental Right by every country and has
also said that disconnecting people from the internet is a human rights violation
and against international law.6 There is a Draft Resolution on the subject by the
Human Rights Council of the United Nations which was presented in the
UNHRC General Assembly, 2016 vide its resolution titled “The promotion,
protection and enjoyment of human rights on the Internet”7
The suspension of internet order issued by the MHA is a gross misuse of power
by the Central government and is causing disruption to the protestors and
individuals in exercising their fundamental conferred under Article 19 (1) (a)
which had been upheld by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Anuradha Bhasin v.
Union of India (2020) 3 SCC 637 and Foundation for Media Professionals v.
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and Another (2020) 5 SCC 746. Recently
the 5-Judge Bench of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India, while hearing a case
against abrogation of Article 370, stated- ‘access to the Internet is a fundamental
right under Article 19 of the Constitution, subject to some restrictions and said
freedom of the press is a valuable and sacred right’. It said, ‘magistrates while
passing prohibitory orders, should apply their mind and follow the doctrine of
Further, the Order issued by the MHA, is bad in the eyes of law and will not hold
water when put to test of ‘Wednesbury Principle’, i.e., Principle to test the
Unreasonableness of the any legal document, which scratches the Fundamental
Constitutional values. Since 29th January 2021, the protest sites have been heavily
guarded by police where the entry has been completely blocked, the roads (public
property) have been dug up, barricading has been increased to four layers on the
main highway connecting Delhi with Haryana, heavy deployment of
paramilitary forces adding up to the heavily charged environment.8 Under the
garb of maintaining peace and security, protesting farmers are being attacked,
castigated and also have been facing scarcity of food and water supply due to
road blocks and internet shutdown9. Ghaziabad’s additional district magistrate
(city) Shailendra Kumar Singh asked protesters to end their two-month-long sit-
https://www.wired.com/2011/06/internet-a-human-right/
https://digitallibrary.un.org/record/845728?ln=en
https://www.hindustantimes.com/india-news/police-cut-off-singhu-border-from-capital-101612125355962.html
https://www.thehindu.com/news/cities/Delhi/farmers-face-food-water-scarcity-due-to-road-
in and vacate the spot at the earliest or face action10, as if this approach of the
establishment against the farmers was not enough. Since 1st February 2021, the
government has turned the protest sites especially the Delhi-Ghazipur border
into a fortress where it seems like they are waging war against their own men.
Embedding more than 2000 iron nails, multi-layer metal barricades, cement
walls, and heavily armed security officials- these cannot be considered as law-
and-order situations. This should be rather termed as fortification!11 These
activities are depriving the protesting farmers of their basic human rights and are
in gross violation of the Right to Life enshrined under Article 21 of the
Constitution. This is also setting a very wrong portrayal of India and putting our
nation in a very bad light before the world.
The fourth pillar of democracy which is the Media are also being restricted at the
protest site and hindered by the police from recording their brazen conduct
towards the farmers at the site. On 30th January 2021, a freelance journalist was
assaulted and arrested by the police and sent to judicial custody the next day,
who however got out on bail on 2nd February, 2021.
As internet services remain suspended in and around the protest venues and its
adjoining areas for the sixth consecutive day, farmers are rightly convinced that
their voices are being shunned down and only one-sided narrative of the
government is being pushed forward, which is a clear attack on the fundamental
values of the Constitution.
Under such unsettling circumstance, the internet is the only constitutional tool
for the farmers and every citizen to bring forth their constantly changing status
quo at the protest sites. Therefore, to get into the crux of the matter before there
is any unpardonable travesty of justice and violation of human rights, it is the
obligation of the Hon’ble Supreme Court to prevent such colorful use of power
by the Government of India.
Furthermore, the plight of the farmers is worsening because of the biased
reporting by few mainstream media channels. It is further denigrating the
peaceful protest and is only adding fuel to the blazing fire. Labeling farmers as
“terrorists” by the mainstream media and airing provocative content is a pressing
issue which the Hon’ble Supreme Court is also currently dealing with. On
28.01.2021, My Lordship while hearing a plea by Jamiat Ulema I Hind against the
communal reporting by media around the Nizamuddin Markaz gathering of
March 2020, expressed his concern on the issue of provocative content of the news
channels going unchecked by the government which he said was “an important
preventive part of the law-and-order situation”. During the hearing in the matter, My
Lord also expressed his anguish and said “controlling the flow of information, which
may cause damage is extremely important and it should be done through preventive
measures.” “There are programs which instigates or impact a community.” This letter
would be incomplete without reiterating My Lord’s following remarks during the
https://www.indiatimes.com/news/india/farmers-protest-updates-ghazipur-singhu-tikri-border-533100.html
https://indianexpress.com/article/cities/delhi/getting-into-protest-sites-now-tough-as-nails-7170623/
hearing– “Fair and truthful reporting is normally not a problem, but the problem
begins when it is used to agitate others and target a particular community.”
There are claims of over 100 farmer protestors including minors who have been
missing since 26th January 2021 as reported by various newspapers.12 There have
been Habeas Corpus Petitions filed and the matter is sub judice before the
Hon’ble Delhi High Court as well.
In a situation like this, the internet shutdown is evidently causing disruption of
communication and increasing the difficulty of thousands of families who are
dependent on the Internet to have access to information on their respective family
members who are missing or are in languishing in jails. Moreover, there are
school students living across the border sites who are unable to attend classes
virtually and working professionals who thrive on the internet while working-
from-home in this pandemic situation, the regular citizen not having to do
anything to do with the protest are ending up being deprived of their
Fundamental rights.
The Hon’ble Kerela High Court in its monumental decision in Faheema Shirin
R.K. & Ors. Vs. State of Kerala & Ors13., has categorically held that right to have
access to Internet becomes the part of right to education as well as right to
privacy under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. It further held: “Right to
access Internet forms part of freedom of Speech and Expression guaranteed under
article 19(1)a) and the Restriction imposed do not come within reasonable
restrictions covered by Article 19(2) of the Constitution of India. The fundamental
freedom under Article 19(1)(a) can be reasonably restricted only for the purposes
mentioned in Article 19(2) and the restriction must be justified on the anvil of
necessity and not the quicksand of convenience or expediency.” Further, the
freedom of trade and commerce through the medium of the internet is also
constitutionally protected under Article 19(1)(g) as held in Anuradha Bhasin v
Therefore, in the light of this situation, we the undersigned urge to the sounding
board of the Nation, guardian of human rights and key custodian of the justice
delivery system to intervene and take active steps over the matter and strike
down further such suspension of Telecom Services Order15 so that the freedom
conferred to every individual as a fundamental right, under The Constitution of
India can be protected and exercised freely.
We have taken the liberty to make a few suggestions and it is earnestly appealed
https://www.tribuneindia.com/news/punjab/over-100-punjab-farmers-missing-since-r-day-rally-205321;
https://www.mha.gov.in/sites/default/files/suspension31st01022021.pdf;
-   Suo moto cognizance of the Hon’ble Supreme Court to suspend the order
of the Ministry of Home Affairs dated 31.01.2021 bearing no.
22016/12/2019-CIS-IV and direct the Ministry of Home Affairs to restrain
from imposing further Internet shutdowns at the protest sites and
adjoining areas.
-   The Judiciary under the guidance of the Chief Justice of India to set up a
- police inaction in controlling the violence and the role of the Delhi
Police in allegedly facilitating the mob attack on 29 January, 2021
and failing to ensure peace and security.
-   Action against the 200 local hoodlums who, as reports state, had
engaged in the manhandling of protestors, and journalists at the
Singhu Protest venue.
-   Strict action against the journalists and the news channels who are
spreading provocative content and fake rumors about the farmers
and their protest.
This must be done immediately in order to stop the gross injustice which is
tarnishing the fabric of our Constitution and causing colossal damage to the sheen
of a democratic country. History will not pardon us if we remain mute spectators
to this violation of human rights.
Signatories to the Letter to Hon’ble CJI