For Respondent(s)         :   Mr. Pankaj Sharma, AAG with
1.    The instant writ petition raises rather uncommon but
intriguing and intricate questions relating to rights of the children
(2 of 37)                [CW-16367/2021]
having their education in a Government school, known as ‘Shri
Hari Singh Sr. Secondary School’, (hereinafter referred to as ‘the
school’) located in Village Pilwa, Panchayat Samiti, Dechu, District
2.    The petitioner No.1 is the School Development Management
Committee (hereinafter referred to as ‘SDMC’) represented by one
of its members while petitioner No.2 & 3 (whose wards are
studying in the school) are parent-members of the SDMC.
3.    It is noteworthy that School Development and Management
Committee is a statutory body constituted under section 21 of
Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009 (for
short ‘the Act of 2009 or the RTE Act’.)
4.    The    petitioners    feel    aggrieved           of   the decision   dated
13.09.2021 taken by the State Government and consequential
decision/order dated 20.09.2021 of the respondent No.2 by which
‘the school’ has been converted to an English Medium School -
5.    For the purpose of the adjudication of the questions that
have cropped up for consideration, brief narration of the facts is
imperative; that the school in the name of Shri Hari Singh Sr. Sec.
School, Pilwa has been functioning in village Pilwa since 1980. The
school has been catering to the educational needs of about 600
children from all sects including girls residing in such village and
nearby villages. The medium of instruction in the school is ‘Hindi’
since its inception.
6.    It will be apposite to give figures of the children taking
education in the school which are as infra :-
(3 of 37)                   [CW-16367/2021]
7.     It is stated by the petitioners that in Panchayat Circle Pilwa,
two    more     Government       schools        other       than    the   one  under
consideration, were established by the State Government during
the last two decades; one being Girls Primary School which was
merged in 2013 and the other school being Government Primary
School, too was merged in the present school in 2012-13.
Resultantly in the entire panchayat circle, the school in question is
the only school which imparts education from class 1 st to class 12th
being home to 601 students who are taking education/instructions
8.     According to the petitioners other schools are situated at a
distance of about 6 to 8 kms from the school in question.
9.     In the budget of 2021-22, Hon’ble the Chief Minister who is
also the Finance Minister of the State, in his speech announced
that within a period of two years about 1200 Mahatma Gandhi
Government Schools will be opened which would impart education
in English in all villages and towns having population of more than
10.    In furtherance of the budget announcement, the SDMC of
the school in its meeting, held on 03.04.2021, discussed the
desirability of an English medium school in the area and
considering the importance and requirement of English medium
(4 of 37)             [CW-16367/2021]
school, and resolved that an English medium school be opened in
the vacant building of the Government school which has been
merged in the school and for the time being, the school be run in
two shifts, out of which first shift be for Hindi medium students
while second shift be kept for English medium.
11.  It was specifically resolved by the SDMC that the existing
school of Hindi medium not be closed.
12.  It will not be out of place to reproduce the resolutions
adopted by the SDMC on 03.04.2021 :-
“izLrko la[;k 1 & ,lMh,elh lfpo Jh nqxkZyky 'kekZ us
izLrko j[kk fd ekuuh; eq[;ea=h egksn; }kjk o"kZ 2021&22 dh
ctV ?kks"k.kk la[;k 37 ds Øe esa 5000 ls vf/kd vkcknh okys leLr
xkaoksa@dLcksa esa egkRek xka/kh vaxzsth ek/;e fo|ky; LFkkfir fd;s tkus
gSA bl Øe esa xzke iapk;r ihyok dh vkcknh 5000 ls vf/kd gSA rFkk
bl ;kstuk esa lwphc) gS vr% bl izLrko ij lnu esa ppkZ dh tk;s vkSj
lq>ko nsdj vko’;d fu.kZ; fy;s tk;s &
ppkZ & lnu esa ppkZ ds mijkUr fuEu fcUnq fudydj lkeus vk;sA
¼i½     xzke iapk;r ihyok ifj{ks= esa dksbZ Hkh jktdh; futh fo|ky;
vaxszth ek/;e dk ugha gSA vr% ;g fo|ky; [kksyk tkuk vfr
vko’;d gSA vaxzsth ek/;e fo|ky; ds fcuk vfHkHkkodksa dks cgqr
ijs’kkuh gks jgh gSA
¼ii½    ;g fo|ky; Hkfo"; esa Jh gfjflag jktdh; mPp ek/;fed
fo|ky; ihyok dks viBuh; jkŒizkŒfoŒ ¼Nk=½ ihyok tks fd iwoZ
esa can gks pqdk gS rFkk ftldk Hkou [kkyh iM+k gS dk mi;ksx
fd;k tk ldrk gSA pwafd ;g fo|ky; blh ih bZ bZ vks fo|ky;
ds Hkw&vf/kdkj okys [kljs ,oa LokfeRo gSA
¼iii½   xzke iapk;r ihyok ds vfrfjDr fgUnh ek/;e ds fo|ky; dk
dksbZ vU; fodYi miyC/k ugha gSA vr% izkjfEHkd rkSj ij blh
fo|ky; mPp izkFkfed Lrj rd nks ikjh] fo|ky; esa lapkfyr
djus dh vuqefr ekaxh tk, ftlesa izFke ikjh esa fgUnh ek/;e o
f}rh; ikjh esa vaxzsth ek/;e dh d{kk,a lapkfyr gksA
fu.kZ; & mijksDr ppkZ ds eq[; fcUnqvksa dks lfEefyr djrs gq, izLrko
cukdj foHkkx ds mPpkf/kdkfj;ksa dks Hksts tkus dk fu.kZ; fy;k x;kA lkFk
(5 of 37)                    [CW-16367/2021]
gh fdlh Hkh fLFkfr esa ¼1&12½ fgUnh ek/;e fo|ky; dks can ugha fd;k
13.   In     the      meantime,         in      furtherance          of    the   budget
announcement          the   State      Government             vide    its  order   dated
13.09.2021 and consequently, the Director, Secondary Education
vide order dated 20.09.2021, permitted/sanctioned conversion of
345 Government Schools to Mahatma Gandhi Government Schools
(English medium), which included the name of the present school
14.   In the wake of conversion of the School to an English
Medium      School,      meeting       of     the      SDMC       was     convened    on
28.09.2021 and the State Government’s proposal of converting
the school to an English medium school was discussed, whereafter
it was resolved that the school as such not be converted to an
English medium school because the conversion would adversely
affect the future of the students, more particularly the girls.
15.   Resolution of the SDMC dated 28.09.2021 reads thus :-
“SDMC cSBd vke lHkk
vkt fnukad 28&09&2021 dks          SDMC      dh vfr vko’;d cSBd
j[kh xbZA cSBd dk eq[; fo"k; egkRek xka/kh vaxzsth ek/;e fo|ky; dks
jk m ek fo Jh gfjflag ihyok ds LFkku ij u [kksydj can iM+h jk izk
fo ¼Nk=½ ihyok ds Hkou esa [kksyh tk;sA
izLrko la[;k 1 &    SDMC    lnL; Jh MkŒ vfuy dqekj us izLrko j[kk
fd xkao vaxzsth ek/;e fo|ky; [kqyuk Lokxr ;ksX; gSA ijUrq Jh
gfjflag jk m ek fo ihyok dks gh vaxzsth ek/;e esa cnyuk Bhd ugha gSA
orZeku bl fo|ky; esa 544 Nk=@Nk=k,a v/;;ujr gS tks fd xjhc
rcds ls vkrs gSA vkSj ftudk 'kS{kf.kd okrkoj.k fgUnh ek/;e ds ;ksX;
gh gSA iwjs xzke iapk;r {ks= esa fgUnh ek/;e ds v/;;u dk vksj dksbZ
fodYi miyC/k ugha gSA vr% eSa izLrko j[krk gWw fd bl ij ppkZ dh
(6 of 37)             [CW-16367/2021]
ppkZ@fopkj foe’kZ & lnu esa bl izLrko ij fopkj foe’kZ fd;k x;k
vkSj fuEu fu.kZ; fy, x,A
¼i½ orZeku esa fgUnh ek/;e esa lapkfyr Jh gfjflag jk m ek fo ihyok
¼220@92½ dks ;Fkkor fgUnh ek/;e j[kk tk,A
¼ii½ blh fo|ky; ds if’peh esa fLFkr [kljk ua 571@4 tks 5 ch?kk
tehu pkjnhokjh ;qDr Hkou cuk gqvk gS tks fd iwoZ esa jk izk fo
¼Nk=½ ihyok lapkfyr FkkA tks can gks pqdk gSA mDr jk m ek fo
ihyok ds v/khu gSA mDr Hkou esa izLrkfor jkŒ egkRek xka/kh
¼vaxzsth ek/;e½ fo|ky; ihyok [kksyk tk ldrk gSA blesa vaxszth
ek/;e fo|ky; lapkfyr djus o [kksyus esa bl fo|ky; dh
SDMC     dks dksbZ vkifÙk ugha gSA
¼iii½ vxj bl fo|ky; ¼jkmekfo Jh gfjflag ihyok½ fgUnh ek/;e dks can
fd;k tkrk gS rks ;g ckfydk cgqy gksus ds dkj.k Nk=kvksa ds
f’k{k.k ij izfrdwy izHkko iM+sxkA
¼iv½    iwoZ esa ,lMh,elh dk;Zdkfj.kh cSBd ds cSBd Øekad 10@
fnukad 03&04&2021 esa mijksDr lHkh fcUnqvksa ij fu.kZ; dj
vaxzsth ek/;e dh ekax j[kh x;h FkhA”
16.   In furtherance of the stand so taken by the SDMC, a few
representations were sent to the State Government requesting it
not to convert the medium of instruction of the school to English.
One such representation dated 26.10.2021 signed by various
students of the school addressed to the Principal has been placed
on record.
17.   On finding that representations made by the petitioners are
not cutting any ice and the State Government is hell bent upon
implementing its decision of conversion of the school to Mahatma
Gandhi Government School, the petitioners have knocked at the
doors of this Court invoking its extraordinary jurisdiction under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
(7 of 37)                  [CW-16367/2021]
18.   Before adverting to the rival contentions, it would be
profitable to wade through the relevant Constitutional and
Statutory provisions relating to the issue at hand :-
“Article 21A of the Constitution :- Right to
education—The        State       shall      provide      free  and
compulsory education to all children of the age of
six to fourteen years in such manner as the State
may, by law, determine.”
“Article 19 of the Constitution :- Protection of
certain rights regarding freedom of speech,
etc—(1) All citizens shall have the right—
(a) to freedom of speech and expression”
Relevant provisions of Right of Children to Free and
“2. Definitions—In this Act, unless the context
otherwise requires,—
(n) “school” means any recognised school imparting
elementary education and includes—
(i) a school established, owned or controlled by the
appropriate Government or a local authority;
(ii) an aided school receiving aid or grants to meet
whole or part of its expenses from the appropriate
Government or the local authority;
(iii) a school belonging to specified category; and
(iv) an unaided school not receiving any kind of aid
or grants to meet its expenses from the appropriate
Government or the local authority; ”
school, other than a school specified in sub-clause
(iv) of clause (n) of section 2, shall constitute a
School Management Committee consisting of the
elected   representatives         of    the      local   authority,
(8 of 37)                    [CW-16367/2021]
parents or guardians of children admitted in such
school and teachers:
Provided that at least three-fourth of members of
such Committee shall be parents or guardians:
Provided further that proportionate representation
shall be given to the parents or guardians of
children belonging to disadvantaged group and
weaker section: Provided also that fifty per cent of
Members of such Committee shall be women.
(2)   The    School    Management              Committee        shall
perform the following functions, namely:—
(a)    monitor     the      working           of     the     school;
(b) prepare and recommend school development
(c) monitor the utilisation of the grants received
from     the   appropriate          Government            or    local
authority      or      any         other          source;         and
(d) perform such other functions as may be
Provided that the School Management Committee
constituted under sub-section (1) in respect of,—
(a) a school established and administered by
minority whether based on religion or language;
(b) all other aided schools as defined in sub-section
(ii) of clause (n) of section 2, shall perform
advisory function only.”
[School    Management           Committee,             except     the
School Management Committee in respect of a
school established and administered by minority,
whether based on religion or language and an
aided school as defined in sub-clause (ii) of clause
(n) of section 2, constituted] under sub-section (1)
(9 of 37)                  [CW-16367/2021]
of section 21, shall prepare a School Development
Plan, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) The School Development Plan so prepared
under sub-section (1) shall be the basis for the
plans and grants to be made by the appropriate
Government or local authority, as the case may
“29. Curriculum and evaluation procedure—
(1) The curriculum and the evaluation procedure
for elementary education shall be laid down by an
academic     authority      to     be      specified     by    the
appropriate Government, by notification.
(2) The academic authority, while laying down the
curriculum and the evaluation procedure under
sub-section (1), shall take into consideration the
following, namely:—
(a) conformity with the values enshrined in the
(b) all round development of the child;
(c) building up child's knowledge, potentiality and
(d) development of physical and mental abilities to
the fullest extent; (e) learning through activities,
discovery and exploration in a child friendly and
child-centered manner;
(f)   medium    of    instructions         shall,     as  far   as
practicable, be in child's mother tongue;
(g) making the child free of fear, trauma and
anxiety and helping the child to express views
(h) comprehensive and continuous evaluation of
child's understanding of knowledge and his or her
ability to apply the same.”
Relevant    provision     of    Right       to     Free  and    Compulsory
Education Rules of 2010 :-
(10 of 37)               [CW-16367/2021]
“3. Composition and functions to the School
Management Committee (hereinafter in this rule
referred to as the said Committee) shall be
constituted in every school, other than an unaided
school, within six months of the appointed date,
and reconstituted every two years.
(2) Seventy five percent, of the strength of the
said Committee shall be from amongst parents or
guardians of children.
(3) The remaining twenty five percent, of the
strength of the said Committee shall be from
amongst the following persons, namely :-
(a) one third members from amongst the elected
members of the local authority, to be decided by
the local authority;
(b) one third members from amongst teachers
from the school, to be decided by the teachers of
(c)   one   third    members           from       amongst   local
educationists or children in the School, to be
decided by the parents in the said Committee.
(4) To manage its affairs, the said Committee shall
elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from
among the parent members; the head teacher of
the school, or where the school does not have a
head teacher, the senior most teacher of the
school, shall be the ex-officio member-convener of
the said Committee.
(5) The said Committee shall meet at least once a
month, and the minutes and decisions of the
meetings shall be properly recorded and made
available to the public.
(6) The said Committee shall, in addition to the
functions specified in clause (a) to (d) of sub-
section (2) of section 21, perform the following
functions, namely:
(11 of 37)                  [CW-16367/2021]
(a) communicate in simple and creative ways to
the population in the neighbourhood of the school,
the rights of the child as enunciated in the Act; as
also the duties of the appropriate Government,
local authority, school, parent and guardian;
(b) ensure the implementation of clauses (a) and
(e) of section 24, and of section 28,
(c) monitor that teachers are not burdened with
non academic duties other than those specified in
(d)    ensure      the      enrolment            and       continued
attendance       of    all     the       children        from     the
neighbourhood in the school;
(e) monitor the maintenance of the norms and
standards specified in the Schedule;
(f) bring to the notice of the local authority any
deviation from the rights of the child, in particular
mental and physical harassment of children, denial
of   admission,      and      timely        provision       of   free
entitlements as per sub-section (2) of section 3;
(g) Identify the needs, prepare a plan, and monitor
the implementation of the provisions of Section 4;
(h) monitor the identification and enrolment of,
and    facilities   for    education          of     children    with
disability, and ensure their participation in, and
completion of elementary education;
(i) monitor the implementation of the mid-day
meal in the school;
(j) prepare an annual account of receipts and
expenditure of the school.
(7) Any money received by the said Committee for
the discharge of its functions under this Act, shall
be kept in a separate account, to be audited
(8) The accounts referred to in clause (j) to sub-
rule (6) and in sub-rule (7) should be signed by the
chairperson or vice-chairperson and convenor of
(12 of 37)                [CW-16367/2021]
the said Committee and made available to the local
authority within one month of their preparation.”
19.   Mr. Pankaj Sharma, learned Additional Advocate General
raised following preliminary objections :-
“(i) No resolution of the SDMC has been filed;
(ii) there is no resolution authorising petitioner No.2
to    swear    the    affidavit      on      behalf     of other  two
(iii) petition involves disputed question of facts”
20.   Learned AAG elaborated the preliminary objections by
submitting that the petitioners have not enclosed any resolution
adopted by the SDMC for filing the present writ petition and even
a resolution authorising to swear affidavit on behalf of the other
two petitioners is absent.
21.   In the opinion of this Court, the preliminary objection raised
by learned AAG may be technically correct but does not render the
writ petition to be not maintainable. In view of the fact that writ
petition in question is not only filed by the SDMC but also by the
petitioner No.2 & 3 in their individual capacity, with an assertion
that their wards are studying in the school in question and further
because the SDMC comprises of mostly illiterate or less educated
parents of the pupils in the schools who are not well conversant
with the procedural aspect, both, the first and second, preliminary
objections raised by learned AAG are liable to be and are, hereby
22.   Third preliminary objection raised by Mr. Sharma that the
petition in hands involves disputed questions of fact, was asserted
emphatically but lacked substance as the State has failed to show
(13 of 37)               [CW-16367/2021]
any    disputed   question,      which        would        not be   possible   to
decide/examine on the basis of affidavits.
23.   As a matter of fact, the writ petition in hand poses pure and
important questions of law and calls upon the Court to examine
the decision of the State Government on the anvil of the
fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution of India and its
conflict with the statutory provisions.
24.   The third preliminary objection is also liable to be and is
hereby repelled.
25.   This Court therefore, proceeds to dwell upon the arguments
advanced by the petitioners and their corresponding response
given by the State.
Contentions/arguments of the petitioners:
26.   Mr. Moti Singh, learned counsel for the petitioners, at the
outset, submitted that the petitioners are not opposed to English
as a medium of instruction while imparting education but they are
against the overnight conversion of the school and more so, are
aggrieved with the ouster of the existing students from the school
due to the overnight conversion of school from Hindi to English
27.   He submitted that petitioners are mindful of the resolution
adopted by the SDMC, which welcomes the establishment of
English medium school in the village, but the same was always
coupled with a caveat that such school be established by
construction/renovation of nearby vacant building and till such a
time, the present infrastructure of the school be used in such a
manner that the English medium school be run in second shift,
without disturbing the academic activities of the existing students,
who are studying in Hindi medium.
(14 of 37)                  [CW-16367/2021]
28.   He referred to the operational guidelines issued by the
Rajasthan Council of Secondary Education while establishing
“Swami Vivekanand Rajkiya Model School” and pointed out that
these     guidelines   provided         creation         of    infrastructure    for
establishment of Swami Vivekanand Model School for English
medium, for which the State had provided a separate budget of
about 3 crores and such schools were opened ensuring medium of
instruction to be English. He highlighted that even such schools
were opened for class 9th and upwards and not for students at
elementary level.
29.   It was argued that if the respondents are of the view that
more English medium schools are to be opened, then the State is
required to allocate funds and create new infrastructure including
new buildings and classrooms before opening the schools but in
any case, the conversion of the existing Hindi medium schools into
English medium schools is arbitrary exercise of the purported
powers of the State Government.
30.   He submitted that right of education up to elementary level
is a fundamental right guaranteed by the Constitution under
Article 21A of the Constitution of India and therefore, the State’s
action of converting the school in question to Hindi medium school
is violative of fundamental rights of the children of the school.
31.   While pointing out that the school comprises of various
children below 14 years, he argued that consequent to the
impugned decision of the State, the students of the school are
compelled to take admission in other schools that too in the midst
of their academic session. Such action/order of the State
Government is violative of the rights of the petitioners and
(15 of 37)            [CW-16367/2021]
students/parents guaranteed under Article 21A of the Constitution
32.   Adverting to the provisions of section 29 of the Act of 2009,
particularly clause (f) of sub-section 2, learned counsel argued
that medium of instruction is required to be in child’s mother
tongue, which in the present case is Hindi.
33.   He elaborated his arguments by informing that the Central
Government has enacted the Act of 2009 in order to give shape to
the fundamental rights of the children below 14 years of age and
since the Central Legislation i.e., the Act of 2009 enjoins upon the
State to lay down curriculum and evaluation process ensuring that
the medium of instruction as far as practicable be in mother
tongue, State’s decision of converting the medium of instruction of
the school in question to English is violative of section 29 (2)(f) of
the Act of 2009 and the decision of the State Government dated
13.09.2021 therefore deserves to be quashed and declared as
34.   Learned counsel invited Court’s attention towards National
Education Policy 2020, particularly, clause 4.9, 4.10 and 4.13 and
pointed out that the National Education Policy 2020 in un-
ambiguous terms prescribes that home/local language or the
second Indian language will be enhanced and therefore, the
present decision to convert the school in question to an English
medium school is contrary to National Education Policy, 2020 as
35.   He submitted that the medium of instruction is undeniably a
part of curriculum to be decided by the SDMC and therefore
impugned decision of forcing the medium of instruction to be
English to the students of the school is not only arbitrary but also
(16 of 37)            [CW-16367/2021]
contrary to the provisions contained in section 29 of the Act of
36.    Learned counsel relied upon judgment of Hon’ble the
Supreme Court dated 06.05.2014, rendered in the case of State
of Karnataka & Anr. Vs. Associated Management of English
Medium Primary and Secondary Schools & Ors. reported in
(2014) 9 SCC 485 and submitted that in the instant case, the
state is doing exactly opposite of what the State of Karnataka had
37.    It was also argued that the state cannot promote English (as
a language or medium of instruction) because English is not a part
of any recognised language enlisted in Schedule VIII of the
Constitution of India.
38.    He further submitted that as per the constitutional mandate,
particularly, Part XVII, official language is Hindi. Further, for an
initial period of 15 years from the commencement of the
Constitution, English was to be used as official language and
thereafter Hindi was required to be used as the official language.
Response/submissions of the state:
39.    Mr. Pankaj Sharma, AAG, defending the decision of the State,
submitted that the Government has undertaken requisite exercise
in this regard and upon realising that the people of the state are
desirous of having more English medium schools, the state in
public interest has decided to convert various schools to Mahatma
Gandhi English Medium Schools. He argued that the policy of the
State cannot be said to be arbitrary and violative of constitutional
provisions inasmuch as enough safeguards have been provided
and that the students who do not want medium of instruction to
(17 of 37)                [CW-16367/2021]
be English, will be given admission in any of the nearby Hindi
medium schools.
40.   Inviting Court’s attention towards communication dated
04.12.2021, written by none other than the Principal of the
School, learned counsel submitted that there are as many as 9
Government schools within the vicinity of 5 kms of the school in
question imparting education in Hindi and therefore petitioners’
stance that their fundamental rights have been violated, is
41.   He submitted that before taking a final call on converting the
present school to an English medium school, an assessment
exercise    was  undertaken        and      report       obtained.  He   further
submitted that an enquiry was got conducted in relation to the
resolutions purportedly adopted by the SDMC and the same have
been found to be irregularly adopted.
42.   It was also emphatically submitted that there are 13 well
maintained classrooms and separate toilets for boys and girls and
therefore the building of Shri Hari Singh Sr. Sec. School, Pilwa was
found most suitable and it was thus, decided to convert the school
into an English medium school.
43.   It was also argued by Mr. Sharma, “if the petition is
considered in individual capacity of petitioner No.2 & 3, then, it is
to be noted that two wards of petitioner No.2 are above 14 years
of age and out of two wards of petitioner No.3, only one child is
below 14 years of age. Hence, for purported rights of one child,
the decision of the State Government taken in the interest of the
entire village cannot be examined/challenged”.
44.   Learned counsel submitted that the establishment of school
including conversion of schools to an English medium is a part of
(18 of 37)            [CW-16367/2021]
policy decision within the domain of the State which better be left
to the discretion of the state and experts of the area and no
interference in the policy matters be made.
45.   Learned AAG also relied upon judgment of Hon’ble the
Supreme Court in the case of State of Karnataka & Anr. Vs.
Associated Management of English Medium Primary &
Secondary Schools & Ors. reported in (2014) 9 SCC 485 and
submitted that the said case (relied upon by the petitioners) is
rather in favour of the State.
46.   It was argued by Mr. Sharma that arguments advanced by
learned counsel for the petitioners that English Medium Schools
cannot be opened at all, are not available to them, if the
resolution adopted by the SDMC is taken into account. He flagged
that the SDMC itself had no in-principle objection regarding the
opening/establishment of the English medium school but its
concern was only that the existing students of the school not be
47.   Learned counsel further argued that true it is, that right of
primary education has been guaranteed by Article 21A of the
Constitution of India, but the same is not an absolute right.
Imparting education in English can by no stretch of imagination be
said to be violation of right guaranteed under Article 21A of the
Constitution of India.
48.   In rejoinder, Mr. Moti Singh submitted that if the State really
wants to bring in more English medium schools or Mahatma
Gandhi Schools, it is incumbent upon it to create infrastructure
and provide for budget as had been done in the operational
guidelines of 2014-15, in which a decision to establish Swami
Vivekanand Government Model School was taken by the State
(19 of 37)                [CW-16367/2021]
Government, however by setting apart separate budget for the
49.   He submitted that even in Swami Vivekanand Model Schools,
medium of instruction up till 8 th standard has been kept as Hindi,
and English has been kept as a medium of instruction, only for the
students of classes 9th and above.
50.   It has been the contention of learned counsel for the
petitioners that English as a medium of instruction for children
below 14 years of age, cannot be forced.
51.   Based on the arguments of the rival counsel and upon
appraisal of the factual matrix of the case, the following four
questions have emerged for consideration :-
(i) Whether Article 21A of the Constitution of India which
guarantees a right to education, also guarantees right to
receive education in mother tongue or home language?
(ii) Whether right to get education in mother tongue or Hindi
is a fundamental right?
(iii)  Whether     the      consent          of      School   Development
Management       Committee           (SDMC)          is  necessary   before
converting a Hindi medium school to an English medium
(iv) Whether the policy decision of the State converting the
school in question to Mahatma Gandhi English Medium
School is in conflict with the provisions of section 20, 21, 22
and 29(2)(f) of the Act of 2009?
(v) Who is competent to change the medium of instruction of
52.   It would be better to deliberate upon each question one by
(20 of 37)            [CW-16367/2021]
(i) Whether Article 21A of the Constitution of India which
guarantees a right to education, also guarantees right to
receive education in mother tongue or home language?
(a)   Crux of argument of learned counsel for the petitioners was
that, if Article 21A of the Constitution of India is read conjointly
with section 29(2)(f) of the Act of 2009, the right to education
enshrined under Article 21A of the Constitution of India, includes
the right to get education in mother tongue or home language,
while learned Additional Advocate General was opposed to such
contention of the petitioners.
(b)   A look at Article 21A of the Constitution of India reveals that
it enjoins upon the State to provide free and compulsory
education to all children between the age of 6 to 14 years, but
then, such right is not an absolute right, as its expanse has been
hedged by the expression “in such manner as the State may, by
law determine”.
(c)   Since, Article 21A of the Constitution is tethered with the
words “in such manner, as the State, may, by law determine”,
according to this Court the State may by law provide the medium
and manner to provide such free education, which in a given case
can be Hindi, English or even regional dialect - the mother tongue
of the child. No child or parent can claim it as a matter of right,
that he/his ward should be instructed in a particular language or
the mother tongue only, on the basis of what has been guaranteed
under Article 21A of the Constitution.
(d)   My aforesaid view finds strength from the judgment of
Hon’ble the Supreme Court, rendered in the case of State of
Karnataka (supra), particularly para No. 44 thereof, which is
reproduced hereinfra:
(21 of 37)            [CW-16367/2021]
“44. Article 21 of the Constitution provides that no
person shall be deprived of his life or personal
liberty except according to procedure established by
law. In Unni Krishnan, J.P. v. State of A.P., a
Constitution Bench of this Court has held that under
Article 21 of the Constitution every child/citizen of
this country has a right to free education until he
completes the age of 14 years. Article 21-A of the
Constitution provides that the State shall provide
free and compulsory education to all children of the
age of six to fourteen years in such manner as the
State may, by law, determine. Under Article 21 and
21-A of the Constitution, therefore, a child has a
fundamental right to claim from the State free
education up to the age of 14 years. The language
of Article 21-A of the Constitution further makes it
clear that such free education which a child can
claim from the State will be in a manner as the
State may, by law, determine. If, therefore, the
State determines by law that in schools where free
education is provided under Article 21-A of the
Constitution, the medium of instruction would be in
the mother tongue or in any language, the child
cannot claim as of right under Article 21 or Article
21-A of the Constitution that he has a right to
choose the medium of instruction in which the
education should be imparted to him by the State.
The High Court, in our considered opinion, was not
right in coming to the conclusion that the right to
choose a medium of instruction is implicit in the
right to education under Article 21 and 21-A of the
(ii) Whether right to get education in mother tongue or
Hindi is a fundamental right?
(22 of 37)            [CW-16367/2021]
(a)   The right to get education in a particular language, in the
opinion of this Court, is relatable to Article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution - “freedom of speech and expression”. A child or on
his behalf, his parent(s) have the right to choose the language in
which his/their child should be imparted education. The right to
have education in mother tongue or in a particular medium is
guaranteed by Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India, as has
been held by Hon’ble the Supreme Court in para No.45 of the
judgment in the case of State of Karnataka (supra). Relevant part
thereof is extracted below :-
“45. Our answer to Question (ii), therefore, is that a
child, and on his behalf his parent or guardian, has
the right to choose the medium of instruction at the
primary school stage under Article 19(1)(a) and not
under Article 21 or Article 21-A of the Constitution.”
(b)   A question may then arise, that such right too is subject to
reasonable restriction, as per clause (2) of Article 19 of the
Constitution of India and if that be so then the State can prescribe
a medium of instruction considering the overall development of
the child and Socio-economic factors.
(c)   It is to be noted that in the present case, State’s decision,
which is purely administrative in nature, cannot firstly be said to
be a law and that apart, it cannot be said to be a reasonable
restriction for the purposes mentioned in clause (2) of Article 19 of
the Constitution.    Because clause (2) postulates that restriction
can be imposed for the purpose of and in the interest of
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State,
friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or
(23 of 37)                  [CW-16367/2021]
morality or in relation to contempt of Court, deformation or
incitement to an offence.
(d)   Since, fundamental right guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a)
is only subject to reasonable restriction by law to be enacted, by
the State, in the opinion of this Court, the instant decision taken
or   the   State’s  policy     decision,         cannot        whittle  down    the
fundamental right of a child to be taught in a particular medium,
which is assured rather protected by Article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution of India.
(iii) Whether the State’s policy decision of converting the
school in question to Mahatma Gandhi English Medium
School is in conflict with the provisions of section 20, 21,
22 and 29(2)(f) of the Act of 2009?
(a). Section 21 of the Act of 2009 provides for constitution of
School Management Committee comprising of representatives of
the local authority, parents/guardians of the children and teachers.
Such committee has been authorised to perform various functions
including monitoring the working of the school and prepare and
recommend school development plan.
(b)   The Central Government has promulgated Rules of 2010 in
exercise of its powers under section 38 of the Act and similarly the
State of Rajasthan has promulgated Rajasthan Right of Children to
Free and Compulsory Education Rules, 2011 (for short ‘Rules of
2011’), vide notification dated 29.03.2011.
(c)   According to section 21 and 22 of the Act of 2009 and Rule 4
& 5 of the Rules of 2011, School Management Committee is
required to prepare a school development plan which shall contain
details of class-wise enrollments each year, requirement of
(24 of 37)                 [CW-16367/2021]
number      of   additional     teachers,         requirement        of  additional
infrastructure etc.     Such development plan is required to be a
three-year plan comprising of three annual sub-plans.
(d)   Rule 3 of the Rules of 2011 requires the School Management
Committee to ensure enrollment and continued attendance of all
the children from the neighbourhood of the school.
(e)   By reading the provisions of the Act of 2009 and Rules of
2011, which were heavily relied upon by Mr. Moti Singh, this Court
is unable to conclude that prescription of medium of instruction is
a decision to be taken by the School Management Committee, as a
part of school development plan. Preparing a school development
plan cannot be misconstrued to mean the prescription of syllabus
and medium of instructions. It has to be done by the experts in
the field of education/child education.
(iv)    Whether       the     consent           of      School      Development
Management         Committee           (SDMC)           is    necessary     before
converting a Hindi medium school to an English medium
(a)   In   the   meeting     held      on     03.04.2021,        the    SDMC    had
unequivocally objected to conversion of the entire school to an
English medium school and the same was duly reiterated in its
subsequent meeting held on 28.09.2021.
(b)   Sub-section (2) of section 21 of the Act of 2009, in no
ambiguous      terms,    prescribes        that      the     school   management
committee shall monitor the working of the school; prepare and
recommend the school development plan.
(c)   In the opinion of this Court, the functions to be discharged
by the School Development Management Committee under clause
(25 of 37)                 [CW-16367/2021]
(a) and (b) of section 21 (2) of the Act of 2009 do not include the
decision to be taken with respect to language or medium in which
the students of the school shall be taught.                       The medium of
instruction is to be determined by the Appropriate Authority or
(d)   Upon a close and conjoint reading of section 21 and 22 of
the Act of 2009 and Rule 3 and 22 of the Rules of 2011, this Court
is of the firm opinion that it is not within the domain of the SDMC
to decide as to what language pupil of the school will be instructed
(e)   It is noteworthy that as per the provisions of the Act of 2009
and Rules of 2010 framed thereunder, 75% of the strength of the
Committee is to be from amongst the parent or guardian of the
(f)   Rules of 2011 as framed by the State of Rajasthan are
slightly different so far as constitution of school management
committee is concerned.              Rule 3(2) thereof provides that
parent/guardian of every child studying in the School will be
member of the committee.           Rule 3 specifies various functions to
be discharged by such committee. Reproduction of Rule 3 of the
Rules of 2011 is also imperative, which is hereby done:-
“3. Composition and functions of the School
Management Committee (hereinafter in this Part
referred  to   as   the     said      Committee)          shall be
constituted in every School, other than an unaided
School and reconstituted every two years, as per the
directions issued by the State Government/Local
Authority from time to time.
(26 of 37)                 [CW-16367/2021]
(2) The said Committee shall have the following
(a) Parent / Guardian of every child studying in
(b) all the teachers working in the School;
(c) the person elected from the ward of the
local authority in which the school is located;
(d) all other elected members of the local
authority residing in the village/ward in which
the school is located.
(3) The Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and Member-
Secretary of the Executive Committee shall be the
Chairperson,       Vice-Chairperson                and      Member-
Secretary, respectively of the said Committee.
(4) The said Committee shall meet at least once in
every three months, and the minutes and decisions
of the meetings shall be properly recorded and made
available to the public.
(5) The said Committee shall, in addition to the
functions specified in clause (a) to (d) of sub-section
(2) of section 21, perform the following functions,
(a) communicate in simple and creative ways
to the population in the neighbourhood of the
school, the rights of the child as enunciated in
the Act and also the duties of the State
Government, local authority, School, parent
(b) ensure the implementation of clause (a)
and (e) of sub- section (1) of section 24 and
(c) monitor the compliance of the section 27;
(d)   ensure      the     enrolment           and    continued
attendance      of     all    the      children     from   the
neighbourhood in the school;
(27 of 37)                [CW-16367/2021]
(e) monitor the maintenance of the norms and
standards        specified         in       the     Schedule;
(f) bring to the notice of the local authority any
deviation from the rights of the child, in
particular mental and physical harassment of
children,    denial      of    admission,         and  timely
provision of free entitlements as per sub-
section (2) of section 3;
(g) identify the needs, prepare a plan, and
monitor the implementation of the provisions
(h) monitor the identification and enrolment of,
and facilities for education of children with
disability, and ensure their participation in and
completion of elementary education;
(i) monitor the implementation of the mid-day
meal in the school; and
(j) prepare an annual account of receipts and
expenditure of the school.
(6) Any money received by the said Committee for
the discharge of its functions under the Act, shall be
kept in a separate account, to be audited annually.
(7) The accounts referred to in clause (j) to sub-
rule (5) and in sub-rule (6) shall be signed by the
Chairperson     or    Vice-chairperson              and   Member-
Secretary    of   the     said      Committee           and  made
available to the local authority within one month of
their preparation.”
(g)  In the case impugned administrative decision of the State is
upheld, without the wishes and consent of the SDMC, the school
cannot be abruptly converted to an English medium school.
Changing the medium of instruction of the school in any case,
cannot be done in the manner that has been done by the State in
the present case.
(28 of 37)            [CW-16367/2021]
(h)   Changing the medium of instruction of a school which houses
601 rural students, out of which 303 are girls and a major part of
them hail from lower strata, including SC, ST, OBC and minorities
cannot be countenanced by this Court. Scooping out 601 students
with one stroke of pen in a bargain of an assurance of being
accommodated in nearby schools is violative of their Constitutional
rights. The same is likely to affect their emotional quotient as well.
Because, for children, their school is not only a structure made of
stones, cement and concrete – it is a second home or sort of a
temple, where they flock to learn; to play and to grow.                Their
bonding, resulting from the togetherness, helps them to grow as a
society and a community.
(i)   In the opinion of this Court, the State should not undermine
the sanctity or ignore the powers of the School Development
Management Committee, which is a creature of the statute,
particularly section 21 of the Act of 2009 and Rule 3 of the Rules
of 2011. Merely because the State has taken a stand that in view
of the demand of more English medium schools, one English
medium school in all villages having the population of more than
5000 should be established, the opinion of the SDMC cannot be
given a go bye – altogether.             The argument that there is no
requirement of consent of the SDMC, for the school in question, as
it is founded; funded; maintained and controlled by the State,
cannot be accepted.
(j)   Notwithstanding the above, as the SDMC of the school in
question has not objected to the very establishment of the English
medium school, and its stand has been, that the present Hindi
medium school be continued, despite being persuaded, this Court
(29 of 37)            [CW-16367/2021]
is not inclined to hold that no English medium school shall function
in the building in question.
(k)   The decision of the State dated 20.09.2021 of converting the
school per-se to Mahatma Gandhi English Medium School is, as
per this Court violative of not only Fundamental rights enshrined
under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India, but also
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India, as such decision
is not based on any research, study or intelligible criteria and
because the same is contrary to section 29 (1) & 2(f) and dehors
of the powers of the State.
(l)   The impugned decision is, in ignorance if not derogation of
the powers of the Academic Authority and the resolution of the
SDMC, which, in no uncertain terms, has resolved that the existing
Hindi medium school not be closed and if necessary, infrastructure
of the school be used in functioning of the English medium school
in the second shift, without disturbing the existing students of
Hindi medium.
(m) The respondents have not placed any material to show that
any study of pros and cons was made about the feasibility or
otherwise of establishing the English medium school in the other
building or by constructing a new building or using any abandoned
building. No material has been placed to show why this particular
school has been chosen to be converted to English medium school,
which in a small town of 5000 is catering to the needs of large
number of students (about 600 in number).
(n)   This Court, therefore, is of the opinion that the decision of
the State Government of converting present school out of 344
schools to English medium schools by a single stroke of pen, is
(30 of 37)                [CW-16367/2021]
arbitrary and contrary to the provisions of the Act of 2009 and the
Rules of 2011.
(o)   The defence, which the State has taken that the children of
this school will be accommodated in nearby schools, cannot be
accepted as a valid justification for uprooting 601 saplings
(students) from the present school to be implanted in nearby
schools, even if they are within the vicinity of 2 kms. Such action
in no case can    be     taken      in     the middle of academic session
2011-22. The State’s decision dated 13.09.2021 and 20.09.2021
is  arbitrary   and    deserves        to    be      quashed      however,   such
adjudication is however confined to the present school, for the
reason, already set out hereinabove.
(v) Who can decide or change the medium of instruction in
elementary level schools?
(a)   It is noteworthy that Section 29 of the RTE Act specifically
provides that curriculum and evaluation procedure shall be laid
down by the Academic Authority. Rule 22 of the Rajasthan Right
of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Rules, 2011, which
have been framed in exercise of powers available to the State
under section 38 of the RTE Act is the relevant provision, which
provides for and speaks of an Academic Authority.                       It is the
Academic Authority, which is the competent authority to lay down
the curriculum, which inherently includes medium of instruction.
Reproduction of Rule 22 of the Rules of 2011 will not be out of
context, hence it is being done:
“Curriculum       and     Completion               of    Elementary
(31 of 37)                  [CW-16367/2021]
of Educational Research and Training shall be the
Academic Authority for the purposes of section 29.
(2) While laying down the curriculum and evaluation
procedure, the Academic Authority shall, -
(a) formulate the relevant and age appropriate
syllabus and text books and other learning material;
(b) develop in-service teacher training design; and
[(c)   prepare     class-wise,          subject-wise         learning
outcomes for all elementary classes; and
(d)  prepare    guidelines        for    putting        into  practice
continuous and comprehensive evaluation, to achieve
the defined learning outcomes.]
(3)   The    academic       authority          shall     design   and
implement     a   process       of     holistic       school   quality
assessment on a regular basis.”
(b)   Since, medium of instruction is to be determined by the
Academic Authority, which in the State of Rajasthan is Rajasthan
School Education Council, the School Management Committee, in
the opinion of this Court, cannot decide the medium of instruction
may it be Hindi or English.
53.   Next arises the question, what should be medium of
instruction? Section 29(2)(f) of the Act of 2009 and the National
Education Policy, 2020 prescribes that the medium of education or
instruction till elementary level shall be in mother tongue. This
Court has no hesitation in holding that the same cannot be
changed to English medium at least by an administrative decision
like the one taken on 13.09.2021 or 20.09.2021. If it were to be
done, it could be done by appropriate legislation to be brought by
(32 of 37)                [CW-16367/2021]
the State Legislature and not even by the Academic Authority.
The conversion of the school in question to English medium is,
therefore, clearly contrary to the provisions of section 21, 22,
29(1) and 29(2)(f) of the RTE Act.
54.   Before reaching the final conclusion, it would be fitting to
refer to a recent Division Bench Judgment of Andhra Pradesh High
Court, rendered on 15.04.2020 in the case of Dr. Srinivas
Guntupalli Vs. The State of Andhra Pradesh & Ors.; Writ
Petition (PIL) No.183/2019. The precise case therein was that by a
Government notification dated 20.11.2019, it was provided that all
Government schools from Grade - I to VIII for the academic
session 2020-21 and Grade – IX & X for the academic session
2021-2022 shall be converted to English medium schools. When
said decision came to judicial scrutiny, the Andhra Pradesh High
Court quashed the Government notification holding, inter-alia, that
the same is violative of Article 21A and 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution of India, apart from being in contravention of
provisions of section 29(2) of the Right to Education Act, 2009 and
section 7(3) and 7(4) of the Act of Andhra Pradesh Right to
55.   The Division Bench of Andhra Pradesh headed by Hon’ble the
Chief Justice (as he then was) has held thus:
“92. In the light of the above discussion, looking to
the    history    of    pre-independence                 and  post-
independence and as per the recommendations of
the Report of the States Reorganisation Commission,
1955 and the National Policy on Education Act, 1968
and   various    other     Reports,         it   is   unequivocally
recognised that medium of instruction in the schools,
particularly, upto to standards I to VIII must be in
(33 of 37)                 [CW-16367/2021]
mother tongue. The effect of the National Policy on
Education,    1968      and     other        Reports      cannot   be
whittled down by way of issuing G.O., by the State
Government, contrary to the spirit of the RTE Act and
also to the provisions of the Constitution and also by
the   judgments      of    the     Hon’ble        Supreme      Court.
Therefore,     the     decision         of      the     Government,
converting the medium of instruction from Telugu to
English medium from Standards I to VI or I to VIII as
the case may be, en-bloc, is against the National
Policy, on Education Act, 1968 and various other
reports, therefore, it cannot be accepted, hence, the
impugned G.O, is deserves to be set aside.
93. In view of the discussion so made herein above,
the inescapable conclusion which can be arrived is
that G.O.Ms. No.85, dated 20.11.2019, is against the
spirit of the various Constitutional provisions and the
amendment so proposed by the State Government is
repugnant and without its assent, it cannot confer
any power to the State Government to issue the said
94. In the result, the W.P. (PILs.) are allowed setting
aside G.O.Ms. No.81, School Education (Prog.I)
Department, dated 05.11.2019 and G.O.Ms.No.85,
School     Education       (Prog.I)         Department,         dated
20.11.2019. In the facts and circumstances of the
case, the parties are directed to bear their own costs.
As a sequel, all pending miscellaneous applications
stand closed.”
56.  As an outcome of discussion foregoing, this Court is of the
considered opinion that changing mode of instruction to English or
imparting   education     in    English        per-se       is  not   violative  of
fundamental rights guaranteed to the children or to their parents
(34 of 37)            [CW-16367/2021]
under Article 21A of the Constitution of India. Because Article 21A
only assures right of a child below 14 years to have access to free
and compulsory education, whereas the manner has been left at
the discretion of the State to be determined by law.
57.   But, at the same time, it can also not be ruled that right to
have education in a particular medium or in a language in which
the child has been brought up is not covered by any of the
fundamental rights.
58.   Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India is the fountain
head, being repository of the right to freedom of speech and
expression from where flows such right. Article 19(1)(a) has wide
ambit and it includes within its fold, right to have education in a
particular medium.
59.   The right of having elementary education in mother tongue is
also a statutory right conferred by section 29 (2)(f) of the Act of
2009, according to which medium of instruction, as far as
practicable, is required to be in child’s mother tongue.
60.   The power to frame laws in the subject of education falls in
the Entry No.25 of concurrent list (list 3 rd) of the VII Schedule.
And since the Act of 2009 occupies the field which unequivocally
prescribes that medium of instructions in elementary education as
far as practicable, be in mother tongue/home language of the
child, any law made or framed by the State but for the assent of
the President would be repugnant by virtue of Article 254 of the
61.   In the opinion of this Court, English, as a medium of
instruction cannot be thrusted upon a child even by a legislation
enacted by the State Government, much less by a policy decision.
(35 of 37)                [CW-16367/2021]
62.   Be that as it may. Since the petitioner No.1 – SDMC of which
petitioner No.2 & 3 are members, has itself decided to have a
school of English medium, impugned decision of the State at the
instance of the present petitioners cannot be quashed, more
particularly, because the decision of the State or its policy as such
are not under challenge.
63.   In line with the mandate of section 29 (2)(f), the Central
Government has framed National Policy, 2020, according to clause
4.9 thereof, the medium of instructions are required to be in home
64.   The rights of the petitioners and the pupil of the school to
have instructions in Hindi that are protected under Article 19(1)(a)
of the Constitution of India and such rights can be diluted only by
way of a legislation enacted in the contingencies mentioned in
clause (2) of Article 19.         In absence of any valid legislation
brought by the State of Rajasthan, this Court is of the view that
such right cannot be abrogated or taken away.
65.   The impugned decision dated 20.09.2021 seeking to convert
the school in question to a Hindi medium school with immediate
effect (session 2021-22) is fortiori, violative of Article 19(1)(a)
and 14 of the Constitution of India. The same is hereby quashed
66.   Now, moving on to the statutory rights of the petitioners and
other children having education in the school.
67.   Indisputably,    the      School         Development         Management
Committee is a statutory body, constituted under the provisions of
section 21 of the Act of 2009 and Rule 3 of the Rules of 2011.
Section 21(2) and 22 of the Act of 2009 enjoins upon the
committee      to  monitor      the      working          of  the   school   and
(36 of 37)            [CW-16367/2021]
prepare/recommend school development plan. In the opinion of
this Court, the State’s administrative decision and action of forcing
English as a mode or medium of instruction is violative of section
21 and 22 of the Act of 2009, particularly, in the face of
resolutions dated 03.04.2021 and 28.09.2021 adopted by the
68.    Though this Court is of the view that the State’s decision
dated 20.09.2021 (in absence of decision of the Academic
Authority) is contrary to Education Policy, 2020 and the provisions
of section 29(1) and 29(2)(f) of the Right to Education Act and
Rules framed thereunder, but since the policy decision itself is not
under challenge and the petitioners themselves had in-principle
welcomed or accepted the establishment of English medium
school, it is hereby directed that in case, for the ensuing session
i.e., 2022-23, the State wishes or proposes to convert the school
in question to Mahatma Gandhi English Medium School, it shall
convene a meeting of the School Development Management
Committee constituted under Rule 3 of the Rules of 2011 in
presence of the Sub Divisional Magistrate/Tehsildar and a nominee
of District Education Officer concerned. Notice of the meeting with
the proposed agenda will be circulated well in advance.
69.    If the School Development Management Committee by
majority of the members present, resolves that the school in
question be converted to an English medium school, then only, the
State’s decision to convert the school in question to a Mahatma
Gandhi English Medium School shall be given effect to. Else, the
school will not be converted to an English medium school.
70.    Writ petition stands allowed in the above terms.
(37 of 37)               [CW-16367/2021]
71.  Stay application and all other interlocutory applications stand
disposed of.