1.    The instant application under Section 151 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 has been filed on behalf of the petitioner seeking
condonation of delay in filing the petition.
2.    For the reasons stated in the application, the same is allowed and the
delay of 70 days in filing the petition is condoned.
3.    The application stands disposed of.
1.    The instant petition under Section 34 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 has been filed on behalf of the petitioner seeking the
following reliefs:
(a) set aside the Award dated 9 September 2019;
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                              Page 1 of 28
(b) direct Respondent No.2 to re-commence the arbitration
proceedings by appointing a new arbitrator and supervise such
proceedings to ensure that they are conducted in compliance
(c) direct the Respondents to bear the costs of the present
(d) pass such other and further orders that this Hon'ble Court
may deem appropriate in the facts and circumstances of this
2.     The facts necessary for the disposal of the present petition are that the
Petitioner is the president of mPedigree Network which is involved in the
development of a range of software products and services in various
industries across several countries. Respondent No.1 is a company
incorporated under the laws of Delaware, USA, providing brand protection
services in certain African countries as well as in India. The Petitioner
registered the Disputed Domain Name, ‘sproxil‘, on 23rd October 2013 and
on 6th November 2014, the Respondent No.1 sent a cease and desist notice
to the Petitioner alleging that mPedigree as well as the Petitioner have been
making unlawful use of Respondent No.1’s trademarks and web domains,
which Respondent No.1 claims to have been in use and occupation since
2011, i.e., two years prior to the date of registration by the Petitioner.
3.     Subsequent to this, on 3rd February 2015, Respondent No.1 filed a
complaint before National Internet Exchange of India (hereinafter referred
to as „NIXI‟) in respect of the disputed domain name. Arbitration
proceedings were conducted pursuant to the First Complaint and an arbitral
award was passed. This arbitral award was set aside by the Delhi High
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                             Page 2 of 28
Court by its judgment dated 9th May 2018 on the grounds that the impugned
arbitral award was passed without complying with the principles of natural
justice.
4.     On 28th June 2019, another complaint was filed by Respondent No.1
in respect of the same disputed domain name with NIXI alleging inter alia
that the Petitioner had registered the Disputed Domain Name by making
false representations of knowledge under paragraph 3 of the .IN Domain
Name Dispute Resolution Policy (hereinafter referred to as ‘INDRP
Policy’). Subsequent to this complaint, Respondent no.2 appointed a sole
arbitrator to adjudicate upon the disputes set out in the complaint. On 9th
September 2019, the learned sole arbitrator passed the impugned award
(i) the Petitioner had no rights or legitimate interests in the Disputed
(ii) the Disputed Domain Name was registered by the Petitioner in
bad faith, and directing that the Disputed Domain Name be
transferred from the Petitioner to Respondent No. 1, with a request to
Respondent No. 2 to monitor the transfer.
5.     Aggrieved with the findings recorded in the impugned arbitral award,
the Petitioner has approached this Court under Section 34 of the Arbitration
6.     Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Petitioner in support of
the instant petition has submitted that the impugned award suffers from
patent illegality, it is contrary to the fundamental principles of Indian Law
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                            Page 3 of 28
and also contrary to the public policy. To substantiate his arguments, the
learned counsel has submitted that the arbitrator has not only erroneously
excluded relevant evidence on record but has also taken into consideration
extraneous and irrelevant material to come to the conclusion that the
Disputed Domain Name registered by the Petitioner is identical or
confusingly similar to a trademark to which Respondent No.1 has rights.
7.      It has been vehemently argued that the arbitrator has turned a blind
eye to the fact that the registration of the Disputed Domain Name was
applied by Respondent No. 1 only in 2016, i.e. 3 years after the Disputed
Domain Name was registered by the Petitioner. The Arbitrator has also
failed to give any basis for his finding that Respondent No. 1 had trademark
registrations and statutory rights in the "sproxil" mark, at the time the
Disputed Domain Name was registered by the Petitioner.
8.      It is further submitted that the Award also fails to consider that
Respondent No. 1 has not produced any credible evidence in support of its
argument that it had been using the "sproxil" mark since 2011, and such a
finding is only based on vague assertions not supported by any documentary
evidence to this effect. On this assertion, learned counsel has submitted that
the Respondent No.1 has failed to discharge its burden of proving the very
first element set out in paragraph 4(i) of the INDRP Policy. It is also argued
that even though the arbitrator has in his preliminary observations
specifically taken note of the fact that the Respondent No.1 has
inadvertently provided incorrect information to the Panel and the trademark
application referred to and relied upon by the Respondent No.1 in the
complaints was marked as abandoned by the Registrar of Trademarks, but
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                          Page 4 of 28
the arbitrator has grossly erred in coming to the conclusion that the
Respondent No.1 had a valid trademark registration in respect of the
‘sproxil’ mark.
9.     It is further submitted that in terms of the INDRP Rules and Policy,
the arbitrator was required to confine his findings in the award to the
submissions made and documents provided by the parties in the arbitration,
but the arbitrator has done ‘independent research’ and has travelled beyond
the submissions advanced by the parties to reach an erroneous conclusion
which is beyond the powers conferred on law upon the arbitrator. It is also
submitted that the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India has, in numerous
judicial pronouncements, observed that where materials are taken behind the
back of the parties by the arbitral tribunal, on which the parties have had no
opportunity to comment, a ground for an arbitral award rendered by the
tribunal to be set aside under Section 34(2)(a)(iii) would be made out. It is
accordingly, submitted that in the present case the arbitrator did not give the
Petitioner any notice that he was considering a trademark registration
application made by Respondent No.1 other than the one produced by the
Respondent No.1 as a part of the Complaint and hence, the impugned
arbitral award cannot be sustained in law and deserves to be quashed and set
aside.
10.    It is submitted that the learned Arbitrator has arbitrarily arrived at the
conclusion that the Petitioner did not have rights or legitimate interests in
the Disputed Domain Name, by applying incorrect principles of standard
and burden of proof, and without considering relevant evidence on the
record to the contrary. It is submitted that to this extent, the Award discloses
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                             Page 5 of 28
non-application of mind by the Arbitrator and is patently illegal, contrary to
fundamental principles of Indian law and Public policy, and is liable to be
set aside under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act. It is further submitted that
the learned Arbitrator has failed to apply the correct burden of proof for
Respondent No. 1 to satisfy paragraph 4(ii) of the INDRP Policy, which is
in contravention of substantive provisions of the INDRP Policy and the
fundamental policy of Indian Law. The learned Arbitrator has failed to
consider that Respondent No. 1 has not produced any evidence to make out
a prima facie case that the Petitioner did not have legitimate rights or
interests in the Disputed Domain Name. The Complaint only discloses
vague allegations in respect of the Petitioner being a competitor of
Respondent No. 1 and the Petitioner being allegedly interested in harming
the business prospects of Respondent No. 1 in India.
11.    It is vehemently argued that the arbitrator while considering whether
the Petitioner in accordance with paragraph 7(iii) of the INDRP Policy is
making non-commercial use of the Disputed Domain Name, the learned
Arbitrator has observed that the Petitioner has not established this "beyond
doubt". Accordingly, it is submitted that the standard of proof imposed by
the Arbitrator in evaluating the evidence adduced by the Petitioner in this
regard is "beyond doubt‖ which on the face of it, is an incorrect standard of
proof to apply on the Petitioner in the Arbitration which was a civil
proceedings. It is submitted that as per fundamental principle of Indian law
for the administration of justice in civil proceedings, the standard of proof
applicable is 'preponderance of evidence' and not 'beyond reasonable doubt'.
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                           Page 6 of 28
12.    It is further submitted that the learned Arbitrator has arbitrarily
arrived at the conclusion that the Petitioner had registered the Disputed
Domain Name in bad faith, without considering material evidence on the
record to the contrary, and by relying erroneously on external evidence not
produced by either party. It is also submitted that the Respondent No. 1 has
not disclosed any evidence in the Complaint to support the position that the
Petitioner had registered the Disputed Domain Name with the intent of
selling it at a profit to either Respondent No. 1 or its competitors. It is in fact
not even the case of Respondent No. 1 in the Complaint that the Petitioner
was indulging in cyber-squatting. Therefore, the learned Arbitrator's finding
that Respondent No. 1 has made out a case of bad faith under paragraph 6(i)
of the INDRP is entirely unsubstantiated in both pleadings and evidence,
and is on the face of it untenable.
13.    It is further submitted that the learned Arbitrator has failed to consider
significant evidence produced by the Petitioner that on the face of it
demonstrates that the Petitioner/mPedigree were not competitors of
Respondent No. 1, including on the basis services offered by mPedigree and
Respondent No. 1, their respective customer bases, their geographical reach
and the mode of conducting business and documents produced. It is
accordingly, submitted that these findings indicate that there was complete
non-application of mind by the arbitrator.
14.    Accordingly, it is humbly prayed that this Court may set aside the
impugned arbitral award as being vitiated by patent illegality, being contrary
to the fundamental policy of Indian laws as well as being contrary to the
Public policy of India.
15.    Per Contra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of Respondent No.1
has strenuously opposed the instant petition as devoid of any merit. It is
submitted that the arbitration has been conducted in accordance with the
procedure and within the four corners of law, and the arbitrator after
appraising all the evidence on record has rightly come to the conclusion that
the Petitioner had no rights or legitimate interests in the Disputed Domain
16.    It is submitted that the argument of the Petitioner that arbitrator has
taken evidence on the back of the Petitioner is a frivolous averment as in the
Trademark Registration Certificate, the application number provided by the
Respondent was wrong and hence, the panel just fetched the correct
application number from the certificate which the Respondent has placed on
record. It is further submitted that the Respondent is in use of the Dispute
Domain Name since 2011, which is prior to the date of Registration by the
Petitioner and hence, the arbitrator has rightly come to the conclusion that
the Petitioner has no right to the Disputed Domain Name.
17.    Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the Respondent No. 2 has
submitted that NIXI has a very limited role in the present petition as the
only prayer sought against NIXI is to recommence the arbitration
proceedings by appointing a new arbitrator and supervise the arbitral
proceedings. In respect of the above prayer, it is submitted that such a
prayer is unheard of and non-maintainable as even in the event of setting
aside of the arbitral award, the finding of this Court on merits would act as
res-judicata and a recommencement of the arbitral proceedings involving
the same parties and same domain-name would be barred under law.
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                          Page 8 of 28
18.   It is further submitted that the impugned arbitral award was
communicated to the Petitioner and Respondent No.1 on 11th September
2019 and hence, the present petition being filed on 17th Jan 2020 is beyond
the period of limitation and hence, is barred by law.
19.   Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record. I have
also perused the impugned arbitral award as well as the entire arbitral record
brought on record. I have also given thoughtful considerations to the
submissions advanced by the parties.
20.   The challenge to the impugned arbitral award inter alia has been
made on the ground that the learned Arbitrator has failed to consider
relevant evidence on record in coming to the conclusion that Respondent
No.1 has trademark rights in the mark ‘SPROXIL’ and that the Petitioner
was using the Disputed Domain Name in bad faith. It is also submitted that
such a finding is not supported by any material on record. Another ground
which has been taken by the Petitioner is that learned Arbitrator has
exceeded the powers vested in him by relying on a trademark application
submitted by Respondent No.1 which was not provided to the Petitioner and
hence, documentary evidence received at the back of the Petitioner was
relied upon by the learned arbitrator in coming to its finding. It is
appropriate to reproduce Rule 8(a) and Rule 12(a) of the INDRP Rules
herein.
―Rule 8(a)- An Arbitrator shall conduct the arbitration
proceeding in such manner as it considers appropriate in
accordance with the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996,
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                         Page 9 of 28
Dispute Resolution Policy, the Rules of Procedure and any bye-
laws, rules and guidelines framed thereunder.
Rule 12(a) – An Arbitrator shall decide a Complaint on the
basis of the statements and documents submitted to it and in
accordance with the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996,
Dispute Resolution Policy, the Rules of Procedure and any bye-
laws, rules and guidelines framed thereunder and any law that
the Arbitrator deems to be applicable."
21.     Another ground which has been relied by the learned counsel for the
Petitioner is that there is complete non-application of mind by the learned
Arbitrator inasmuch as the wrong standard of burden of proof has been
placed on the Petitioner, requiring him to prove his case beyond reasonable
doubt and not on the basis of preponderance of probabilities. It has also
been argued that the complaint filed by the Respondent No.1 before the
Respondent No.2 was required to make out a prima facie case before the
burden could have been shifted on the Petitioner herein.
22.     It has been further pointed out that the learned Arbitrator has
conducted a "limited but independent search of its own" by reviewing the
description of business set out in the website of the Petitioner and of
Respondent No. 1, to find that similarities exist between the services offered
by both companies, and that for the purposes of this Policy, the
Respondent's company can be considered a competitor to the Complainant.
It is in this background that it is posited that the award suffers from multiple
infirmity.
23.     The main ground taken by the Petitioner while assailing the arbitral
award is that the arbitral award is patently illegal and contrary to the
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                             Page 10 of 28
fundamental policy of Indian laws due to the grounds as recorded above.
The law regarding patent illegality and public policy of India in no more res
integra and has been authoritatively clarified by the Hon’ble Supreme Court
in a number of judicial pronouncements. Before delving into the judicial
decisions, it is pertinent to reproduce the relevant portion of Section 34 of
the Arbitration Act.
34. Application for setting aside arbitral award.—(1) Recourse
to a Court against an arbitral award may be made only by an
application for setting aside such award in accordance with
sub-section (2) and subsection (3).
(2) An arbitral award may be set aside by the Court only if—
(a) the party making the application [establishes on the
basis of the record of the arbitral tribunal that]—
(i) a party was under some incapacity; or
(ii) the arbitration agreement is not valid under the law
to which the parties have subjected it or, failing any
indication thereon, under the law for the time being in
(iii) the party making the application was not given
proper notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or of
the arbitral proceedings or was otherwise unable to
present his case; or
(iv) the arbitral award deals with a dispute not
contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the
submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on
matters beyond the scope of the submission to
arbitration: Provided that, if the decisions on matters
submitted to arbitration can be separated from those not
so submitted, only that part of the arbitral award which
contains decisions on matters not submitted to
arbitration may be set aside; or
(v) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the
arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the
agreement of the parties, unless such agreement was in
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                          Page 11 of 28
conflict with a provision of this Part from which the
parties cannot derogate, or, failing such agreement, was
not in accordance with this Part; or
(i) the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of
settlement by arbitration under the law for the time being
(ii) the arbitral award is in conflict with the public
policy of India.
[Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is
clarified that an award is in conflict with the public
policy of India, only if,—
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by
fraud or corruption or was in violation of Section 75 or
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of
morality or justice.
Explanation 2.—For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to
whether there is a contravention with the fundamental policy of
Indian law shall not entail a review on the merits of the
dispute.
(2-A) An arbitral award arising out of arbitrations other than
international commercial arbitrations, may also be set aside
by the court, if the court finds that the award is vitiated by
patent illegality appearing on the face of the award:
Provided that an award shall not be set aside merely on the
ground of an erroneous application of the law or by
reappreciation of evidence.]
24.   In Renusagar Power Co. Ltd. v. General Electric Co., 1994 Supp (1)
SCC 644, the Hon’ble Supreme Court dealt with a challenge to a foreign
award under Section 7 of the Foreign Awards (Recognition and
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                          Page 12 of 28
Enforcement) Act, 1961. Though, the Arbitraton Act has repealed the
Foreign Awards Act but the said judgment is of great importance in
understanding the parameters of judicial review when it comes to either
foreign awards or international commercial arbitration seated in India as
Section 7 of the Foreign Awards Act contained grounds that were borrowed
from Article V of the Convention on the Recognition and Enforcement of
Foreign Arbitral Awards, 1958 (the "New York Convention"), which is
almost in the same terms as Sections 34 and 48 of the Arbitration Act. After
referring to the New York Convention, the Hon’ble Supreme Court
delineated the scope of enquiry of grounds under Sections 34/48 (equivalent
to the grounds under Section 7 of the Foreign Awards Act, which was
considered by the Court), and held:
34. Under the Geneva Convention of 1927, in order to obtain
recognition or enforcement of a foreign arbitral award, the
requirements of clauses (a) to (e) of Article I had to be fulfilled
and in Article II, it was prescribed that even if the conditions
laid down in Article I were fulfilled recognition and
enforcement of the award would be refused if the Court was
satisfied in respect of matters mentioned in clauses (a), (b) and
(c). The principles which apply to recognition and enforcement
of foreign awards are in substance, similar to those adopted by
the English courts at common law. (See: Dicey & Morris, The
Conflict of Laws, 11th Edn., Vol. I, p. 578). It was, however,
felt that the Geneva Convention suffered from certain defects
which hampered the speedy settlement of disputes through
arbitration. The New York Convention seeks to remedy the said
defects by providing for a much more simple and effective
method of obtaining recognition and enforcement of foreign
awards. Under the New York Convention the party against
whom the award is sought to be enforced can object to
recognition and enforcement of the foreign award on grounds
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                          Page 13 of 28
set out in sub-clauses (a) to (e) of clause (1) of Article V and
the court can, on its own motion, refuse recognition and
enforcement of a foreign award for two additional reasons set
out in sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause (2) of Article V. None of
the grounds set out in sub-clauses ( a ) to ( e) of clause (1) and
sub- clauses ( a ) and ( b) of clause (2) of Article V postulates a
challenge to the award on merits.
37. In our opinion, therefore, in proceedings for enforcement of
a foreign award under the Foreign Awards Act, 1961, the
scope of enquiry before the court in which award is sought to
be enforced is limited to grounds mentioned in Section 7 of the
Act and does not enable a party to the said proceedings to
impeach the award on merits.
65. This would imply that the defence of public policy which is
permissible under Section 7(1)( b )( ii) should be construed
narrowly. In this context, it would also be of relevance to
mention that under Article I(e) of the Geneva Convention Act of
1927, it is permissible to raise objection to the enforcement of
arbitral award on the ground that the recognition or
enforcement of the award is contrary to the public policy or to
the principles of the law of the country in which it is sought to
be relied upon. To the same effect is the provision in Section
7(1) of the Protocol & Convention Act of 1837 which requires
that the enforcement of the foreign award must not be contrary
to the public policy or the law of India. Since the expression
―public policy‖ covers the field not covered by the words ―and
the law of India‖ which follow the said expression,
contravention of law alone will not attract the bar of public
policy and something more than contravention of law is
required.
66. Article V(2)(b) of the New York Convention of 1958 and
Section 7(1)(b)(ii) of the Foreign Awards Act do not postulate
refusal of recognition and enforcement of a foreign award on
the ground that it is contrary to the law of the country of
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                           Page 14 of 28
enforcement and the ground of challenge is confined to the
recognition and enforcement
25.   Alan Redfern & Martin Hunter in Law and Practice of
International Commercial Arbitration, 2nd Edn., p. 461 have made a similar
―The New York Convention does not permit any review on the
merits of an award to which the Convention applies and, in this
respect, therefore, differs from the provisions of some systems
of national law governing the challenge of an award, where an
appeal to the courts on points of law may be permitted.‖
26.   Albert Jan van den Berg in his treatise The New York Arbitration
Convention of 1958 : Towards a Uniform Judicial Interpretation, has
expressed the following view:
―It is a generally accepted interpretation of the Convention
that the court before which the enforcement of the foreign
award is sought may not review the merits of the award. The
main reason is that the exhaustive list of grounds for refusal of
enforcement enumerated in Article V does not include a
mistake in fact or law by the arbitrator. Furthermore, under the
Convention the task of the enforcement judge is a limited one.
The control exercised by him is limited to verifying whether an
objection of a respondent on the basis of the grounds for
refusal of Article V(1) is justified and whether the enforcement
of the award would violate the public policy of the law of his
country. This limitation must be seen in the light of the
principle of international commercial arbitration that a
national court should not interfere with the substance of the
arbitration.”
27.    In International Commercial Arbitration by Gary B. Born (Wolters
Kluwer, Second Ed., 2014) [“Gary Born”], the learned author deals with
the proposition in the following manner:
“[12] No Judicial Review of Merits of Foreign or Non
Domestic Awards in Recognition Actions
It is an almost sacrosanct principle of international arbitration
that courts will not review the substance of arbitrators‘
decisions contained in foreign or nondomestic arbitral awards
in recognition proceedings. Virtually every authority
acknowledges this rule and virtually nobody suggests that this
principle should be abandoned. When national courts do
review the merits of awards, they labour to categorize their
action as an application of public policy, excess of authority, or
some other Article V exception, rather than purporting to
justify a review of the merits.
[a] No Judicial Review of Awards Under New York and Inter-
Neither the New York Convention nor the Inter American
Convention contains any exception permitting non-enforcement
of an award simply because the arbitrators got their decision
on the substance of the parties‘ dispute wrong, or even badly
wrong. This is reasonably clear from the language of the
Convention, which makes no reference to the possibility of a
review of the merits in Article V‘s exhaustive list of the
exclusive grounds for denying recognition of foreign and
nondomestic awards. There is also no hint in the New York
Convention‘s drafting history of any authority to reconsider the
merits of an arbitral award in recognition proceedings.
Likewise, the prohibition against review of the merits of the
arbitrator‘s decision is one of the most fundamental pillars of
national court authority interpreting the Convention. This
prohibition has repeatedly and uniformly been affirmed by
national courts, in both common law and civil law
jurisdictions. Simply put: ―the court may not refuse to enforce
an arbitral award solely on the ground that the arbitrator may
have made a mistake of law or fact‖ [Karaha Bodas Co. LLC
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                           Page 16 of 28
v. Perusahaan Pertambangan Minyak Dan Gas Bumi Negara,
364 F.3d 274, 287-88 (5th Cir. 2004)]. Thus, in the words of
the Luxembourg Supreme Court [Judgment of 24 November
Supérieure de Justice) (1996)]:
―The New York Convention does not provide for any control on
the manner in which the arbitrators decide on the merits, with
as the only reservation, the respect of international public
policy. Even if blatant, a mistake of fact or law, if made by the
arbitral tribunal, is not a ground for refusal of enforcement of
the tribunal‘s award.‖
Or, as a Brazilian recognition decision under the Convention
held [Judgment of 19 August 2009, Atecs Mannesmann GmbH
v. Rodrimar S/A Transportes Equipamentos Industriais e
Tribunal de Justiça) (2010)]:
―these questions pertain to the merits of the arbitral award
that, according to precedents from the Federal Supreme Court
and of this Superior Court of Justice, cannot be reviewed by
this Court since recognition and enforcement of a foreign
award is limited to an analysis of the formal requirements of
the award.‖
Commentators have uniformly adopted the same view of the
Convention [See, for e.g., K.-H. Böckstiegel, S. Kröll & P.
Nacimiento, Arbitration in Germany 452 (2007)].‖
28.   In Ssangyong Enginerring & Construction Co. Ltd vs. National
Highway Authority of India, (2019) 15 SCC 131, the Hon’ble Supreme
Court while explaining the scope of the expression ‘Public Policy of India’
made the following pertinent observations:
―23. What is clear, therefore, is that the expression ―public
policy of India‖, whether contained in Section 34 or in Section
48, would now mean the ―fundamental policy of Indian law‖ as
explained in paragraphs 18 and 27 of Associate Builders
(supra), i.e., the fundamental policy of Indian law would be
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                          Page 17 of 28
relegated to the ―Renusagar‖ understanding of this expression.
This would necessarily mean that the Western Geco (supra)
expansion has been done away with. In short, Western Geco
(supra), as explained in paragraphs 28 and 29 of Associate
Builders (supra), would no longer obtain, as under the guise of
interfering with an award on the ground that the arbitrator has
not adopted a judicial approach, the Court‘s intervention
would be on the merits of the award, which cannot be permitted
post amendment. However, insofar as principles of natural
justice are concerned, as contained in Sections 18 and
34(2)(a)(iii) of the 1996 Act, these continue to be grounds of
challenge of an award, as is contained in paragraph 30 of
25. Thus, it is clear that public policy of India is now
constricted to mean firstly, that a domestic award is contrary to
the fundamental policy of Indian law, as understood in
paragraphs 18 and 27 of Associate Builders (supra), or
secondly, that such award is against basic notions of justice or
morality as understood in paragraphs 36 to 39 of Associate
Builders (supra). Explanation 2 to Section 34(2)(b)(ii) and
Explanation 2 to Section 48(2)(b)(ii) was added by the
Amendment Act only so that Western Geco (supra), as
understood in Associate Builders (supra), and paragraphs 28
and 29 in particular, is now done away with.
26. Insofar as domestic awards made in India are concerned,
an additional ground is now available under sub-section (2A),
added by the Amendment Act, 2015, to Section 34. Here, there
must be patent illegality appearing on the face of the award,
which refers to such illegality as goes to the root of the matter
but which does not amount to mere erroneous application of
the law. In short, what is not subsumed within ―the
fundamental policy of Indian law‖, namely, the contravention
of a statute not linked to public policy or public interest, cannot
be brought in by the backdoor when it comes to setting aside an
award on the ground of patent illegality.
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                            Page 18 of 28
27. Secondly, it is also made clear that re-appreciation of
evidence, which is what an appellate court is permitted to do,
cannot be permitted under the ground of patent illegality
appearing on the face of the award.
28. To elucidate, paragraph 42.1 of Associate Builders (supra),
namely, a mere contravention of the substantive law of India,
by itself, is no longer a ground available to set aside an
arbitral award. Paragraph 42.2 of Associate Builders (supra),
however, would remain, for if an arbitrator gives no reasons
for an award and contravenes Section 31(3) of the 1996 Act,
that would certainly amount to a patent illegality on the face of
the award.
30. What is important to note is that a decision which is
perverse, as understood in paragraphs 31 and 32 of Associate
Builders (supra), while no longer being a ground for challenge
under ―public policy of India‖, would certainly amount to a
patent illegality appearing on the face of the award. Thus, a
finding based on no evidence at all or an award which ignores
vital evidence in arriving at its decision would be perverse and
liable to be set aside on the ground of patent illegality.
Additionally, a finding based on documents taken behind the
back of the parties by the arbitrator would also qualify as a
decision based on no evidence inasmuch as such decision is not
based on evidence led by the parties, and therefore, would also
have to be characterised as perverse.
31. Given the fact that the amended Act will now apply, and
that the “patent illegality” ground for setting aside arbitral
awards in international commercial arbitrations will not
apply..............‖
29.    Here, it is pertinent to elaborate the meaning of the ‘Fundamental
Policy of Indian Law’, as the Petitioner has taken a plea that the impugned
arbitral award is contrary to the fundamental policy of Indian Law and
hence, being opposed to the Public Policy of India.
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                          Page 19 of 28
30.   In Associate Builders vs. Delhi Development Authority, (2015) 3
SCC 49, the Hon’ble Supreme Court clarified the meaning and scope of
‗Fundamental Policy of Indian Law‘ in the context of Section 34 of the
Arbitration Act in the following manner:
―28. In a recent judgment, ONGC Ltd. v. Western Geco
International Ltd., 2014 (9) SCC 263, this Court added three
other distinct and fundamental juristic principles which must be
understood as a part and parcel of the fundamental policy of
Indian law. The Court held-
―35. What then would constitute the ―fundamental policy
of Indian law‖ is the question. The decision in ONGC
[ONGC Ltd. v. Saw Pipes Ltd., (2003) 5 SCC 705] does
not elaborate that aspect. Even so, the expression must,
in our opinion, include all such fundamental principles
as providing a basis for administration of justice and
enforcement of law in this country. Without meaning to
exhaustively enumerate the purport of the expression
―fundamental policy of Indian law‖, we may refer to
three distinct and fundamental juristic principles that
must necessarily be understood as a part and parcel of
the fundamental policy of Indian law. The first and
foremost is the principle that in every determination
whether by a court or other authority that affects the
rights of a citizen or leads to any civil consequences, the
court or authority concerned is bound to adopt what is in
legal parlance called a ―judicial approach‖ in the
matter. The duty to adopt a judicial approach arises
from the very nature of the power exercised by the court
or the authority does not have to be separately or
additionally enjoined upon the fora concerned. What
must be remembered is that the importance of a judicial
approach in judicial and quasi-judicial determination
lies in the fact that so long as the court, tribunal or the
authority exercising powers that affect the rights or
obligations of the parties before them shows fidelity to
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                           Page 20 of 28
judicial approach, they cannot act in an arbitrary,
capricious or whimsical manner. Judicial approach
ensures that the authority acts bona fide and deals with
the subject in a fair, reasonable and objective manner
and that its decision is not actuated by any extraneous
consideration. Judicial approach in that sense acts as a
check against flaws and faults that can render the
decision of a court, tribunal or authority vulnerable to
challenge.
38. Equally important and indeed fundamental to the
policy of Indian law is the principle that a court and so
also a quasijudicial authority must, while determining
the rights and obligations of parties before it, do so in
accordance with the principles of natural justice.
Besides the celebrated audi alteram partem rule one of
the facets of the principles of natural justice is that the
court/authority deciding the matter must apply its mind
to the attendant facts and circumstances while taking a
view one way or the other. Non-application of mind is a
defect that is fatal to any adjudication. Application of
mind is best demonstrated by disclosure of the mind and
disclosure of mind is best done by recording reasons in
support of the decision which the court or authority is
taking. The requirement that an adjudicatory authority
must apply its mind is, in that view, so deeply embedded
in our jurisprudence that it can be described as a
fundamental policy of Indian law.
39. No less important is the principle now recognised as
a salutary juristic fundamental in administrative law that
a decision which is perverse or so irrational that no
reasonable person would have arrived at the same will
not be sustained in a court of law. Perversity or
irrationality of decisions is tested on the touchstone of
Wednesbury principle of reasonableness. Decisions that
fall short of the standards of reasonableness are open to
challenge in a court of law often in writ jurisdiction of
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                         Page 21 of 28
the superior courts but no less in statutory processes
wherever the same are available.
40. It is neither necessary nor proper for us to attempt
an exhaustive enumeration of what would constitute the
fundamental policy of Indian law nor is it possible to
place the expression in the straitjacket of a definition.
What is important in the context of the case at hand is
that if on facts proved before them the arbitrators fail to
draw an inference which ought to have been drawn or if
they have drawn an inference which is on the face of it,
untenable resulting in miscarriage of justice, the
adjudication even when made by an Arbitral Tribunal
that enjoys considerable latitude and play at the joints in
making awards will be open to challenge and may be
cast away or modified depending upon whether the
offending part is or is not severable from the rest.‖
31. The third juristic principle is that a decision which is
perverse or so irrational that no reasonable person would have
arrived at the same is important and requires some degree of
explanation. It is settled law that where:
1. a finding is based on no evidence, or
2. an arbitral tribunal takes into account something
irrelevant to the decision which it arrives at; or
3. ignores vital evidence in arriving at its decision,
such decision would necessarily be perverse.
33. It must clearly be understood that when a court is applying
the ―public policy‖ test to an arbitration award, it does not act
as a court of appeal and consequently errors of fact cannot be
corrected. A possible view by the arbitrator on facts has
necessarily to pass muster as the arbitrator is the ultimate
master of the quantity and quality of evidence to be relied upon
when he delivers his arbitral award. Thus an award based on
little evidence or on evidence which does not measure up in
quality to a trained legal mind would not be held to be invalid
on this score1 . Once it is found that the arbitrators approach
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                             Page 22 of 28
is not arbitrary or capricious, then he is the last word on
facts......‖
31.    Therefore, what really transpires herein is that first, the learned
arbitrator must have taken a judicial approach; secondly, the principles of
natural justice must have been adhered; thirdly, the decision must not been
perverse.
32.    In R vs. Northumberland Compensation Appeal Tribunal. Ex Parte
Shaw, 1952 1 All ER 122, Lord Denning made the following pertinent
―Leaving now the statutory tribunals, I turn to the awards of
the arbitrators. The Court of King's Bench never interfered by
certiorari with the award of an arbitrator, because it was a
private tribunal and not subject to the prerogative writs. If the
award was not made a rule of court, the only course available
to an aggrieved party was to resist an action on the award or
to file a bill in equity. If the award was made a rule of court, a
motion could be made to the court to set it aside for misconduct
of the arbitrator on the ground that it was procured by
corruption or other undue means: see the statute 9 and 10 Will.
III, c. 15. At one time an award could not be upset on the
ground of error of law by the arbitrator because that could not
be said to be misconduct or undue means, but ultimately it was
held in Kent v. Elstob, (1802) 3 East 18, that an award could
be set aside for error of law on the face of it. This was
regretted by Williams, J., in Hodgkinson v. Fernie, (1857) 3
C.B.N.S. 189, but is now well established.‖
33.    The Privy Council in Champsey Bhara Company vs. The Jivraj
Balloo Spinning and Weaving Company Ltd., AIR 1923 PC 66, held as
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                           Page 23 of 28
―The law on the subject has never been more clearly stated
than by Williams, J. in the case of Hodgkinson v. Fernie (1857)
―The law has for many years been settled, and remains so at
this day, that, where a cause or matters in difference are
referred to an arbitrator a lawyer or a layman, he is
constituted the sole and final judge of all questions both of law
and of fact …… The only exceptions to that rule are cases
where the award is the result of corruption or fraud, and one
other, which though it is to be regretted, is now, I think firmly
established viz., where the question of law necessarily arises on
the face of the award or upon some paper accompanying and
forming part of the award. Though the propriety of this latter
may very well be doubted, I think it may be considered as
established.
Now the regret expressed by Williams, J. in Hodgkinson v.
Fernie has been repeated by more than one learned Judge, and
it is certainly not to be desired that the exception should be in
any way extended. An error in law on the face of the award
means, in their Lordships‘ view, that you can find in the award
or a document actually incorporated thereto, as for instance, a
note appended by the arbitrator stating the reasons for his
judgment, some legal proposition which is the basis of the
award and which you can then say is erroneous. It does not
mean that if in a narrative a reference is made to a contention
of one party that opens the door to seeing first what that
contention is, and then going to the contract on which the
parties‘ rights depend to see if that contention is sound. Here it
is impossible to say, from what is shown on the face of the
award, what mistake the arbitrators made. The only way that
the learned judges have arrived at finding what the mistake
was is by saying: ―Inasmuch as the Arbitrators awarded so and
so, and inasmuch as the letter shows that then buyer rejected
the cotton, the arbitrators can only have arrived at that result
by totally misinterpreting Cl.52.‖ But they were entitled to give
their own interpretation to Cl. 52 or any other article, and the
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                          Page 24 of 28
award will stand unless, on the face of it they have tied
themselves down to some special legal proposition which then,
when examined, appears to be unsound. Upon this point,
therefore, their Lordships think that the judgment of Pratt, J
was right and the conclusion of the learned Judges of the Court
of Appeal erroneous.‖
34.   The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Associate Builders vs. Delhi
Development Authority (supra), while explaining the meaning an scope of
Patent Illegality held as follows:
―42. In the 1996 Act, this principle is substituted by the ‗patent
illegality‘ principle which, in turn, contains three sub heads –
42.1 (a) a contravention of the substantive law of India would
result in the death knell of an arbitral award. This must be
understood in the sense that such illegality must go to the root
of the matter and cannot be of a trivial nature. This again is a
really a contravention of Section 28(1)(a) of the Act, which
―28. Rules applicable to substance of dispute.—(1)
Where the place of arbitration is situated in India,— (a)
in an arbitration other than an international commercial
arbitration, the arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute
submitted to arbitration in accordance with the
substantive law for the time being in force in India;‖
42.2 (b) a contravention of the Arbitration Act itself would be
regarded as a patent illegality- for example if an arbitrator
gives no reasons for an award in contravention of section 31(3)
of the Act, such award will be liable to be set aside.
42.3 (c) Equally, the third sub-head of patent illegality is really
a contravention of Section 28 (3) of the Arbitration Act, which
―28. Rules applicable to substance of dispute.— (3) In
all cases, the arbitral tribunal shall decide in
accordance with the terms of the contract and shall take
into account the usages of the trade applicable to the
transaction.‖
This last contravention must be understood with a caveat. An
arbitral tribunal must decide in accordance with the terms of
the contract, but if an arbitrator construes a term of the
contract in a reasonable manner, it will not mean that the
award can be set aside on this ground. Construction of the
terms of a contract is primarily for an arbitrator to decide
unless the arbitrator construes the contract in such a way that
it could be said to be something that no fair minded or
reasonable person could do.
35.   This Court is conscious of the statutory injunction envisaged under
Section 34(2A) read with Section 2(1)(f) of the Arbitration that the ground
of ‘patent illegality‘ in setting aside an arbitral award is not available in the
case of international commercial arbitrations. It is important to reproduce
Section 2(1)(f) of the Arbitration Act.
(f) ―international commercial arbitration‖ means an
arbitration relating to disputes arising out of legal
relationships, whether contractual or not, considered as
commercial under the law in force in India and where at least
one of the parties is—
(i) an individual who is a national of, or habitually resident in,
any country other than India; or
(ii) a body corporate which is incorporated in any country
other than India; or
(iii) [* * *] an association or a body of individuals whose
central management and control is exercised in any country
other than India; or
(iv) the Government of a foreign country;
36.   Accordingly, as the award in the present case arises out of
International Commercial Arbitration seated in India, the Petitioner could
not be said to have the benefit of the ‘ground of patent illegality‘ to assail
the impugned arbitral award under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act.
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                             Page 26 of 28
37.    I am unable to subscribe to the submissions made by the learned
counsel for the Petitioner. The Petitioner has failed to show that the arbitral
award has been passed by not taking a judicial approach; or the award is
based on no evidence. Merely, because an application of Trademark
Registration has been given a passing reference by the Arbitrator cannot
inevitably lead to the conclusion that the principles of natural justice have
not been complied with and the award is rendered as perverse. This Court is
satisfied that there has been no violation of Rules 8(a) and 12(a) of the
INDRP Rules. This court is conscious that it is not sitting in appeal over the
arbitral award and hence, do not find any merit on the argument of the
Petitioner that the conclusion reached by the learned arbitrator to the effect
that the Disputed Domain Name registered by the Petitioner is identical is
perverse or contrary to the fundamental policy of Indian Law. This Court is
also satisfied that the arbitrator has reached a right conclusion to the effect
that the mark ‘sproxil’ has been in use by the Respondent No.1 since 2011,
on the basis of materials on record. Another ground taken is that the
arbitrator has placed wrong burden of proof on the Petitioner while
appreciating evidence inasmuch as the arbitrator held that the Petitioner has
not been able to prove beyond doubt that it was making a non-commercial
use. The relevant portion of the award is reproduced below:
―This, the Respondent contends, establishes that no
commercial gain was received by the Respondent through the
domain name. However, a detailed review of the screenshot
provided by the Complainant- and relied upon by the
Respondent as well- does not reveal any evidence which could
beyond doubt establish that the Respondent was/is making a
non-commercial use of the domain name.‖
O.M.P. (COMM) 32/2020                                           Page 27 of 28
38.    I am unable to agree to the interpretation as has been provided by the
Petitioner as the terminology used by the arbitrator cannot be equated with
legal term ‘beyond reasonable doubt‘ as is used in the criminal trial. I am
also unable to agree with the submission of the Petitioner that the arbitrator
has wrongly applied paragraph 6(i) of the INDRP Policy as even if the
submission of the Petitioner is accepted, then merely because there has been
wrong application of law not leading to perversity cannot lead to the setting
aside of the arbitral award.
39.    The Petitioner has failed to corroborate with evidence how the
learned arbitrator’s finding regarding the similarity of the disputed domain
name is contrary to the public policy of India. Even if the submissions of the
Petitioner qua patent illegality in the award is accepted, then also no ground
has been made out to set aside the award inasmuch as the threshold to
interfere in an arbitral award has not been made out.
40.    In view of the above discussion of facts and law, the present petition
does not have any substance to warrant interference by this Court under
Section 34 of the Arbitration Act.
41.    Accordingly, the instant petition being bereft of any merit is
dismissed along with pending applications, if any.
42.    The order be uploaded on the website forthwith.