I.A. 3970/2019 (U/O XI Rules 1 & 5 r/w Section 151 of CPC, 1908)
1.     The present application has been filed under Order XI Rules 1 and 5
read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter
referred to as “CPC, 1908”)on behalf of the plaintiff seeking directions to
the defendant Nos. 2 to 5 to answer the interrogatories attached with the
present application.
2.     It is submitted in the application that the defendants in their Written
Statement-cum-Counter Claim have admitted the entitlement of the plaintiff
to the MVC rebates and bonus for the period from December, 2008 till June,
2009 which is the claim of the plaintiff in the present Suit. However, the
defendants have alleged set off and raised a counter-claim of Rs.
5,69,00,000/- against the plaintiff alleging that the plaintiff has received
excess payments from November, 2007 to April, 2009 which was
discovered during the audit. However, no document has been placed by the
defendant No. 1 on the basis of which it is claiming excess payment to the
plaintiff.
3.     The defendant No. 4, Praveen Kumar was the Regional Manager
North Supplies Business of defendant No. 1 and as MVC Manager, was
required to monthly visit to the MVC customers and check and verify the
supplies made by the plaintiff on day-to-day basis and consumptions with
the MVC customers.         After the end of every month, the plaintiff sent
photocopy of all invoices raised to MVC customers to the MVC team of the
defendant No. 1 at Bangalore. The plaintiff also filed MVC sheets provided
by the defendant No. 1 and sent it back to the defendant No. 1.
4.     The defendant No. 3, Vibhor Bansal as Country Category
Manager/Head of MVC team approved and sanctioned the rebates to the
plaintiff. The defendant No. 2, Ravi Aggarwal as President of Imaging and
Printing Group of the defendant No. 1 ratified and approved the MVC
claims of the plaintiff. It is only after such ratification and approval of that
the claims of the plaintiff were forwarded for disbursal to defendant No.
5-Baskar Laguduva Rajaram, who headed the Finance Division of the
defendant No. 1.
5.     It is submitted that the defendant Nos. 3 and 4 were keeping hour to
hour online information about the status of the purchases made by the
two-tier distributors like the plaintiff, from the registered wholesalers of the
defendant No. 1. However, the defendant Nos. 1 to 5 in their consolidated
Written Statement have only made bald denial of specific averments made
by the plaintiff in the plaint and have evaded to refer to their relevant record
on the basis of which the averments of the plaintiff have been denied. The
averments made by the plaintiff in paragraphs 17 and 18 of the plaint have
been vaguely responded and the response to specific averments has been
avoided. It is submitted that there is a suppression of material record on the
basis of which the Counter-Claim has been filed by the defendant No. 1.
6.     It is asserted that the Legal Notice dated 28 th May, 2018 was served
upon the defendants despite which, the relevant documents have not been
produced. An application under Order 11 Rule 12 of CPC, 1908 was filed,
but the same has also not been complied with.
7.     It is claimed that the material information has been suppressed by the
defendants and hence, the present application has been filed requesting the
defendants to answer the specific interrogatories which read as under:
“1. Is it correct, that as President of M/s. Imaging and Printing
Group of the Defendant No. 1, you finally approved for
disbursal the rebates, which were verified, tallied, finalized for
approval by Defendant No. 3 and 4, on the basis of sales
transactions and records of the Tier-1 Distributors, Tier-2
Distributors and MVC Customers and then forwarded to your
office for final approval and disbursal to the Tier-2 Distributors
like Plaintiff.
If so, please furnish the full particulars of the said records of
the Defendant No. 1.”
8.     Learned counsel on behalf of the defendant No. 1 in its Reply has
taken a preliminary objection that the answering defendant has nowhere
admitted to the entitlements of the plaintiff to the alleged MVC rebates. On
the contrary, it has been specifically pleaded that the plaintiff has wrongly
claimed MVC rebates.            Moreover, the interrogatories sought to be
administered to the defendants is nothing but a fishing expedition
tantamounting to embarking on a roving enquiry.
9.     It is claimed that the questions that may be relevant during
cross-examination, may not be necessarily relevant as interrogatories. It is
submitted that the present application is without any merit and is liable to be
dismissed.
11.    The provisions of Order 11 Rule 1 of CPC, 1908 are intended to
curtail evidence thereby expediting trial of the Suit and saving time of the
Court and costs of litigation. The interrogatories must be used liberally by
the parties. One of the great object of the interrogatories when properly
administered is to save evidence i.e., to diminish the burden of proof which
was otherwise on the plaintiff. The object is not merely to discover the facts
but also to save the expense of proving a part on the case. Interrogatories
are not limited to giving the plaintiff the knowledge of that which is not
already known, but includes getting admission of anything which he has to
prove on any issue which is raised between him and the defendant. Order 11
gives a party a right to interrogate with a view to obtain an admission from
his opponent of everything which is material and relevant to the issue raised
in the pleadings.
12.    In Transport Corporation of India Ltd. (supra), it was observed that
the pleadings may not sufficiently disclose the case of the parties and in
order to make good the deficiencies, this rule has been enacted.
13.    Similar observations have been made in Smt. Sharda Dhir vs. Sh.
Ashok Kumar Makhija and Ors. 2003 AIR(Del) 288, wherein it was
observed that the Court should not be hyper technical at the stage of
interrogatories. While it cannot be used as a means for obtaining information
which may be admissible during the oral cross-examination of a party and
its witnesses, but at the same time, interrogatories cannot be disallowed
merely because of the party interrogating has other means of proving the
facts in question.
14.    The plaintiff in detail has explained that it had claimed various MVC
rebates and has given the detailed process by which the rebates are verified
after which the plaintiff became entitled to said rebates. The defendants in
their Written Statement had not only denied the said rebates but had also
filed a Counter-Claim claiming that in the audit, it was pointed out that the
excess amount has been paid to the plaintiff by way of MVC rebates.
15.    The plaintiff admittedly has filed an earlier application under Order
11 Rule 12 of CPC, 1908 seeking the documents from the defendants in
support of its Counter-Claim to demonstrate how there was an excess
payment on account MVC rebates, but the said application had been
dismissed vide Order dated 12th March, 2020.
16.    Essentially, the objective of interrogatories is to narrow the
controversy and to facilitate framing of issues only in respect of the disputed
facts.   However, the interrogatories cannot be used by the plaintiff for
substituting its burden of proving of things by adducing relevant evidence.
17.    Learned counsel on behalf of the plaintiff has placed reliance on the
decision in Canara Bank vs. Rajiv Tyagi & Associates 2010 (166) DLT 523,
wherein it was held that the Suit was based on accounts and interrogatories
were served in respect of 84 bills. It was held that the interrogatories have
to be judged in the light of nature of the Suit. The Suit of the plaintiff was
based on the accounts and the interrogatories were sought by the defendant
in respect of the bills on which the plaintiff was placing his reliance. In that
context, it was held that the interrogatories were answerable by the plaintiff.
The facts in hand are clearly distinguishable because it is the plaintiff who is
seeking to prove his case by compelling the defendant to answer the
interrogatories in support of his case.          The judgement is clearly
distinguishable.
18.     Learned counsel on behalf of the plaintiff has also placed reliance on
the decision in Transport Corporation of India Ltd. vs. Reserve Bank of
India & Anr. 2017 (243) DLT 168, wherein it was held that at the stage of
administration of interrogatories, the Court has to only consider whether the
answer to the interrogatories would have some bearing on the issues
involved in the case.      In the said case the plaintiff had sought the
interrogatories to be administered to the defendant to solicit the admissions
about having entered into transactions with the entities and if they had
facilitated/brokered several transactions for and on behalf of the defendants.
The information sought through interrogatories was that which was in the
private domain of the defendants and thus was required to be furnished by
the defendants. The facts as involved are again distinguishable from the
facts in hand.
19.     From the detailed explanation given by the plaintiff, it is evident that
there was multiple-tier process for enquiring into the MVC rebates due to
plaintiff, which according to the plaintiff had been stringently followed and
there are no excess payment made. It is for the plaintiff to prove its case in
regard to its entitlements and the interrogatories sought by the plaintiff do
not meet the criteria of interrogatories and cannot be permitted.           The
documents sought from the defendants are those which pertain to the
Counter-Claim of the defendants and if the defendants fail to produce and/or
prove the documents, the consequence would be the dismissed of the
Counter-Claim. However, these documents do not in any manner shorten
the controversy or narrow the scope of evidence that the plaintiff would
have to necessarily prove in support of its claim.
20.    In view of the facts and submissions made, the present application is
without merit and is hereby dismissed in the above terms.