Mr. Sanjeev Kumar Akash, the petitioner, has
filed the present Public Interest Litigation in order to
challenge the order dated 12.02.2021, passed by the
Secretary, Department of Home, the respondent no. 2,
whereby the Officers of the Police Department have been
given the additional charge of the office of the Senior
Superintendent/Superintendent       of   Jail  at  Sitarganj,
Haldwani,   Haridwar,    Dehradun     and    Roorkee.    The
petitioner has further challenged the consequential order
dated 12.02.2021, passed by the Inspector General of
Prisons, the respondent no. 3, whereby the Officers of the
Police Department have been transferred, and posted
with      the      additional      charge       of     Senior
Superintendent/Superintendent of Jail at various prisons
in the State of Uttarakhand.
2.         Briefly stated, the facts of the case are that, as
per the structure in the Department of Prison in the State
of Uttarakhand, there are three sanctioned posts of
Senior Superintendent of Jail, and nine sanctioned posts
of Superintendent of Jail.      Out of the nine sanctioned
posts of Superintendent of Jail, four posts are to be filled
up by way of direct recruitment, and five posts are to be
filled up by way of promotion from the post of Jailor.
Presently, one post of Senior Superintendent of Jail, and
four posts of Superintendent of Jail, have been filled up.
Therefore, currently two posts of Senior Superintendent
of Jail, and five posts of Superintendent of Jail are lying
vacant. According to the State Government, considering
the difficulties faced in running the Jails properly, it has
taken a conscious decision to give additional charge of
Senior Superintendent of Jail, and Superintendent of Jail,
to officers of the Indian Police Service (IPS). Hence, the
present Public Interest Litigation before this Court.
3.         Ms. Kamini Jaiswal, the learned Senior Counsel
for the petitioner, has raised the following contentions
Firstly, that the job responsibility and      the
training of the Police Officers, and those of the Officers of
the Jail Administration, stand on different plains.      The
duty of the Police Officers is preventive and penal, and
spans    the   arena   of   investigation, prevention    and
protection, and maintenance of law and order.         On the
other hand, with the emerging modern trends in penology
and theories of punishment, the fundamental duty of the
Officers of the Department of Jail is the protection, the
reformation, and the rehabilitation of the prisoners.
Since the job responsibilities are of different nature, the
psychological makeup, the thinking, the conduct of the
Police Officers and the Jail Officers, perforce, has to be
quite different. Whereas, generally a Police Officer sees
an offender as a culprit, as a person who has violated the
law, and thus deserves to be condemned and punished,
the Officers of the Department of Prison see prisoners as
human     beings, who have        erred,  who need     to be
reformed, who need to be rehabilitated, and brought back
as productive members of the society.         Thus, the very
philosophy behind the interaction between a Police Officer
and an offender, and the interaction between a Jail
Officer and the prisoner, stand on a different footing.
Therefore, one cannot be confused with the other.
Secondly, keeping this distinction in mind, even
law has bifurcated these two services into two different
classes; the laws have empowered them differently.
Therefore,   to confuse these two         classes would be
violative of the fundamental philosophy, which govern
these two different services.
Thirdly, this bifurcation of the two departments,
and    the   philosophy     behind   working    of  the  two
departments, is not unique to India.       But has universal
application throughout the world.          According to the
learned Senior Counsel, the United Nations has issued
“Standard    Minimum     Rules   for   the   Treatment   of
Prisoners”, better known as “the Nelson Mandela Rules”.
These Rules prescribe the “good principles and practice in
the treatment of prisoners and prison management”.
Rules 74 to 82 deal with “Institutional Personnel”. Rule
74 provides for “careful selection of every grade of the
personnel”. It emphasises “on their integrity, humanity,
professional capacity, and personal suitability for the
work that the proper administration of prisons depends”.
Rule 74(3) further stresses on the need for appointment
of prison personnel “on a full-time basis”.     Rule 75(2)
states that “before entering on duty, all prison staff shall
be provided with training tailored to their general and
specific duties, which shall be reflective of contemporary
evidence-based best practice in penal sciences”. Rule 76
further states that the training referred to in Rule 75(2)
shall include, at a minimum, training on “rights and
duties of prison staff in the exercise of their functions,
including respecting the human dignity of all prisoners,
and the prohibition of certain conduct, in particular
torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment,
or punishment.” Rule 79 further states that “the Prison
Director (Superintendent of Jail in India) shall devote his
or her entire working time to official duties, and shall not
be appointed on a part-time basis. He or she shall reside
on the premises of the prison or in its immediate
Relying on the Nelson Mandela Rules, the
learned    Senior   Counsel    has   emphasised    that  the
Superintendents of Jail are        required to undergo a
particular training, which will inculcate a sense of dignity
of all the prisoners, will make them humane, and
sensitise them to the plight of the prisoners, to their
families, and to the prison conditions. The learned Senior
Counsel has further stressed on the need for appointing
the Senior Superintendent/Superintendent of Jail on a
full-time basis, rather than on a part-time basis.
Fourthly, referring to the Uttar Pradesh Jail
(Group A and B) Service Rules, 1982 (for short “the
Rules, 1982”), the learned Senior Counsel has submitted
that Rule 3(k) defines the post of "Superintendent,
District Jail" to mean “the whole-time Superintendent, Jail
appointed in accordance with the 1982 Rules”. According
to    Rule   5(6)  of   the   Rules,  1982,   the   post  of
Superintendent of District Jail is to be filled up fifty
percent by direct recruitment, and fifty percent by
promotion from amongst the regularly appointed Deputy
Superintendents/Jailors with a minimum of five years’
service as Deputy Superintendents, or Jailors or both.
Moreover,      Rule  14  deals   with   “determination  of
vacancies”. Rule 15 deals with the “procedure for direct
recruitment”.     Rule 16 deals with the “procedure for
recruitment by promotion to the post of Superintendent,
District Jail”. Therefore, according to the learned Senior
Counsel, the procedure for making an appointment to the
post of Senior Superintendent/Superintendent of Jail is
clearly prescribed by Rules 14, 15 and 16 of the Rules,
1982. These Rules do not permit ad-hoc appointment of
Police     personnel    on     the    post     of   Senior
Superintendent/Superintendent of Jail.      Therefore, the
impugned orders are clearly in violation of the Rules,
Fifthly, even the Code of Criminal Procedure,
prevents the keeping of an undertrial prisoner in police
custody beyond a stipulated period of time. According to
Section 167 of Cr.P.C, an accused cannot be detained in
police custody beyond a period of fifteen days. In case
the investigation is not completed within a period of
ninety    days,  for   offences   punishable    with   death,
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term of not
less than ten years, the offender would have to be
granted     bail  under     Section   167(2)(a)(i)    Cr.P.C.
Therefore, even the Cr.P.C. does not envisage keeping of
undertrial prisoners in police custody for too long a
period.    Even otherwise, while keeping an offender in
judicial custody, he/she cannot be kept beyond a period
of sixty days or ninety days in case the investigation were
not completed within the stipulated period of time.
Moreover, in case the investigation were to be completed
within the stipulated period of sixty days or ninety days,
and in case bail were not granted by a competent Court,
an undertrial is required to be kept in judicial custody.
But,    by   appointing    police   personnel    as    Senior
Superintendent/Superintendent of Jail, for all practical
purposes, the custody is suddenly changed from a judicial
one to a police one.        Therefore, the learned Senior
Counsel submits that the impugned orders violate the
letter and the spirit of Section 167 Cr.P.C.
Lastly, despite the fact that a prisoner loses the
freedom of movement, he/she continues to enjoy the
other   fundamental      rights,   as   guaranteed by  the
Constitution of India.       Therefore, Article 21 of the
Constitution of India, guaranteeing protection of Life and
personal liberty, continues to shine even in the dark
corners of a prison cell. According to the learned Senior
Counsel, once a procedure has been established by law-
that too a procedure backed by certain penological
philosophy- it cannot be violated by the State. Therefore,
the State is legally bound to implement the service rules
as contained in the Rules, 1982, to implement the
requirements of Cr.P.C, to implement the constitutional
philosophy,    as   embodied     in   the Preamble  of the
Constitution of India, and to implement the “Nelson
Mandela Rules”. Hence, according to the learned Senior
Counsel, the impugned orders deserve to be set-aside by
4.         On the other hand, Mr. Anil Kumar Bisht, the
learned Additional Chief Standing Counsel for the State,
has raised the following counter-contentions before this
Firstly, in the order dated 17.11.2006, issued
by the Principal Secretary, Uttaranchal Administration, it
was clearly mentioned that the Inspector General of
Prisons would either be the Secretary, Home, or IAS
officers, or of equivalent posts.     Similarly, Additional
Inspector General of Prisons would be from the post of
Additional Secretary, Home/Joint Secretary, Home, or
from PCS Cadre. In fact, even presently, the post of the
Inspector General of Prisons is occupied by a person
belonging to the IPS cadre. Therefore, the appointment
of    police  personnel     to   the    post    of   Senior
Superintendent/Superintendent of Jail can certainly be
made from Police Officers.
Secondly, considering the fact that presently
there are two posts of Senior Superintendent of Jail, and
five posts of Superintendent of Jail, which are lying
vacant, considering the fact that direct recruitment to
these posts would require some time, considering the fact
that there is no one in the post of Jailors, who has
completed five years of required service for being
Superintendent/Superintendent     of   Jail, the   State is
justified in making Police Officers incharge of these two
posts on a temporary basis.        Therefore, the learned
counsel has supported the impugned orders.
5.          In rejoinder, Ms. Kamini Jaiswal, the learned
Senior Counsel for the petitioner, has pleaded that the
letter dated 17.11.2006 does not support the case of the
State. For, while the post of Inspector General of Prisons
and Additional Inspector General of Prisons may be
permitted to be filled up from IPS Officers, the post of
Senior Superintendent/Superintendent of Jail is covered
by the Rules, 1982.       Once the Rules, 1982 have been
promulgated, they cannot be diluted by a mere letter
issued     by  the   Principal   Secretary.   In  fact,  the
Superintendent/Superintendent of Jail has to be strictly in
accordance with the Rules, 1982.
6.          Heard    the   learned   counsel,  perused   the
impugned orders.
7.          Prisons are as ancient as human civilization.
Initially, prisons were created as detention centres for
detaining those who were threat to the political power.
According to the Bhagavata Purana, an ancient text on
the   life  of  Lord   Krishna,   his parents, Devaki   and
Vasudeva, were imprisoned by Kansa, the King of
Mathura.      However, over the centuries, prisons were
constructed for the purpose of punishing those, who
violate the law.      Soon the purpose of prisons was
changed    from   detention  to punishment. In     ancient
Athens, Socrates was imprisoned for punishing him for
having   corrupted   the  minds   of  the  youth.     Long
imprisonment sentences catered to the retributory and
deterrent theories of punishment.
8.         In the eighteenth-century Europe, in the age of
Enlightenment, John Locke, the great English political
theorist, claimed that although men are basically good,
but laws and prisons were still needed to keep down “the
few desperate men in society”. Therefore, prisons were
needed to protect the society from molestation of others.
9.         However, in the 1700’s, British Judges, like Sir
William Blackstone, criticized the use of executions and
other harsh punishments being meted out to the people.
In 1777, the British reformer, John Howard published his
book called “The State of the Prisons in England and
Wales”. For the first time, he introduced the theory of
reformation i.e. to make the prisoners aware of their
guilt, and to motivate them to do penance for their
wrongful act; thereby cleansing their soul and mind so
that they may reform themselves as individuals. Because
the prisoners were motivated to feel penitent (sorry for
doing   wrong),   the   prisons came     to   be   known   as
10.        On the other side of the Atlantic, in 1787, the
founders of Philadelphia, a city in the United States, the
Quakers, formed the “Philadelphia Society for Alleviating
the Miseries of Public Prisons” (presently known as the
Pennsylvania Prison Society). According to the Quakers,
a prisoner could be reformed through hard work and
meditation.      They    introduced   the   classification of
criminals   into  different   groups.     While     the  most
dangerous criminals were to be kept away, those accused
of petty crimes could be reformed. Due to their efforts,
in 1790, the United States had its first prison known as
11.        In 1835, Lord Macaulay presented a note to the
Legislative Council in India as he was shocked by the
horrifying and inhumane conditions prevalent in the
Indian jails. The next year, on 02.01.1836, Lord William
Bantick constituted a “Prison Discipline Committee”. The
report of this Committee, submitted to Lord Auckland in
1838, revealed the rampant corruption, the laxity in
discipline, and the abuse of men and women, who were
imprisoned.        However,    surprisingly,  the  Committee
rejected the thought of reforming the criminals.
12.          Over the years, the “Conference of Experts”
held in 1877, and the “Fourth Jail Commission” in 1888,
recommended that there should be a uniformity in all the
Jails functioning in British India. Since Indians were seen
as subjects and not as citizens, since the Britishers saw
themselves as the Ruler, they recommended rigorous
prison sentences, and even punishments within the
confines of the Jails, such as whipping and solitary
confinement,      and   keeping    the   prisoners  in  gunny
clothing.     The outcome of the recommendations of the
“Conference of Experts” and the “Fourth Jail Commission”
was the enactment of the “Prisons Act of 1894”.           The
Prisons Act, 1894 continues to govern most of the Jails
even today.
13.          The “All India Jail Committee (1919-1920)” for
the    first   time  recommended       the   reformation  and
rehabilitation of offenders as one of the objectives of the
prison administration.     The Committee spoke about the
adequate training of the prison staff, and about the
separation     of   executive/custodial,    ministerial   and
technical staff in prison service. The Committee believed
that a different sort of training needs to be provided to
the prison staff, than the training being provided to the
police staff.
14.        After independence, a number of Committees
have    been     constituted,   beginning   with    the   Jail
recommendations made by Dr. W.C. Reckless, a U.N.
Expert on Correctional Work. While submitting his report
on “Jail Administration in India”, he advocated the
reformative theory of punishment; he emphasised on
specialized training of correctional personnel; he stressed
on the need for a cadre of properly trained personnel
15.        In   1972,    the  Ministry   of  Home     Affairs,
Government of India, appointed a “Working Group on
Prisons”. In its report submitted in 1973, the Committee
again emphasised the need for proper training of prison
personnel.    It also stressed that “prison administration
should be treated as an integral part of the social defence
components of national planning process”.          Thus, the
very basis for prison administration was to protect,
reform and rehabilitate the prison population. Moreover,
the prison population is not a population to be neglected.
But it is a population, which needs to be encouraged to
be productive. Therefore, skill upgradation is a sine qua
16.        In 1980, the Government of India constituted
an “All India Committee on Jail Reforms” under the
chairmanship of Hon’ble Mr. Justice A. N. Mulla.       The
Mulla   Committee    submitted    658   recommendations.
According to the Committee, prisons in the country shall
endeavour to reform and reassimilate offenders in the
social milieu by giving them appropriate correctional
treatment. One of the most important recommendations
is  that  “prison  services  shall  be   developed  as    a
professional career service. The State shall endeavour to
develop    a  well-organized   prison   cadre   based   on
appropriate job requirements, sound training and proper
promotional avenues. The efficient functioning of prisons
depends,    undoubtedly,   upon   the  personal  qualities,
educational qualifications, professional competence and
character of prison personnel.    The status, emoluments
and other service conditions of prison personnel should
commensurate        with   their    job    requirements     and
responsibilities. An All-India Service, namely the ‘Indian
Prisons and Correctional Service’ shall be constituted to
induct better qualified and talented persons at higher
echelons.    Proper training of prison personnel shall be
developed at the ‘national, regional and State levels’.”
17.        On 17.07.2009, the Ministry of Home Affairs,
Government      of  India   had    written   to   the Principal
Secretary    (Prison)/Secretary      (Home)     (In-charge   of
Prisons) - All State Governments / UTs DGs/ IGs incharge
of prisons- All State Governments / UTs, wherein it had
emphasised the large number of judgments delivered by
the Hon’ble Supreme Court with regard to the prison
administration and the jail system prevalent in India. It
had further made certain recommendations as under:-
(i)        Establishing       well      equipped       training
infrastructure in the State, with adequate skilled and well
qualified instructional staff, to cater to the normal needs
of basic and in-service training for the prison staff in
different discipline.
(ii)       Creating adequate posts for prison staff as per
norms    in   different   categories,    commensurate      with
operational     needs    of   safe    custody,   reformation,
rehabilitation, health care, legal assistance etc.
(iii)      Filling up all the vacancies, presently running
up to 17.58% (in 2006) within time bound frame and
ensure    proper    cadre    management      through   timely
trainings, promotions, recruitments etc.
18.        Over the decades, the Hon’ble Supreme Court
has rushed to the rescue of the prisoners.          The Apex
Court has not only given the protection of Article 21 of
the Constitution of India to the prisoners, but has also
emphasised on the penological philosophy of reformation,
and rehabilitation of the prisoners. It has, thus, stressed
on the need for having a well-trained prison staff, who
would cater to the needs of the prisoners on a full-time
19.        Recently, in the case of Inhuman Conditions
In 1382 Prisons, In re [(2018) 18 SCC 777], keeping
in mind the dire necessity of reforming in prison
administration, and the prison management, the Hon’ble
Supreme     Court    has    constituted  a  Supreme     Court
Committee on “Prison Reforms” consisting of : (i) Hon'ble
Mr Justice Amitava Roy, a former Judge of the Supreme
Court as its Chairperson, (ii) Inspector General of Police,
Bureau of Police Research and Development as its
Member, and (iii) Director General (Prisons) Tihar Jail,
New Delhi as its Member. The Committee has made the
following recommendations with regard to the staffing
The Hon'ble Court may issue following directions in this
(a) All State Governments will hold special recruitment
drives to fill up the existing vacancies in different ranks with
the following timelines.
(i)   In  case  of  regular  recruitment   against
permanent vacancies, the recruitment process should
start within three months and should be completed
within one year in the maximum.
(ii) All promotional vacancies should be filled up
within six months”.
20.         At the International level, the United Nations
has issued the “Nelson Mandela Rules”, which deal with
the “Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of
Prisoners”.       As mentioned hereinabove, these Rules
prescribe the accepted good principles, and practices in
the treatment of prisoners and prison management.
Rules 74 to 82 deal with “Institutional Personnel”.
1. The prison administration shall provide for the
careful selection of every grade of the personnel, since
it is on their integrity, humanity, professional capacity
and personal suitability for the work that the proper
administration of prisons depends.
2. The prison administration shall constantly seek to
awaken and maintain in the minds both of the
personnel and of the public the conviction that this
work is a social service of great importance, and to this
end all appropriate means of informing the public
should be used.
3. To secure the foregoing ends, personnel shall be
appointed on a fulltime basis as professional prison
staff and have civil service status with security of
tenure subject only to good conduct, efficiency and
physical fitness. Salaries shall be adequate to attract
and retain suitable men and women; employment
benefits and conditions of service shall be favourable in
view of the exacting nature of the work.”
1. All prison staff shall possess an adequate standard of
education and shall be given the ability and means to
carry out their duties in a professional manner.
2. Before entering on duty, all prison staff shall be
provided with training tailored to their general and
specific    duties,   which    shall  be    reflective of
contemporary evidence-based best practice in penal
sciences. Only those candidates who successfully pass
the theoretical and practical tests at the end of such
training shall be allowed to enter the prison service.
3. The prison administration shall ensure the
continuous provision of in service training courses with
a view to maintaining and improving the knowledge
and professional capacity of its personnel, after
entering on duty and during their career.”
1. Training referred to in paragraph 2 of rule 75 shall
include, at a minimum, training on:
(a) Relevant national legislation, regulations and
policies, as well as applicable international and
regional instruments, the provisions of which must
guide the work and interactions of prison staff with
(b) Rights and duties of prison staff in the exercise
of their functions, including respecting the human
dignity of all prisoners and the prohibition of
certain conduct, in particular torture and other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
(c) Security and safety, including the concept of
dynamic security, the use of force and instruments
of restraint, and the management of violent
offenders, with due consideration of preventive
and defusing techniques, such as negotiation and
(d) First aid, the psychosocial needs of prisoners
and the corresponding dynamics in prison settings,
as well as social care and assistance, including
early detection of mental health issues.
2. Prison staff who are in charge of working with
certain categories of prisoners, or who are assigned
other specialized functions, shall receive training that
has a corresponding focus.”
1. The prison director should be adequately qualified
for his or her task by character, administrative ability,
suitable training and experience.
2. The prison director shall devote his or her entire
working time to official duties and shall not be
appointed on a part-time basis. He or she shall reside
on the premises of the prison or in its immediate
vicinity.
3. When two or more prisons are under the authority of
one director, he or she shall visit each of them at
frequent intervals. A responsible resident official shall
be in charge of each of these prisons.”
(Emphasis added).
25.        Since India is a member of the United Nations,
these   Rules    are    equally    binding    on   the   country.
Therefore, neither these Rules, nor the recommendations
of the various Committees, nor the letter issued by the
Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India dated
17.07.2009, can possibly be ignored by the State.
26.        All these recommendations, and Rules are in
conformity with the great transformation, which has
occurred in the theory of punishment : from the theory of
“Retribution And Deterrence”, we have come to the age
of “Reformation and Rehabilitation of Prisoners”. These
Committee      recommendation        and    the    Nelson    Rules
emphasize the need for carefully selecting the prison
personnel, for providing rigorous training, both prior to
their joining the service, and subsequent thereto, of the
appointment being a full-time, regular appointment. It is
only when these factors are inculcated in the prison
administration     that  the    prison   system     succeeds     in
protecting, reforming and rehabilitating the prisoners.
Otherwise, it is a self-defeating proposition.
27.         Needless to say, the purpose of the Police is
not to reform, or to rehabilitate, but to prevent the
occurrence    of crime,      and    to    punish   the   criminals.
Therefore, the very training of a police personnel is
carried out with a different purpose in mind, and with
different goals prescribed by law.          Thus, there is a vast
difference in the philosophy that permeates the police
administration, and the jail administration. Hence, even
their training and the psychology of the police personnel
and prison personnel are poles apart.
28.         Keeping the differences in two systems, the
Rules,    1982      clearly    provide      that   the    post    of
Superintendent, District Jail should necessarily has to be
filled up in accordance with the Rules, 1982. Rule 5(6) of
50 per cent of posts in the cadre by direct
recruitment through the Commission.
(ii)   50 per cent of post in the cadre by
promotion     through     the   Commission    from
amongst        regularly      appointed     Deputy
Superintendents/Jailors with a minimum of 5
years services as Deputy Superintendents of
Jailors or both.”
29.         Rule 14 of the Rules, 1982 is as under :-
“14. Determination of vacancies.- The
appointing authority shall determine and intimate
to the Commission the number of vacancies on
the posts of Superintendents, District Jails to be
filled during the year of recruitment as also the
number of vacancies to be reserved for
candidates belonging to the Scheduled Castes,
Scheduled Tribes and other categories under Rule
30. Rule 15 of the Rules, 1982 is as under :-
“15. Procedure for direct recruitment.-
(1) Application for permission to appear in the
competitive examination for direct recruitment
shall be invited by the Commission in the
prescribed form which may be obtained from the
Secretary to the Commission on payment, if any.
(2) No candidate shall be admitted to the
examination unless he holds a certificate of
admission, issued by the Commission.
(3) After the results of the written
examination have been received and tabulated
the Commission shall, having regard to the need
for securing due representation of the candidates
belonging to the Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes, and others under Rule 6, summon for
interview such number of candidates as, on the
result of the written examination, have come up
to the standard fixed by the Commission in this
respect. The marks awarded to each candidate at
the interview shall be added to the marks
obtained by him in the written examination.
(4) The Commission shall prepare a list of
candidates in order of their proficiency as
disclosed by the aggregate of-marks obtained by
each candidate at the written examination and
interview and recommend such number of
candidates as they consider fit for appointment.
If two or more candidate obtain equal marks in
the aggregate, the name of the candidate
obtaining     higher   marks     in   the    written
examination shall be placed higher in the list. The
number of names in the list shall be larger but
not larger by more than 25 percent of the
number of vacancies. The Commission shall
forward the list to the appointing authority.
Note. - The syllabus and rules for the
competitive examination shall be such as may be
prescribed by the Commission from time to time.
31.        Rule 16 of the Rules, 1982 is as under :-
promotion to the post of Superintendent,
District Jail.- Recruitment by promotion to the
post of Superintendent of District Jail shall be
made on the basis of seniority subject to the
rejection of the unfit in accordance with the Uttar
Pradesh Promotion by Selection in Consultation
with Public Service Commission (Procedure)
Rules, 1970 as amended from time to time.”
32.        A bare perusal of these Rules of 1982 clearly
reveals that the post of Superintendent of Jail necessarily
has to be filled up either by direct recruitment (fifty
percent), or by promotion (fifty percent). The Rules do
not permit an ad-hoc appointment from any other
service, much less the police service. Therefore, the post
can be filled up either directly from candidates from the
open     market,    or     from      the     post    of    Deputy
Superintendents/Jailors having a work experience of
minimum of five years.        Hence, the appointment of the
police personnel, by the impugned orders, is clearly
33.        Although the learned counsel for the State has
tried to support the impugned orders ostensibly on the
ground that the Inspector General of Prisons and the
Additional Inspector General of Prisons can be appointed
from the     IPS cadre, the said argument is clearly
untenable.     For, once the Rules, 1982, which deal with
Group A and B services, clearly provide a procedure for
determination of vacancy, and selection and promotion
for filling up the post, the said Rules cannot be deviated
from. After all, it is a settled position of law that once a
procedure has been established by law, it cannot be
circumvented from. Therefore, merely because the post
of Inspector General of Prisons, and Additional Inspector
General     of Prisons   can be     filled  up from persons
belonging to the IPS cadre, it does not empower the
State to fill up the post of the lower echelons by posting
police      personnel     on      the      post     of    Senior
Superintendent/Superintendent of Jail.
34.         For the reasons stated above, the impugned
order     dated  12.02.2021     passed     by   the    Secretary,
Department      of  Home,    respondent      no.   2,   and   the
consequential order dated 12.02.2021, passed by the
Inspector General of Prisons, respondent no. 3, are
hereby set-aside. The State is directed to immediately fill
up      the   posts    of    Senior      Superintendent      and
Superintendent of Jail either through direct recruitment,
or through promotion.       Since the Rules permit ad-hoc
promotion     as   a  temporary      measure,     even    ad-hoc
promotions may be granted by the State till regular
promotions are made. The said exercise shall be carried
out as expeditiously as possible and preferably within one
month from the date of receiving the certified copy of this
35.         The Writ Petition is, hereby, allowed.