Petitioner has applied for passport but his application
apparently has not been considered on account of
pendency of the State appeal against the judgment and
order dated 23.12.2020 passed in Sessions Trial No. 63 of
2014 ( State of U.P. Vs. Pramod Kumar) arising out of case
Crime No. 133 of 2014.
It appears that criminal proceedings were initiated against
the petitioners in case Crime No. 133 of 2014 under
Sections 354-A, 506 and 376 I.P.C. and Section 3/4 of the
PACSO Act, Police Station Pakadi District Ballia, which has
ultimately led to petitioner's acquittal by the competent
Sessions Court vide order dated 23.12.2020. The
application for grant of passport apparently has been
withheld only because Government Appeal has been filed
in the matter. Section 6 of the Passports Act,1967 lays
down the considerations for which a passport can be
denied to an applicant and is reproduced:-
" 6. Refusal of passports, travel documents, etc.
(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the passport authority
shall refuse to make an endorsement for visiting any foreign country
under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 5 on any one
or more of the following grounds, and on no other ground, namely:--
(a) that the applicant may, or is likely to, engage in such country in
activities prejudicial to the sovereignty and integrity of India;
(b) that the presence of the applicant in such country may, or is likely
to, be detrimental to the security of India;
(c) that the presence of the applicant in such country may, or is likely
to, prejudice the friendly relations of India with that or any other
(d) that in the opinion of the Central Government the presence of the
applicant in such country is not in the public interest.
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the passport authority
shall refuse to issue a passport or travel document for visiting any
foreign country under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 5 on any
one or more of the following grounds, and on no other ground,
(a) that the applicant is not a citizen of India;
(b) that the applicant may, or is likely to, engage outside India in
activities prejudicial to the sovereignty and integrity of India;
(c) that the departure of the applicant from India may, or is likely to, be
(d) that the presence of the applicant outside India may, or is likely to,
prejudice the friendly relations of India with any foreign country;
(e) that the applicant has, at any time during the period of five years
immediately preceding the date of his application, been convicted by a
court in India for any offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced
in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than two years;
(f) that proceedings in respect of an offence alleged to have been
committed by the applicant are pending before a criminal court in
(g) that a warrant or summons for the appearance, or a warrant for the
arrest, of the applicant has been issued by a court under any law for
the time being in force or that an order prohibiting the departure from
India of the applicant has been made by any such court;
(h) that the applicant has been repatriated and has not reimbursed the
expenditure incurred in connection with such repatriation;
(i) that in the opinion of the Central Government the issue of a
passport or travel document to the applicant will not be in the public
The case of the petitioner would not fall in any of the
category inasmuch as there is already an order of acquittal
passed in his favour which has not been reversed in
appeal. No order prejudicial to petitioner's interest
otherwise has been passed. So long as the order of
acquittal remains, the petitioner's innocence would be
presumed and, therefore, petitioner's application cannot be
declined merely on account of pendency of Government
In view of the deliberations made above, this petition
stands disposed of with a direction upon respondent no. 3
to process petitioner's application for grant of passport in
light of the above observations, within a period of three
months from the date of presentation of certified copy of
this order.