Challenge in the present writ petition filed under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India is to the striking down of Note-1 of Clause (d) of
Sub-rule (ii) of Rule 4 of the Family Pension Scheme, 1964 (as applicable to
the State of Haryana) being discriminatory and arbitrary and offending
Article 14 of the Constitution of India. Challenge is primarily raised on the
ground it has been provided that under the said offending note that children
adopted legally before retirement would fall under the definition of family.
It is, thus, contended and argued that fixing the date of
retirement as the cut off date would not be legally sustainable and is
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India since a child adopted
after retirement is not entitled for the benefit for retiral benefits.
Resultantly, writ in the nature of certiorari for quashing of order dated
CWP No. 15387 of 2017                                                  2
30.03.2017 (Annexure P-11), which rejected the case of the petitioner for
the claim of family pension on account of the fact that she was adopted on
07.04.1995 whereas, her adoptive father Guggu Ram had retired from
government service on 31.07.1993 has been filed. It is not disputed that the
right for family pension was governed under the Family Pension Scheme,
1964 and the definition of family provided in the same reads thus:-
[ii] “Family” for the purposes of this scheme includes
the following relatives of the officer.-
(a)      wife, in the case of a male officer;
(b)    husband, in the case of a female officer;
(d)    unmarried minor daughters;
(e)      widowed/legally divorced daughers; and
(f)     the parents of an unmarried officer.
Note1.-         Clauses (c) and (d) include children
adopted legally before retirement.
Note 2.-       A judicially separated wife/husband does
not loose her/his legal status of wife/husband of the
Government employee and is thus eligible for the benefit
of the Family Pension Scheme, 1964.
(a)      in the case of widow/widower upto the date of
death or remarriage, whichever is earlier;
(b)     in the case of son/daughter uptil he/she attains
the age of twenty five years;
dependent on the Government employee when he/she
was alive, upto the date of death provided the deceased
employee had left behind neither a widow nor a child;
(d)     in the case of children in the order of their birth
and younger of them will not eligible for family pension
unless the elder next above him/her has become
CWP No. 15387 of 2017                                                3
(e)      in the case of divorced/widowed daughter till
Provided     that  an      unmarried  daughter  including
widowed/divorced daughter will become ineligible for
pension from the date of her marriage/remarriage.
Provided further that the son/unmarried daughter
including widowed/divorced daughter shall become
ineligible for pension if he or she starts earning
livelihood.
The income criteria in respect of parents and
widowed/divorced daughter shall be that their earning is
not more than Rs. 2550/- per month. Provided also that
parents and widowed/divorced daughter shall produce
an annual certificate to the effect that their earning is
not more than Rs. 2550/- per month. The upper ceiling of
family pension shall be 30% of basic pay of the deceased
employee, subject to a minimum of Rs. 1913/- per
month.”
The pleaded case of the petitioner is that she is unmarried
adopted daughter, aged about 22 years, of the deceased government
employee namely Guggu Ram, who retired as Beldar from PWD
Department on 31.07.1993. With the consent of his wife Smt. Mansi Devi,
Guggu Ram adopted the petitioner when she was 5 months old vide the
registered adoption deed dated 07.04.1995 (Annexure P-1A). The proof of
adoption is the said registered adoption deed, which would show that Guggu
Ram and his wife had no son or daughter and he was 61 years of age and his
wife was 51 years old. On account of having no hope of conceiving the
child, they had adopted the petitioner, whose real name was Manpreet Kaur
and was daughter of the first party. They had, thus, named her Raj Bala and
CWP No. 15387 of 2017                                                  4
all the necessary formalities are stated to have been done. The proof of the
fact of adoption had also been shown by attaching middle examination
certificate(Annexure P-2) and the ration card alongwith the adhaar card
(Annexures P-3 and P-4).         The succession certificate in favour of the
petitioner issued by the Court of the Civil Judge (Sr. Divn.), Jagadhari filed
under Section 372 of the Indian Succession Act, has been appended as
Annexure P-4A, wherein, the requisite benefits as such are liable to be paid
to her on attaining the age of majority.         The death certificates of the
adoptive father and mother have also been placed on record as Annexure
After    attaching      the necessary      succession certificate,
representation was given to sanction family pension to her and on the
strength of the same, the claim was made before respondent No.3, the
Accountant General (A & E), Haryana on 09.04.2016 (Annexure P-6). The
same was followed by another representation on 07.11.2016 (Annexure P-7)
and the matter was processed vide communication dated 21.11.2016 by the
said respondent (Annexure P-8). The necessary certificates were furnished
on 31.01.2017 (Annexure P-9). The Executive Engineer of the Department
as such, vide communication dated 27.02.2017, forwarded the same to
respondent No.3 for taking necessary action in case it was permissible,
which as noticed, has met the legal hurdle of the fact that the petitioner was
adopted after the date of retirement.
In such circumstances, writ petition has been filed and reliance
has also been placed upon the Haryana Civil Service (Pension) Rules, 2016
wherein, Rule 10 has been relied upon which provides that sons and
daughters including legally adopted children/widow/divorced daugthers
CWP No. 15387 of 2017                                                   5
would fall within the definition of 'family'. It is submitted that the claim of
family pension is admissible as such to the unmarried eldest dependent
daughter upto the age of 25 years or upto the date of marriage. It is further
submitted that Note 3 provides that son/daughter would include children
legally adopted under the Hindu Law or personal law of the government
employee residing with and wholly dependent upon his/her parent but does
not include step children.
The stand of the State is that Guggu Ram never disclosed the
name of the petitioner as his adopted daughter till the date of his retirement.
His wife had died on 23.06.2003. The claim was made in the year 2017,
which has been rejected on 30.03.2017 (Annexure R-3) by the respondent
No.3 on the ground that the adoption was after the retirement. The action is,
thus, defended on the fact that the scheme as such bars the persons adopted
after retirement. Reliance has also been placed upon the notification dated
26.08.2004 (Annexure R-4) issued under the Punjab Civil Services
(Haryana Second Amendment) Rules, 2004, which also substituted the
definition of family under the Punjab Civil Services Rules, Volume-II in
Appexdix I in the Family Pension Scheme to the extent that the legal
adoption was to be done before the date of retirement.
In our considered opinion, the argument which has been raised
as such by counsel for the petitioner is well justified that the said Note
enhances the discrimination inter se children adopted before and after
retirement and keep the ones adopted after retirement out of the ambit of
family. They are, thus, excluded from the right of family pension, which is
a beneficial provision to ensure that children of a retired government
employee do not face any vagrancy. The Rule as such is thus liable to be
CWP No. 15387 of 2017                                                  6
quashed on the ground of being violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of
India as it does not serve any purpose and discriminates against children
legally adopted after retirement. The State seems to have become wiser in
as much as while providing for family pension in the Haryana Civil Services
Pension Rules, 2016, the right to be represented or recognized as a person
belonging to the family has been recognized for a legally adopted child
without any cut off date of disqualification after retirement. Rule 10, which
defines family, reads as under”-
1(c). sons and daughters including legally adopted children,
widowed/divorced daughter(s).
“Note     3.—Son/daughter      includes   children
legally adopted under the Hindu Law or personal law
of the Government employee residing with and wholly
dependent upon his/her parent but does not include
step children.
(B)     for the purpose of family pension means-
(i)(a)   widow (widows wherever permissible under
personal law) or widower, upto the date of re-marriage
or death, whichever is earlier;
(i)(b) judicial separated wife or husband of a deceased
Government employee, such separation not being
granted on the ground of adultery and the person
surviving was not held guilty of committing adultery;
(i)(c)   childless widow of a deceased Government
employee who has got remarried provided her
independent income from all other sources is less than
the minimum family pension prescribed by the State
CWP No. 15387 of 2017                                                    7
Government from time to time plus dearness relief
thereon. In all such cases, she shall be required to give
a declaration regrding her income from all other
sources to the Pesion Disbursing Authority once in a
year in the month of March;
(ii) failing (i) above, the eldest unmarried and
dependent son(s) or daughter(s) upto the age of 25
(iii)    failing (i) and (ii) above, the dependent eldest
divorced or widowed daughter(s) upto the age of 25
years, upto the date of her marriage/re-marriage or till
the date she starts earning livelihood, whichever is the
earliest provided she should have been widowed or
divorced before the date of expiry of eligibility of other
existing family member for family pension;”
Another factor which is to be seen, which also emanates from
the present case, is that a child-less employee may adopt a child after
retirement. Merely because the adoption is post retirement which is mainly
for the purpose of providing dependency and also some light in the evening
of the life of the couple. The same would not as such be good enough to
deny the said child the benefit of the family pension merely on account of
the fact that the decision as such to adopt was taken at a belated stage.
It is not disputed that the right to receive pension is on account
of the service rendered by the government employee and it is governed by
the relevant Rules and is not a bounty. The same is for maintaining oneself
after giving the best of the youth of the employee to service and it is an
economic security as such for the service rendered not only to the
government employee but to the dependents who are entitled for the same.
The Apex Court, while dealing with the issue of grant of family pension in
CWP No. 15387 of 2017                                                  8
Smt. Bhagwanti vs. Union of India, (1989) 4 SCC 397 set aside the
provision wherein, the wife who had married after retirement had been
denied the same. Resultantly, it was held that the limitation incorporated in
the definition of family suffers from the vice, arbitrariness and
discrimination and is not sustainable by any nexus or reasonable
classification and has been thus held to be ultra vires of Article 14 of the
Constitution of India.
The issue in question was Rule 54(14)(b) of the Central Civil
Services (Pension) Rules, 1972 and the definition of family was that
marriage had to take place before the retirement of the government servant.
Similarly, the issue was also whether sons and daughters adopted legally
before retirement and the exclusion of the similarly placed children born
after retirement while striking down the said provisions. Relevant portion
in Bhagwanti's (supra) reads thus:-
“9.     Pension is payable, as pointed out in several
judgments of this Court, on the consideration of past
service rendered by the Government servant. Payability
of the family pension is basically on the self same
consideration. Since pension is linked with past service
and the avowed purpose of the Pension Rules is to
provide sustenance in old age, distinction between
marriage during service and marriage after retirement
appears to be indeed arbitrary. There are instances
where a Government servant contracts his first
marriage after retirement. In these two cases before us,
retirement had been at an early age. In the Subedar's
case, he had retired after putting in 18 years of service
and the Railway employee had retired prematurely at
the age of 44. Premature or early retirement has indeed
CWP No. 15387 of 2017                                                 9
no relevance for deciding the point at issue. It is not the
case of the Union of India and, perhaps there would
have been no force in such contention if raised, that
family pension is admissible on account of the fact that
the spouse contributed to the efficiency of the
Government servant during his service career. In most
cases, marriage after retirement is done to provide
protection, secure companionship and to secure
support in old age. The consideration upon which
pension proper is admissible or the benefit of the family
pension has been extended do not justify the distinction
envisaged in the definition of 'family' by keeping the
postretiral spouse out of it.
10.    Government Servants Conduct Rules prohibit
marriage during the life-time of a spouse. Section
494 of the Indian Penal Code makes second marriage
void and makes it a criminal offence. Thereafter, both
before retirement and even after retirement there is no
scope for a person to have a second wife or a husband.
as the case may be, during the life-time of an existing
spouse.
recommendations of the Third Pay Commission on the
basis of which the amendment in the Pension Rules is
said to have been made. Apart from referring to the
recommendations, no attempt has been made at the
hearing by counsel for the Union of India to derive
support from the recommendations. We really see no
justification as to why post-retirement marriages
should have been kept out of the purview of the
definition.
12.    In clause (ii) of the definition son or daughter
born after retirement even out of wedlock prior to
retirement have been excluded from the definition. No
CWP No. 15387 of 2017                                                 10
plausible explanation has been placed for our
consideration for this exclusion. The purpose for which
family pension is provided, as indicated in Smt.
Poonamal's case, is frustrated if children born after
retirement are excluded from the benefit of the family
pension. Prospect of children being born at such
advanced      age      (keeping   the   age   of   normal
superannuation in view) is minimal but for the few that
may be born after the retirement, family pension would
be most necessary as in the absence thereof, in the
event of death of the Government servant such minor
children would go without support. The social purpose
which was noticed in some pension cases by this Court
would not justify the stand taken by the Union of India
in the counter-affidavit. It is not the case of the Union
Government that as a matter of public policy to con-
tain the growth of population, the definition has been so
modified. Even if such a contention had been advanced
it would not have stood logical scrutiny on account of
the position that the Government servant may not have
any child prior to retirement and in view of the
accepted public policy that a couple could have
children    upto    two, the     only  child  born    after
superannuation should not be denied family pension.
13.     Considered from any angle, we are of the view
that the two limitations incorporated in the definition of
'family' suffer from the vice of arbitrariness and
discrimination and cannot be supported by nexus or
reasonable classification. The Words 'provided the
marriage     took     place   before  retirement   of   the
Government servant' in clause (i) and 'but shall not
include son or daughter born after retirement' in clause
(ii) are thus ultra vires Article 14 of the Constitution
and cannot be sustained.
14.     The writ petitions are allowed. The respondent
Union of India shall have a direction to extend to each
of the petitioners in the two writ petitions family
pension as admissible under the respective schemes
from the date the husband of each of petitioners died.”
In similar circumstances, learned Single Judge of this Court in
Gurdial Singh vs. State of Haryana, (2000) 1 SCT 1072 struck down Note
2 to Rule 1.27 Sub-Rule 3 of the Punjab Family Pension Rules of Punjab
Civil Service Rules Vol. II which did not recognize marriage after
retirement while placing reliance upon the judgment in Bhagwanti (supra)
and the judgment of the Apex Court in Smt. Lakshmi Kunwar vs. State of
Rajasthan, 1993 (8) SLR 427 and Kanta Devi vs. UOI 1994 (5) SLR 279.
We are of the considered opinion that the above said judgments
are fully applicable to the facts and circumstances of the present case and
the said Note suffers from the vice of discrimination and arbitrariness.
In the present case, there is no such dispute regarding the
validity of the adoption and that it is a registered adoption deed. The
succession certificate has been duly issued in favour of the petitioner by a
Court of competent jurisdiction.         It is apparent that the State has also
became wiser when it notified Rules of 2016 wherein, it has done away with
the discriminatory provisions as such and granted the benefit to the legally
adopted children irrespective of the fact that whether the adoption was
before or after retirement.
Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed. Note-1 of Clause (d)
of Sub-rule (ii) of Rule 4 of the Family Pension Scheme, 1964 (as
applicable to the State of Haryana) is read down in as much as it qualifies
the adoption with period of time and the order dated 30.03.2017 is quashed.
CWP No. 15387 of 2017                                                 12
Directions are issued to the respondents to consider the case of
the petitioner further for grant of family pension, which she is entitled to
from the date her father died i.e. 20.02.2006. Since the claim was only
made in the year 2017 and there was a legal hitch, we do not consider it
appropriate as such to grant the benefit of interest on the payment which has
been delayed.      However, the case be processed and family pension
alongwith the arrears as such be paid to the petitioner within a period of 3
months from the date of receipt of certified copy of the judgment. In case
the needful is not done, the respondents will be liable to pay interest @6%
per annum from the date of entitlement till the date of payment.