Counsel for Petitioner :- Sharad Chand Rai,Subhash Chandra
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ashish Mishra
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 10036 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Pankaj Kumar Tyagi,Amit Pandey
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ashish Mishra
1.     Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Ashish Mishra,
learned counsel for the respondent no.2.
2.     The writ petition no. 10584 of 2021 has been filed by the
Sandeep Mittal-petitioner, the interim prayer prayed for as follows:-
"It is, therefore, most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Court may
graciously be pleased to allow this application and to stay the effect and
operation of the direct recruitment to Uttar Pradesh Higher Judicial
Service 2020, impugned notification dated 20.01.2021 passed by
respondent no.2, during the pendency of the writ petition."
3.     The petitioner's final prayer is as follows :-
"I. Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of certiorari quashing the
impugned notification dated 20.01.2021 passed by the respondent no.2.
II. Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus commanding
and directing the respondent no.2 to issued amended notification for 10%
reservation for Economically Weaker Sections (E.W.Ss.).
III. Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus
commanding and directing the respondent no.2 i.e. Registrar General,
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad to decide the representation of the
petitioner dated 08.02.2021, 18.02.2021 and 12.04.2021 within some
stipulated period."
4.     The brief facts of the writ petition no.10584 of 2021 are that the
petitioner is a practicing advocate and practicing since 18.12.2005 till
date in District Court Meerut, U.P. and his enrollment no. is
U.P.7070/2005. The respondent no.2 issued a notification for Direct
Recruitment to Uttar Pradesh Higher Judicial Service, 2020
(hereinafter referred to as "U.P.H.J.S.").
5.     The total vacancies notified were 98 and 87 vacancies for direct
recruitment out of the same, 18 vacancies are reserved for Scheduled
Castes candidates, 01 vacancy is reserved for Scheduled Tribes
candidates, 23 vacancies are reserved for Other Backward Class
candidates and 45 vacancies are for General Category candidates. 11
unfilled vacancies of reserved category were also notified.
6.     The petitioner applied for the same on 18.02.2021 and he was
allotted serial number 5309. The experience certificate and character
certificate issued by the District Judge are not in dispute. A
representation was made by the petitioner by speed post so as to grant
benefit to the petitioner belonging to Economically Weaker Sections
(in short "E.W.S.") belong to the General Category other than the
category of O.B.C.,SC/ST.
7.     It is submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that
respondent no.2 did not take any action on the representation of the
petitioner and no information was given. The petitioner submits that
as per the Constitutional mandate and the amendment in the
Constitution, 10% reservation to be provided to the E.W.S. General
Category candidates. As per the Article 16(6), the Uttar Pradesh
Legislative Assembly also passed the bill in the year 2020.
8.     It is also submitted that the same reservation should have been
applicable to the High Court also and non providing of such
reservation is against the constitutional mandate. Petitioner submits
that the Rajasthan High Court which issued notification prior to the
notification of this Court earmarked 10% reservation and similar was
the case with Punjab and Harayana High Court.
9.     The parity was sought by the petitioner. According to the
petitioner, the respondent no.2 while recruiting and issuing the
notification has committed violation of Article 14 and 16(6) of the
Constitution of India and, therefore, has sought a mandamus against
the respondent no.2 so as to declare the inaction or omission on the
part of the respondents issued illegal, arbitrary, mala fide and is
manifest error of law.
10.    On notices being being served, the respondent no.2 has filed
reply contending that the reservation of E.W.S. has provided under the
Act No.10 of 2020 was not adopted by the High Court while issuing
the notification. The reply in paragraph 11 reads as follows:-
"That furthermore the Hon'ble Selection and Appointment
Committee while considering the matter regarding query of
Government of Uttar Pradesh on issuance of advertisement for
Direct Recruitment to UPJHS-2020 without implementation of
10% EWS category quota, in its meeting dated 22.032021 was
pleased to resolve the following:-
".....amendment in Rule 7, Part III of the U.P. Higher
Judicial Service Rules, 1975, was placed before the
Committee in its meeting held on 09.02.2021, wherein
it was resolved as under:-
".....the Committee has been apprised that the matter
with regard to making provisions for E.W.S. category
by making suitable amendments in U.P. Judicial
Service Rules, 2001 is already placed before the
Administrative Committee of this Court under the
recommendations dated 18.03.2020 of the Committee.
Thus, in view of the above, the Committee resolved
that the matter with regard to making for EWS
category by making suitable amendments in Rule 7,
Part-III of the U.P. Higher Judicial Service Rules,
1975, be placed before Hon'ble the Chief Justice for
appropriate order."
It has been informed that now after the approval of Hon'ble the
Chief Justice, the matter is pending considering before the
In such circumstances the Committee feels it appropriate that the
provision of reservation to EWS category cannot be made in the
ongoing recruitment exercise of UPJHS-2020....."
11.    The petitioner has approached this Court on 11.8.2021 for
permitting him to take the examination of U.P. Higher Judicial
Services. During this period, he has not cleared the preliminary
examination. He has contended that from the beginning, the petitioner
is eligible for the reservation in Economically Weaker Sections Quota
as per the Constitutional Amendment and Legislative Amendment,
adopted by the State of U.P.
12.    Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that petitioner
belongs to Economically Weaker Sections category. It is also
submitted that Rajasthan High Court has provided 10% reservation for
Economically Weaker Sections candidates. According to 103rd
Amendment of Constitution of India, 10% reservation is provided to
the Economically Weaker Sections candidates, under Article 16(6)
dated 12.01.2019, hence, petitioner be given benefit of said
reservation as per the constitutional amendment and legislative
amendment adopted by the State of U.P.
13.    Per contra, Mr. Ashish Mishra, learned counsel for the
respondent no.2 has submitted that Constitutional Amendment, which
is brought in the legislation and made part of the Constitution has to
be adopted by the High Court. It is next submitted that the petitioner is
seeking reservation which will not be applicable this year i.e.
notification dated 20.01.2021 because the High Court has taken a
view that an advertisement had already been issued before adopting
the aforesaid amendment.
14.    Learned counsel for the petitioner orally submits that either the
petitioner be permitted to take the main examination or he may be
given one more chance by raising the age as he would become
disqualified next year for being overage.
15.    We are unable to subscribe to the oral requests of the petitioner.
We cannot issue a writ of mandamus where the petitioner has
appeared in preliminary examination as general category candidate
with open eyes. It is admitted by the petitioner that he never
challenged the rules of Uttar Pradesh Higher Judicial Services. It is
also the admission of petitioner that he has not cleared the preliminary
16.    We are unable to accept the submissions of the petitioner. The
advertisement issued by the respondent no.2 cannot be turmed as
illegal or arbitrary and against the mandate of the Constitution of
India. It cannot be said that petitioner is discriminated.
17.    The decision of the Apex Court in Nawal Kishore Mishra and
Others Vs. High Court of Judicate of Allahabad through its
Registrar General and Others, (2015) 5 Supreme Court Cases 479,
would apply to this case. The autonomy of the High Court has
envisaged under Article 233 to 235 is basic structure of Constitution.
The State legislature was not permitted to lay down statutory scheme
of reservation, which would govern judicial servcie and which would
be bypassing constitutional mandate for Articles 233 to 235. In our
case, the High Court in his wisdom had not adopted the said rules for
the academic year 2020. We have our sympathy with the candidates
but we cannot grant a mandamus to the petitioner to reconsider where
the rules are silent.
18.    Once the advertisement is out, it would not be just and proper
for the authorities to insert any new clause. The Apex Court has also
held that change of any condition in the advertisement would be
violative of constitutional mandate. Hence, we cannot direct the High
Court by way of mandamus to provide reservation benefit to the
Economically Weaker Sections category candidates for taking the
examination this year. However, we request the High Court of
Judicature at Allahabad to adopt the same, if not adopted.
19.    With these observations, both writ petitions stands dismissed.