(MS. VIBHA DATTA MAKHIJA, SR. ADV. A.C. Following Advocates have
filed Vakalatnama or Appearance Mr. Aniruddha P. Mayee for Bombay
High Court, Mr. P.I.Jose for Gauhati High Court, Mr. Nikhil Goel
for Gujarat High Court, Mr. Arjun Garg for Madhya Pradesh High
Court, Mr. Mahesh Thakur for Manipur High Court, ms Parekh and Co.
for Patna High Court, Mr. Mukul Kumar for Rajasthan High Court, Mr.
Mukul Kumar for Rajasthan High Court, Ms. Rachana Srivastava for
Uttarakhand High Court, Ms. Uttara Babbar for Andhra Pradesh High
Court and Telangana High Court, Mr. Kunal Chatterji for Calcutta
High Court, Mr. Sahil Tagotra for J and K High Court, Mr. Mahfooz
Ahsan Nazki for State Of Andhra Pradesh, Mr. V. N. Raghupathy for
State Of Karnataka, Mr. G. Prakash for State Of Kerala, Mr. M.
Yogesh Kanna for State Of Tamil Nadu, Mr. Surjendu Kumar Das for
State of Goa, Ms. KSN and CO. for High Court of Madras, Ms. Astha
Sharma for State of Mizoram, Mr. Sibo Sankar Mishra for Odisha High
Court, Mr. K. Enatoli Sema for State of Nagaland, G. Indira for
Andaman and Nicobar Administration, Mr. Ashok Mathur for Punjab and
Haryana High Court, Ms. Preetika Dwivedi for Allahabad High Court,
Mr. Himanshu Shekhar for Jharkhand High Court, Mr. Jaspreet Gogia
for State of Punjab, Mr. Narendra Kumar for High Court of Sikkim
and for State of Sikkim and Mr. Anil Nag for High Court of Himachal
(With IA No. 7862/2017 - CONDONATION OF DELAY IN FILING and IA No.
Date : 19-01-2021 These matters were called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
This Court took suo moto cognizance of certain inadequacies
and deficiencies which have been noticed in the way criminal trials
are conducted in the country.
It was found that some of these inadequacies and deficiencies
were relatable to the rules in that regard framed by the various
High  Courts.   Undoubtedly   such   inadequacies and  deficiencies
attributable to the rules do not exist in all the High Courts.
Nonetheless, it was found necessary to prepare draft rules the
provision of which can be incorporated in the existing rules by the
Accordingly,    this   Court   issued    notices    to   the   Registrars
General      of    all     the     High      Courts      and      the    Chief
Secretaries/Administrators      of  all   States/Union     Territories   (UTs)
including the Advocates General and the Standing Counsel for the
States/UTs    for  arriving    at  a   general     consensus   to   amend  the
Criminal Manual to bring about uniform best practices across the
A Committee of learned Amici Curiae comprising of Mr. Sidharth
Luthra,   learned   Senior   Counsel,    Mr.   R.   Basant,   learned   Senior
Counsel and Mr. K. Parameshwar, learned counsel, was constituted to
examine the issues after considering the existing rules of all the
High Courts. The Committee has submitted a report for which we have
sought responses from all the High Courts. Only five High Courts
viz.,   High    Courts   of   Andhra     Pradesh,     Karnataka,    Telangana,
Allahabad and Delhi have filed their responses. The High Courts of
Sikkim  Uttarakhand    and  Tripura    have   not   filed   their   respective
responses so far.
In   these   circumstances,    we   consider    it   appropriate   having
regard to the urgency of change that is necessary to call upon the
High Courts to submit their substantive response dealing with all
aspects within a period of two weeks from today. In case the High
Courts cannot do so, the Registrars General of such High Courts
shall remain present in person before this Court on the next date
of hearing with appropriate instructions from their High Courts to
make a statement about the changes in the rules.
Ordered accordingly.
The Committee has submitted its report on 05.03.2020. The said
report is available on the official website of this Court.
List the matter after four weeks.
We have noticed that in the special leave petitions filed by
Supreme Court Legal Services Committee (SCLSC) on behalf of the
convicts, there is an inordinate delay which becomes difficult to
condone. Needless to say, the situation brings about a lack of
evenhandedness in dealing with matters of condonation of delay. We
see  no    reason  why   these   delays  should  continue   to   occur
particularly with the availability of tools provided by information
and communication technology which are easily available. In this
matter,   Ms.  Vibha   Datta  Makhija,  learned  Amicus  Curiae,   has
submitted a report dated 15.01.2021 in consultation with the SCLSC
on measures to curb the delay. Valuable as that report is, we
consider it appropriate to constitute a Committee comprising of
certain experts who would examine all the suggestions and responses
which may be received by it from the High Courts as well as the
other stakeholders.
In view of the other suggestions (Annexure B) by NALSA and the
response submitted by various High Courts, we find it appropriate
to constitute a Committee comprising of Secretary (Ministry of Home
Affairs),    Government   of   India,   Director  General,   National
Informatics Centre, Member (Process), E-Committee, Supreme Court of
India and Member Secretary, NALSA. The Committee shall examine the
aforementioned   suggestions/responses    and  submit   a  report   with
regard to digitization, translation and electronic transmission of
records  to  facilitate   access  to  justice   and  timely   filing  of
appeals/SLPs  by  the  convicts,  by   utilizing  the  Information   and
Communication Technology tools, within four weeks.
We  have  also  gone  through   the  Module  and  the   Note  dated
16.10.2019 as per the report for timely filing of appeals/SLPs of
convicts  though   the  Legal  Services   Institutions.   We   therefore
direct the High Courts to submit their responses to the Committee
through their Registrars General within two weeks. The Committee
shall submit its report within two weeks’ thereafter.
The Secretary General of this Court shall coordinate meetings
of the Committee.
List the matter after four weeks.