Mr. Pawan Shamsundar Sarda and Ors.
Office Notes, Office Memoranda of Coram,
appearances, Court's orders of directions                                      Court's or Judge's orders.
Shri Rahul Bhangde, Advocate for the petitioners.
Ms N.P. Mehta, AGP for respondent Nos.1, 2, 3 and
Shri J.B. Kasat, Advocate for respondent Nos.4-a and 4-b.
Shri M.V.Samarth, Senior Advocate assisted by Shri C.M. Samarth,
Advocate for respondent No.6.
Police Station Sitabuldi Nagpur, Branch is personally
present before this Court.
3.                  A copy of the order passed by him on
24.09.2022 has been filed on record alongwith
wp5935.2022 final.odt
application seeking amendment of the writ petition filed
by the petitioners.
4.          Amendment application is allowed.
5.          Amendments be carried out forthwith. The
civil application stands disposed of, accordingly.
3.          The last condition of the order which is about
the order being made subject to final result of this
petition shows that Senior Police Inspector was well
aware of pendency of this petition and this Court being
seized of the matter, when he passed the order. Shri M.V.
Samarth, learned Senior Advocate submits that the
order has been made subject to final result of this
petition. As we have already gone through the order, we
are quite well aware of the condition so mentioned in
wp5935.2022 final.odt
the order.   We, therefore, put a question to learned
Senior Advocate as to why he, by interjecting in the
midst of dictation of this order, pointed out this fact.
His answer is that he has only pointed out this condition
and nothing more. We feel that the petitioners are
supporting this order.     This is the reason why the
petitioners are reminding this Court of the said
condition, though we have already gone through the
order. The order is nothing short of interfering with the
administration of justice by this Court and therefore, the
association i.e. respondent No.6 must not do anything
which would amount to aggravating the interference
with the administration of justice being made by the
Deshpande, on instructions, submits that the senior
Police Inspector would withdraw the order.
5.         The statement is accepted and we treat this
order as withdrawn by him. Now we shall proceed to
hear the matter finally.
6.         We have heard this matter further, there
being an urgency involved in the whole issue. After all
wp5935.2022 final.odt
celebration of Devi Navratra Festival has commenced
from today and from evening of this day and on wards,
for nine nights, there would be celebration of the
festival in various ways. Performance of ‘ Dandiya’ and
‘Garba’ is one of the traditional ways of celebrating the
festival and it is considered by a large section of Hindu
religion to be the best way of expressing their devotion
in its fullest form to the presiding deity of Navratra
7.          Presiding deity may have different names
such as Ambamata, Durgadevi, Kali, Uma, Bhairavi,
Bhuwaneshwari and so on.            But, these are only
outwardly manifestations, as perceived by a devotee, of
the underlying fundamental energy called “ Shakti”. In
Hindu pantheon `Shakti’ is considered to be so essential
that without it no one can attain the ‘ Truth’ or ‘Shivam’
or ‘Brahmah’ or ‘Moksha’ or ‘Supreme Reality’ ‘Salvation’
also called freedom from the cycle of birth and rebirth.
Sri M the revered Indian spiritual Guru explaining the
significance of Shakti has said thus:
“Shakti is most important because
Shivam cannot be touched without the
activation of the Shakti, without the
`Havan Kund’ (“Holifire pit”), no homa
can be done”.
So, in `Devi Navratra Festival’ what is
worshipped for nine nights is a form of ` Shakti’. The
worship to goddess of Shakti is effective only when it is
done with one pointed attention,             without any
hesitation, without any disturbance of mind coming
from the atmosphere around us and without causing
any disturbance to others. Therefore, a question would
arise – Whether one pointed worship and devotion to
the presiding deity of `Navratra Festival’ is possible if
the celebration is noisy or is done in a manner as to
cause annoyance and disturbance to others.           There
would be an incidental question – Whether such
celebration can be done in breach of the Rule declaring
the area to be a silence zone? Let us now make an
attempt to answer this question.
8.          The answer to first question is an obvious
‘no’. No offering of one pointed worship and devotion
to the presiding deity of Navratra festival is possible
unless there is full concentration of mind, all energies of
body and mind are focused on nothing but the deity and
there is gradual shading of once own identity till the
realisation of the supreme reality or the truth. This State
of being is described in ‘Mandukya Upanishad’ as, “it is
the cessation of all phenomena; it is all peace, all bliss
wp5935.2022 final.odt
and non dual”. Such a State can be attained in various
ways but one can choose to begin his spiritual journey
through worship of the deity and expression of his
devotion to the deity with attention on nothing but on
the deity only. Obviously, therefore, a true devotee
would like to express his devotion and offer his worship
to the deity without receiving any disturbance of any
kind from the outside world and he himself would not
cause any disturbance to others in his worship and
expression of devotion to the deity or otherwise there
would be a fear of deviating from his object of worship
and devotion. If any act of worship by a devotee causes
annoyance or disturbance to others, there would be a
possibility of rebounding action of same disturbance or
even greater disturbance from others. It then follows
that every offering of worship and devotion to the
presiding deity of Navratra festival must be done with
great care and a devotee must ensure that by his or her
actions, the discipline and sanctity of the festival are not
sacrificed. What is to be sacrificed by the devotee is his/
her own indiscretion and indiscipline.
9.          To answer the second question, it is necessary
to consider rival arguments. Shri Rahul Bhangde,
learned counsel for the petitioners has invited our
attention to the law declared by the Division Bench of
wp5935.2022 final.odt
this Court in the case of Dr. Mahesh Vijay Bedekar Vs.
State of Maharashtra reported in 2016 SCC OnLine Bom
9422 wherein, a view has been taken that there is no
need for declaration of any public place as a silence
zone, when the hospital or the educational institution or
both are situated within 100 meters, from such a place.
The law declared by this Court further shows that in
silence zones, use of any sound amplifiers or playing of
any music or beating of drums or tom-tom or blowing a
horn either musical or pressure, or trumpet or playing
any sound instrument is not permissible.
10.        Of course, after declaration of such a law by
the Co-ordinate Bench of this Court at Mumbai the
Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules, 2000
(for short “the Rules of 2000”) were amended by the
State and a proviso was inserted to the effect that an
area shall not fall under silence area or zone category,
unless notified by the State Government in accordance
with sub-rule (2) of Rule 3 of the Rules of 2000.
11.        This amended portion of the State Rules has
been stayed by Full Bench of this Court specially
constituted for adjudicating upon this very issue by the
Hon’ble the Chief Justice in the case of Ajay Marathe Vs.
wp5935.2022 final.odt
Union of India and others reported in 2018 (4) Mh.L.J .
70. The Full Bench has granted interim stay to the effect
and operation of the amended portion of the Rules of
12.         So, the position obtaining today is that in
silence   zones   there   cannot    be   playing  of   any
loudspeaker or public address system/musical system
and even beating of drums or tom- tom or blowing of
horns etc. This position answers the second question
posed by us effectively.     Now, we shall consider the
fact-situation of this case in the light of the arguments
advanced and applicable law.
13.         Shri Samarth, learned Senior Counsel for the
petitioners submits, relying upon the case of Vinayak
Yashvant Sanap Vs. State of Maharashtra and others
(Public Interest Litigation (L) No.29467 of 2022)
decided on 23.09.2022, that Navratra festival is a
religious function and the State Government can permit
the organising of a function of religious nature under
Section 37-A of the Maharashtra Regional and Town
Planning Act, 1966 (for short, “Act of 1966”). There can
be no two opinions about the proposition of law
propounded in the case of Vinayak Yashvant Sanap
wp5935.2022 final.odt
(supra). There can also be no second opinion about the
fact that Devi Navratra is indeed a religious festival.
There is also no doubt about the fact that a playground
involved in this petition can be permitted to be a venue
for celebrating Navratra festival.     But, the question
involved in this petition also requires an answer from
the view point of restrictions applicable to silence zones,
which was not the issue involved in the case of Vinayak
Yashvant Sanap (supra). In that case the objection was
that permission granted under Section 37-A of the Act of
1966 in respect of temporary change of user of the
playground should not be of a kind where the
organizers generate profits by utilizing the playgrounds.
Such is not the issue here, as it was turned out after
hearing both sides.     The basic issue involved in this
petition is of prohibition upon use of music or sound
system or playing of musical or percussion instruments
while celebrating a religious festival in a silence zone,
which issue was not involved in the case of Vinayak
Yashvant Sanap (supra) and therefore, for answering
the issue involved here, the said case of Vinayak
Yashvant Sanap (supra)          would not render any
assistance to us. Now, let us go to the facts of this case.
14.         In this case, the facts established on record
show that the venue of Navratra festival, where Dandiya
and Garba are going to be performed is a playground of
wp5935.2022 final.odt
Institution and it shares common compound wall with
hospital of Dr. Arneja. So, the position obtaining today,
as cleared by the order of the Full Bench granting
interim relief, is that the venue of this performance is a
silence zone and therefore, all the restrictions and
prohibitions as contained in Rule 3(5), as it stood
originally before amendment would apply to the facts of
this case all the consequences of violation of those
prohibitions as provided under Rule 6 of the Rules of
2000 would also follow. That means, no Dandiya and
Garba performances can be permitted without imposing
the prohibitions contained in said Rule. This is all the
more so because Association i.e. respondent No.6 has
already admitted that the venue has a common
compound wall with Dr. Arneja’s Hospital.
15.         There is another aspect of this case, which
needs consideration by us. It appears that similar
complaints were made by the residents of the area in
the past and the respondent No.6 responding to these
grievances executed and signed a memorandum of
understanding        with     these    petitioners.    This
memorandum         of    understanding    is   signed    on
27/09/2019 and for the sake of convenience it is
reproduced below:-
16.        It could be seen from the signatories to the
memorandum of understanding that it was signed and
executed between the petitioners on the one hand and
the organizers of the festival i.e. Ramdaspeth Plot
Owners and Residents Association on the other hand. It
has been signed not only by the petitioners but also by
the President and Secretary of the Association i.e.
respondent No.6. It also bears signatures of at least
eight members of Ramdaspeth Plot Owners and
Residents Association. Therefore, there is no gain saying
in making an argument that this memorandum of
understanding     does   not   bind   the   members      of
Ramdaspeth     Plot   Owners    and   Residents.      This
conclusion is further fortified by the fact that this year,
the application for grant of permission to play the music
system, of-course, subject to noise limits, was made by
the President of this Association, who was the signatory
to the memorandum of understanding. If such a
memorandum of understanding had been arrived at
between the petitioners and the members of plot owners
association and residents, the terms and conditions of
the memorandum of understanding ought to have been
honoured by both parties. At least this year, it appears
that these conditions of the agreement are not being
honoured by the respondent No.6, one of the signatories
to this memorandum of understanding.
wp5935.2022 final.odt
17.         This memorandum of understanding, we
must say, at the cost of repetition, is binding on both
the parties and that would mean that the members of
Ramdaspeth Plot Owners and Residents Association
cannot celebrate Navaratra festival with Dandiya and
Garba performances on the background of any music in
breach of Rule 3(5) of the Rules of 2000. But, that does
not mean that there can be no celebration altogether.
Dandiya and Garba performances being intrinsic part of
a religious celebration can still be performed in purely
traditional and religious way, which do not contemplate
use of modern gadgets like, music system, loudspeakers,
DJ sound and the like.     In addition, such celebration
would also have to be consistent with provisions made
in Rule 3(5) of the Rules of 2000, it being done in a
silence zone.
18.         Accordingly, for the time being, we grant
permission to respondent No.6 to engage in Dandiya
and Garba performances in a traditional and purely
religious   way   without   using    any   loud  musical
instruments or drums or tom-tom or sound system or
D.J. system or the like.
19.         The respondent No.6 shall strictly abide by
its commitments made in the MOU dated 27/09/2019.
wp5935.2022 final.odt
20.        With this, we see no purpose in keeping this
petition pending. The Writ Petition stands disposed of.
makes a prayer for granting stay to the effect and
operation of the order.
22.        The prayer is opposed by learned counsel for
the petitioners. Since we have not prohibited the
respondent No.6 from celebrating Navratra Festival
altogether and have permitted respondent No.6 to
celebrate this Navratra in a traditional and purely
religious way, we do not think any prejudice has been
caused to the petitioner and so there is no need to
accede to the request. The prayer is, therefore, rejected.