Present petition is a criminal revision under Section 102 of
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,2015 (for
brevity “the Act of 2015”)          filed by the petitioner/Child in
Conflict with Law, against the order dated 14.10.2020 passed by
Bhind in Criminal Appeal No. 76/2020, whereby appeal preferred
by the petitioner has been dismissed and order passed by Juvenile
Justice Board, Morena has been affirmed.
2.      In the case in hand, it appears from the pleadings and
submissions that Child in Conflict with Law (CICL) is in
correction/remand home since 26.02.2020 and is facing
proceedings before Juvenile Justice Board for alleged offence
under Section 376 of IPC and Section 5/6 of Protection of
Children from Sexual Offences Act. (hereinafter shall be referred
to as “POCSO Act”).
3.     Learned counsel for the petitioner prays for release of
CICL on the ground of period of retention in remand/correction
home, and raised the legal question that as per Provision of
Section 436-A of Cr.P.C. petitioner suffered more than two years
of incarceration, therefore, he ought to be released on bail
because maximum retention/detention for CICL in remand home
can be three years and since the petitioner has completed more
than half of the period of detention, therefore, his case be
considered for bail.
4.     For assistance of this Court, Shri     Vijay Dutt Sharma,
learned counsel and Shri Sanjay Kumar Sharma, learned Govt.
Advocate, who were present in the Court room were appointed
as Amici Curiae and vide order dated 09.09.2021 following
questions were framed.
“1. Whether a child in conflict with law completes
more than one half of total period of retention of
three years in special home, then whether he is
entitled to avail the benefit of Section 436-A of
2.    Whether a child in conflict with law can be
treated as under trial prisoner as contemplated
3.   Any additional submission related to this
question can also be addressed by the learned
amici curiae in the matter.”
5.     Counsel for the parties delivered their arguments in
6.     It is the submission of learned counsel for the petitioner
that since the Act of 2015 is a beneficial and benevolent
legislation, therefore, is to be construed as incorporated the
provisions impliedly, which furthers the cause of the Act of 2015.
Application under Section 436-A of Cr.P.C. is one such clause
which offers the welfare of CICL and it helps to achieve general
objective of the Act of 2015 which does not exclude Cr.P.C. in
expressed terms. Therefore, relevant provision like Section 436-A
of Cr.P.C. can be borrowed here for the benefit of CICL.
7.     Shri Vijay Dutt Sharma, learned Amicus Curiae through his
synopsis and arguments submits that Section 1(4) of the Act,
2015 clearly gives all pervasive power to the Act of 2015 in all
the matters in relation to children and overrides any other law
for the time being in force, including the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, which is very well saved by the savings clause
as contained under Section 5 of Cr.P.C.
8.     According to him, the Code itself has saved the
applicability of the special law, subject to the absence of a
specific provision to the contrary. While relying upon the
interpretation given by the Apex Court in respect of expression
“specific provision to the contrary” in the case of Maru Ram
Vs. Union of India & Ors.(1981) 1 SCC 107 and while relying
legal maxim “generalia specialibus non derogant”, it is
submitted that the Act of 2015 shall prevail over Cr.P.C.
9.     Shri Sharma further relied upon judgment referred by
Division Bench of this Court in case of Ankesh Gurjar @ Ankit
Gurjar Vs. The State of M.P., 2021 (1) MPLJ (Cri) 403, passed
on 20.01.2021 and submits that Division Bench of this Court has
concluded that Section 12 of the Act of 2015 is a complete code
in itself qua the subject of bail and, therefore, it appears that
general provisions as to Bail and Bond as referred in Section
436-A of Cr.P.C. has no applicability in relation to the bail of
Juvenile. Thus, according to him, Section 436-A of Cr.P.C. 1973
cannot be attracted in any case, relating to Juveniles.
10.    He also addressed over the point that the Act of 2015 is
beneficial legislation, specifically meant to deal with all the
matters relating to Children and vide Section 3 of the Act of
2015, the legislature had intended to provide certain principles
which are to be followed while implementing the provisions of
the Act of 2015. It is submitted that a conjoint reading of Section
3(xii) with Section 12 coupled with Rule-8 of the 2016 Rule of
the Act of 2015, provides that apprehension/detention of the
child is an exception and should be a matter of last resort, that too
by recording reasons for doing the same. Therefore, purview of
Code of Criminal Procedure has been taken away from the Act of
2015. Therefore, implicitly also the child who is assessed to be
tried as an adult, is neither jointly tried with the adult co-accused
persons as per Section 23 of the Act of 2015, nor is tried by the
regular courts of law. Child has to be provided child friendly
atmosphere and, therefore, a special as well as dedicated
Children's Court is established for their trial. He relied upon the
judgment of Apex Court in the case of Shilpa Mittal Vs. State of
NCT of Delhi & Anr., (2020) 2 SCC 787, in this regard and the
subsequent amendment in the Act of 2015 by Parliament. His
submission is that Special Act can only be regulated through the
provisions contained into the Act.
11.    Shri Sanjay Kumar Sharma, learned counsel as Amicus
curiae has a different point of view. It is his submission that
historical background in which provision as enshrined under
Section 436-A of Cr.P.C. finds its genesis from the judgment
passed by the Apex Court in the case of Hussain Ara Khatoon
& Ors. Vs. Home Secretary, State of Bihar reported in AIR
1979 SC 1369. Judgment emphasized the mandate that the
accused who are incarcerated for more than half of terms for
which they may be sentenced, must be released forthwith.
12.    After due research of law Commission of India,
incorporation of such provision by way of under Section 436-A
of Cr.P.C. was suggested and later on included, for which it came
into force by way of Code of Criminal Procedure (amendment)
Act, 2005, whereas, Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2000 (Predecessor of Act of 2015) is prior in time.
Therefore, non obstante clause of Section 1(4) of the Juvenile
Justice Act, 2000 (predecessor of the Act of 2015) did not have
any occasion to consider Section 436-A of Cr.P.C.
13.    Since the very concept originates from different judgments
of Apex Court and based on Article 21 of the Constitution of
India, therefore, bar, if any,    under Section 1(4) of Juvenile
Justice Act, 2015 impliedly exists, even then it cannot hold good.
This is fundamental right of petitioner enshrined in the
Constitution. As per the provisions of Act of 2015, certain
presumptions have been raised in favour of juvenile in which
Presumption of Innocence of juvenile is one of the attributes and
same is applicable here. Since remand home also confines and
restrains the activities of a juvenile, therefore, in fact his
confinement deserves to be addressed as per Section 436-A of
Cr.P.C. By relying upon the book Principles of Statutory
Interpretation by Justice G.P. Singh, it is hereby submitted that
historical facts in which certain law is germinated and developed
must be kept in mind while interpreting the provisions of law.
14.    He echoed the same voice like the counsel for petitioner
and according to him, looking to the period of retention of the
petitioner, his case be considered for release on adequate surety.
15.    Heard learned counsel for the parties and learned Amici
Curiae at length and perused the documents appended thereto.
16.   The instant case is a revision preferred by a Child in
Conflict with Law (CICL)seeking his release from remand home
on the basis of completing more than half of period of retention
which ultimately a child would receive when he would be found
to be in conflict with law. Petitioner/ CICL is facing allegations
for offence under Section 376 of IPC. As per submissions of
learned counsel for petitioner, CICL appears to be 14 years of
17.   Section 1 (4) of Act of 2015 appears to have been
incorporated to bring all pervasive nature of application of Act of
2015 in respect of all matters concerning children in need of care
and protection and children in conflict with law those matters
include all aspects; right from Apprehension and Detention to
Social Reintegration. Said section is reiterated for ready
“1. Short title, extent, commencement and
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law for the time being in force, the
provisions of this Act shall apply to all matters
concerning children in need of care and
protection and children in conflict with law,
(i) apprehension, detention, prosecution, penalty
or imprisonment, rehabilitation and social re-
integration of children in conflict with law;
(ii) procedures and decisions or orders relating to
rehabilitation,    adoption,    re-integration,   and
restoration of children in need of care and
protection.”
18.    Similarly, Section 5 of Cr.P.C. was referred by the Amicus
“5.Saving. Nothing contained in this Code shall,
in the absence of a specific provision to the
contrary, affect any special or local law for the
time being in force, or any special jurisdiction or
power conferred, or any special form of procedure
prescribed, by any other law for the time being in
force.”
19.    A conjoint reading of Section 1(4) of Act of 2015 as
referred above and Section 5 of Code of Criminal Procedure and
while going through the various provisions of Act of 2015 and
taking    aid   of   the   maxim      “generalia   specialibus    non
derogant”which means “special things derogate from general
things”, it appears that if a special provision is made on a certain
matter, the matter is excluded from the general provisions, then
picture emerges regarding prevalence of Section 1(4) over any
other provisions of law.
20.    Not only this, it is the settled canon of interpretation that a
particular provision which is to be constructed/interpreted shall
not be done in isolation, rather it is the entire scheme of the Act
which is to be taken into consideration as a whole, which is
unequivocally enunciated in the case of Indore Development
Authority Vs. Shaildra (dead) through Lrs. And Ors., (2018) 3
SCC 412 and in the case of Godawat Pan Masala I.P. Ltd. &
Anr. Vs. Union of India & Ors., ( (2004) 7 SCC 68; wherein,
“It is an accepted cannon of Constructions of
Statutes that a statute must be read as a whole and
one provisions of the Act should be construed with
reference to other provisions of the same act so as
to make a consistent , harmonious enactment of
the whole statute. The court must ascertain the
intention of the legislature by directing its
attention not merely to the clauses to be construed,
but to the scheme of the entire statute. The attempt
must be to eliminate conflict and to harmonise the
different parts of the statute for it cannot be
assumed that Parliament had given by one hand
what it took away by the other. (See in this
connection Commissioner of Income Tax Vs.
Hindustant Bulk Carries, AIR 2002 SC 3491 and
This Court in O.P.Singla and Anr. Vs. Union of
India and Ors., 1984 AIR 1595 (para 17) said:
“However, it is well recognised that, when a rule
of a section is a part of an integral scheme, it
should not be considered or construed in isolation.
One must have regard to the scheme of the
fasciculus of the relevant rules or sections in order
to determine the true meaning of any one or more
of them. As isolated consideration of a provision
leads to the risk of some other inter-related
provision becoming otiose or devoid of meaning.”
21.    Taking cue from the said precedent, statute has to be seen
in toto and a conjoint look of other relevant provisions of statute
are to be seen. One such provision is Section 3 of the Act of 2015
in which certain general principles of care and protection of
children are being referred. Apparently, these principles constitute
aims/objects/spirit of Act of 2015. Said principals deserve
“3. General principles to be followed in
administration of Act.-The Central Government,
the State Governments, the Board, and other
agencies, as the case may be, while implementing
the provisions of this Act shall be guided by the
following fundamental principles, namely:—
(i)Principle of presumption of innocence: Any
child shall be presumed to be an innocent of any
mala fide or criminal intent up to the age of
eighteen years.
(ii)Principle of dignity and worth: All human
beings shall be treated with equal dignity and
rights.
(iii)Principle of participation: Every child shall
have a right to be heard and to participate in all
processes and decisions affecting his interest and
the child views shall be taken into consideration
with due regard to the age and maturity of the
(iv)Principle of best interest: All decisions
regarding the child shall be based on the primary
consideration that they are in the best interest of
the child and to help the child to develop full
(v)Principle of family responsibility: The primary
responsibility of care, nurture and protection of
the child shall be that of the biological family or
adoptive or foster parents, as the case may be.
(vi)Principle of safety: All measures shall be taken
to ensure that the child is safe and is not subjected
to any harm, abuse or maltreatment while in
contact with the care and protection system, and
(vii)Positive measures: All resources are to be
mobilised     including   those    of   family    and
community,      for   promoting    the    well-being,
facilitating development of identity and providing
an inclusive and enabling environment, to reduce
vulnerabilities of children and the need for
intervention under this Act.
(viii)Principle of non-stigmatising semantics:
Adversarial or accusatory words are not to be
used in the processes pertaining to a child.
(ix)Principle of non-waiver of rights: No waiver
of any of the right of the child is permissible or
valid, whether sought by the child or person
acting on behalf of the child, or a Board or a
Committee and any non-exercise of a fundamental
right shall not amount to waiver.
(x)Principle of equality and non-discrimination:
There shall be no discrimination against a child
on any grounds including sex, caste, ethnicity,
place of birth, disability and equality of access,
opportunity and treatment shall be provided to
every child.
confidentiality: Every child shall have a right to
protection of his privacy and confidentiality, by all
means and throughout the judicial process.
(xii)Principle of institutionalisation as a measure
of last resort: A child shall be placed in
institutional care as a step of last resort after
making a reasonable inquiry.
(xiii)Principle of repatriation and restoration:
Every child in the juvenile justice system shall
have the right to be re-united with his family at the
earliest and to be restored to the same socio-
economic and cultural status that he was in,
before coming under the purview of this Act,
unless such restoration and repatriation is not in
his best interest.
(xiv)Principle of fresh start: All past records of
any child under the Juvenile Justice system should
be erased except in special circumstances.
(xv)Principle of diversion: Measures for dealing
with children in conflict with law without resorting
to judicial proceedings shall be promoted unless it
is in the best interest of the child or the society as
a whole.
(xvi)Principles     of    natural    justice:   Basic
procedural standards of fairness shall be adhered
to, including the right to a fair hearing, rule
against bias and the right to review, by all persons
or bodies, acting in a judicial capacity under this
22.    Conjoint reading of Section 3 (xii) and (xiii) with Section
12 as well as Rule 8 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection
of children) Model Rules, 2016 reveals that apprehension /
detention of the child is an exception and in fact except where
heinous offence is alleged to have been committed by the child or
committed jointly with adults, no FIR shall be registered and in
that condition logical inference is that registration of FIR,
investigation, filing of charge-sheet and trial as contemplated in
Cr.P.C. appear to be ousted prima facie, although at some places
some minor overlapping of expressions exists. One exception
appears to be carved out in Section 15 in cases of heinous offence
committed by child between 16 to 18 years of age but in that case
also, Children's Court shall try CICL. As explained earlier,
primary purpose of Act of 2015 is to reform or a repatriate the
child in to society and not of deterrence or retributive qua child.
23.    For this reason even when the child is assessed to be tried
as an adult is not jointly tried with the adult co-accused (Section
23 of the Act of 2015) nor is tried by the regular Courts of law but
by Children Courts as per Sections 15 and 19, so that child
friendly atmosphere may prevail in that Children's Court.
24.    Perusal of Section 1 (4) although gives an impression that
apprehension, detention or imprisonment etc. are contemplated by
the legislature while enactment, but when it is tested on the anvil
of Section 12 of the Act of 2015 vis-a-vis provisions of Cr.P.C.,
then Division Bench of this Court ironed out the creases in the
case of Ankesh Gurjar (supra) and held that concept of arrest /
apprehension in a police lock-up / jail as contemplated in Chapter
V of Cr.P.C. is not recognized in the Scheme of Act of 2015.
Therefore, juvenile is not lodged in any police lock-up and jail,
therefore, benefit of anticipatory bail is not available to him in
Act of 2015. Very concept of “Apprehension or Arrest” has been
negatived by the Division Bench of this Court and therefore, as
per the legal mandate, Juvenile is never under confinement by
way of arrest (pre or post trial) and when he is not arrested under
the Act of 2015,then Section 436-A of Cr.P.C. does not come in to
play. Words Investigation, Inquiry or Trial as contemplated in
Cr.P.C. are not borrowed in letter and spirit in Act of 2015.
25.   Section 436-A of Cr.P.C. contemplates a specific condition,
wherein, a person when suffered detention for a period extending
up to one half of the maximum period specified for that offence
under that law, he shall be released by the Court on his personal
bond with or without sureties.
26.   Said section is reiterated hereinbelow for ready reference;-
“436A. Maximum period for which an undertrial
prisoner can be detained.- Where a person has,
during the period of investigation, inquiry or trial
under the Code of an offence under any law (not
being an offence for which the punishment of
punishments under that law) undergone detention
for a period extending up to one-half of the
maximum period of imprisonment specified for
that offence under that law, he shall be released
by the Court on his personal bond with or without
Provided that the Court may, after hearing the
Public Prosecutor and for reasons to be recorded
by it in writing, order the continued detention of
such person for a period longer than one-half of
the said period or release him on bail instead of
the personal bond with or without sureties:
Provided further that no such person shall in any
investigation, inquiry or trial for more than the
maximum period of imprisonment provided for the
said offence under that law.
Explanation.-     In  computing     the   period    of
detention under this section for granting bail, the
period of detention passed due to delay in
proceeding caused by the accused shall be
excluded.
27.    Although     Section    436-A     of   Cr.P.C.   Contemplates
maximum period of imprisonment specified for that offence
under that law. Here expression, under that law can only mean
either Indian Penal Code (because of Section 376 of IPC, Juvenile
is facing) or POCSO (Section 5/6 of POCSO Act), not the Act of
28.    On close scrutiny,it appears that Act of 2015 nowhere,
contemplates imprisonment for such period which is being posed
in the present case. It is an Act for the welfare of children and laid
stress over Principles as enumerated in Section 3 of Act of 2015.
It is being guided by the said spirit and objects. Said Act
nowhere, contemplates imprisonment as a way of punishment or
as a way of retribution to the crime allegedly committed by a
29.    When relevant Law itself desist from imprisonment or
arrest then the theory of suffering more than half of the maximum
period of imprisonment gets frustrated. In short, Section 436-A of
Cr.P.C. itself does not support the arguments advanced by
30.    If the controversy is seen from the vantage point of
judgment delivered by Division Bench of this Court in the case of
Ankesh Gurjar (supra) then also it is legally established that
CICL can never be arrested or apprehended and therefore,
valuable right of anticipatory bail is not even contemplated in the
Act of 2015. Thus, provisions of Section 436-A of Cr.P.C. is not
applicable in the present set of facts.
31.    In cumulative analysis, this Court is of the considered
opinion that when the promulgation of the special Act meant to
treat children in specific manner, then bringing analogy from
other statutes would overlap the remedies and may hamper the
very object and spirit of Act of 2015.
32.    Shri Sanjay Kumar Sharma raised his arguments on the
basis of judgment of Apex Court in the case of Hussain Ara
Khatoon (supra) and submitted that this judgment would apply
in the present set of facts. He tried to pick up the thread from the
principles as enumerated in Section 3, specially Principle of
Presumption of Innocence but that principle is universal
principle in criminal jurisprudence and on the basis of said
presumption only, provisions of Cr.P.C. would not be attracted
33.    According to him, remand home also confines               the
activities of juvenile, therefore, it is to be considered as
confinement as per Section 436-A of Cr.P.C. but that analogy
would lead to anomalous condition because when the other
provisions of Cr.P.C. are specifically ousted and when principles
of Deinstitutionalization and Repatriation are General Principles
to be followed in the Act of 2015 and when Community Service /
Creative Pursuits are contemplated as reformatory measures, then
the confinement of child in remand home cannot be construed
just like confinement of under trial in jails / prisons. Therefore,
those arguments, although look attractive but lacks merit.
Therefore, no benefit can be given to a child in conflict with law
as per Section 436-A of Cr.P.C.
34.    However, non application of provision of Section 436-A
does not mean that Juvenile cannot be repatriated to his family
and community at all, but said order can always be made even
before such completion of period on individual facts of the case.
31.    Coming to the present case, from the case diary, it appears
that petition is aged 14 years and is facing allegations of
commission of offence of rape of a girl aged 3 years. His arrest
memo indicates his age as 14 years and medical report supports
allegations of prosecution in specific terms, therefore, case of the
petitioner lacks merits at this stage. He may renew his prayer later
35.    In view of the discussion made about, questions as
formulated above deserve to be answered in negative and child in
conflict with law can not be treated as under trial prisoner as
contemplated under Section 436-A of Cr.P.C. and cannot be
released after completing half of total period of detention of three
years in special home to avail the benefit of Section 436-A of
36.    Before parting, this Court records its appreciation for
valuable assistance rendered by learned Amici Curiae Shri Vijay
Dutt Sharma and Shri Sanjay Kumar Sharma. Their efforts
deserve appreciation.
37.    Resultantly, revision petition sans merits and is hereby
dismissed. Petitioner may take keen interest in positive and
creative pursuits during rehabilitation.
JAI PRAKASH Digitally signed by JAI PRAKASH SOLANKI
DN: c=IN, o=HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH BENCH GWALIOR,
ou=HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH BENCH GWALIOR,
postalCode=474001, st=Madhya Pradesh,