Case :- GOVERNMENT APPEAL No. - 1990 of 1985
Appellant :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Respondent :- U.K. Saxena, Kamal Kishor Mishra,
1.   This appeal against acquittal by appellant State is
directed against the impugned judgment and order dated
22.4.1985 passed by Special Judge (E.C. Act)/ Additional
Sessions Judge, Jalaun at Orai in S.T. No. 143 of 1980 (State
Vs. Narendra Singh and another), P.S. Kotwali Orai, district
Jalaun by which the accused respondents have been acquitted
of the charges under Sections 302/34, 302 IPC.
2.   At the very outset, it is very relevant to mention here
that during pendency of Appeal, accused respondent No.2
Ramesh has died. Accordingly, by the order dated 27.11.2021,
this Court passed order directing abatement of Government
Appeal as against the accused respondent no.2.
3.   Now, we are proceeding to consider the government
appeal in respect of rest of the accused respondent i.e.
4.   Brief facts of the case, in nutshell, are that informant and
his brother Bhanu Pratap Singh had gone to the Court on
16.7.1980 for taking certified copy of certain judgment. At
about 02.00 - 02.15 p.m. after finishing their court work they
were going towards Orai market. Near the Orai Jhansi Bus
Stand at the gate of Kutchahri they were joined by Taqdir
Singh, Bal Ram Tewari and Ram Swarup Singh. While going to
the Orai market, Informant Ram Lakhan Singh and his brother
Bhanu Pratap Singh accompanied by the aforesaid three
witnesses reached the Konch Bus Stand. At about 02.25 p.m.
accused Narendra Singh, Ramesh and one Surendra Singh
Yadav saw them all. Accused Ramesh alarmed Surendra Singh
that the enemy was coming and on seeing this Surendra
exalted the accused Narendra to kill Bhanu Pratap Singh.
Bhanu Pratap Singh seeing these persons tried to run away
but before that he was fired at by the accused Narendra Sigh
and Ramesh with country made pistol and a pistol. Informant
Ram Lakhan Singh and the aforesaid witnesses challenged the
accused persons but they made their escape good under the
cover of fire by them. Then the informant found that his
brother Bhanu Pratap Singh was dead. The aforesaid murder
by the accused persons, namely, Narendra Singh and Ramesh
was committed due to old enmity between the accused
Narendra Singh and the informant. The accused Ramesh and
Surendra Singh were the party-men of the accused Narendra
Singh. Informant Ram Lakhan Singh prepared F.I.R. and
lodged the same at the police station concerned. Necessary
formalities i.e. Panchayatnama etc. were prepared and the
dead body of the deceased Bhanu Pratap Singh was sent for
post mortem. Investigation started and and after completion
of  investigation  charge  sheet    against   Narendra   Singh,
Surendra   Singh     and  Ramesh     was   submitted.   Accused
Surendra Singh died during trial. Trial started against accused
respondents Narendra Singh and Ramesh.
5.   Accused persons appeared and charge under Sections
302/34 and 302 IPC was framed in the trial court against
them. Accused have denied the charges framed against them
and claimed their trial.
6.   Trial proceeded and on behalf of prosecution, eight
witnesses i.e. PW-1 Ram Lakhan Singh (informant), PW-2 Bal
who conducted the post mortem on the dead body of
were examined.
7.   After closure of prosecution evidence, statement of
accused persons under Section 313 Cr.P.C. was recorded in
which they denied the allegations and stated that they have
been falsely implicated due to enmity. Deceased was a
notorious Gunda and a known criminal having his criminal
history. He was leader of the dacoits engaged in road hold-up
and therefore he was killed by the then Kotwal Devraj Singh
through his men. They produced one head constable named
Sobran Singh in their defence as DW-1. This witness brought
the road gang register to show that the deceased Bhanu
Pratap Singh was registered as leader of road gang engaged in
dacoity by road hold-up in the police record.
8.   Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and
going through the record, the trial court found that the
prosecution has not fully succeeded in bringing home the
charges against the accused respondents beyond reasonable
doubt and acquitted the accused respondents.
9.   Aggrieved with the said judgment and order dated
22.4.1985, the State Government has preferred the present
10. Vide order dated 5.5.1987 the leave to appeal application
was allowed and the appeal was admitted.
11. Heard Shri Raj Kamal Srivastava, learned AGA appearing
for the State as well as Shri Satish Trivedi, learned Senior
Counsel assisted by Shri Kamal Kishore Mishra, learned
counsel for the accused respondent.
12. Castigating the impugned judgment and order, learned
learned AGA has submitted that prosecution has established
the guilt of the accused respondents beyond reasonable
doubt. It was further submitted that findings recorded by the
trial court in the impugned judgment and order are perverse
and illegal. It was a day hours incident. There are eye account
witnesses. Presence of PW-1 and PW-2 at the place of
occurrence at the time of incident is natural and probable.
Finding of the trial court placing the PW-2 Balram Tiwari in the
category of 'unreliable witness' is against the facts and
evidence.    Referring to entire evidence adduced       by the
prosecution     it was further submitted that deceased and
witnesses disclosed in the F.I.R. were returning together from
the District Court and as and when they reached near the
place of occurrence, accused persons opened fire upon the
deceased. This fact has been proved by the prosecution
beyond reasonable doubt. Medical evidence fully supports the
oral version. F.I.R. was lodged promptly. It was also submitted
that PW-2 Balram Tiwari is a reliable witness and his
statement finds support with the statement of PW-1 and
medical evidence. There was no reason to falsely implicate the
accused respondents in this case. Charges framed against the
accused respondents are proved. It was lastly submitted that
the findings recorded by trial court in the impugned judgment
and order are not based on correct appreciation of facts and
evidence and suffer from infirmity and illegality warranting
interference by this Court.      In support of his submissions,
learned AGA placed reliance on a decision of Apex Court in
Vadivelu Thevar Vs. The State of Madras, 1957 AIR 614.
13. In reply, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
accused respondent has submitted that the accused had not
committed the present offence. Referring to the findings
recorded by the trial court in the impugned judgment and
order it was further submitted that PW-2 Balram Tiwari in his
cross examination       done by the accused Narendra has
admitted that he received information about the incident in
the District Court premises and thereafter this witness and
PW-1 both went to the place of occurrence. To substantiate
this argument, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
accused respondent referred to the statement of PW-1 and
further submitted that this witness has also stated in the
beginning part of examination-in-chief that he was returning
from the District Court alongwith Takdir Singh, Balram Tiwari
and Ram Swarup Singh. No other person was alongwith them.
It was further submitted that F.I.R. was lodged after due
consultation. Witnesses disclosed in the F.I.R. were planted
after calling them from their houses. They were said to be
present at the place of occurrence after the incident and
Investigating   Officer  was  also   present   there  but   their
statements under Section 161 CrPC were not recorded
immediately. Prosecution has also not produced the FSL
report. Thus, place of occurrence is also not established in this
case. Referring to cross-examination of PW-1 it was also
submitted that witnesses disclosed in the F.I.R. were the
witness in a number of cases initiated on behalf of informant.
They are pocket witness of the police. In fact they were not
present on the spot nor they had seen the incident. It was also
submitted that it was blind murder case. Deceased was
hardened criminal. A number of criminal cases were pending
against him and due to this reason he was done to death by
some unknown person.       It was next contended that at this
time age of accused respondent Narendra Singh is about 80
years. He was aged about 45 years at the time of recording of
statement under Section 313 CrPC. Prosecution was not able
to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt against the accused
respondent. There is no infirmity, illegality or perversity in the
impugned judgment and order warranting interference by this
Court. Findings of trial court in the impugned judgment and
order are based on correct appreciation of facts, evidence and
law. View adopted by the trial court is also a possible view.
14. We have considered the rival submissions made by the
learned counsel for the parties and have gone through the
entire record and evidence carefully.
15. Before proceeding to discuss the submissions raised by
the learned counsel for the parties, we may mention the
findings of the trial court on material points in the impugned
judgement and order, which are as under:
(i). PW-1 and PW-2 are not the eye account witnesses. They
were present at the time of incident in the District Court
premises and had received information about the incident
(ii). Prosecution was not able to prove the place of incident.
(iii). It was a blind murder case.
(iv). PW-1 being the real brother of the deceased is interested
(v). PW-2 is pocket witness of the police and he appeared as
witness in several cases initiated on behalf of prosecution.
16. After outlining the findings recorded by the trial court in
the impugned judgement and order on material points, we are
proceeding to deal with the submissions advanced by the
learned counsel for the parties.
17. In this matter, as is evident from the record, incident
took place on 16.7.1980 at about 2.45 p.m.. F.I.R. was lodged
by PW-1, brother of the deceased, on the basis of written
report - Ext. Ka-1 on 16.7.1980 itself at 3.30 p.m.. Distance
between place of occurrence and police station concerned was
about one and half furlong. Specific role for causing injuries to
the deceased is assigned to present accused respondent and
co-accused Ramesh (since dead). PW-1 in his examination-in-
chief has stated that he was returning from the Court
alongwith Takdir Singh, Balram Tiwari and Ram Swarup Singh.
No other person was alongwith them. A lengthy cross-
examination was done from this witness wherein he has
admitted that number of criminal cases were pending against
the deceased started by the police and private person. Though
PW-2 has supported the prosecution case in examination-in-
chief and in his cross-examination completed in the year 1982
yet no cross-examination was done on the part of accused
respondent Ramesh (since dead) at that time. He was recalled
on the application moved by the co-accused in the year 1985
for cross-examination and he has specifically stated that at
the time of incident he was present in the District Court
premises alongwith PW-1 and had received information about
the present incident in the Court premises itself and thereafter
they went to the place of occurrence. Looking to the
statement of PW-2 made in the cross-examination done by
accused Ramesh (since dead) the trial court has observed that
PW-2 is not a reliable witness. He has not been declared
hostile by the prosecution. Statement made by this witness in
the cross-examination done by co-accused Ramesh (since
dead) placed him in the category of 'fully unreliable witness'.
Trial court was also of the view that examination-in-chief of
PW-1 itself makes it clear that this witness was also not
present at the place of occurrence at the time of incident. On
the basis of aforesaid facts, the findings of the trial court
recorded in the impugned order are to be analyzed.
18. It is settled principles of law that in the appeal against
acquittal   the   Appellate   Court   should  interfere with  the
judgment and order of acquittal passed by the Trial Court if it
arrives at a finding that the trial Court's decision was perverse
or otherwise unsustainable. It is also settled that if the view
adopted by the trial court is a possible view and trial court has
well discussed the entire facts and evidence in the impugned
judgment and order, the Appellate Court should not interfere
with    the   said  findings.   The   Appellate   Court  will not
superimpose its view over the view adopted by the Trial Court
in the impugned judgment and order.
19. In this case, as is evident from the record, PW-2 was
cross-examined on two occasions, firstly, in the year 1982 and
secondly, in the year 1985. In the year 1985 when he was
cross-examined on behalf of co-accused Ramesh (since dead)
he did not support the prosecution case but he was not
declared hostile. If the statement of this witness made in the
examination-in-chief and cross-examination both are taken
together it is evident that PW-2 cannot be placed in the
category of 'fully reliable witness'. He can also not be placed in
the category of 'fully unreliable witness'. If such is the
position, he can be placed in the category of neither wholly
reliable witness nor wholly unreliable witness and in that
situation Court has to be circumspect and has to look for
corroboration in material particulars by reliable testimony. The
trial court has taken into consideration the statement of PW-1
and has compared the same with the statement of PW-2 and
was of the view that PW-1 was also not present at the time of
occurrence at the place of incident. He himself has admitted in
the examination-in-chief that when they were returning from
the    Court    towards     the  market,     deceased   was   not
accompanying them.         If the   statement of PW-1 in      the
examination-in-chief in this case is compared with the cross-
examination of PW-2 made in the year 1985 it can safely be
held that view taken by the trial court in the impugned
judgment and order regarding presence of PW-1 and PW-2 at
the place of occurrence at the time of incident is not illegal
and perverse. PW-2 has not been declared hostile. Thus, the
trial court has rightly taken into consideration the part of
cross-examination done in the year 1985 on the part of
accused Ramesh (since dead). Had he (PW-2) been declared
hostile on the basis of cross-examination done in the year
1985, its impact could be otherwise. The trial court has rightly
taken into consideration the cross-examination part of PW-2
done in the year 1985, as he cannot be placed in the category
of 'fully reliable witness' and his statement in the cross-
examination are self-contradictory. Presence of this witness
alongwith PW-1 and other witnesses disclosed in the F.I.R. at
the time of incident was not found believable , which is based
on correct appreciation of facts and evidence. The trial court
while recording the aforesaid facts has discussed the entire
evidence in detail and has rightly concluded that PW-1 and
PW-2 were not present at the place of occurrence at the time
of incident. They were planted later on by the police after due
20. Prosecution has examined only two fact witnesses i.e.
PW-1    and   PW-2,   however,  some    other  witnesses   were
disclosed in the F.I.R. but they were not examined. There
remains only formal witnesses. Presence of PW-1 and PW-2 at
the time of incident is not believable, as discussed here-in-
above. Thus, it can safely be held that prosecution was not
able to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. It is pertinent
to mention here that prosecution has also not produced the
FSL report to establish the place of occurrence. If the findings
of the trial court recorded in the impugned judgment and
order are analyzed in consonance with the facts and evidence
adduced by the parties in the present matter in light of
submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the parties,
we are of the view that the view taken by the trial court in the
impugned judgment and order is a possible view.
21. Considering the entire aspects of the matter, we are of
the view that impugned judgment and order passed by the
trial court is well thought and well discussed and trial court
has rightly held that prosecution has not succeeded to prove
guilt of accused respondent beyond reasonable doubt. The
accused respondent is found not guilty for the offence
punishable       under Sections  302/34, 302  IPC.    As   such,
impugned judgment and order passed by trial court is liable to
be upheld and government appeal having no force is liable to
be dismissed.
22. Accordingly, present Government Appeal is dismissed
and the impugned judgment and order passed by the trial
court is affirmed.