The instant Writ Petition has been filed by a mother seeking for compensation from
the respondents for the physical pain and mental agony underwent by her for a period of
nearly nine months after delivering a child in the 3rd respondent hospital, due to the alleged
negligence on the part of the respondents.
2.The case of the petitioner is that she was admitted in the 3rd respondent hospital on
4.11.2005 and she delivered a baby boy on the same day at about 12.30 PM. The 4th
respondent doctor performed the delivery and she had to use the forceps, since there was a
last minute complication and it required stitches. From 5.11.2005 onwards, puss was oozing
from the surgical scars and the petitioner was experiencing difficulty in urinating and
defecating. On 9.11.2005, the stitches were undone by the 4th respondent and she redid the
stitches on the same day.
3.The situation did not improve for the petitioner and on 10.11.2005, Dr. Ilanchezian
examined the petitioner and he used catheter to remove the puss and it was informed that
the said doctor will perform the second surgery. The further case of the petitioner is that the
situation was not improving for the petitioner and the puss was oozing and dribbling down
the legs and she was undergoing extreme pain and hardship. Since there was no progress till
15.11.2005, the husband of the petitioner decided to get the petitioner discharged from the
3rd respondent hospital. The 4th respondent informed that the petitioner has to wait for the
second surgery to be performed by Dr. Ilanchezian and since he was not readily available,
the petitioner was asked to wait. However, the husband of the petitioner was not able to
take it anymore and he insisted for the discharge of the petitioner and the petitioner was
discharged on 16.11.2005.
4.The petitioner was thereafter rushed to a private hospital and at which point of time,
the petitioner was informed that her rectum had been injured due to the use of forceps and
since it has not been stitched and treated properly, it got infected. Immediately, steps were
taken to perform a surgery. The private doctor informed the petitioner that a three stage
surgery would be needed to perfectly address the problem.
5.The first surgery was performed on 20.11.2005. Thereafter, the left leg of the
petitioner began to swell and hence, the petitioner was admitted in the vascular care centre
for nearly 15 days. The petitioner had to wait till the swelling subsided. Ultimately, the
second surgery was performed during May 2006 and the third surgery was performed during
6.In view of the above facts, the petitioner claims to have spent nearly Rs. 1.5 Lakhs
towards surgery expenses and she was also forced to spend money towards medicine, rent
and travel expenses. That apart, the petitioner was not able to take care of her new born
child for nearly nine months. In view of the same, the petitioner has sought for
compensation against the respondents and she has also sought for taking action against the
4th respondent for her negligence in performing the operation. The second limb of the relief
sought for by the petitioner becomes infructuous since the 4th respondent died during the
pendency of this Writ Petition. Hence, this Court has to consider only the issue of negligence
and the consequent payment of compensation.
7.The 2nd respondent has filed a counter affidavit. The relevant portions in the counter
affidavit are extracted hereunder :
“8. It is humbly submitted that Fourth Respondent herein
was leave 13.11.2005. Another Gynaecologist namely Dr.
Vijayanthi found that the wound of the patient again broken down
and it turned cut and then she called the surgeon immediately. The
patient was examined by the surgeon on the same day. After
examination of the wound of the patient, the Surgeon opined that
the skin and muscle was infected and the patient put on antibiotics
and the wound be re-sutured only after 15 days, after controlling
the infection. This opinion communicated to the patient's husband
immediately (i.e) on 13.11.2005. On 16.11.2005 it was informed to
the patient's husband that patient may be taken to Coimbatore
Medical College Hospital, Coimbatore for the further treatment
where the experts are available with good intention. But, the patient
and her husband ignored the advice of the Doctor and chosen to go
to a private Hospital. At their request, the patient was discharged
from Government Hospital, Mettupalayam on 16.11.2005. These
facts distinct that no negligence on the part of the third and fourth
respondent.
9. I respectfully further submit that patient and her
husband ware independently chosen to go for treatment at private
Hospital. For their own decision, put allegations on the
Government Hospital and the Doctor who gave treatment to her is
unfair and unethical.
10. I further submit that negligence committed by the
patient and her husband. In order to hide their mistakes preferred
this writ petition and seeking compensation and action on the
doctor who gave treatment to her with good intention. Therefore,
the contention of the petitioner against the Government Hospital
and the Doctor is unfair and unethical.
petitioner in the type set along with this writ petition are the
concrete documentary evidence that there no negligence on the
part of the Government Hospital and the Doctor who gave
treatment to the petitioner.
12. I humbly submit that the Joint Director or Health
Services, Coimbatore @ Tiruppur has submitted inquiry report to
the    District    Collector,    Coimbatore     Vide   their    Letter
Ref.No.2239/E8/2005 Dated: 21.09.2006. In this inquiry report, the
Joint Director of Health Services, Coimbatore @ Tiruppur has
been mentioned as follows:
"In my opinion there is a possibility of occurrence of
complete perineal tear in the patient Mrs.Banupriya which can be
treated and managed at Coimbatore Medical College Hospital,
Coimbatore where there were enough facilities available.
Under the above enough circumstances and on the
basis of the opinion statement submitted the by the expert doctors I
No negligence is noticed on the part of Doctors who
gave treatment to the patient and hence the question of rendering
financial remedy to the petitioner does not arise.”
8.The 3rd and 4th respondents have also filed counter affidavits. Since they have
taken a similar defence, it will suffice to take note of the counter affidavit filed by the 3rd
respondent and the relevant portions are extracted hereunder:
“5. It is respectfully submitted that after delivery of the baby, the
episiotomy was sutured well and the patient's pulse rate and B.P. was
good and the patient was then treated with antibiotics. The petitioner
started passing urine freely for four days and also passed motion and
her wound was clean until then. While so when on the fifth day that is on
09.11.2005 when the doctor concerned examined the patient's wound so
as to discharge her, it was found there was a breakdown of muscle
and skin layer which is a common complication for any surgical
procedure depending upon the health and hence the fourth respondent
put the patient on higher antibiotics and re-sutured the wound. Such
repaired wound sometimes breaks down more than once, inspite of
efficient and meticulous efforts requiring repeated repairs because of
poor resistance power of the patient and proximity of the wound to anus
which leads to all infections with known and unknown bacteria, some of
which are resistant to all available antibiotics.
6.It is respectfully submitted that after re-suturing, the petitioner
passed urine and motion freely through proper passages. While so she
came to know, that when the doctor concerned was on leave on 13.11
2005, another gynaecologist Dr. Vijayanthi found that the wound of the
petitioner was again broken down and it turned out to be complete
perineal tear. The said doctor, it seems immediately called surgeon Dr.
Ilanchezhian a surgeon who was in the same hospital.
7. It is respectfully submitted that the said doctor after examination
of the wound of the patient gave his opinion that as the skin and muscle
was infected, the patient be put on antibiotics and the wound be re-
sutured only after 15 days after controlling the infection. The said
surgeon also advised the duty Doctor to refer the patient to Coimbatore
Medical College Hospital, the higher centre of treatment to get expert
and adequate treatment. The opinion of the said surgeon was also
communicated to the petitioner's husband.
8.It is respectfully submitted that on 16.11.2005, when the doctor
concerned was insisted the petitioner's husband that the patient may be
taken to Coimbatore Medical College Hospital, Coimbatore for further
treatment where experts are available, the petitioner's husband refused
to heed to the advice of the doctor concerned and insisted for
discharging the patient and hence having no other go, the doctor
concerned discharged the patient on the said day.”
9.Heard Ms.Poongkhulali, learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr.T.K.Saravanan learned
Government Advocate for R1 and R2 and Mr.N..Damodaran, learned counsel for R3
10.The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that there was negligence on the
part of the 4th respondent since she did not take due care while performing episiotomy and
as a result of the same, there was damage/rupture of the anus resulting in unbearable
suffering for the petitioner. The learned counsel further submitted that the 3rd respondent
hospital was not taking immediate steps to treat the infected portion and from 5.11.2005
onwards, the petitioner was made to face unbearable pain and hardship till 16.11.2005 and
the husband of the petitioner was forced to discharge her and give her treatment in a private
hospital. As a result of the negligence of the 3rd respondent hospital, the petitioner had to
undergo three operations thereafter and also undergo treatment in a vascular care centre. In
view of the same, the petitioner was forced to bear huge expenses and the petitioner was
not even in a position to take care of her child for nearly nine months. The learned counsel
submitted that this is a fit case where the respondents must be directed to pay compensation
for their negligence.
11.Per contra, the learned Government Advocate appearing on behalf of the
respondents submitted that the 4th respondent was forced to adopt episiotomy as a surgical
procedure in order to create space for the delivery of the baby. After the delivery, it was
sutured well and the petitioner was treated by giving her antibiotics. Thereafter, there was a
complication which is common in any surgical procedure and hence, the wound was
re-sutured. The petitioner was also given higher antibiotics. Unfortunately, the suture once
again gave way and it was diagnosed that there was complete perineal tear. Since there was
an infection, the petitioner was put on antibiotics and the 3rd respondent waited for the
infection to get controlled and thereafter, to perform the operation. The husband of the
petitioner was also advised that the surgery can be done at the Coimbatore Medical College
Hospital. However, since the husband of the petitioner insisted for discharge and refused to
heed to the advice, the 3rd respondent had to discharge the petitioner. The learned
Government Advocate therefore submitted that there was absolutely no negligence on the
part of the respondents and the present Writ Petition is liable to be dismissed. The learned
Government Advocate in order to substantiate his submissions, relied upon the following
1. Dr. (Mrs.) Chanda Rani Akhouri and others reported in 2022
2. S.K. Jhunjhunwala Vs. Dhanwanti Kaur and Another reported
in (2019) 2 SCC 282.
3. Kusum Sharma and Others reported in (2010) 3 SCC 480.
4. Martin F.D’souza Vs. Mohd. Ishfaq reported in (2009) 3 SCC 1.
5. Jacob Mathew Vs. State of Punjab and Another reported in
12.This Court has carefully considered the submissions made on either side and the
materials available on record.
13.This Court must bear in mind that while considering the grant of compensation in
exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, this Court must be
careful enough not to get into serious factual disputes which would require examination of
witnesses and such cases can only be agitated before a Competent Civil Court. This Court
must venture to decide on the questions of negligence and payment of compensation only in
cases where it can be determined on the basis of the materials available before the Court
and the same will not involve any appreciation of evidence.
14.This Court must also bear in mind the parameters fixed by the Apex Court while
deciding the issue of negligence. In the present case, the issue of negligence has to be
looked at, at two stages. The first stage was when the episiotomy procedure was performed
by the 4th respondent. The second stage is when the wound started getting infected and
whether the 3rd respondent hospital was negligent in taking care of the petitioner till
16.11.2005, when the petitioner was discharged against advice. The judgments that were
relied upon by the learned Government Advocate pertains to the parameters to be applied
by the Court while determining the negligence of a doctor, who performs a procedure or a
surgery. The Apex Court has repeatedly held that a medical practitioner cannot be held to be
negligent just because something went wrong while performing the procedure or surgery,
inspite of the best efforts put in by the doctor and the doctor had exercised a reasonable
degree of care, skill and knowledge as is expected under normal medical standards.
15.In the present case, the 4th respondent had to perform episiotomy, which is a
regular procedure adopted in normal vaginal deliveries. In this procedure, an incision is made
on the vagina of the patient to make space at the outlet bigger for the baby to come out
comfortably         and to make  the   birth easier and    in   order to   avert   a   possible
brain damage for the baby. On carefully going through the medical literature, it is seen that
“it is common for the perineum to tear to some extent during childbirth. Tears can also
occur inside the vagina or other parts of the vulva, including the labia. Up to 9 in
every 10 first time mothers who have a vaginal birth will experience some sort of tear,
graze or episiotomy. It is slightly less common for mothers who have had a vaginal
birth before. For most women, these tears are minor and heal quickly.”
16.It is clear from the above that the 4th respondent was forced to adopt this
procedure since the baby’s head was at the outlet and was not able to come out and the
petitioner was not able to strain any further. That apart, the fetal heart rate was decreasing
and in order to save the baby, the 4th respondent applied outlet forceps after giving
episiotomy, whereby, the perineum was cut down to create space for the delivery of baby.
This procedure adopted by the 4th respondent cannot be held to be negligent and she had
taken the decision in the interest of the petitioner and her baby.
17.The next issue that has to be gone into is as to whether a complete perineal tear
that resulted after the performance of the procedure, can be held to be negligence on the
part of the 4th respondent. On going through the medical literature, it is seen that a perineal
tear is not uncommon after an episiotomy procedure. In fact, there is a possibility of
4 degrees of perineal tear.
●    “First-degree - Small tears affecting only the skin which usually
heal quickly and without treatment.
●     Second-degree - Tears affecting the muscle of the perineum and
the skin. These usually require stitches.
●     Third- and fourth-degree tears - For some women (3.5 out of
100) the tear may be deeper. Third- or fourth- degree tears, also
known as obstetric anal sphincter injuries (OASI), extend into the
muscle that controls the anus (anal sphincter). These deeper
18.It is clear from the above that complete perineal tear that resulted from the
procedure, cannot be held to be negligence on the part of the 4th respondent doctor. The
enquiry report of the Joint Director of Health Services, dated 21.9.2006, was placed before
this Court. While giving this report, the expert opinion of three doctors have been obtained.
They have opined that such complete perineal tear is a possibility and in all such cases, the
patient is put on antibiotics and the re-suture is done only after the healing of the tissues.
The Joint Director has also opined that a complete perineal tear is always a possibility in
certain cases of forceps delivery.
19.In view of the above, this Court has to necessarily take into consideration the
medical literature and the opinion given by experts, since this Court is not an expert in the
field of medicine and this Court does not have the expertise to hold that the procedure
performed on the petitioner by the 4th respondent resulting in the complete perineal tear was
as a result of insufficient care taken by the 4th respondent.
20.This Court has to now consider as to whether there is negligence on the part of the
3rd respondent, in not taking proper care of the petitioner for the period from 5.11.2005 to
16.11.2005. It is true that the petitioner was experiencing extreme pain and was also put to
a lot of discomfort due to the oozing of puss and the bad smell it was emanating. It is clear
from the records that her rectum was cut/injured due to the use of forceps. This resulted in
difficulty in urinating and defecating, according to the petitioner. The respondents have taken
a stand to the effect that the petitioner was passing urine and motion freely till 9.11.2005.
Thereafter, there was a breakdown of muscle and skin layer and according to the 3rd
respondent, the wound was re-sutured and the petitioner was passing urine and motion
freely. Once again on 13.11.2005, there was a breakdown and it was only at that point of
time, it was diagnosed as a complete perineal tear. One, Dr. Ilanchezian was immediately
called and he, after examining the wound gave an opinion that the petitioner must be put on
antibiotics and the wound can be re-sutured only after the infection is controlled. The experts
who had given their opinion have opined that re-suture will be normally done only after the
tissues heal.
21.The husband of the petitioner was not able to see his wife suffering with pain and
facing hardship. Hence, the petitioner was discharged against advice on 16.11.2005.
According to the respondents, the husband of the petitioner was advised that the petitioner
can be referred to the Coimbatore Medical College Hospital, for expert advice and treatment
and this advice was not taken by the husband of the petitioner. The petitioner has taken a
very specific stand that the 4th respondent refused to discharge the petitioner and she was
asked to wait till Dr. Ilenchezian returned back after his leave. The petitioner or her husband
do not admit to the fact that they were advised to be shifted to the Coimbatore Medical
College Hospital. Even in the discharge summary, there is absolutely no reference to the
effect that the petitioner was referred to the Coimbatore Medical College Hospital. It only
states that the patient was discharged at request. Even when the husband of the petitioner
was examined at the time of enquiry, he categorically states that the petitioner was asked to
take treatment in the same hospital and that a doctor will come from the Coimbatore Medical
22.In the considered view of this Court, the 3rd respondent hospital was expected to
take effective decisions since the situation faced by the petitioner could not be effectively
handled in the 3rd respondent hospital. This became apparent even on 13.11.2005, when the
petitioner was diagnosed with a complete perineal tear. At that point of time, immediate
steps must have been taken by the 3rd respondent to shift the petitioner to the Coimbatore
Medical College Hospital. This decision does not require the consent of the petitioner or her
husband. The interest of the patient gains significance and to waste time for 3 more days till
16.11.2005, virtually gave an impression in the mind of the husband of the petitioner that
effective steps are not being taken to treat the petitioner and he was a witness to the pain
and agony undergone by his wife.
23.If really, the petitioner had to wait till the entire wound is healed to perform the
re-suture, it is quite curious to note that the first surgery was performed on the petitioner in
the private hospital on 20.11.2005, which is within four days from the date of discharge from
the 3rd respondent hospital.
24.The medical certificate that has been given by the private hospital shows that the
petitioner had to undergo a three stage surgery to address the tear of the rectum. The first
stage surgery was colostomy, the second stage surgery was CPT- repair and the third stage
surgery was colostomy closure. The first stage of surgery was undergone by the petitioner
within four days after the discharge from the 3rd respondent hospital. This situation could
have been averted by the 3rd respondent hospital by immediately shifting the petitioner to
the Coimbatore Medical College Hospital atleast on 13.11.2005 and all these procedures
could have been done in that hospital. The delay on the part of the 3 rd respondent which
caused anxiety to the husband of the petitioner, should necessarily be held to be negligence
on the part of the 3rd respondent hospital. The 3rd respondent hospital, after having realised
that the petitioner cannot be given adequate care in the hospital, should have immediately
shifted the petitioner to the Coimbatore Medical College Hospital. If this was not done and
the 3rd respondent was waiting for the arrival of a doctor who had gone on leave, the
petitioner cannot continue to face pain and agony and under the given circumstances, the
husband of the petitioner thought it fit to shift the petitioner to a private hospital. In fine,
this Court holds that there was a clear negligence on the part of the 3 rd respondent hospital
for not having taken proper care of the petitioner and for having failed to shift the petitioner
to Coimbatore Medical College Hospital when the situation really warranted.
25.The upshot of the above discussion leads to the conclusion that the 3rd respondent
hospital must be held liable for negligence and the petitioner is entitled for payment of
compensation by the 1st respondent since the Government is vicariously liable for negligence
on the part of the Government hospital.
26.The petitioner was admitted four times in the hospital to undergo three surgeries
and to recover for her swelling of leg, in a vascular care centre. In this process, the petitioner
was forced to spend towards surgery expenses, medicine expenses, travel expenses and also
rental expenses, when they were forced to stay at Sathyamangalam, till all the three
surgeries were completed. That apart, the petitioner also faced untold hardship in not being
able to take care of her new born baby effectively for nine months. In view of the same, this
Court is inclined to fix a lumpsum compensation of Rs. 5 Lakhs payable to the petitioner.
27. In the result, this Writ Petition is allowed and there shall be a direction to the 1st
respondent to pay a compensation of Rs.5 Lakhs (Rupees Five Lakhs only) to the petitioner
within a period of six weeks from the date of receipt of copy of this Order. No costs.