“The beggarly question of parentage--what is it, after all? What does it
matter, when you come to think of it, whether a child is yours by
blood or not? All the little ones of our time are collectively the
children of us adults of the time, and entitled to our general care….”
Thomas Hardy, “Jude the Obscure”
1.      This writ petition challenges the communication dated 10
August 2022 issued by the Central Adoption Resource Authority1
informing the Specialized Adoption Agency2 concerned and where
Child “S” presently stands housed, of a complaint which had been
received by the National Commission for Protection of Child
Rights3 alleging violation of the adoption regulations which apply.
CARA in terms of that communication apprised the SAA that till the
aforesaid complaint is investigated, it should withdraw the Adoption
Petition No. 1248/2022 which had been presented before the
competent court.
2.      Taking note of the challenge which stood raised in the writ
petition, the Court on 28 September 2022 had passed the following
“1.     Notice. Although the respondents are stated have been
placed on advance notice, none has appeared on their behalf when
the matter was called. Consequently, let learned counsel for the
petitioner take steps for service on the said respondents through all
permissible modes including via approved courier service as well
as dasti.
2.      The Court notes that in terms of the communication which
stands impugned in the present writ petition, the Central Adoption
Resource Authority [“CARA”] has issued directions not only for
an investigation being initiated but for the adoption petition itself
being withdrawn from the Court where it was pending. The
aforesaid directions appear to have been issued pending CARA
examining and investigating a complaint which is stated to have
been received. The record would further reflect that after
completion of all formalities, CARA itself had proceeded to issue
the No Objection Certificate on 15 March 2022. Presently the
impugned communication does not record any valid or legally
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                       Page 2 of 46
justifiable reasons which may have compelled or constrained
CARA to commence an investigation or warranted the withdrawal
of the adoption petition itself.
3.      In view of the aforesaid and bearing in mind the advanced
stage to which the adoption process had reached, let the petition be
called again on 13 October 2022.
4.      Till the next date of listing the direction as contained in the
impugned order dated 10 August 2022 for withdrawal of the
adoption petition shall remain stayed. The Court additionally
restrains CARA from taking any steps for unmatching the
petitioner from the child which was to be taken in adoption. The
concerned Court before which the adoption petition is pending
shall also stay its hands pending further orders being passed on the
present writ petition.
5.      CARA shall additionally place on the record a report with
respect to the welfare of the child in question.
6.      Dasti under signatures of the Court Master.”
3.       Thereafter and when the matter was taken up on 17 October
2022, the petitioners moved a miscellaneous application for
appropriate directions in light of the material which had been placed
on the record and which indicated that unauthorized third parties had
been granted access to the child. The material indicated that in the
course of those interactions, photographs of Child “S” were taken and
thereafter posted online on various social media platforms. Taking
cognizance of the allegations which stood levelled, the Court on 17
October 2022 passed the following order: -
This application for urgent direction places on the record
certain disturbing facts in respect of Child „S‟ who presently stands
housed in a specialized adoption agency. The Court also bears in
mind the terms which were incorporated in its order of 28
However, the material which stands placed on the record
appears to prima facie indicate that unauthorized third parties have
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                          Page 3 of 46
been granted access to the child and that in the course of those
interactions certain photographs are also stated to have been taken
and thereafter posted online on various media platforms.
In view of the nature of allegations which stand made, let
Central Adoption Resource Authority [“CARA”] depute a team of
responsible officials which shall duly inspect the adoption agency
in question and submit a report with respect to the welfare of the
child on or before the next date fixed.
The adoption agency shall in the meanwhile stand
restrained from granting third parties unauthorized access to the
child which may tend to compromise the identity and the privacy
rights of Child “S”. The aforesaid restraint, however, shall not be
construed as depriving Child “S” the facility to participate in group
activities which may be organized or held within the precincts of
the adoption agency and are duly supervised by the caregivers of
the agency. CARA shall instruct the adoption agency to proceed in
accordance with the aforesaid directions.
W.P.(C) 14069/2022 and CM APPL. 44913/2022
Both respondent Nos. 1 and 2 shall ensure that their
responses to the writ petition are filed on or before the next date
fixed.
List on the date fixed i.e., 11.11.2022.”
4.       Thereafter both CARA and NCPCR have filed their affidavits
in the present matter and have been heard. In order to appreciate the
issues which arise, it would be pertinent to refer to the following
undisputed facts. Child “S” was found abandoned in a cremation
ground on 10 October 2019. She was immediately admitted to the
District Women Hospital for medical treatment. A First Information
Report in connection with the above also came to be registered.
Simultaneously, a letter dated 19 October 2019, detailing the facts
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                        Page 4 of 46
pertaining to the aforesaid discovery was also submitted before the
5.      On a preliminary medical examination, the child was found to
have been born prematurely and therefore was referred for further
examination to the Vatsalya NBCC, Bareilly. The attending doctor on
05 November 2019 apprised the CWC that considering that the child
was suffering from meningitis, she would require further medical
treatment. Consequently, Child “S” remained hospitalized and
underwent treatment in Vatsalya NBCC Hospital between 12 October
2019 to 03 December 2019.
6.      From the Inspection Report which has been submitted by the
team members constituted by CARA pursuant to the order of the
Court dated 17 October 2022, it further transpires that the child was
on 09 December 2019 placed before the CWC, Bareilly along with the
requisite report concerning her medical condition. The Medical
Examination Report5 dated 09 December 2019 would indicate that
the child was suffering from convulsions, hernia and hypoglycemia.
The attending and examining physician further observed that Child
“S” may suffer from mental retardation in the future. It was also
suggested that she be operated upon for hernia.
7.      Taking note of the medical condition of Child “S”, the CWC
issued an order on the same date for her short time placement with the
concerned SAA. The Inspection Report also refers to the recordal of
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                           Page 5 of 46
the medical condition of Child “S” while she was undergoing
treatment in the District Women Hospital during 10 October 2019 to
12 October 2019 and again during the period 03 December 2019 to 09
December 2019. Those reports reiterate the medical afflictions being
suffered by Child “S” to include septicemia, hypothermia,
hypoglycemia, acute weight loss and convulsions.
8.      The team of CARA had also referred to the opinion of other
doctors who examined and treated Child “S” and had prescribed
medication for the frequent convulsions suffered by her. They lastly
refer to the prescription drawn by the attending doctor dated 26 May
2022 and 29 May 2022 in which she was diagnosed as suffering from
epilepsy. The record would further bear out that she is presently
undergoing treatment for epilepsy.
9.      The child was ultimately declared legally free for adoption by
the CWC on 28 July 2020. Consequent to the child being declared as
legally free for adoption, her details were uploaded on the Child
further asserts that on 05 November 2021, the child was placed under
the “special needs category” of the CARINGS portal and her status
made live. It further discloses that no Resident Indian, NRI or OCI
made a reservation in respect of Child “S” during the stipulated
timeline of 15 days computed from 05 November 2021.
10.     On the expiry of the aforesaid period, the petitioners here made
a reservation for Child “S” on 21 November 2021. It is the categorical
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                              Page 6 of 46
stand of CARA that no resident Indian, NRI or OCI card holder made
a reservation during the statutorily prescribed period of 15 days as a
consequence of which the case was opened for inter-country adoption.
The petitioners, the Prospective Adoptive Parents7 made a
reservation in favour of Child “S” thereafter. However, the adoption
process does not appear to have been finalized within the stipulated
period of 30 days and till 21 December 2021. Child “S” was again
made available for reservation on CARINGS from 21 December 2021
to 11 January 2022. She was reserved by the PAPs again on 11
January 2022. The process of matching and acceptance was completed
on 05 February 2022 and a No Objection Certificate thereafter issued
by CARA on 15 March 2022.
11.     CARA, in its affidavit which has been filed in these proceeding
and based on the findings which have been returned by its
investigating team, has further reiterated that Child “S” was made live
under the special needs category on its portal on 05 November 2021
and that no reservation in her favor was made by any Resident Indian,
NRI or OCI.
12.     Before proceeding further, it would be pertinent to advert to the
following facts which led to the present writ petition being preferred
before this Court. The dispute emanates from a complaint which is
stated to have been made to the NCPCR by one Amit Kumar Mishra
who had alleged that Child “S” had been rescued by his uncle and that
the entire medical expenditure relating to her treatment in different
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                             Page 7 of 46
hospitals had been born by the complainant and his family. That
complaint was dated 04 August 2022.
13.     The complainant asserted that it was his family members who
had rescued Child “S” and had been taking care of her needs and her
medical expenses throughout. It was further asserted that in the course
of their interactions with Child “S”, both the complainant as well as
his wife had become emotionally attached to Child “S”. They are
stated to have consequently applied for adoption and registered on the
CARINGS portal on 13 November 2019. It is alleged that on the
website they could not see the details of Child “S” under the category
of special needs children. It was further asserted that despite having
made the application on 13 November 2019 they had not heard
anything from CARA and nor had they been provided any information
with respect to their adoption application. The complainant goes on to
allege that he had only recently come to know through a source that
Child “S” has been given in adoption to persons residing in a foreign
country despite the application that had been made by him. It would
be relevant to note that the complainant admits that Child “S” was a
special needs child in the complaint itself.
14.     The inspecting team of CARA has categorically stated that no
Resident Indian including the complainant or for that matter an NRI or
an OCI card holder made any reservation with respect to Child “S”
within the stipulated period. It is disclosed that it was only after the
period of 15 days from 05 November 2021 had expired that the
petitioners acting as the PAPs‟ had reserved Child “S”. It is further
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                            Page 8 of 46
averred that the PAPs‟ did not complete the requisite procedures
within the prescribed period of 30 days. According to CARA it is only
thereafter that Child “S” was again made available for adoption under
the special needs category on CARINGS. It is then disclosed that yet
again no Resident Indian including the complainant, NRI or OCI card
holder logged in or made any reservation in respect of the Child “S”.
The petitioner PAPs‟, on the other hand, are stated to have made the
requisite reservation and exercised their choice to adopt Child “S” on
11 January 2022. CARA has ultimately and in terms of the averments
set out in paragraph 8 of their affidavit suggested the following: -
“8. That based on the inspection report, the following are
a. CARA may ask the CMO of the District to submit a
fresh MER (Medical Examination Report) of the child to
determine whether or not the child has special needs as
there are concerns about the child‟s health because the SAA
did not respond to letters written by CARA and child was
made live by CARA based on the medical reports provided
by the SAA Doctor. As per Regulation 37 of the Adoption
Regulations 2022 (notified on 23rd September 2022), the
Chief Medical Officer of the district shall facilitate the
treatment of the children having special needs housed in
Specialised Adoption Agency or Child Care Institution
through the existing Central Government or State
Government schemes and shall declare the health status of
the child as normal or having special needs as provided in
the Schedule XVIII and Schedule III(Part-E) within a period
of fifteen days and also encourage treatment of such
children under various schemes of the Government. A copy
of the Regulation along with the Schedule XVIII and
Schedule III (Part-E) is placed as Annexure-R/3.
b. In case the child is found to have normal health
conditions, the child would be subject to normal referral as
per existing norm.
c. In case the child is found to have special needs, the child
may be allowed to be placed with the foreign PAPs.
d. The State Government shall be asked to issue Show
Cause Notice       to the SAA for violations of various
provisions of the Regulations as provided in regulation
15.     NCPCR which has also filed its affidavit in the present
proceedings has firstly referred to its position as flowing from the
provisions of the Commissions for Protection of Child Rights Act,
20058 and its obligation to protect child rights and other related
matters. It has sought to justify its intervention in light of the
provisions made in Section 13(1)(j) of the 2005 Act. In the affidavit it
is averred that NCPCR took cognizance of the entire episode on
receipt of the complaint dated 04 August 2022 and the allegation that
Child “S” was not visible under the special needs category and
therefore she could not be reserved by the complainant even though
they had duly registered themselves on the CARINGS platform.
16.     NCPCR contends that it was constrained to call upon CARA to
place further proceedings relating to the adoption process of Child “S”
in abeyance till a thorough enquiry is conducted and completed. The
NCPCR is also stated to have called upon the District Magistrate and
Superintendent of Police, Bareilly to submit Action Taken Reports9.
Those reports also take note of the complaint which was made namely
of Child “S” not being visible under the special needs category. The
reports which have been gathered by the NCPCR also suggest that a
forensic audit of the CARINGS platform be initiated. Insofar as the
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                        Page 10 of 46
issue of a forensic audit of the CARINGS platform is concerned,
CARA has in its affidavit as well as the reports which have been
submitted categorically and unequivocally asserted that the adoption
was completed in a transparent manner and in accordance with the
regulations which apply, namely, the Adoption Regulations, 201710
and the Adoption Regulations 202211. They have also while dealing
with the placement of Child “S” obtained confirmatory reports from
the Technical Support team of National Informatics Centre12 which
is stated to administer the CARINGS portal.
17.      The NCPCR lastly asserts that till such time as all facts
surrounding the adoption process of Child “S” are duly investigated, it
would be in the child‟s best interest that further proceedings are kept
in abeyance. NCPCR has also taken note of the assertion made by the
complainant that all expenditure incurred in the course of the medical
treatment of Child “S” was borne by the complainant, his family
members as well as the uncle. It also alludes to the emotional
attachment which appears to have come to exist between the
complainant and Child “S” since they appeared to have been granted
access to the child by the SAA.
18.      The complainant who had moved an application for
impleadment in the present writ petition was permitted to intervene in
these proceedings and to address submissions through learned
counsel. The intervener has firstly drawn the attention of the Court to
a screenshot of the CARINGS portals which would indicate that the
Resident Indian couple had in fact registered on the portal as PAPs on
13 November 2019. It is then contended that Child “S” had in fact
been rescued by the uncle of the complainant and that she was
provided all care by the complainant and his family members. The
complainant asserts that the entire family has become emotionally and
mentally attached to Child “S” and were also providing her support
during the entire course of her treatment in different medical
institutions. It is in aforesaid backdrop that they contend that great
prejudice would be caused if the adoption process is permitted to be
concluded and the child handed over in adoption to the petitioners.
19.      Ms. Guruswamy, learned senior counsel, appearing for the
petitioners has taken the Court in great detail through the provisions
contained in the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act 201513 as well as the 2017 and 2022 Regulations. Ms.
Guruswamy firstly submitted that the MERs which were prepared in
respect of Child “S” clearly bear out that she was a child with special
needs and thus rightly categorised and placed in that category by
CARA. Ms. Guruswamy contended that the respondents have failed
to establish or prove that the medical examination reports which were
prepared at the relevant time were either inaccurate or merited any
review. Learned senior counsel laid stress on the fact that right from
the time of the initial admission of Child “S” in a medical institution,
she was found to be suffering from hernia, convulsions and having
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                            Page 12 of 46
come into the world prematurely. According to learned senior counsel
all the three conditions referred to above warranted her placement as a
special needs child in light of the provisions made in Schedule XVIII
of the 2017 Regulations. Ms. Guruswamy submitted that once a child
had come to be placed in the category of special needs, the legal
regimen which applies neither contemplates a review or revision nor
does it envisage a process of a medical examination being undertaken
all over again. She has in support of the aforesaid contention also
drawn the attention of the Court to the Minutes of the 31 st Meeting of
the Steering Committee of CARA, and more particularly, to
paragraphs 9, 10 and 11 thereof, which are extracted hereinbelow:-
“9.     According to Adoption Regulations, 2017, “Special need
child” means a child who is mentally ill or physically challenged or
both. In Schedule XVIII of Adoption Regulations, 2017, children
are classified into physically challenged, mentally challenged,
Neurological challenged and any other ailment for the purpose of
adoption. During The International Adoption Month, November
2021, a total of 496 Special Need Children were made live on
CARINGS Portal for the purpose of adoption. These children were
suffering from various physical and mental disorders and disabilities
and waiting in Institutional care for family warmth, love and care.
The Special Need Children were classified according to Schedule
XVIII of Adoption Regulations, 2017. The main disabilities
included visual impairment, cerebral palsy, cleft lip-cleft palate, club
feet, hearing impairment, congenital heart disease, haemophilia,
hepatitis B+, Hernia, HIV, hydrocephalus, low birth weight,
premature birth, missing organs, speech dysfunction, thalassemia,
tumour, intellectual disability, autism, seizures, mental illness and
spinal bifida. All the reports were supported by doctors associated
with the Specialized Adoption Agency.
10.     It has been envisaged that the issue relating to identification
of special need would be addressed once CMO of the district is
assigned the task. Till such time, we may continue the existing
practice of verifying the profile of special need children by the
AIIMS doctors.
11.     Any child cleared as SN child once and accepted by the
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                        Page 13 of 46
PAPs, such a child should not be withdrawn from the PAPs in case
the child becomes normal at a later date as health feature can be
dynamic.
Decision: Chairperson emphasized that categorization of special
needs should be based on the Disability Act, 2016. He also raised
the issue about correctable medical conditions like cleft palate and
low birth weight etc. However, upon notification of the amended
Adoption Regulations, cases where a child is diagnosed with a
Special Needs beyond the disability department‟s notification may
be sent to AIIMS doctor with endorsement of CMO.”
20.     Ms. Guruswamy further submitted that CARA has clearly taken
inconsistent stands in the course of these proceedings. According to
learned senior counsel, while on the one hand it has chosen to assert
that the adoption process was compliant with the provisions of the
2015 Act as well as the 2017 and 2022 Regulations, it has yet chosen
to suggest that the medical condition of Child “S” be reviewed all over
again. This, according to learned senior counsel, would be clearly
impermissible when viewed in light of the relevant provisions made in
the Regulations. Ms. Guruswamy submitted that the entire complaint
rests upon a desire of the complainants to adopt Child “S” specifically.
According to learned senior counsel, the law confers no such right on
any PAPs. Ms. Guruswamy also laid stress on the fact that although
Child “S” was placed for reservation on two occasions on CARINGS,
neither the complainant nor any other resident Indian, NRI or OCI
exercised an option which the law provides. It was submitted that on
both occasions, it was only the petitioners who had exercised the
required option. Learned senior counsel laid stress on the fact that the
PAPs had in the course of the adoption process struck a deep and
endearing emotional bond with the child and it would thus be wholly
illegal to deprive them of the rights which have come to fructify in
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                     Page 14 of 46
their favour in terms of the provisions made in the relevant
21.     Learned senior counsel laid great stress on the fact that the legal
regime pertaining to adoption in India nowhere recognises a right
inhering in PAPs to pick or choose a particular child. According to
learned senior counsel, the recognition of such a right would clearly
be destructive of the regulatory scheme which holds the field quite
apart from being totally abhorrent to the guiding principles relating to
adoption as prevalent in the country. Ms. Guruswamy submitted that
as per the disclosures made by CARA itself, the complainant apart
from registering on CARINGS did not exercise the right to reserve
Child “S” on any occasion between 2019 and 2022 when for the first
time a complaint was made.              According to Ms. Guruswamy, if
cognizance were taken of such unsubstantiated complaints, it would
clearly derail the entire adoption process and reverse the progress
which has been made in respect of the adoption of Child “S”.
According to Ms. Guruswamy, the adoption process must primarily be
concerned with the interest of the abandoned child and for an
expeditious conclusion of the entire adoption process thus enabling
the child to be placed in the company of loving and caring parents.
According to Ms. Goswami, if the suggestion as mooted by CARA
were to be accepted, it would cause irreparable harm and prejudice to
22.     Appearing for CARA, Ms. Arora, learned CGSC submitted that
the authority had scrupulously adhered to the statutory procedure as
constructed and put in place in terms of the 2017 and 2022
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                              Page 15 of 46
Regulations. Ms. Arora submitted that CARA had while reviewing all
processes connected with the adoption of Child “S” found no fault in
the steps which were taken and that it could not be said that any
prescription of the statutory regulations which apply had been
violated. Ms. Arora submitted that the process of adoption had been
put on hold solely on account of the directives issued by the NCPCR
and in deference to the directions issued by that body. Ms. Arora
however submitted that bearing in mind the reservations which have
been expressed coupled with the complaint which has now been made,
it may be appropriate that a fresh MER is obtained to determine
whether Child “S” has special needs. Ms. Arora submitted that in case
on a review medical examination, it is ultimately found that the child
has normal health conditions, she would be liable to be placed as per
the normal referral channel for the purposes of adoption.         In the
alternative it was submitted that if the special needs of Child “S” are
found to be evident even in the course of the review medical
examination, she may be allowed to be placed with the foreign PAPs.
This according to Ms. Arora would allay all apprehensions and
reservations that may be harboured or may exist.
23.     Learned counsel appearing for the NCPCR has firstly sought to
justify the intervention of that body in light of the obligation placed
upon it by virtue of Section 13(i)(j) of the CPCR. According to
learned counsel, the complainant had raised the serious issue of being
denied the right to reserve Child “S” notwithstanding the fact that it
had duly applied for adoption and registered on CARINGS on 13
November 2019 itself. According to learned counsel, the complainant
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                            Page 16 of 46
had alleged that Child “S” was not visible under the category of
special needs children on the said portal. NCPCR, according to
learned     counsel, intervened in the proceedings taking into
consideration the fact that although the complainant had duly
registered on CARINGS in November 2019 itself, it had not heard
anything from CARA with respect to its desire to adopt Child “S” and
had also not been provided any feedback with respect to its pre-
existing application. Learned counsel submitted that resident Indians
in terms of the relevant provisions engrafted in the 2017 and 2022
Regulations are clearly provided preference and a pre-eminent right to
adopt. Learned counsel submitted that the regulations lay emphasis
and stress on the child being placed in its own socio-cultural
environment as far as possible. According to learned counsel if the
adoption process in favour of the petitioners here were permitted to
proceed further, these valuable rights which are conferred on resident
Indian PAPs would clearly stand violated.
24.     Learned counsel has also taken the Court through the ATRs
which had been obtained from the District Magistrate as well as the
Superintendant of Police, Bareilly and who had opined that a cyber
forensic investigation may be conducted in order to verify the
allegation which had come to be levelled.               According to learned
counsel, the ends of justice would warrant the aforesaid investigation
being completed before the same becomes an empty formality.
25.     Learned counsel appearing for the intervenor has asserted that
Child “S” was, undisputedly, rescued and recovered by his uncle. It
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                 Page 17 of 46
was submitted that undisputedly, the complainant and his family
members have been looking after and providing for all the needs of
Child “S” during her stay in the child care institution as well as in the
course of her medical treatment in hospitals and attending doctors.
According to learned counsel, the complainant and his family
members have become attached to Child “S” and if their preeminent
right to adopt Child “S” were to be defeated, it would result in a
travesty of justice.
26.     Having noted the submissions which were addressed by
respective counsels, the Court deems it apposite to notice certain
statutory provisions which would have a bearing on the issues which
arise. Section 38 of the 2015 Act sets out the procedure which is to be
followed for adoption of orphaned or abandoned children. That
provision reads as follows:-
“38. Procedure for declaring a child legally free for adoption.—
(1) In case of orphan and abandoned child, the Committee shall
make all efforts for tracing the parents or guardians of the child and
on completion of such inquiry, if it is established that the child is
either an orphan having no one to take care, or abandoned, the
Committee shall declare the child legally free for adoption:
Provided that such declaration shall be made within a period of two
months from the date of production of the child, for children who are
up to two years of age and within four months for children above two
Provided further that notwithstanding anything contained in this
regard in any other law for the time being in force, no first
information report shall be registered against any biological parent in
the process of inquiry relating to an abandoned or surrendered child
under this Act.
(2) In case of surrendered child, the institution where the child has
been placed by the Committee on an application for surrender, shall
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                      Page 18 of 46
bring the case before the Committee immediately on completion of
the period specified in section 35, for declaring the child legally free
for adoption.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the
time being in force, a child of a mentally retarded parents or a
unwanted child of victim of sexual assault, such child may be
declared free for adoption by the Committee, by following the
procedure under this Act.
(4) The decision to declare an orphan, abandoned or surrendered
child as legally free for adoption shall be taken by at least three
members of the Committee.
(5) The Committee shall inform the State Agency and the Authority
regarding the number of children declared as legally free for adoption
and number of cases pending for decision in the manner as may be
prescribed, every month.”
27.     The subject of adoption is more elaborately dealt with in
Chapter VIII of the 2015 Act. While dealing with the right of Indian
PAPs, it makes the following provisions in Section 58:-
“58. Procedure for adoption by Indian prospective adoptive
parents living in India.
(1) Indian prospective adoptive parents living in India, irrespective
of their religion, if interested to adopt an orphan or abandoned or
surrendered child, may apply for the same to a Specialised Adoption
Agency, in the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed
by the Authority.
(2) The Specialised Adoption Agency shall prepare the home study
report of the prospective adoptive parents and upon finding them
eligible, will refer a child declared legally free for adoption to them
along with the child study report and medical report of the child, in
the manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the
(3) On the receipt of the acceptance of the child from the
prospective adoptive parents along with the child study report and
medical report of the child signed by such parents, the Specialised
Adoption Agency shall give the child in pre-adoption foster care and
file an application in the court for obtaining the adoption order, in the
manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the
(4) On the receipt of a certified copy of the court order, the
Specialised Adoption Agency shall send immediately the same to the
prospective adoptive parents.
(5) The progress and wellbeing of the child in the adoptive family
shall be followed up and ascertained in the manner as provided in the
adoption regulations framed by the Authority.”
28.     Proceeding then to deal with the subject of inter country
adoption, Section 59 provides as under:-
“59.Procedure for inter-country adoption of an orphan or
abandoned or surrendered child
(1) If an orphan or abandoned or surrendered child could not be
placed with an Indian or non-resident Indian prospective adoptive
parent despite the joint effort of the Specialised Adoption Agency and
State Agency within sixty days from the date the child has been
declared legally free for adoption, such child shall be free for inter-
Provided that children with physical and mental disability, siblings
and children above five years of age may be given preference over
other children for such inter-country adoption, in accordance with the
adoption regulations, as may be framed by the Authority.
(2) An eligible non-resident Indian or overseas citizen of India or
persons of Indian origin shall be given priority in inter-country
adoption of Indian children.
(3) A non-resident Indian or overseas citizen of India, or person of
Indian origin or a foreigner, who are prospective adoptive parents
living abroad, irrespective of their religion, if interested to adopt an
orphan or abandoned or surrendered child from India, may apply for
the same to an authorised foreign adoption agency, or Central
Authority or a concerned Government department in their country of
habitual residence, as the case may be, in the manner as provided in
the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(4) The authorised foreign adoption agency, or Central Authority, or
a concerned Government department, as the case may be, shall
prepare the home study report of such prospective adoptive parents
and upon finding them eligible, will sponsor their application to
Authority for adoption of a child from India, in the manner as
provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(5) On the receipt of the application of such prospective adoptive
parents, the Authority shall examine and if it finds the applicants
suitable, then, it will refer the application to one of the Specialised
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                       Page 20 of 46
Adoption Agencies, where children legally free for adoption are
available.
(6) The Specialised Adoption Agency will match a child with such
prospective adoptive parents and send the child study report and
medical report of the child to such parents, who in turn may accept
the child and return the child study and medical report duly signed by
them to the said agency.
(7) On receipt of the acceptance of the child from the prospective
adoptive parents, the Specialised Adoption Agency shall file an
application in the court for obtaining the adoption order, in the
manner as provided in the adoption regulations framed by the
(8) On the receipt of a certified copy of the court order, the
specialised adoption agency shall send immediately the same to
Authority, State Agency and to the prospective adoptive parents, and
obtain a passport for the child.
(9) The Authority shall intimate about the adoption to the
immigration authorities of India and the receiving country of the
child.
(10) The prospective adoptive parents shall receive the child in
person from the specialised adoption agency as soon as the passport
and visa are issued to the child.
(11) The authorised foreign adoption agency, or Central Authority,
or the concerned Government department, as the case may be, shall
ensure the submission of progress reports about the child in the
adoptive family and will be responsible for making alternative
arrangement in the case of any disruption, in consultation with
Authority and concerned Indian diplomatic mission, in the manner as
provided in the adoption regulations framed by the Authority.
(12) A foreigner or a person of Indian origin or an overseas citizen
of India, who has habitual residence in India, if interested to adopt a
child from India, may apply to Authority for the same along with a no
objection certificate from the diplomatic mission of his country in
India, for further necessary actions as provided in the adoption
regulations framed by the Authority.”
29.     The 2017 Regulations define a „special needs child‟ to mean
one who is either mentally ill or physically challenged or both as
specified in Schedule XVIII. The fundamental principles governing
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                      Page 21 of 46
adoption are set forth in Regulation 3, which reads as under:-
“3. Fundamental principles governing adoption. - The following
fundamental principles shall govern adoptions of children from India,
(a) the child's best interests shall be of paramount consideration,
while processing any adoption placement;
(b) preference shall be given to place the child in adoption with
Indian citizens and with due regard to the principle of placement
of the child in his own socio-cultural environment, as far as
(c) all adoptions shall be registered on Child Adoption Resource
Information and Guidance System and the confidentiality of the
same shall be maintained by the Authority.”
30.     Regulation 6 then lays down the detailed procedure for adoption
of an orphaned or abandoned child. The said provisions is extracted
“6. Procedure relating to orphan or abandoned child.- (1) The
provisions relating to the process of declaring an orphan or
abandoned child, as legally free for adoption are laid down in
sections 31, 32, 36, clauses (a) to (c) and clause (h) of sub-
section (1) of section 37 and section 40 of the Act, as well as
under the relevant provisions of the rules made thereunder.
(2)    An orphan or abandoned child received by a Child Care
Institution, including a Specialised Adoption Agency, directly
without the involvement of Child Welfare Committee, shall be
produced before the Child Welfare Committee within twenty-
four hours (excluding the journey time) along with a report as
per the format given in Form 17 of Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Model Rules, 2016 and a copy of such
report shall be submitted by the Child Care Institution or the
Specialised Adoption Agency, as the case may be, to the local
police station within the same period.
(3)   If a child is under treatment or not in a condition to be produced
before the Child Welfare Committee, only documents related to
the child shall be produced before the Child Welfare Committee
within the said timeline and the Child Welfare Committee may
visit the ailing child.
(4)   The Child Welfare Committee, pending inquiry, shall issue an
order in Form 18 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Model Rules, 2016 for a short term placement or
interim care of the child, as per the provisions of sub-section (c)
of section 37 of the Act and the sub-rule 26 of rule 18 of the
said rules.
(5)   On admission of the child, his details and photograph shall be
entered online in the Child Adoption Resource Information and
Guidance System in the prescribed format by the Specialised
Adoption Agency within three working days of receiving the
child, and the photograph of the child shall be changed by the
Specialised Adoption Agency every six months in Child
Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System.
(6) For tracing out the biological parents or the legal guardian(s), the
Child Welfare Committee, after taking into account the risk
factors, and in the best interest of the child, may direct the
District Child Protection Unit to advertise the particulars and
photograph of an orphan or abandoned child in a national
newspaper with wide circulation within three working days
from the time of receiving the child and also ensure entry of
data in the designated portal in its missing or found column by
the concerned Child Care Institution or Specialised Adoption
(7)   In case where the child is from another State, the publication
shall be done in the known place of origin of the child in the
local language and such publications shall be facilitated by State
Adoption Resource Agency concerned.
(8) Wherever District Child Protection Unit is not functional, the
District Magistrate concerned shall get such advertisement
issued.
(9) In case the biological parents or legal guardian cannot be traced,
despite the efforts specified in sub-regulations (6) to (8), the
District Child Protection Unit shall accordingly, submit a report
to the Child Welfare Committee within thirty days from the date
of production of the child before the Child Welfare Committee.
(10) The Child Care Institution or Specialised Adoption Agency shall
submit a report to the Child Welfare Committee, immediately
on completion of thirty days from the date of production of the
child, before the Child Welfare Committee and the report shall
include any information revealed by the child during his short
term placement and details of person(s) whosoever approached
for claiming the child, if any.
(11) In case the report from the local police regarding the non-
traceability of the biological parents or legal guardian is not
submitted within two or four months in the case of an
abandoned child less than two or four years of age respectively,
such report shall be deemed to have been given.
(12) The Child Welfare Committee shall use the designated portal to
ascertain whether the abandoned child or orphan child is a
missing child.
(13) The Child Welfare Committee, after taking actions as per the
provisions of the Act, rules made thereunder and these
regulations shall issue an order signed by any three members of
the Child Welfare Committee declaring the abandoned or
orphan child as legally free for adoption in the format at
Schedule I within a period of two or four months, from the date
of production of the child before the Child Welfare Committee,
in case of a child upto two or above two years of age
respectively.
(14) The inquiry under section 36 of the Act and the order declaring
an abandoned or orphan child as legally free for adoption by the
Child Welfare Committee under section 38 of the Act shall be
completed in the district where the child was initially found, or
in the district to which the child is shifted under orders of the
(15) The Child Welfare Committee and Medical Examination Report
of an orphan or abandoned child shall be prepared in the format
at Schedule II and III respectively and posted in the Child
Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System by the
Specialised Adoption Agency maximum within ten days from
the date the child is declared legally free for adoption and the
details shall be updated on Child Adoption Resource
Information and Guidance System every six months or
whenever appreciable physical changes are observed in the
child.
(16) The Child Welfare Committee and Medical Examination Report
shall be made available in English, apart from the local
language.
(17) The District Child Protection Unit shall facilitate the Specialised
Adoption Agency in uploading the Child Study Report and
Medical Examination Report in Child Adoption Resource
Information and Guidance System, in case the Specialised
Adoption Agency is facing any technical difficulty.
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                      Page 24 of 46
(18) The procedure for declaring a child of parents with mental
disability as legally free for adoption by the Child Welfare
Committee shall be done on the basis of a certificate reflecting
mental disability of the parents from the medical board
constituted by the Central Government or the State
Government, as the case may be, as per guidelines for mental
illness issued by the Government of India in the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment from time to time.
(19) In case of siblings or twins, the Child Welfare Committee shall
specify the status of the children as siblings or twins and declare
the children as legally free in a single order.”
31.     Regulation 8 sets out the procedure to be adopted once a child
has been declared as legally free for adoption. That provisions reads as
“8. Availability of child for adoption.- As soon as a child is
declared legally free for adoption by the Child Welfare Committee,
such child shall be allowed to be given in adoption to a resident
Indian or non-resident Indian parents:
Provided that such child shall be allowed to be given in inter-country
adoption.-
(a) after sixty days, if the child is below five years of age;
(b) after thirty days, if the child is above five years of age or is a
(c) after fifteen days, if the child has any mental illness or physical
disability as listed in Schedule XVIII.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this regulation, it is clarified that
the time limits specified in the proviso shall be calculated from the
date, the certificate issued by the Child Welfare Committee declaring
the child as legally free for adoption, is uploaded in Child Adoption
Resource Information and Guidance System”
32.     The procedure which PAPs are to follow is set forth in greater
detail in Regulation 10, which reads thus:-
“10. Referral of a child from a Specialised Adoption Agency
through Child Adoption Resource Information and
Guidance System to prospective adoptive parents.- (1) The
seniority of the prospective adoptive parents for child referral
shall be from the date of uploading of documents and
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                         Page 25 of 46
completion of registration process in Child Adoption Resource
Information and Guidance System.
(2) On the basis of seniority, the prospective adoptive parents shall
be referred online profile of three children which will include
the photographs, Child Study Report and Medical Examination
Report, in their preference category, if any, from one or more
Specialised Adoption Agencies through the Child Adoption
Resource Information and Guidance System in one or more
referrals.
(3) After viewing the profile of the child or children, the prospective
adoptive parents may reserve one child within a period of forty-
eight hours for possible adoption and the rest of the children
would be released by Child Adoption Resource Information and
Guidance System for other prospective adoptive parents in the
waiting list.
(4) The Specialised Adoption Agency shall get the details of the
prospective adoptive parents through the Child Adoption
Resource Information and Guidance System for fixing an
appointment with the prospective adoptive parents for matching,
to assess the suitability of the prospective adoptive parents by
an Adoption Committee as defined in sub-regulation (2) of
regulation 2 and the Adoption Committee shall prepare the
minutes of the meeting as per format provided in Schedule
(5)   The quorum of the Adoption Committee shall be two members
and the quorum of the Adoption Committee in case of adoption
from a Child Care Institution shall be three members, while the
presence of one official from the District Child Protection Unit
would be mandatory.
(6)   The Specialised Adoption Agency shall also organise a meeting
of the prospective adoptive parents with the child.
(7)   The entire process of matching shall be completed within a
maximum period of twenty days from the date of reserving the
child.
(8)   The Specialised Adoption Agency shall counsel the prospective
adoptive parents when they visit the agency for matching.
(9)   While accepting the child, the prospective adoptive parents shall
sign the Child Study Report and Medical Examination Report
which may be downloaded from the Child Adoption Resource
Information and Guidance System, in the presence of the social
worker or chief functionary of the Specialised Adoption Agency
and the Specialised Adoption Agency shall record the
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                      Page 26 of 46
acceptance by the prospective adoptive parents in the Child
Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System.
(10) In case the prospective adoptive parents are not selected for the
child by the Adoption Committee, the reason for non-selection
of the prospective adoptive parents shall be recorded in the
Child Adoption Resource Information and Guidance System.
(11) If grounds of rejection are found to be due to systemic error or
on non-justifiable reasons, seniority of the prospective adoptive
parents shall be retained.
(12) In case the prospective adoptive parents do not accept the
reserved child or the Adoption Committee does not find the
prospective adoptive parents suitable, then the prospective
adoptive parents shall be relegated to the bottom of the seniority
list, as on that date, who may avail a fresh chance when the
seniority becomes due and the same procedure shall be followed
in the subsequent chances.
(13) In all cases referred to in sub-regulations (12), the reasons for not
considering the child have to be clearly stated in Child Adoption
Resource Information and Guidance System.
(14) The registration of prospective adoptive parents shall continue
till child adoption, with revalidation of the Home Study Report
in every three years.
(15) The prospective adoptive parents may also get the Medical
Examination Report of the child reviewed by a medical
practitioner of their choice before giving their acceptance for
adoption of the child.”
33.     The adoption of children with special needs is provisioned for
and governed by Regulation 48, which is extracted hereunder:-
“48. Adoption of children with special needs.- (1) The adoption
process for children with special needs shall be completed as
expeditiously as possible by the agencies or authorities concerned,
who shall be available for adoption by resident Indians and Non-
Resident Indians from the date they are declared legally free for
adoption by the Child Welfare Committee:
Provided that such children with special need shall be available for
adoption by Overseas Citizen of India or foreign adoptive parents,
after fifteen days from the date they are declared legally free for
adoption.
(2) Special care shall be taken while processing the cases for adoption
of children with special needs, so that the prospective adoptive
parents are aware of exact medical condition of the child and are
ready to provide extra care and attention that the child needs.
(3) The types of children with special needs are available in Schedule
XVIII, which is illustrative and not exhaustive; the same may also be
accessed from www.cara.nic.in, and the decision of the Authority
shall be final in this regard.
(4) The children with special needs who were not adopted shall be
provided due care and protection by the Specialised Adoption Agency
and if they do not have necessary facilities and the means for their
long term care, such children shall be shifted to any other specialised
institutions run by any Government or non-Government
34.     The 2022 Regulations reiterate the fundamental principles
governing adoption in Regulation 3, which reads as follows:-
“3. Fundamental principles governing adoption.― The following
fundamental principles shall govern adoptions of children from India,
(a) the child's best interests shall be of paramount consideration, while
processing any adoption placement;
(b) preference shall be given to place the child in adoption with Indian
citizens with due regard to the principle of placement of the child in
their own socio-cultural environment, as far as possible;
(c) all applications for adoptions shall be registered on the Designated
Portal and confidentiality of the same shall be maintained by the
35.     The procedure for adoption of orphaned or abandoned children
is then set forth in Regulation 6 and the said provision is extracted
“6. Procedure relating to orphan or abandoned child.― (1) The
provisions relating to the process of declaring an orphan or abandoned
child, as legally free for adoption are laid down in sections 31, 32, 36,
clauses (a) to (c) and clause (h) of sub-section (1) of section 37,
section 38 and section 40 of the Act, as well as under the relevant
provisions of the rules made thereunder.
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                        Page 28 of 46
(2) An orphan or abandoned child received by a Child Care
Institution, including a Specialised Adoption Agency, directly without
the involvement of Child Welfare Committee, shall be produced
before the Child Welfare Committee within twenty-four hours
(excluding the journey time) along with a report as per the format
given in Form 17 of the rules and a copy of such report shall be
submitted by the Child Care Institution or the Specialised Adoption
Agency, as the case may be, to the local police station within the same
period.
(3) If a child is under treatment or not in a condition to be produced
before the Child Welfare Committee, only documents related to the
child shall be submitted to the Child Welfare Committee within the
said timeline and the Child Welfare Committee shall visit the child.
(4) If inquiry is pending, the Child Welfare Committee shall issue an
order in Form 18 of the rules for a short term placement or interim
care of the child to a Child Care Institution or a Specialised Adoption
Agency, as the case may be, as per the provisions of clause (c) of sub-
section (1) of section 37 of the Act and the sub-rule (26) of rule 19 of
the said rules.
(5) On admission of the child by the order of the Child Welfare
Committee, their details and photograph shall be entered online on the
Designated Portal in the prescribed format by the Specialised
Adoption Agency within three days of getting the order of the Child
Welfare Committee, and the photograph and profile of the child shall
be updated by such Agency every six months on the Designated
(6) In case of orphan, abandoned or surrendered older children
admitted in Child Care Institutions on the basis of the order from the
Child Welfare Committee, the details of such children shall be entered
by the District Child Protection Unit concerned on the Designated
(7) For tracing out the biological parents or the legal guardians, the
Child Welfare Committee, after taking into account the risk factors,
and in the best interest of the child, may direct the District Child
Protection Unit to advertise the particulars and photograph of an
orphan or abandoned child in a national newspaper with wide
circulation in the place where the child was found within three days
from the time of receiving the child and also ensure entry of data in
the Track Child portal or Khoya Paya by the concerned Child Care
Institution or Specialised Adoption Agency.
(8) In case where the child is from another State, the publication shall
be done in the known place of origin of the child in the local language
and such publications including the entry of information in Track
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                       Page 29 of 46
Child portal or Khoya Paya shall be facilitated by the State Adoption
Resource Agency concerned.
(9) In case the biological parents or legal guardian cannot be traced,
despite the efforts specified in sub-regulations (7) to (8), the District
Child Protection Unit shall submit a report to the Child Welfare
Committee within thirty days from the date of production of the child
before the Child Welfare Committee.
(10) The Child Care Institution or Specialised Adoption Agency shall
submit a report to the Child Welfare Committee, immediately on
completion of thirty days from the date of production of the child,
before the Child Welfare Committee and the report shall include any
information revealed by the child during their short term placement
and details of persons whosoever approached for claiming the child, if
(11) If the local police report on the non-traceability of the biological
parents or legal guardians is not received within two months in the
case of an orphan or abandoned child under the age of two years, and
within four months in the case of child over the age of two years
respectively, the parents shall be deemed to be non-traceable.
(12) The Child Welfare Committee shall use the Track Child Portal or
Khoya Paya to ascertain whether the abandoned child or orphan child
is a missing child and incase the child‟s identity is established, they
shall be restored to biological parents or legal guardians.
(13) The Child Welfare Committee, after taking actions as per the
provisions of the Act, rules made thereunder and these regulations
shall issue an order signed by any three members of the Child Welfare
Committee declaring the abandoned or orphan child as legally free for
adoption in the format provided in the Schedule I within a period of
three days after the expiry of two or four months, from the date of
production of the child before the Child Welfare Committee, in case
of a child upto two or above two years of age respectively.
(14) The inquiry under section 36 and the order declaring an
abandoned or orphan child as legally free for adoption by the Child
Welfare Committee under section 38 shall be completed in the district
where the child was initially found, or in the district to which the
child is shifted under orders of the Child Welfare Committee.
(15) The Child Study Report and Medical Examination Report of an
orphan or abandoned child shall be prepared in the format provided in
the Schedule II and Schedule III respectively and posted on the
Designated Portal by the Specialised Adoption Agency maximum
within ten days from the date the child is declared legally free for
adoption and the details shall be updated on the Designated Portal
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                        Page 30 of 46
every six months and whenever appreciable physical changes are
observed in the child.
(16) The Child Study Report and Medical Examination Report shall
be in English, apart from the regional language of the concerned area.
(17) The District Child Protection Unit shall facilitate the Specialised
Adoption Agency in uploading the Child Study Report and Medical
Examination Report or any other required information on the
Designated Portal, in case the Specialised Adoption Agency is facing
any technical difficulty.
(18) The procedure for declaring a child of parents with mental illness
or intellectual disability as legally free for adoption by the Child
Welfare Committee shall be done on the basis of a certificate
reflecting mental disability of the parents from the medical board
constituted by the Central Government or the State Government, as
the case may be, as per the laws established by the Government of
India, with respect to the same.
(19) In case of siblings or twins, the Child Welfare Committee shall
specify the status of the children as siblings or twins and declare the
children as legally free in a single order.”
36.     The adoption of children declared legally free for the said
purposes is governed by Regulation 8 which reads thus:-
“8. Availability of child for adoption.―(1) As soon as a child is
declared legally free for adoption by the Child Welfare Committee,
such child shall be allowed to be given in adoption to prospective
adoptive parents who is a resident Indian or non-resident Indian or a
Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.
(a) a normal child below the age of five years shall be referred to
resident Indian or non-resident Indian or Overseas Citizen of India
Cardholder prospective adoptive parents for sixty days;
(b) a normal child above the age of five years or siblings shall be
referred to resident Indian or non-resident Indian or Overseas Citizen
of India Card holder prospective adoptive parents for thirty days;
(c) categories of children mentioned in clause (a) and (b) above who
have not been placed in adoption in the prescribed time limit shall be
made available to resident Indian or non-resident Indian or Overseas
Citizen of India Card holder prospective adoptive parents for seven
days irrespective of their seniority;
(d) thereafter, categories of children mentioned in clause (a) to (c)
above shall be referred to foreign prospective adoptive parents for
fifteen days.
(2) Procedure related to special needs child or children:- If the child
has any disability as listed in the Schedule XVIII and Schedule III
(Part E) of the Medical Examination Report, such a child shall be
made available for resident Indian or non-resident Indian or Overseas
Citizen of India Card holder prospective adoptive parents for fifteen
days and thereafter shall be made available for all categories of
prospective adoptive parents.
(3) Procedure related to hard to place children: - As far as hard to
place children are concerned, such children shall be made available
for adoption as provided in sub-regulation (13) of regulation 2.
Explanation:- For the purposes of this regulation, it is hereby
clarified that the time limit shall be calculated from the date when the
certificate issued by the Child Welfare Committee declaring the child
as legally free for adoption is uploaded on the Designated Portal.”
37.     The detailed procedure with respect to placement of a child
whose details are uploaded on CARINGS is then prescribed in
Regulation 11 which reads as follows:-
“11. Referral of a child from a Specialised Adoption Agency
through the Designated Portal to prospective adoptive parents.―
(1)The seniority of the prospective adoptive parents for child referral
shall be from the date of completion of registration process on the
(2) On the basis of seniority, the prospective adoptive parents shall be
referred maximum three referral with one month interval in between
two consecutive referrals subject to availability of children through
the Designated Portal which shall include their photographs, Child
Study Report and Medical Examination Report, in their preference
category, if any, from one or more Specialised Adoption Agencies.
(3) After viewing the profile of the child or children on the
Designated Portal, the prospective adoptive parents may reserve the
child or children within a period of forty-eight hours for possible
adoption and the unreserved child or children shall be released by the
Designated Portal for other prospective adoptive parents in the
waiting list.
(4) The Specialised Adoption Agency shall get the details of the
prospective adoptive parents through the Designated Portal for fixing
an appointment with the prospective adoptive parents for matching, to
assess the suitability of the prospective adoptive parents by an
Adoption Committee as defined in sub-regulation (2) of regulation 2
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                       Page 32 of 46
and the Adoption Committee shall prepare the minutes of the meeting
as per format provided in the Schedule XXVII.
(5) The Chairperson and another member shall form the quorum of
the Adoption Committee in case of adoption from a Specialised
Adoption Agency and in case of adoption from a Child Care
Institution, the committee shall constitute Chairperson and two other
members of the committee as specified in sub-regulation (2) of
regulation 2.
(6) The Adoption Committee shall scrutinise the requisite documents
as stipulated for the prospective adoptive parents and listed in the
Schedule IX (Part 1) of the regulations.
(7) The Specialised Adoption Agency shall organise a meeting of the
prospective adoptive parents with the child.
(8) At the time of matching, the social worker of Specialised
Adoption Agency concerned shall orient the prospective adoptive
parents for taking care of the child and also older child or children
about their rights and responsibilities.
(9) The entire process of matching shall be completed within a
maximum period of thirty days from the date of reserving the child.
(10) The prospective adoptive parents shall raise their grievance to
District Child Protection Unit regarding the matching of the child, if
(11) While accepting the child, the prospective adoptive parents shall
sign the Child Study Report and Medical Examination Report which
may be downloaded from the Designated Portal, in the presence of the
social worker or chief functionary of the Specialised Adoption
Agency and the Specialised Adoption Agency shall record the
acceptance by the prospective adoptive parents on the Designated
(12) In case the prospective adoptive parents are not selected for the
child by the Adoption Committee, the reason for non-selection of the
prospective adoptive parents shall be recorded on the Designated
(13) If grounds of rejection after the enquiry are found to be due to
systemic error or on non-justiciable reasons, seniority of the
prospective adoptive parents shall be retained.
(14) In case the prospective adoptive parents do not accept the
reserved child, the prospective adoptive parents shall be relegated to
the bottom of the seniority list, as on that date, who may avail a fresh
chance when the seniority becomes due and the same procedure shall
be followed in the subsequent chances.
(15) In all cases referred to in sub-regulations (12), the reasons for not
considering the prospective adoptive parents have to be clearly stated
on the Designated Portal.
(16) The registration of prospective adoptive parents shall continue
till the time they have not exceeded the maximum composite age, i.e.
fifty five years for single and one hundred ten years for couple as
provided in sub-regulation (4) of regulation 5 and subject to
revalidation of the Home Study Report in every three years.
(17) The prospective adoptive parents may also get the Medical
Examination Report of the child reviewed by a medical practitioner of
their choice before giving their acceptance for adoption of the child.”
38.     The subject of adoption of children with special needs is then
dealt with in Regulation 51 which is extracted hereinbelow:-
“51. Adoption of children with special needs.―(1)The adoption
process for children with special needs shall be completed as
expeditiously as possible by the agencies or authorities concerned,
who shall be available for adoption by resident Indians, non-resident
Indians and Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder found eligible and
suitable by way of Home Study Report from the date their profile is
uploaded on the Designated Portal after the special needs children are
declared legally free for adoption by the Child Welfare Committee:
Provided that such children with special needs shall be available for
adoption by foreign adoptive parents, after fifteen days from the date
they are declared legally free for adoption.
(2) All prospective adoptive parents shall be able to indicate whether
they want to adopt a specific category of child having special needs.
(3) Special care shall be taken while processing the cases for adoption
of children with special needs, so that the prospective adoptive
parents are aware of exact medical condition of the child and are
ready to provide extra care and attention that the child needs.
(4) The types of children with special needs are provided in the
Schedule XVIII and Schedule III (PartE) of these Regulations,
which are illustrative and not exhaustive; the same may also be
accessed from www.cara.nic.in, and the decision of the Authority
shall be final in this regard.
(5) The children with special needs who were not adopted shall be
provided due care and protection by the Specialised Adoption Agency
and if they do not have necessary facilities and the means for their
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                        Page 34 of 46
long term care, such children shall be shifted to any other specialised
institutions run by any Government or non-government organisation.”
39.     There perhaps can be no greater imaginable tragedy in the
world than of a child who is orphaned or abandoned. An orphaned or
abandoned child impacts the very foundation of civilised society and
shakes the core of our conscience. This for every child, nay every
living being, must be loved, provided care and comfort, a home and a
family, the opportunity to breathe and exist. The act of adoption is not
one of redemption or grace. An evolved human being, as we recognize
ourselves to be, cannot perhaps perform a more pious duty than to
embrace an infant who is left abandoned in this world. It is a
reiteration of our pledge to provide a home, a family and secure the
future of every child.
40.     It is important to bear in mind that the bonds of family are not
forged merely by blood but bonded by the love and care that we
extend to those around us. The Court shudders at even imagining the
first waking hours of Child “S” as she entered this world. Her fate thus
cannot be left to the vagaries of litigation or to competing forces
which seek to stake a claim upon her very existence and life, her body
and soul. The Court notes that the process of adoption has stretched
over three years already. It is thus imperative that she be placed in the
warmth of a loving family, a home and a hearth enabling her to find
her place in the world in the years to come.
41.     As the discussion which ensues would bear out, Child “S” was
not only orphaned, but one who was found to be of “special needs”. It
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                                     Page 35 of 46
thus becomes the bounden duty of the Court to not only empower her
to erase and overcome the trauma that she underwent, but to also
enable her to find the warmth of a home and enable her to stand on her
feet as expeditiously as possible. It is these concerns which have
weighed upon the Court while rendering this verdict.
42.     There are two fundamental precepts relating to adoption which
must be recognised to exist and apply. Whenever a question of
adoption does arise, the need or the desire of a PAP would always be
subservient to the interest of the child. It is equally important to
preface this decision by recognising and reiterating the well settled
principle that civilised societies across the world have adopted the
principle of the prospective parents not having the right to pick or
choose a particular child. The act of adoption is not available to be
exercised with respect to a child specific. This for each child is a gift
of God and thus entitled to an equal right to be embraced by a family
and be fostered and nurtured. Neither colour, caste, creed nor
nationality should on a fundamental plane have any role to play at all.
43.     While a PAP may be recognised to have the right to exercise a
choice based on gender or to adopt one based on his/her special needs,
no legal system prevalent in civilised nations entitles one to
specifically select or choose a particular child. This for the reason that
every child is equal and is entitled to be treated as such. Every child
who enters this world must be recognised in law to have basic rights, a
right and an opportunity to not just survive but to strive towards
finding its true place amongst us. While legal systems may adopt and
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                              Page 36 of 46
incorporate principles of preference and priority amongst prospective
parents, none of them countenance, recognize or foster a right to
choose a child. It is these essential precepts which must be borne in
mind by the Court while deciding the present writ petition.
44.     The above position stand reaffirmed by the 2017 and 2022
Regulations. As would be manifest from a conjoint reading of
Regulations 8, 9, 10 and 48 of the 2017 Regulations, a child once
declared legally free to be adopted is made live on the CARINGS
portal whereafter all registered PAP‟s may reserve a child. The portal
is dynamic and the status of children is made live based upon the date
when the CWC may have declared them legally free for adoption and
the uploading of their details on CARINGS. Regulation 8 sets out the
order of priority with resident Indians or NRI‟s having the right to
exercise a choice to adopt first and before the child may be considered
for inter-country adoption. Regulation 8 then stipulates that a child
with a mental or physical disability listed in Schedule XVIII would be
available for inter-country adoption after 15 days. A resident Indian or
an NRI must consequently exercise the choice to reserve within the
aforesaid period. It becomes pertinent to note that the period of 15
days appears to have been consciously adopted both under the 2017
and the 2022 Regulations insofar as children with special needs are
concerned, since their placement in a family would necessarily have to
be considered and accomplished, for obvious reasons, with expedition.
45.      However, Regulations 8, 9, 10 and 48 neither incorporate nor
can be interpreted to confer a right on a PAP to adopt a particular
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                            Page 37 of 46
child. The right to reserve would have to necessarily be exercised with
respect to the children whose status may be live on the CARINGS
portal at any particular point of time. While that right may be
available to be exercised periodically and over a course of time, the
statutory scheme does not invest a right upon a PAP to reserve a
particular child. The registration of a PAP on the system is solely
aimed at enabling a reservation being made in respect of a child who
may at any given point of time become available for adoption on the
CARINGS portal. However, no PAP can claim a right in law to be
entitled to adopt a child of his or her choosing or desire.
46.     An identical scheme stands constructed in terms of Regulations
6, 8, 9, 10, 16 and 51 of the 2022 Regulations. While these
Regulations too reiterate the priority regime which stood constructed
under the 2017 Regulations, the right to reserve is identically
provisioned for. On an overall consideration of the two sets of
regulations noticed above, the Court comes to the firm conclusion that
no PAP can assert a right to adopt a particular child. The Court is thus
in complete agreement with the submissions advanced by Ms.
Guruswamy in this respect when she contended that recognising a
right to choose would be wholly abhorrent to the system of adoption
as adopted by our Nation and as embodied in the 2017 and 2022
47.     Turning then to the facts of the present case, it cannot possibly
be said that the priority principles adopted in the 2017 and 2022
Regulations were violated. This since CARA has categorically averred
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                             Page 38 of 46
that the adoption procedure was completed by adhering to a fair and
transparent process and in accordance with the procedure prescribed
under the regulations. Undisputedly no reservation came to be made
by a resident Indian, NRI or OCI card holder within the stipulated
period prescribed under the regulations. It was only thereafter that
Child “S” was made available for inter-country adoption. This was
therefore not a case where the priority accorded to resident Indians
including the complainant was violated or ignored. While the
regulations accord primacy to resident Indians, NRI‟s and OCI card
holders, they cannot be interpreted to require CARA to continually
defer the process of adoption till such time as a PAP falling in the
aforesaid genre condescends to make a reservation. The regulations
put in place strict timelines in order to subserve the principal objective
of a speedy and expeditious conclusion of the adoption process. The
aforesaid principle subserves the primary objective of the interest of
the child being accorded preeminence and the imperative to place it in
the folds of a family as expeditiously as possible.
48.     The second aspect which merits consideration pertains to the
medical condition of Child “S”. Undisputedly the MER which was
conducted initially clearly recorded and chronicled the various
afflictions which beset Child “S”. These reports were neither doubted
nor questioned either by CARA or the NCPCR. The fact that Child
“S” was a special needs child is admitted even to the Intervenor as
would be evident from the original complaint itself. The fact that she
is being currently treated for epilepsy was also not questioned. The
MER‟s as well as the attending doctors‟ prescriptions and examination
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                              Page 39 of 46
notes clearly evidence that Child “S” was suffering from various
ailments which merited her being placed in the special needs category.
Her condition clearly fell within clauses A 31, A 50 and C 4 falling in
Schedule XVIII of the 2017 Regulations. If that be the admitted
position that emerges from the record, the Court fails to find any
justification for a review medical examination being ordered.
49.     The Court       further finds itself unable to         accept the
recommendation of CARA made in this respect for the following
additional reasons. A review medical examination may have been
warranted provided a credible doubt stood raised with respect to her
initial classification. However, neither CARA nor NCPCR questioned
or challenged the fact that she was duly examined at the time when
she was rescued and that the subsequent medical examinations which
were conducted all pointed towards Child “S” being liable to be
placed in the special needs category. The Court further deems it
necessary to observe that a person suffering from convulsions or
epilepsy may not at all times necessarily demonstrate or exhibit
symptoms connected with the aforesaid ailment or condition. The
Court thus finds no ground to either doubt or question her initial
classification as a special needs child. The respondents also fail to
bear in mind that Child “S” is even presently undergoing treatment for
epilepsy. Viewed in the aforesaid backdrop, the Court finds no
justification for a further medical examination being conducted.
50.     The Court also bears in mind the fact that the child was rescued
on 10 October 2019. She was produced before the CWC on 09
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                               Page 40 of 46
October 2019. She was declared legally free for adoption on 28 July
2020. Child “S” was offered for reservation on two separate
occasions. In the two rounds when she was made available for
adoption, it was the petitioners alone who applied. No resident Indian,
NRI or OCI exercised the choice to reserve. The complainant also did
not exercise the choice to reserve Child “S”. The matching process
was completed on 05 February 2022 and the NOC ultimately issued
on 15 March 2022. The process of placement has thus taken almost
three years. The arduous and torturous process of placement of a
special needs child must thus be conferred a closure. Her confusing
and disturbed initial years have undoubtedly been traumatic. It is time
that she finds the quiet and comfort of a home and a family.
51.     The Court then proceeds to consider the objection which was
raised by the complainant. It must at the outset be noted that it was the
complainant and his family members who are stated to have rescued
Child “S” initially. They also appear to have borne the expenses for
her medical treatment. While their acts are laudable and deserve our
praise and gratitude, the Court must necessarily evaluate the complaint
that was made uninfluenced by the fact that they had provided love
and support to Child “S”. This since the validity of an adoption and
the proceedings undertaken by CARA cannot be adjudged based upon
the support or succor that may have been provided to an abandoned or
orphaned child. That would clearly amount to according recognition to
a right inhering in that caregiver to claim a superior right when it
comes to adoption and the creation of a priority which is otherwise
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                            Page 41 of 46
neither envisaged nor sanctioned under the 2015 Act or the two sets of
regulations noticed above.
52.     It becomes pertinent to note that the Inspection Report of
CARA bears out that the complainant registered on CARINGS on 13
November 2019. It further records that the complainant had submitted
a preference with respect to a normal girl child. This issue assumes
significance since a reading of the complaint of 04 August 2022
clearly establishes that the complainant throughout knew that Child
“S” was a special needs child. The report then further goes on to list
out details when Child “S” was made available under the special
needs category on the CARINGS portal. It specifically records that
the complainant did not exercise the right of reservation within 15
days from 05 November 2021. The petitioners here came to exercise
that choice only after the period of 15 days had expired.
53.     The Inspection Report also carries appropriate reports from the
Technical Support Staff of NIC which was charged with maintaining
the CARINGS portal. It also takes into account the date wise login
details of the complainant. Those details which appear at pages 109-
110 of the record would indicate that the complainant logged in 67
times on the CARINGS portal between 28 July 2020 and 28
September 2022. From a perusal of Annexure 27 of the report, it is
evident that the complainant did not log in either when Child “S” was
originally made available on 05 November 2021 nor did they exercise
the right to reserve between 21 December 2021 and 11 January 2022
when the child was made available for the second time. In fact, the
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                           Page 42 of 46
login details which have been placed on the record would indicate that
after 27 November 2021, the complainant logged on to the CARINGS
portal only on 04 August 2022.
54.     It is thus evident that during the period 21 December 2021 and
11 January 2022, the complainant neither accessed the CARINGS
portal nor did it exercise the right of reservation as provided under the
Regulations. The Court also bears in mind the undisputed fact that
between 13 November 2019 and till 04 August 2022, the complainant
did not raise any question with respect to the placement of Child “S”
on the CARINGS portal or followed up with CARA with regard to its
application that had been duly registered. The Inspection Report
would indicate that the “Home Study Report” of the complainant was
prepared on 18 February 2020. It was thus the obligation of the
complainant to have accessed the CARINGS portal and reserve the
child who may have been made available on the said portal post 13
November 2019. The complainant also does not assert that during the
period commencing from 13 November 2019, it exercised the choice
to reserve any child that may have been made available on the
CARINGS portal. In view of the above, this Court is of the firm
opinion that the adoption which came to be finalized in favour of the
petitioner can neither be stalled nor does it merit review in light of the
disclosures which have been made by CARA in these proceedings.
55.     While dealing with this aspect, the Court also takes note of the
stand of the NCPCR which had on the basis of the ATRs alluded to a
requirement for a forensic examination of the CARINGS portal by
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                              Page 43 of 46
cyber experts being undertaken. The Court is of the opinion that such
an exercise would have been warranted provided a plausible or
substantiated doubt with respect to the integrity of the portal had been
raised or had come to the notice of the NCPCR. The integrity of a
web portal can neither be doubted nor questioned merely on the basis
of a complaint whose allegations itself have remained unsubstantiated.
The Court also bears in mind the categorical assertion of CARA,
which had on the basis of the data and the material available with it,
unequivocally taken the stand that the adoption processes which had
been undertaken was in accordance with the provisions of the Act and
the Regulations referred to above.
56.     Before concluding, the Court also deems it apposite to briefly
deal with certain issues which though not urged at the time of oral
submissions, nonetheless had been raised by NCPCR in its affidavit
and related to the number of adoptions being finalized in favour of
parents residing in Malta. That data is referred to in paragraphs 25 and
26 of its counter affidavit. NCPCR appears to have raised the issue of
a large number of placements in favour of PAPs‟ who were residents
of Malta. According to the said respondent, the said placements would
appear to be contrary to the basic principle of all endeavor being made
to ensure that children are placed in a familiar socio-cultural
environment. NCPCR has also alluded to “a possibility of irregularity
being involved in the adoption process of the minor…”. The Court
however finds itself unable to appreciate the insinuation which is
sought to be raised especially when no breach of a fundamental
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                             Page 44 of 46
procedure pertaining to the extant adoption could be either pointed out
or established.
57.     As the facts of the present case would bear out, Child “S” was
made available for inter-country adoption only when no reservation
from a resident Indian, NRI or OCI card holder was forthcoming.
Undisputedly it was only after the statutory timelines for submission
of such a reservation had come to an end that the child was placed for
being reserved by a foreign PAP. The respondents do not rest their
objections on any Indian parent having made a reservation for Child
“S” and yet she having been placed with the petitioners. If a failure on
the part of a resident Indian be the cause for a child being made
available for inter-country adoption, that cannot possibly be viewed as
constituting a valid or cogent ground to either doubt the validity of the
adoption or question the integrity of the adoption process. The Court
in any case is of the firm opinion that the validity of an adoption can
neither be doubted nor questioned merely on an asserted “possibility
of irregularity”.
58.     Accordingly, and for the aforesaid reasons, the writ petition
stands allowed. The impugned communication of 10 August 2022
issued by CARA shall stand quashed and set aside. CARA is
consequently directed to take further steps to complete the process of
adoption in accordance with the No Objection Certificate which has
been issued by it. Bearing in mind the fact that Child “S” was
abandoned in 2019, it is expected that all concerned authorities shall
W.P.(C) 14069/2022                                            Page 45 of 46
aid and assist in the expeditious conclusion of all legal formalities
relating to her adoption by the petitioners.
59.     Before parting, the Court notes that various documents have
been filed by respective parties in these proceedings which may have
a direct bearing on securing the identity of Child “S”. The disclosure
of or access to that material may lead to the breach of her identity or
even an invasion of the privacy rights of Child “S”. These include
various medical reports, reports of CARA and other material relating
to the entire process of adoption.
60.     In view of the above, the Registry of the Court is directed to
ensure that the said material is not released, made available or
accessed by any third parties. The parties to these proceedings
including learned counsels who have appeared in these proceedings
shall also ensure that in case any such material is required for use or
reference in any further proceedings, all care shall be taken that
identifying disclosures relating to Child “S” as appearing in the said
documents are duly masked or redacted.