(1) Pragya Prateek Shukla S/o Sh. Shyam Prakash, age About
(2) Priya Shukla W/o Sh. Pragya Prateek Shukla, age 33 years
Both the appellants are residents of Nagesh (E), Police Station
Sadar, Tehsil and District Hardoi (Uttar Pradesh)
(Presently Lodged in Central Jail, Bikaner).
For Petitioner(s)        :    Mr. Vineet Jain, through VC
Special Public Prosecutor, assisted by
The instant application for suspension of sentence
under Section 389 CrPC has been preferred on behalf of the
Prakash and (2) Priya Shukla W/o Pragya Prateek Shukla, who
have been convicted and sentenced as below vide the judgment
dated 08.10.2021 passed by the learned Special Judge, POCSO
Act Cases and the Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act,
2005, Cases, Bikaner in Sessions Case No.68/2018 :
Offence         for       which Sentence and fine awarded
(2 of 7)                   [SOSA-710/2021]
Section 305 IPC                      Six years’ rigorous imprisonment
alongwith a fine of Rs.10,000/-
Section 21 of the POCSO Act          One year’s rigorous imprisonment
alongwith a fine of Rs.5,000/- and
Section 3(2)(vi) of the SC/ST Two years’ rigorous imprisonment
Act                                  alongwith a fine of Rs.5,000/- and
Learned    Public     Prosecutor          has    filed reply to    the
application for suspension of sentence.
Learned counsel Mr. Vineet Jain, representing the
appellant-applicants, vehemently and fervently contends that the
conviction of the appellant-applicants as recorded by the trial
court for the above offences is absolutely unwarranted.                        The
allegation set out in the FIR (Ex.P/2) that the appellant Priya
Shukla pushed the victim Mst. ‘D’ into the room of the PTI
Vijendra Singh was not found proved by the trial court vide
findings recorded in para No.94 of the impugned judgment. The
trial court convicted the appellants by recording a finding that the
appellants herein abetted the victim to commit suicide.                    In this
regard, the trial court relied upon the letters Ex.P/55 and Ex.P/56
written   by  the   accused       Vijendra         Singh     and   the   deceased
respectively.  Mr. Jain submits that the appellant Pragya Prateek
Shukla was working as a Faculty Member in the BSTC college
whereas, the appellant Priya Shukla was the Warden in the hostel,
where the deceased was staying as a boarder.                        She had just
returned from her village. The other girls in the hostel informed
(3 of 7)                   [SOSA-710/2021]
the appellant Pragya regarding the victim having gone missing, on
which, an extensive search was made in presence of the other
girls staying in the hostel and the nurse.                 Ultimately, the victim
was found present inside the room of the PTI Vijendra Singh. In
this background, it was absolutely natural for the persons incharge
to have made enquiries to find out the reason for this unnatural
behaviour and in this process, the letters Ex.P/55 and Ex.P/56
were voluntarily written by the co-accused Vijendra Singh and the
victim. There is no element of confession/admission in either of
these letters and thus, it cannot be held that the appellants herein
coerced the victim to write a confessional letter, which can be
considered as a circumstance which instigated the girl to commit
suicide. Mr. Jain further submitted that as the incident took place
in the odd hours of the night, it would be too harsh to expect that
the appellants would immediately realize that the victim was a
minor and thus, the matter should be forthwith reported to the
authorities. Neither the victim nor the co-accused Vijendra Singh
made any disclosure regarding having indulged in any sexual
relations and thus, they were simply advised in routine to write
down the gist of the circumstances in which they were found
together and in this process, the letters Ex.P/55 and Ex.P/56 were
voluntarily written by the co-accused Vijendra Singh and the
victim Mst. ‘D’ and as such, conviction of the appellants for the
offences punishable under Section 305 IPC and Section 21 of the
POCSO Act is totally unjustified.            Mr. Jain further submits that
after the process of bonafide enquiry had been completed, the
victim went back to sleep in her room. In the morning, she woke
up and then jumped into the water body, thereby ending her life.
There is no evidence to show that the appellants were in contact
(4 of 7)                 [SOSA-710/2021]
with the victim during this period. There is no evidence to show
that the appellants were conscious of the fact that the girl was
minor on the date of incident.             He further contended that the
appellants were on bail during the course of trial and they did not
misuse the liberty so granted to them. Hearing of the appeal is
bound to consume time. On these grounds, Mr. Jain implored the
court to accept the application for suspension of sentences and
direct enlargement of the appellants on bail during the pendency
of the appeal.
Per contra, learned Special Public Prosecutor Mr. J.S.
Choudhary, Sr. Advocate, Ms. Disha Wadekar and Mr. Shreyansh
Mardia, representing the complainant, vehemently and fervently
opposed the submissions of Mr. Jain and contended that the
appellants were in a position of power.                   No sooner the minor
victim was found in the room of the PTI Vijendra Singh, the
appellants should have reported the matter to the police, rather
than taking the things in their own hands.                     The victim was
pressurized/coerced to write the confession/admission (Ex.P/56).
They further urged that rather than making an enquiry from the
victim on their own, the appellants were under a lawful obligation
to forthwith report the matter to the police because a minor girl
staying in the hostel was found in the room of the PTI. By failing
to do so, the appellants acted in gross contravention of the
procedure provided under Chapter V of the POCSO Act.                         In
extracting the confession Ex.P/56, the appellants coerced the girl
to such an extent that she was left with only two options, either to
have her image tarnished in the eyes of the society or to end her
own life.    The minor girl became disconsolate and took the
extreme step of ending her life. Thus, the appellants were rightly
(5 of 7)              [SOSA-710/2021]
held responsible for instigating      the victim to commit suicide. They
thus, urged that the appellants do not deserve indulgence of bail
in this case.
We have given our thoughtful consideration to the
submissions advanced at bar and have gone through the material
available on record.      It would be premature for this Court to
record any opinion on the issue whether or not the appellants
were aware regarding the victim being below 18 years of age, as it
would be subject matter of extensive appreciation of evidence and
any observation by this court on this aspect of the case at this
stage may prejudice the outcome of the appeal. However, the fact
remains that the absence of the victim in the dormitory was
reported to the appellant Priya Shukla, the hostel warden,
whereafter, a search was made in the natural course of events and
the girl was found inside the room of the PTI Vijendra Singh with
the door bolted.      We are of the view that there was nothing
abnormal/unnatural for the hostel warden and her husband, a
teacher in the college, in which, the victim was studying to have
made enquiries as to the circumstances in which, the girl had
been found inside the room of the PTI in the dead of the night. It
appears that at that stage, neither the co-accused Vijendra Singh
nor the girl made any admission regarding they being involved in
any kind of sexual relations. Prime facie, other than an admission
that she was wrong in going to the room of the PTI Vijendra
Singh, there is hardly anything in the letter Ex.P/56, which can be
considered enough to brand it to be an admission by the victim.
In this background, we are of the firm view that the applicants
have an arguable case that they did not pressurize the girl nor did
they try to extract any confession/admission from her. Whether or
(6 of 7)                [SOSA-710/2021]
not the circumstances, which came to light in the dead of the
night on 29.03.2016 warranted immediate reporting of the matter
to the police would also require elaborate consideration at the
stage of final disposal of the appeal. Incidents are not uncommon
where after deliberations, it is decided in a bonafide manner not to
report such matters to the police, lest the reputation of the girl is
tarnished. This aspect gains more importance because the hostel
warden/higher ups would definitely have preferred to deliberate
with the parents of the girl before taking any such action.
The appellants were on bail during the course of trial.
There is no allegation whatsoever that they misused the liberty so
granted to them by the court during the course of the trial or that
they might do so if released on bail during pendency of the
appeal. There is no likelihood of the appellants absconding in the
event of their being released on bail.                 Hearing of the appeal is
bound to consume time.
In this background and having regard to the entirety of
the facts and circumstances of the case, this court is of the view
that it is a fit case for grant of indulgence of bail to the appellant-
applicants by suspending the sentences awarded to them by the
trial court during the pendency of the appeal.
Accordingly, the application for suspension of sentences
filed under Section 389 Cr.P.C. is allowed and it is ordered that the
sentences passed by the learned Special Judge, POCSO Act Cases
and the Commission for Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005,
Cases, Bikaner vide judgment dated 08.10.2021 in Sessions Case
No.68/2018 against the appellant-applicants (1) Pragya Prateek
Shukla S/o Shyam Prakash and (2) Priya Shukla W/o Pragya
Prateek Shukla shall remain suspended till final disposal of the
(7 of 7)                   [SOSA-710/2021]
aforesaid appeal and they shall be released on bail, provided each
of them executes a personal bond in the sum of Rs.1,00,000/-
with two sureties of Rs.50,000/- each to the satisfaction of the
learned  trial  Judge    for    their      appearance          in this  court   on
14.02.2022 and whenever ordered to do so till the disposal of the
appeal on the conditions indicated below:-
1. That they will appear before the trial Court in the
month of January of every year till the appeal is
decided.
2. That if any of the applicant changes the place of
residence, he/she will give in writing his/her
changed address to the trial Court as well as to the
counsel in the High Court.
3. Similarly, if the sureties change their address(s),
they will give in writing their changed address to
the trial Court.
The learned trial Court shall keep the record of
attendance of the accused-applicants in a separate file. Such file
be registered as Criminal Misc. Case related to original case in
which the accused-applicants were tried and convicted. A copy of
this order shall also be placed in that file for ready reference.
Criminal Misc. file shall not be taken into account for statistical
purpose relating to pendency and disposal of cases in the trial
court. In case any of the accused applicants does not appear
before the trial court, the learned trial Judge shall report the
matter to the High Court for cancellation of bail.