is also pointed out that statement of the petitioner
is recorded on 13.01.2022.
4.    Learned         advocate     for       the    petitioner          further
submitted         that     when    the        cognizable        offence            is
committed by the concerned persons, it is the duty of
the respondent police authority to register the FIR.
However, till today, no action is taken. Therefore,
appropriate          direction    be    issued       to   the     respondent
police authority.
5.    On the other hand, learned APP Mr. Ronak Raval
has opposed this petition and submitted that from the
averments made in the written complaint given by the
petitioner, it appears that petitioner is trying to
take the defence in the proceedings, which may be
filed by the concerned persons under the provisions
of the Negotiable Instruments Act against the present
petitioner.           Learned    APP       has     referred        the         said
averments         made    in   the     written       complaint.            It      is
specifically           stated    that        9    blank     cheques            were
obtained         by     the     concerned          persons        from          the
petitioner. Thus, learned APP submitted that when the
petitioner is trying to take the defence by giving
such type of complaint, this Court may not entertain
the present petition. It is further submitted that
even otherwise the petitioner is having remedy of
filing       private        complaint          before     the       concerned
Magistrate         Court.    Learned       APP    has    placed       reliance
upon    the       order     dated     17.12.2020         passed         by      the
Coordinate Bench of this Court in Special Criminal
Application           No.6760   of   2020.       Learned     APP,         after
referring         to    the  relevant       paragraphs    of     the        said
order, submitted that after relying upon the decision
rendered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court, the Coordinate
Bench has specifically observed that, “It is noticed
by    this       Court     that  various       applications          seeking
registration of FIR are being filed before this Court
directly without approaching the concerned Magistrate
under Section 156(3) of the Code. Such applications
which are directly filed are in direct conflict with
the observations of the Apex Court. The Apex Court
has expressed its concern with regard to filing of
such applications/petitions directly before the High
Court since filing of such petitions/applications are
an unnecessary burden.” Learned APP, therefore, urged
that in spite of the aforesaid observations made by
this Court, number of such petitions are filed before
this Court directly. Learned APP, therefore, urged
that this petition be dismissed.
6.     I have considered the submissions canvassed by
learned advocates appearing for the parties. I have
also perused the material placed on record. The only
grievance raised by the petitioner in the petition is
that     though        the   written      complaint     given        by      the
petitioner           on   10.01.2022,        the   respondent           police
authority has not registered the FIR. However, it is
pertinent to note at this stage that as per the case
of     the       petitioner,       petitioner        was      called            on
13.01.2022 i.e. within a period of three days from
the    date        of    giving  a    written      complaint         to      the
concerned         police     authority,         in    spite       of        that,
immediately          the   present     petition        has     been         filed
directly before this Court. The Coordinate Bench of
this Court, in the order dated 17.12.2020 passed in
Special      Criminal      Application         No.6760     of    2020,         has
observed in para 3 to 7 as under:
“3. At this stage, it would be apposite to
incorporate the observations made by the Apex
Court in the case of M. Subramaniam v. S. Janki
dated 20.03.2020 passed in Criminal Appeal No.102
of 2011. The Apex Court has observed thus;-
“5.While it is not possible to accept the
contention of the appellants on the
question of locus standi, we are inclined
to accept the contention that the High
Court       could    not        have     directed          the
registration of an FIR with a direction
to the police to investigate and file the
final report in view of the judgment of
this Court in Sakiri Vasu v. State Of
Uttar Pradesh And Others in which it has
been inter alia held as under:
“11. In this connection we would like to
state that if a person has a grievance
that        the    police          station       is        not
registering his FIR under Section 154 of
CrPC,        then     he       can      approach           the
Superintendent of Police under Section
154(3) CrPC by an application in writing.
Even       if    that     does       not     yield         any
satisfactory result in the sense that
either the FIR is still not registered,
or that even after registering it no
proper investigation is held, it is open
to the aggrieved person to file an
application (2008) 2 SCC 409 under
Section 156(3) CrPC before the learned
Magistrate         concerned.           If     such           an
application under Section 156(3) is filed
before the Magistrate, the Magistrate can
direct the FIR to be registered and also
can direct a proper investigation to be
made, in a case where, according to the
aggrieved person, no proper investigation
was made. The Magistrate can also under
the       same    provision         monitor          the
investigation       to        ensure    a      proper
investigation.
12. Thus in Mohd. Yousuf v. Afaq Jahan
this Court observed: (SCC p. 631, para
11) “11. The clear position therefore is
that any Judicial Magistrate, before
taking cognizance of the offence, can
order investigation under Section 156(3)
of the Code. If he does so, he is not to
examine the complainant on oath because
he was not taking cognizance of any
offence therein. For the purpose of
enabling       the        police       to        start
investigation      it        is    open     to       the
Magistrate to direct the police to
register an FIR. There is nothing illegal
in doing so. After all registration of an
FIR involves only the process of entering
the substance of the information relating
to the commission of the cognizable
offence in a book kept by the officer in
charge of the police station as indicated
in Section 154 of the Code. Even if a
Magistrate does not say in so many words
while      directing       investigation         under
Section 156(3) of the Code that an FIR
should be registered, it is the duty of
the officer in charge of the police
station to register the FIR regarding the
cognizable     offence         disclosed     by      the
complainant because that police officer
could take further steps contemplated in
Chapter XII of the Code only thereafter.”
13. The same view was taken by this Court
in Dilawar Singh v. State of Delhi (JT
vide para 17). We would further clarify
that even if an FIR has been registered
and even if the police has made the
investigation, or is actually making the
investigation, which the aggrieved person
feels is not proper, such a person can
approach the Magistrate under Section
156(3) CrPC, and if the Magistrate is
satisfied        he     can        order     a     proper
investigation and take other suitable
steps and pass such order(s) as he thinks
necessary         for       ensuring        a      proper
investigation.          All        these     powers           a
Magistrate enjoys under Section 156(3)
14. Section 156(3) states:“156. (3) Any
Magistrate empowered under Section 190
may order such an investigation as
abovementioned.”               The       words           “as
abovementioned”           obviously         refer           to
Section        156(1),          which     contemplates
investigation by the officer in charge of
the police station.
15. Section 156(3) provides for a check
by        the   Magistrate          on    the      police
performing its duties under Chapter XII
CrPC. In cases where the Magistrate finds
that the police has not done its duty of
investigating the case at all, or has not
done it satisfactorily, he can issue a
direction to the police to do the
investigation properly, and can monitor
the same.
16. The power in the Magistrate to order
further        investigation           under      Section
156(3) is an independent power and does
not affect the power of the investigating
officer to further investigate the case
even after submission of his report vide
Section 173(8). Hence the Magistrate can
order reopening of the investigation even
after the police submits the final
report, vide State of Bihar v. J.A.C.
Saldanha (SCC : AIR para 19).
17. In our opinion Section 156(3) CrPC is
wide enough to include all such powers in
a Magistrate which are necessary for
ensuring a proper investigation, and it
includes the power to order registration
of an FIR and of ordering a proper
investigation         if       the     Magistrate           is
satisfied that a proper investigation has
not been done, or is not being done by
the police. Section 156(3) CrPC, though
briefly worded, in our opinion, is very
wide and it will include all such
incidental powers as are necessary for
ensuring a proper investigation.
18. It is well settled that when a power
is given to an authority to do something
it includes such incidental or implied
powers which would ensure the proper
doing of that thing. In other words, when
any power is expressly granted by the
statute, there is impliedly included in
the grant, even without special mention,
every power and every control the denial
of which would render the grant itself
ineffective. Thus where an Act confers
jurisdiction it impliedly also grants the
power of doing all such acts or employ
such means as are essentially necessary
for its execution.”
6. The said ratio has been followed in
Sudhir     Bhaskarrao         Tambe    v.      Hemant
Yashwant Dhage and Others2, in which it
is observed.
“2. This Court has held in Sakiri Vasu v.
State of U.P., that if a person has a
grievance that his FIR has not been
registered by the police, or having been
registered, proper investigation is not
being done, then the remedy of the
aggrieved person is not to go to the High
Court     under    Article         226     of        the
Constitution of India, but to approach
the Magistrate concerned under Section
156(3) CrPC. If such an application under
Section 156(3) CrPC is made and the
Magistrate is, prima facie, satisfied, he
can direct the FIR to be registered, or
if it has already been registered, he can
direct proper investigation to be done
which includes in his discretion, if he
deems it necessary, recommending change
of the investigating officer, so that a
proper investigation is done in the
matter. We have said this in Sakiri Vasu
case because what we have found in this
country is that the High Courts have been
flooded with writ petitions praying for
registration of the first information
report    or     praying          for   a      proper
investigation.
3. We are of the opinion that if the High
Courts entertain such writ petitions,
then they will be flooded with such writ
petitions and will not be able to do any
other work except dealing with such writ
petitions. Hence, we have held that the
complainant must avail of his alternate
remedy    to     approach         the    Magistrate
concerned under Section 156(3) CrPC and
if he does so, the Magistrate will
ensure, if prima facie he is satisfied,
registration of the first information
report    and     also         ensure   a      proper
investigation in the matter, and he can
also monitor the investigation.
4. In view of the settled position in
Sakiri Vasu case, the impugned judgment
of the High Court cannot be sustained and
is hereby set aside. The Magistrate
concerned is directed to ensure proper
investigation into the alleged offence
under Section 156(3) CrPC and if he deems
it necessary, he can also recommend to
the SSP/SP concerned a change of the
investigating (2016) 6 SCC 277 officer,
so that a proper investigation is done.
The Magistrate can also monitor the
investigation, though he cannot himself
investigate (as investigation is the job
of the police). Parties may produce any
material they wish before the Magistrate
concerned. The learned Magistrate shall
be uninfluenced by any observation in the
impugned order of the High Court.
8. In these circumstances, we would allow
the present appeal and set aside the
direction     of     the        High   Court         for
registration of the FIR and investigation
into the matter by the police. At the
same time, our order would not be an
impediment in the way of the first
respondent filing documents and papers
with the police pursuant to the complaint
dated 18.09.2008 and the police on being
satisfied that a criminal offence is made
out would have liberty to register an
FIR. It is also open to the first
respondent to approach the court of the
metropolitan    magistrate        if       deemed
appropriate and necessary. Equally, it
will be open to the appellants and others
to take steps to protect their interest.”
4. While referring to the judgment of Sudhir
Bhaskarrao Tambe (supra), it is observed that
if the High Courts entertain such writ
petitions seeking registration of FIR, then
they will be flooded with such writ petitions
and will not be able to do any other work,
except dealing with them. It is specifically
held that the complainant must avail of his
alternate remedy to approach the Magistrate
concerned under section 156(3) of Cr.P.C and
if he does so, the Magistrate will ensure, if
prima facie he is satisfied, registration of
the        FIR   and  also        ensure   a      proper
investigation in the matter. While approving
the aforenoted view, the Supreme Court has
set aside the direction of the High Court for
registration of the FIR and has directed the
respondent thereto to approach the court of
Magistrate if deem appropriate and necessary.
Thus, the law on the registration of FIR is
well settled and has been reiterated in the
recent judgment of the Supreme Court as noted
herein above.
5. In the present case, the petitioner has
not approached the concerned Magistrate and
has directly approached this Court for the
aforesaid prayer.
6. Under the circumstances and in light of
the observations made by the Apex Court, the
writ         petition    is      rejected       since         the
petitioner has the remedy to approach the
approach         the   concerned         Magistrate       under
section 156(3) of the Cr.PC.
7. It is noticed by this Court that various
applications seeking registration of FIR are
being filed before this Court directly
without approaching the concerned Magistrate
under Section 156(3) of the Code. Such
applications which are directly filed are in
direct conflict with the observations of the
Apex Court. The Apex Court has expressed its
concern with regard to filing of such
applications/petitions directly before the
High          Court     since         filing      of        such
petitions/applications are an unnecessary
burden.”
7.      At this stage, it is pertinent to note that the
Coordinate           Bench  of   this       Court   has    specifically
observed in para 7 of the aforesaid order that it has
come      to      the   notice    of     the     Court   that        various
applications seeking registration of FIR are being
filed before this Court directly without approaching
the concerned Magistrate under Section 156(3) of the
Code,        which      is   in    direct        conflict       with         the
observations of the Apex Court. Thus, in the facts
and circumstances of the present case, this petition
is dismissed.