1.      This hearing has been done through video conferencing.
2.      The present second appeal has been filed challenging the impugned
order dated 16th November 2019, passed by the ld. ADJ (North-east),
Karkardooma Courts, Delhi (hereinafter, “first Appellate Court”) in RCA
DJ No. 46/19, arising out of the initial order of the ld. SCJ, (North-east),
Karkardooma Courts, Delhi (hereinafter, “Trial Court”) dated 18th April
2019, in Suit No. 148/16. The trial court had allowed the application under
Order 12 Rule 6 of the CPC, and decreed the suit. The First Appellate Court,
dismissed the appeal challenging the said judgement/decree passed by the
3.      The background to the present second appeal is that the
Plaintiff/Respondent in the suit Sh. Ganga Saran (hereinafter `Plaintiff’),
who is the father of Appellant No.2, filed a suit against his son and
daughter-in-law i.e., Sh. Vinay Kumar and Ms. Aarti Sharma, respectively
(hereinafter `Defendants’). The reliefs sought in the suit before the Trial
i.     Pass a decree of permanent injunction in
favour of the plaintiff and against the defendant,
their attorney, successor, assignee, legal heirs,
associates etc. thereby restraining them from
disposing-off the suit property No. A-65, Gali
which is more specifically shown in red colour in
site plan attached.
ii.    Pass a decree of mandatory injunction in
favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants,
their attorney, successor, assignee, legal heirs etc.
thereby directing them to remove themselves from
the suit Property and hand over peaceful vacant
possession of the same to plaintiff in respect of
property bearing No. A-65, Gali No.3, A-Block,
Rama Garden, Delhi-110094, as more specifically
shown in red colour in site plan attached.
iii. Pass a decree of future/pendent-lite
damages/mesne profits @ Rs. 8,000/- p.m. from the
dated of filling present petition till suit property is
vacated and peaceful possession is handed over to
plaintiff.
iv.    Any other relief as this Hon’ble Court may
circumstances of the case may also be passed in
favour of the plaintiff and against the defendants,
in the interest of justice.”
4.      The case of the Plaintiff in the suit is that he is the owner of the
property bearing No. A-65, Gali No.3, A-Block, Rama Garden, Delhi,
(hereinafter, “suit property”) as shown in the site plan. In view of various
disputes between him and his son/daughter-in-law, he sought permanent and
mandatory injunction, damages seeking vacant and peaceful possession of
the suit property and removal of his son and daughter-in-law. Damages and
mesne profits were also sought by the Plaintiff in the suit.
5.      In the written statement before the Trial Court, the case of the
Defendants, was that the suit property was purchased from the joint family
fund. The said property is stated to have been purchased out of the funds
generated by the sale of the earlier property which was originally registered
in the name of the mother i.e., the wife of the Plaintiff, and upon her demise
in 2007, the said property had devolved upon the husband i.e., the Plaintiff,
as also their children, i.e., the Defendants. Thus, it was claimed in the
Written Statement that as the suit property was bought using the funds that
were generated out of the sale of the earlier property, to which the son had a
right, it does not exclusively belong to the Plaintiff.
6.      Vide order dated 18th April 2019, the Trial Court examined the matter
“(a) Thus, in order to succeed under Order 12
Rule 6 CPC, the admissions by the defendant must
be clear, unequivocal and unambiguous.
(b) The plaintiff Sh. Ganga Saran is admittedly the
father of defendant no. l and father-in-law of
defendant no. 2.
(c) The plaintiff has claimed to be the owner of the
said property i.e. A-65, gali no.3, A Block, Rarna
Garden, Delhi measuring 100 Sq. Yards having
plaintiff has filed property documents in the nature
of GPA, agreement to sell, receipt, will and
possession letter with affidavit, all dated
26.12.2011. The site plan has also been filed.
The defendants have admitted that the property
documents are in the name of the plaintiff. What is
disputed though is the ownership of the plaintiff
over the property.
The contention of the defendants is that the said
property was purchased by the plaintiff from the
funds generated through the sale of another
property bearing no.A-1/103, Gali no.2, Nehru
Vihar, Delhi-110094 and through funds given by
defendants. The property bearing No. A-1/103,
Gali No. 2, Nehru Vihar, Delhi-110094, was
owned by Smt. Pushpa Devi (wife of plaintiff and
mother of defendant no.1) who executed GPA in
favour of the plaintiff, who then sold the said
proceeds of the sale, the new property no. A-65,
gali no.3, A Block, Rama Garden, Delhi measuring
100 Sq. Yards, was purchased in the name of the
plaintiff. The sale of the property and the
consequent purchase of the other property as
stated above was a mark of respect to the plaintiff
and with mutual assurances that property would
be considered to be of the plaintiff, defendant no.1
and Vijay Kumar Tiwari.
The said contention of the defendants cannot be
accepted as firstly the property bearing no. A-65,
gali no.3, A Block, Rama Garden, Delhi measuring
100 Sq. Yards, is admittedly in the name of the
plaintiff. Secondly, even if defendants contributed
in purchase of the said property, they would not
become the co-owners of the said property.
Thirdly, the property documents in favour of
plaintiff in respect of property no. A-65, gali no.3,
A Block, Rama Garden, Delhi measuring 100 Sq.
Yards, or GPA in respect of property no. A-1/103,
Gali no.2, Nehru Vihar, Delhi-110094, in favour of
plaintiff or its subsequent sale by plaintiff through
GPA dated 24.12.2011 are not disputed nor the
defendants admit that the documents were not
challenged at the time of their execution. The said
documents are the only documents in respect of the
properties. Thus, it has to be held that plaintiff is
the owner of the property of the bearing no. A-65,
gali no.3, A Block, Rama Garden, Delhi measuring
plaintiff, then in law, simply by stating that it was
meant to be owned by all including defendants, it
cannot be said defendants are co-owners/joint
owners of the property.
(d) The plaintiff has claimed that he has permitted
defendants to reside in one room set with kitchen
on ground floor of property bearing no. A-65, gali
no.3, A Block, Rama Garden, Delhi measuring 100
Sq. Yards, as licensee and the same is depicted in
red colour in the site plan. The defendants being
son and daughter-in-law of the plaintiff have to be
held to be licensee of the plaintiff in respect of the
said suit property and the license has been
terminated by the plaintiff.
(e) The contention of the defendants that they
cannot be removed from the house/suit property
because the suit property is the shared house-hold
and as members of the joint family property is not
tenable as defendant no.2 can claim her rights
from her husband i.e. defendant no.1 only and not
from her father-in-law/plaintiff, who has no duty to
provide residence to either son or daughter-in-law.
The reference may also be held to the judgment of
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in S. R. Batra and
Anr. vs. Smt. Taruna Batra. 1(2007) SLTl.
Singh (HUF), 2008 (2) SSC 728, it was held that
filing of suit is itself a notice to quit on the tenant
and therefore, no notice to quit under Section 106
T.P. Act is necessary to enable the landlord to get
the decree of possession. The requirement of the
present ease is lesser as defendants are claimed to
be licensee and not tenant in the property.
(g) Thus, all the defendants have not denied in
their written statement regarding, the existence of
property documents of thy suit property in the
name of the plaintiff and admissions of defendants
in written statement and defendant No.1 & 2 being
the son and daughter-in-law of the plaintiff and
considering the ratio of Nopany Investment
(supra), there is every reason to allow the request
for judgment on the basis of admissions under
(h) In view of the above discussion, the plaintiff
has shown himself to be the owner of the property
Garden, Delhi measuring 100 Sq. Yards, and
defendants are residing in a portion of the suit
property i.e. one. room set with kitchen on ground
floor of property bearing no. A-65, gali no.3, A
Block, Rama Garden, Delhi measuring 100 Sq.
Yards as shown in red colour in the site plan, in
the capacity of the licensee of the plaintiff. All the
satisfied. Accordingly, oral application under
mandatory injunction directing defendants to
remove themselves from the suit property i.e. one
room set with kitchen on ground floor of property
Garden, Delhi measuring 100 Sq. Yards as shown
in red colour in the site plan, and hand over the
possession of the same to the plaintiff, is decreed.
Decree-sheet be accordingly prepared. No order
as to cost.”
7.      The Trial Court recognized that the Plaintiff was the exclusive owner
of the said property and the son and daughter-in-law i.e., the Defendants
were merely licensees. Accordingly, a decree was passed in favour of the
Plaintiff in his application under Order 12 Rule 6 of CPC.
8.      The said order was appealed by the Defendants before the first
Appellate Court, which confirmed the findings of the Trial Court in the
“12. As was also rightly noted by Ld. Trial court,
contention of the defendants that they cannot be
removed from the suit property because suit
property is shared household and as members of
the joint family property is not tenable as
defendant no.2 could claim her rights from her
husband i.e. defendant no.l and not from her father
in law who has no duty to provide residence to
either son or daughter in law. Reference was made
to the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in S.R.
categorically point out towards the ownership of
the plaintiff with regard to the subject premises
and the status of the defendants in the suit property
as licensee being son and daughter in law of the
plaintiff which license could be revoked with the
conveying of intention by plaintiff seeking vacation
of the defendants from the subject premises.
14. The unequivocal and unambiguous admission
that the property was owned by plaintiff and there
being no challenge to the documents executed in
favour of plaintiff till now, the legal position which
emerges on record regarding the plaintiff being
the absolute owner of the suit property and his son
i.e. appellant no. 1 having no right, title and
interest therein. Appellant no.1 had been
occupying the suit property being son of plaintiff
and after the marriage, appellant no.2 joined the
company of her husband i.e. appellant no.1. Son
and daughter in law acquire no legal right to
occupy the self-acquired property of the parents or
parents in law as the case may be, against their
documentation available on record and their
admission with regard to property being in name
of the respondent, no triable issue qua that aspect
remained to be adjudicated and Ld. Trial court
thereby did not err in considering the matter for
disposal under order 12 Rule 6 CPC.”
9.      It is this order of the first Appellate Court that has been challenged by
the Defendants in the present second appeal.
10.     There are two issues that have arisen in the present case. The first
issue concerns with condonation of delay of 342 days, in filing the present
second appeal. The second issue concerns with the merits of the matter.
I. Condonation of delay in filing the appeal
11.     On behalf of the Appellants/Defendants, Mr. Ali, ld. Counsel submits
that the impugned order of the first Appellate Court was passed on 16th
November 2019. An application for a certified copy of the said order was
filed on 9th December 2019 and the same was received only on 13th January
2020. He submits that thereafter, the lockdown, on account of the COVID-
19 pandemic, commenced on 24th March 2020. Accordingly, he submits that
the period post 15th March 2020 to 14th March 2021 ought to be excluded
while calculating the limitation period on account of the judgment of the
Supreme Court dated 8th March 2021, in Suo Moto Writ Petition (Civil) No.
3 of 2020, titled In Re: Cognizance for extension of limitation. He submits
that since present second appeal was filed on 25th January 2021, thus, the
appeal is within limitation. He further submits that in any case, the delay is
not to the tune of 342 days due to the order of the SC, and considering the
pandemic, as also the fact that the delay is not very long, he prays for the
delay to be condoned and the appeal to be admitted, as substantial questions
of law arise in the matter.
12.     Mr. Tiwari, ld. counsel appearing for the Plaintiff, on the other hand,
submits that the delay is not liable to be condoned because the delay is of
more than 300 days in the present case. The order of the Supreme court in In
Re: Cognizance for extension of limitation (supra), directing that the
period between 15th March 2020 and 14th March, 2021 would be excluded
while calculating limitation, would not apply in the present case as the
limitation expired prior to 15th March 2020. Accordingly, he submits that the
delay is not liable to be condoned.
II. On the merits of the present second appeal
13.     Mr. Ali, ld. Counsel for the Defendants firstly submits that the
property is a joint family property and was purchased from joint funds. He
relies upon the written statement filed before the Trial Court to canvass the
said proposition. He submits that funds for purchasing the said property
were generated out of the sale of a property bearing no. A-1/103, Gali No. 2,
Nehru Vihar, Delhi, which was originally in the name of the mother. The
mother unfortunately expired, and the son had become one of the legal heirs
of the mother. He submits that the General Power of Attorney (hereinafter
“GPA”), in favour of the Plaintiff, in respect of the first property which was
sold, had already expired and could not have been used after the death of the
mother. He accordingly submits that the son had a share in the first property,
which generated funds for the purchase of the suit property, and hence, he
cannot be evicted in this manner.
14.     Mr. Ali, ld. Counsel, secondly submits that one of the Defendants,
being the daughter-in-law of the Plaintiff, even if is assumed that the suit
property belongs to the Plaintiff, the said premises is a `shared household’
and her matrimonial home. To canvass the same, he submits that the parties
were living in a joint premises, and the kitchen was also common.
Accordingly, she would not be liable to be evicted in view of the judgments
of the Supreme Court in Satish Chandra Ahuja v. Sneha Ahuja., [2020
(11) SCALE 476], as also Smt. S. Vanitha v. The Deputy Commissioner,
15.     Finally, Mr. Ali submits that this was not a case of passing of a decree
under Order XII Rule 6 of CPC, inasmuch as the question as to the nature of
the property would require evidence to be led before the Trial Court. He
therefore submits that until the question of joint-property was not decided,
the Trial Court could not have directed the eviction, and the same ought not
to have been upheld by the Appellate Court.
16.     Mr. Tiwari, ld. Counsel for the Plaintiff, however, refutes these
submissions. He firstly submits on the ownership of the property, that in the
written statement before the Trial Court, the clear stand of the Defendants is
contrary to what is being currently argued. He submits that it is, in effect,
admitted in the written statement that the Plaintiff may be the absolute
owner of the suit property in question, however, the Defendants, are in a
domestic relationship with the Plaintiff. He further submits that the question
concerning the contribution of jewelry towards the purchase of the suit
property by the Defendants, has also been discussed by the Trial Court in
paragraph 6 & 7 of its judgment/decree, and at best the same can be a case
of borrowing. However, the same would not amount to a contribution in the
purchase of the suit property. He further submits that the fact that the
Plaintiff was working at Delhi Cloth Mills, which is an established
company, is not disputed, nor is the execution of the GPA in favour of the
Plaintiff disputed. Further, no suit, claiming any rights in respect of the suit
property has ever been instituted by the Defendants before any court.
17.     In response to the argument on `shared household’, Mr. Tiwari, ld.
counsel for the Plaintiff, submits that the impugned order dated 16th
November, 2019 in paragraphs 9 & 10, has considered the said defence
which has been raised by the Defendants, and has thereafter upheld the
decree in favour of the Plaintiff. He submits that the judgments of the
Supreme Court in Satish Chandra Ahuja (supra) and Smt. S. Vanitha
(supra) are not applicable to the present case. He submits that in both these
cases there were disputes between the husband and the wife. In those cases,
the husband and wife had an estranged relationship, and the daughter-in-law
was alleging domestic violence against the husband. He submits that to the
contrary, in the present case, both the husband and wife are cooperating with
each other, and they have jointly the first appeal as also the present appeal.
There is no matrimonial discord between the husband and the wife, and even
at the time of filing of the appeal, both were residing together. Under these
circumstances, he submits that both the above-mentioned judgments for the
Supreme Court would not be applicable to the present case. Thus, the
submission of Mr. Tiwari, ld. Counsel is that these two judgments of the
Supreme Court in Satish Chandra Ahuja (supra) and S. Vanitha (supra)
would apply only in cases of domestic violence and when the daughter-in-
law is estranged from the husband, which is not the case in the present
18.     Mr. Tiwari, ld. Counsel, finally submits that the execution of the
decree was also sought and in March 2021, the Defendants have already
vacated the suit premises. He accordingly submits that thus the execution of
the decree no longer survives.
19.     In Rejoinder, Mr. Zahid Ali, ld. Counsel for the Defendants, submits
that the fact that the son and daughter-in-law are residing together, and are
not estranged, would not make any difference in the position of law. He
submits that the concept of `shared household’ would apply to the daughter-
in-law irrespective of whether the son and daughter-in-law are living
together or not. The submission of the Plaintiff that in cases where the
husband and wife are living together, the Protection of Women from
Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (hereinafter, “DV Act”) will not apply, is
vehemently controverted.
20.     Reliance is placed upon the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court
in Satish Chandra Ahuja (supra) to argue that in the said judgment, there is
no observation to the effect that if the husband and the wife are living
together, the right of the wife under the DV Act, to claim ‘shared
household’ and the right to reside, can be taken away. Reliance is also
placed on the judgment of the Supreme Court in S. Vanitha (supra) to argue
that even in the said judgment, the daughter-in-law had not specifically filed
a complaint under the DV Act, and the said judgment further explains the
right to reside in detail, to the effect that even if the son and daughter-in-law
are living together or if the son continues to live with the daughter-in-law,
the right of the daughter-in-law to reside in the matrimonial home cannot be
I. On Condonation of delay in filing the appeal
21. CM Appl. 21708/2021 and CM Appl. 3966/2021 are applications that
have been filed on behalf of the Defendants, seeking condonation of delay in
filing the present second appeal. The impugned order in this case was
passed on 16th November, 2019. The Defendants applied for a certified
copy on 9th December, 2019, which was received on 13th January, 2020. As
per the Supreme Court order in In Re: Cognizance for extension of
limitation (supra), the period of 15th March, 2020 till 14th March, 2021 is to
be excluded while calculating the limitation period, in light of the COVID-
19 pandemic. Accordingly, after deducting the period during which the
certified copy was to be issued by the Court, the limitation of 90 days to file
the present second appeal, has not expired prior to 15th March, 2020. The
appeal was filed on 25th January, 2021, which is within the period excluded
by the Supreme Court’s order.
22.     Considering these facts, there is no delay in filing the present appeal.
However, the Defendants have filed these applications by way abundant
caution. Accordingly, the delay, if any, in filing the present appeal stands
condoned. Applications are disposed of.
II. On the merits of the present second appeal
23.     This court has heard ld. counsels for the parties from time to time, and
has perused the record. The ld. Counsel for the Appellants/Defandants has
placed vehement reliance on the judgments recently delivered by the
Supreme Court on the issue of ‘shared household’ in the context of the DV
Act. The fact that the Plaintiff is the owner of the suit property is not
disputed. However, some arguments have been raised in respect of how the
Plaintiff got ownership of the property. Primarily however, as a question of
law in this second appeal, the only submission urged is in respect of the suit
property being a ‘shared household’ or matrimonial home for the daughter-
in-law. Thus, before dealing with the merits of the matter, it is necessary to
consider the judgments cited by the ld. Counsels for the parties.
24.     In Satish Chandra Ahuja (supra) the Supreme Court was dealing
with a dispute between in-laws and son on the one hand, and the daughter-
in-law on the other hand. There were various cases pending between the son
and the daughter-in-law, including a divorce petition under Section 13 (1A)
of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, and an application under Section 12 of the
DV Act alleging severe emotional and mental abuse. A suit for injunction
was filed by the father-in-law against the daughter-in-law without
impleading the son. The daughter-in-law, who was having marital disputes
with her husband, had in her defence claimed that the New Friends Colony
residence, which was her matrimonial home, would be a ‘shared household’
in terms of Section 2 (s) of the DV Act, and accordingly she could not be
evicted from the same. The Trial Court had passed a decree of eviction
under Order 12 Rule 6 of CPC, against the daughter-in-law, in the said suit.
The said order of the Trial Court was appealed against, by the daughter-in-
law, and the High Court had set aside the decree passed by the Trial Court
and remanded the matter for fresh adjudication. The High Court had
refrained from determining as to whether the premises of the father-in-law
would be a ‘shared household’ or not and had remanded the matter for trial.
The said decision of the High Court was challenged before the Supreme
Court. The Supreme Court, in this background, gave the following findings:
i)     The definition of ‘shared household’ under Section 2(s) of the
DV Act, is an exhaustive definition.
ii)    The ‘shared household’ could belong to any relative of the
husband, with whom the daughter-in-law may have lived.
iii)   The Supreme Court also held that the right to residence, as
provided to the daughter-in-law under Section 19 of the DV Act, is
not an indefeasible right, and hence the Court has to balance the rights
of the parties.
25.     The observations of the Supreme Court are as under:
“83. Before we close our discussion on Section 2(s),
we need to observe that the right to residence under
Section 19 is not an indefeasible right of residence
in shared household especially when the daughter-
in-law is pitted against aged father-in-law and
mother-in-law. The senior citizens in the evening of
their life are also entitled to live peacefully not
haunted by marital discord between their son and
daughter-in-law. While granting relief both in
application under Section 12 of Act, 2005 or in any
civil proceedings, the Court has to balance the
rights of both the parties. The directions issued by
High court in paragraph 56 adequately balances
the rights of both the parties.”
26.     The Supreme Court further went on to observe that the claim of the
Defendant that the suit property is a ‘shared household’, ought to have been
considered by the trial Court. It held that a decree under Order 12 Rule 6 is
discretionary and not a matter of right. It further held that the proceedings
under the DV Act and the civil suit are independent proceedings and the
order passed by the Magistrate in a DV Act proceeding would be of
evidentiary value in the suit, but of a limited nature, as the issues raised in
the civil suit are to be determined by the trial Court. Finally, the Supreme
Court observed that relief under the DV Act can be sought in any legal
proceeding, including a Civil Court. Family Court or a Criminal Court by
the aggrieved person. The said observations of the Supreme Court are as
“93. As per Section 26, any relief available
under Sections 18, 19, 20, 21 and 22 of the Act,
2005 may also be sought in any legal proceeding,
before a civil court, family court or a criminal
court being the aggrieved person. Thus, the
defendant is entitled to claim relief under Section
19 in suit, which has been filed by the plaintiff.
Section 26 empowers the aggrieved person to
claim above relief in Civil Courts also.
27.     After analysing the law to the facts of the case, the court upheld the
judgment of the High Court, setting aside the decree under Order 12 Rule 6
of the CPC and remanding the matter for fresh adjudication.
28.     In the case of S. Vanitha (supra), the dispute arose between both the
in-laws on the one hand, and the daughter-in-law, on the other. The son was
also impleaded as a party. The in-laws, in the said case, had preferred an
application under the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens Act, 2007 (hereinafter, “Senior Citizens Act)” and sought eviction
of their daughter-in-law and grand-daughter. The authorities under the
Senior Citizens Act directed the Defendant/ daughter-in-law in the said case,
to vacate the premises. The same was upheld by the Division Bench of the
Karnataka High Court, which held that the remedy of the daughter-in-law to
seek maintenance and shelter, lies only against the husband i.e., the son, and
accordingly the eviction order was valid. This judgment of the Karnataka
High Court was challenged before the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court
considered the right of residence given to the daughter-in-law, under the
provisions of the DV Act, as also the relevance of the provisions of the
29.     The Supreme Court held that the intention of the legislators would be
to read the said two legislations harmoniously, as both deal with the salutary
aspects of public welfare and interest. It held that the Senior Citizens Act
cannot have an overriding force in all situations irrespective of competing
entitlements of a women in a ‘shared household’, as the same would defeat
the purpose of the DV Act. The provisions of both the Acts cannot be
ignored and have to be harmoniously construed. The relevant observations
“… The law protecting the interest of senior
citizens is intended to ensure that they are not left
destitute, or at the mercy of their children or
relatives. Equally, the purpose of the PWDV Act
2005 cannot be ignored by a sleight of statutory
interpretation. Both sets of legislations have to be
harmoniously construed. Hence the right of a
woman to secure a residence order in respect of a
shared household cannot be defeated by the simple
expedient of securing an order of eviction by
adopting the summary procedure under the Senior
30.     The Supreme Court further observed that both these legislations are
special legislations. Section 3 of the Senior Citizens Act cannot override and
nullify other provisions of law, including Section 17 of the DV Act.
Applying the said law to the facts, the Supreme Court then emphasized upon
the series of transactions in respect of the subject property from which the
daughter-in-law was to be evicted. The Supreme Court observed that the
said property was originally bought in the name of the son, just a few
months before the marriage, and was sold a few years later at the same price
to the father-in-law. The father-in-law then gifted the property to the
mother-in-law, after divorce proceedings were initiated between the son and
the daughter in law. The daughter-in-law had also filed proceedings for
maintenance under the Hindu Marriage Act. In the said background of the
two proceedings filed by the son and the daughter-in-law against each other,
the application under the Senior Citizens Act came to be filed by the father-
in-law. In that context the Supreme Court held as under:
interpreted to include the residence where the
appellant had been jointly residing with her
husband. Merely because the ownership of the
property has been subsequently transferred to her
in-laws (Second and Third Respondents) or that
her estranged spouse (Fourth respondent) is now
residing separately, is no ground to deprive the
appellant of the protection that was envisaged
under the PWDV Act 2005.”
31.     The Supreme Court, thereafter, restrained the in-laws from evicting
the daughter-in-law for a period of one year, in order to enable her to avail
of her remedies in accordance with law. The operative portion of the
“For the above reasons, while allowing the appeal,
i) The impugned judgment and order of the Division
Bench of the High Court of Karnataka dated 17
September 2019 affirming the order of eviction
against the appellant shall stand set aside
Assistant Commissioner ordering and directing the
appellant to vacate the suit premises shall stand set
ii) We leave it open to the appellant to pursue her
purpose, it would be open to the appellant to seek
the help of the District Legal Services Authorities
and if the appellant does so, all necessary aid and
assistance shall be furnished to her in pursuing her
iii) IA 111352/2020 for restoration of the electricity
connection is allowed by directing the Fourth
respondent to take all necessary steps for
restoration of the electricity connection to the
premises within a period of two weeks from the
receipt of a certified copy of this judgment. The
Fourth respondent shall also continue to pay the
iv) In order to enable the appellant to pursue her
remedies under the PWDV Act 2005, there shall
respondents from forcibly dispossessing the
appellant, disposing of the premises or from
creating any right, title and interest in favour
of any third party in any manner whatsoever
for a period of one year, to enable the appellant
to pursue her remedies in accordance with law.
The appellant is at liberty to move the Court to
2005 for appropriate orders, including interim
protections.”
32.     Previously, in Vinay Verma vs. Kanika Pasricha and Ors., 265
(2019) DLT 211, this Court had the opportunity to examine both the Senior
Citizens Act as also the DV Act, and had laid down certain guidelines to be
followed by Courts, in order to strike a balance between the said two acts.
“1. The court/tribunal has to first ascertain the
nature of the relationship between the parties and
the son’s/ daughter’s family.
2. If the case involves eviction of a daughter in
law, the court has to also ascertain whether the
daughter-in-law was living as part of a joint
family.
3. If the relationship is acrimonious, then the
parents ought to be permitted to seek eviction of
the son/daughter-in-law or daughter/son- in-law
from their premises. In such circumstances, the
obligation of the husband to maintain the wife
would continue in terms of the principles under the
4. If the relationship between the parents and the
colluding with their son, then, an obligation to
maintain and to provide for the shelter for the
daughter-in-law would remain both upon the in-
laws and the husband especially if they were living
as part of a joint family. In such a situation, while
parents would be entitled to seek eviction of the
daughter-in-law from their property, an alternative
reasonable accommodation would have to be
provided to her.
5. In case the son or his family is ill-treating the
parents then the parents would be entitled to seek
unconditional eviction from their property so that
they can live a peaceful life and also put the
property to use for their generating income and for
their own expenses for daily living.
6. If the son has abandoned both the parents and
his own wife/children, then if the son’s family was
living as part of a joint family prior to the
breakdown of relationships, the parents would be
entitled to seek possession from their daughter-in-
law, however, for a reasonable period they would
have to provide some shelter to the daughter-in-
law during which time she is able to seek her
remedies against her husband.”
33.     The facts of the present case show that the suit before the Trial Court
was instituted by the Plaintiff against both his son and his daughter-in-law.
Undisputedly, the Plaintiff is not in a good financial condition, and in fact
was required to avail of legal-aid, to be able to pursue the suit before the
34.     The suit property was purchased by the Plaintiff on 26th December,
2011. His son got married in the year 2005 and both the son and daughter-
in-law started living in the suit property on the ground floor. Several
disputes arose amongst the said family members, which, according to the
Plaintiff, were due to the interference of the family members of the
daughter-in-law, including the mother and the brothers of the daughter-in-
law. The Plaintiff is stated to have suffered various severe medical problems
including a stroke and paralysis. The Plaintiff’s mother i.e., the grand-
mother of the son- is 85 years old and is also handicapped. She is living with
35.     The Plaintiff had filed various complaints with the ACP, Bhajanpura,
July, 2010 and 30th July, 2010, alleging humiliation, agony and threats by
the Defendants. An application under the Senior Citizens Act was also filed
by the Plaintiff in 2015, but no orders were passed in the same. The Plaintiff
then disowned his son and got a publication issued to this effect on 27th
36.     The Defendants, i.e., the son and daughter-in-law are employed. The
daughter-in-law is a teacher and the son works as a sales agent in a
showroom. The Defendants are stated to have threatened the Plaintiff that
they would implicate him in a dowry case.
37.     In the joint written statement filed by Defendants, their case is that the
first house bearing House No. A-1/103, Gali No. 2, Nehru Vihar, Delhi-94,
belonged to the Plaintiff’s wife i.e., the mother of the son. The said property
was purchased in December, 1981, by the mother who was earning by
stitching and doing other odd household jobs. It is further their case that
there was a mutual understanding that the said property would be
partitioned, and accordingly a Registered General Power of Attorney was
executed by the mother in favour of the Plaintiff, with this mutual
understanding. After the unfortunate demise of the mother, the Plaintiff on
24th December 2011, sold the said house, and it is stated that with the money
received from the said sale, he bought the suit property. According to the
Defendants, the clear intention while effecting the said sale and purchase,
was that the Plaintiff and the son, along with his brother would be co-owners
of the suit property, inspite of the same being in the name of the Plaintiff.
The submission is that the mere registration of the GPA in favour of the
Plaintiff in respect of the first house, does not confer all rights in his favour,
and as the said first house was a joint property, of which the son was a legal
heir, the suit property which is stated to have been bought using the funds
generated out of the said sale, ought to be deemed to be co-owned by the son
and the Plaintiff. It is accordingly, argued in the written statement that the
son had 1/3rd share in the property as the Plaintiff was the Karta of the joint
and undivided Hindu family.
38.     Without prejudice to all the above submissions, it was pleaded in the
written statement before the Trial Court that the Defendants and the Plaintiff
have a domestic relationship, so the right of residence of one of the
Defendants, i.e., the daughter-in-law, in the ‘shared household’ is unfettered
according to the DV Act, and cannot be taken away. An allegation of
domestic violence by the brother-in-law as also the Plaintiff has also been
levelled in the said written statement, on behalf of the daughter-in-law.
39.     The Trial Court, vide order dated 18th April, 2019, has held that
admittedly the Plaintiff is the owner of the suit property. It further held that
even if the Defendants have contributed to the purchase of the said property,
the same would not entitle them to be co-owners. It held that none of the
documents of sale are disputed, and merely to argue that the property ought
to have been co-owned by the Defendants also, would not create co-
ownership. Due to the existence of property documents which was admitted
by the parties, the decree for mandatory injunction was passed on the
application under Order 12 Rule 6 of CPC.
40.     In the order passed by the Appellate Court, the Appellate Court has
also held that the admission of ownership of the suit property in favour of
the Plaintiff, is unambiguous and unequivocal. The relevant portion of the
“14. The unequivocal and unambiguous admission
that the property was owned by plaintiff and there
being no challenge to the documents executed in
favour of plaintiff till now, the legal position which
emerges on record regarding the plaintiff being
the absolute owner of the suit property and his son
i.e. appellant no.1 having no right, title and
interest therein. Appellant no.1 had been
occupying the suit property being son of plaintiff
and after the marriage, appellant no.2 joined the
company of her husband i.e. appellant no.1. Son
and daughter in law acquire no legal right to
occupy the self acquired property of the parents or
parents in law as the case may be, against their
documentation available on record and their
admission with regard to property being in name
of the respondent, no triable issue qua that aspect
remained to be adjudicated and Ld. Trial court
thereby did not err in considering the matter for
disposal under order 12 Rule 6 CPC.”
41.     The suit filed by the Plaintiff is one for permanent and mandatory
injunction, pendente lite damages and mesne profits. The pleadings in the
plaint clearly shows that this is not a case which invokes the provisions of
either Senior Citizens Act or DV Act. The Plaintiff filed the suit on the
strength of his ownership of the suit property. His case is that his son and
his daughter-in-law are licensees in the property, as he had permitted them
to live there. For various reasons, disputes have arisen between him and his
son’s family, due to which, in the suit, he sought a mandatory injunction to
remove them from the suit property.
42.     A perusal of the written statement also shows that the case set up by
the Defendants is one of contribution in the purchase of the property or an
understanding amongst the family members, that the property would be co-
owned. However, the ownership of the Plaintiff and the documents that
exist in favour of the Plaintiff are not in dispute and are admitted on record.
43.     Insofar as the allegations relating to the sale of the earlier Nehru Vihar
property, which was in the name of the mother, is concerned, no challenge
in respect of the same has ever been raised by the Defandants. The sale of
the said property and thereafter the purchase of the suit property by the
Plaintiff in 2011, in his own name, has also not been objected to. There is no
document on record to show the existence of an HUF, of which, the Plaintiff
is alleged to be the Karta.
44.     The second plea of ‘shared household’ appears to have clearly been
put up on behalf of the daughter-in-law, as a faint plea, and as an argument
of last resort. The following are the pleadings in the written statement to
canvass the argument of ‘shared household’:
“Further it is respectfully submitted that in case
the Hon’ble Court is of the view that the defendant
no.1 is not the co-owner of the said property and
the plaintiff is the absolute owner of the suit
property then it is respectfully submitted that the
defendants have lived as members of joint family
property in domestic relationship with the relatives
of the defendant no.1 in the suit property and
house no.A-1/103, Gali No.2, Nehru Vihar, Delhi-
94, so the right of the defendants to residence of
the suit property/shared house hold is unfettered
and cannot be taken away. In case the defendants
are to be vacated from the said shared house hold
then the plaintiff has to secure same level of
accommodation for the defendants as enjoyed by
them in the shared house hold or pay rent for the
same.
Further both the defendants were working hard
but due to health problems could not earn as much
as Vijay. The plaintiff heard the abuses and came
and told the defendant no.2 that he was already
dissatisfied with the dowry gifted in her marriage
and since long also the financial contribution by
sufficient.”
45.     The above allegations cannot be looked at in an isolated manner and
have to be read with context of the plaint and the written statement. These
pleas are very generalised in nature, and clearly appear to be pleas which are
taken to highlight the domestic problem within the family members rather
than to set up a case under the DV Act. Admittedly, there are no complaints
that have been preferred against the father-in-law and there are no cases
filed or pending under the DV Act, or any other legislation at the instance of
the daughter-in-law. Remote allegations against the brother i.e., the devar, in
the written statement, would not result in a finding of ‘shared household’,
where the daughter-in-law, by herself, would have to be given a right of
46.     At this stage, it is trite to mention that the reliance by the Trial Court
as well as the first Appellate Court on the judgment in S.R. Batra v. Smt.
Taruna Batra, 1 (2007) SLT 1 was, in fact, completely misplaced in the
facts of this case. The present is a civil suit filed by the father against his
son and daughter-in-law, between whom there is no marital discord or
estrangement.     The father is merely seeking to evict both his son and
daughter-in-law, on the strength of his ownership of the suit property.
47.     The submissions based on S. Vanitha (supra) and Satish Chandra
Ahuja (supra) would, therefore, have no applicability in the present case, as
this is not a suit where the daughter-in-law pleads and claims the right of
residence, against the father-in-law, independent of her claims against her
own husband. In fact, there are no claims against the husband whatsoever.
The husband is a co-Appellant in this appeal, and was a co-Defendant before
the Trial Court, who the Plaintiff wanted to evict.
48.     In any case, the submission of the Defendants, relying on S. Vanitha
(supra), is that specific proceedings under the DV Act need not be initiated.
While there is no doubt about this proposition, in the opinion of this Court,
all cases of family disputes cannot be characterised as cases under the DV
Act. In S. Vanitha (supra), there were various proceedings which were
pending both between the husband and wife, and the wife and the in-laws,
under various legislations. Divorce proceedings had been initiated, dowry
harassment proceedings were initiated against the mother-in-law and spouse,
maintenance proceedings had been initiated and even proceedings under the
Senior Citizens Act were filed. Although, the settled position of law is that
proceedings under the DV Act are not required and the same can also be
raised as defence in the suit, the basic requirements of the said Act ought to
be satisfied. The present is not a case where the case set up is one under the
DV Act, involving domestic violence.
49.     While the DV Act is a social welfare legislation granting protection to
women who are victims of domestic violence, every dispute amongst family
members cannot be converted into a dispute under the DV Act. The same
ought not to be allowed to happen, as it may cause unintended misuse of the
provisions of the said Act creating turmoil within families, especially when
there is no matrimonial dispute whatsoever between husband and the wife,
i.e., son and daughter-in-law. The provisions of the DV Act cannot be used
as a ploy by the son, to either claim a right in his father’s property or
continue to retain possession of the father’s property, on the strength of his
wife’s right of residence. A civil dispute relating to ownership of property
cannot be converted, in this manner, into a case under the DV Act, as the
same would amount to be an abuse of the beneficial provisions of the DV
Act, by stretching it over and beyond its purpose and ambit.
50.     The following peculiar facts arising in this case, deserve to be
(i)   The ownership of the Plaintiff in the suit property is not in
dispute.
(ii)  The sale of the property of the mother, which took place in
2011, was never challenged by the Defendants.
(iii) The purchase of this suit property in the name of the Plaintiff
was never challenged by the Defendants.
(iv)  There is no complaint of Domestic Violence raised by the
daughter-in-law before any forum. In fact, to the contrary, the
Plaintiff has filed complaints against his son and daughter-in-
law with police repeatedly, alleging ill-treatment and abuse.
(v)   The Defendants i.e., the son and daughter-in-law are living
together peacefully. The written statement before the trial court
was filed jointly. The first appeal was also filed jointly, and so
is the present second appeal.      There is no estrangement or
marital discord between them.
(vi)  The order passed in the application under Order XII Rule 6
CPC has also been executed and the Defendants have already
moved out of the suit property and are living in alternate
premises.
Therefore, the facts of this case are clearly distinguishable from the facts in
Satish Chandra Ahuja (supra) and Smt. Vanitha (supra).
51.     Accordingly, under the facts and circumstances of this case, this Court
is of the opinion that the judgments of the Trial Court and the first Appellate
Court do not warrant interference in these proceedings. However, insofar as
the reliance on the judgment in SR Batra (supra) is concerned, it is clear
that the said judgment is not applicable to the facts of the case, and has in
any case been overruled by the judgment in Satish Chandra Ahuja (supra).
The reliance on the said judgment was uncalled for both by the Trial Court
as well as the Appellate Court.
52.     The present Appeal is accordingly dismissed, in the above terms, with
no order as to costs.