I.A. 4237/2021 (u/O. XXXIX Rules 1&2 CPC seeking interim relief)
1.     The Plaintiff seeks urgent interlocutory injunction to restrain the
release of a feature film named ‘Haathi Mere Saathi’ (alternately titled
‘Kaadan’ in Tamil and ‘Aranya’ in Telugu) [hereinafter referred to as “the
movie”] via any media platform such as cinemas, OTT, etc., alleging that the
movie disparages Plaintiff’s registered trademark/brand ‘DRL’.
Briefly stated,  the facts giving rise to the present dispute are as
(i)  The Plaintiff is a multinational pharmaceutical company engaged in
the business of manufacturing, marketing and distribution of
pharmaceutical, nutritional and cosmetic products, having its
headquarters located at Hyderabad. It is the registered proprietor of the
word mark ‘DRL’ under Trade Mark Registration No. 1529767 dated
09th February 2007 in Class 05 (pharmaceutical preparations).
(ii)  The Plaintiff maintains that its impeccable reputation is at the core of
its existence and a large segment of the population knows its business
as ‘DRL’. It claims that the mark/brand ‘DRL’ has acquired
distinctiveness and is associated only with the Plaintiff. The Plaintiff
claims that ‘DRL’ has been openly, continuously, extensively and
exclusively used by them as well as third parties in various promotion
materials, press reports and other publications. They have subsidiaries
that have DRL as part of their corporate name, such as ‘DRL Impex
Ltd. and ‘DRL Investments Ltd.’. Since 1986, its reputation has
spread far and wide by virtue of its corporate social governance (CSR)
initiatives.
(iii)  Defendant No. 1 is a leading global motion movie production and
distribution company incorporated in 1981. It is producing and
releasing the movie (Haathi Mere Saathi), which has been directed by
(iv)  In the last week of February, 2020, the Plaintiff discovered that the
Defendant media house is using/portraying the Plaintiff’s word
mark/brand ‘DRL’ in the trailer video of the movie, as part of the
name ‘DRL Township’, in a derogatory/disparaging manner. The plot
of the movie centres on the destruction of an elephant corridor and
habitat, by a corporate entity named ‘DRL’, for the construction of its
(v)  The Plaintiff is aggrieved that such unauthorized use of ‘DRL’ as part
of the movie plot, as one acting for commercial exploitation and gain
with no regard to the environment, and showing its brand in a poor
light, is purposeful, mala fide and intended to detriment the distinctive
character, reputation and goodwill of the plaintiff’s brand.
(vi)  Despite notice dated 03rd March, 2020 by the Plaintiff to the
Defendants asking for deletion of the relevant scenes from the movie,
no reply was received. However, the movie was not released on its
originally set date of 2nd April, 2020.
(vii)  Then on 3rd or 4th March, 2021, Defendants launched the trailer video
of the movie on YouTube, spotting which, the Plaintiff issued another
letter/notice dated 8th March, 2021 to the Defendants. Defendant No. 1
replied through their advocate on 12th March, 2021, denying all
allegations therein and refusing to comply with the requisitions
thereof. The movie is now slated to be released on 26th March, 2021.
(viii)  The Plaintiff fears that such use of its mark in the movie will impact
its: (a) sales, (b) power to attract talent for R&D/innovation, (c) new
collaboration, (d) share price, (e) business partners, (f) morale of
employees, (g) repute among existing stakeholders, as, they would
assume and carry the impression that the Plaintiff must have been part
of encroachment of a restricted area, for which reason the producers
have chosen the name ‘DRL Township’ for its movie.
(ix)    Moreover, the use of ‘DRL’ will have the inevitable consequence of:
(a) exposing the Plaintiff to hatred, ridicule or humiliation, (b) injuring
the Plaintiff in their profession or trade, and (c) lowering the
reputation of the Plaintiff in the estimation of the right thinking
members of society and consumers. The impact upon the reputation of
the Plaintiff is immeasurable and goes to the very essence of the
business that it has built over the years using the brand name
3.     Mr. Chander M. Lall, learned Senior Counsel for the Plaintiff, at the
outset, drew the attention of this Court to the registration of the word mark
‘DRL’ under Trade Mark Registration No. 1529767 dated 9th February, 2007
in Class 05. Further, to substantiate his contention that the said mark has
acquired distinctiveness and is associated only with the Plaintiff, Mr. Lall
(a) news articles from English language newspapers, where the Plaintiff
has been referred to as ‘DRL’.
(b) results from Google search engine, to show that in case a search is done
for the letters ‘DRL’, the name of the Plaintiff company is shown on
the first page, thereby, clearly indicating that ‘DRL’ is associated with
the Plaintiff.
(c) Internet extracts showing annual reports of Plaintiff’s company wherein
it has referred to itself by its abbreviation ‘DRL’.
(d) Internet extracts from the website of the Ministry of Corporate Affairs
to show that the names of some of the Plaintiff’s subsidiaries contain
the letters ‘DRL’, such as ‘DRL Impex Ltd.’ and ‘DRL Investments
4.      He submitted that the Plaintiff’s reputation is not limited to the
healthcare industry, but has spread far and wide by virtue of the CSR
initiatives undertaken by the foundation set up by the Plaintiff in 1996, and
refers to internet reports to highlight the amounts spent by the Plaintiff on
CSR activities, which are in the range of Rs. 27-34 crores for the past four
financial years. Mr. Chander Lall contended that as the Plaintiff is also
referred as ‘DRL’, any use of the said mark in a bad light would negatively
affect the Plaintiff. The deliberate negative portrayal in the movie would
seriously tarnish its impeccable reputation as an environmentally-conscious
company, impinge upon the Plaintiff’s standing in the eyes of the society,
and hamper the public trust gained by it through years of CSR activities.
5.      Explaining the context of the use of the mark by the Defendant, Mr.
Lall elucidated that the teaser and trailer of the movie indicate that the movie
revolves around theme that ‘DRL’ is a villainous corporation, destroying the
habitat of elephants and the livelihood of humans in the locality by setting
up a township in the middle of an elephant corridor. The entire plot of the
movie seems to be a struggle of the protagonist against ‘DRL’, where the
entity, represented by these letters, is shown in extremely poor right. Mr.
Lall submitted that while it is doubtless that the movie is described as a work
of fiction, however, it portrays a real-world situation of mass mindless
destruction of wildlife habitats for human consumption. He submitted that
the movie is bound to leave the audience with a clear message that ‘DRL’ is
an irresponsible and reprehensible company, which is entirely to the peril of
the Plaintiff. The counsel assisting Mr. Lall also played the video clip of the
trailer in Court, to show the use of the mark ‘DRL’ in the movie. Besides,
screenshots shown in the teaser, which form part of the plaint, were also
pointed out to the Court. Mr. Lall further submitted that the Defendant No.
1, in response to the legal notice issued by the Plaintiff, has contended that
‘DRL’ refers to a fictional corporate entity, named ‘Drishti Refineries
Limited’. Mr. Lall thus submitted that the Defendant should instead use the
full name Drishti Refineries Limited in the movie, instead of the acronym
‘DRL’, which may cause confusion in the minds of viewers. Alternatively,
the acronym should be used in conjunction with the name of the corporate.
In such an event, he would not have any objection as the use of ‘DRL’ as it
would then clearly be relatable to the fictitious corporate ‘Drishti Refineries
6.      Mr. Lall also made a legal submission regarding the use of the
trademark ‘DRL’. Firstly, he contended that the use of the said word mark
by the Defendant would not only amount to infringement of the registered
Section 29 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 [hereinafter
referred to as ‘the Act’], but also would amount to passing of. He referred to
Section 29 (6) and (8) to contend that the use of a registered mark in an
advertisement amounts to infringement, if such advertising is against the
reputation of the trademark. In support of this contention, Mr. Lall relied
upon the judgement of this Court in Hamdard National Foundation and
Anr. v. Hussain Dalal and Ors.1 On the aspect of impact or visual effect on
the viewers through the medium of television channels and electronic media,
Mr. Lall relied upon the judgment in Hindustan Unilever v. Reckitt
7.       Mr. Sandeep Sethi, Senior Counsel for the Defendants, on the other
hand, argued that the present suit is completely misconceived, baseless and
frivolous. The Plaintiff has instituted the suit on claims that are based on
conjectures, surmises and mere apprehensions about the impact of the use of
an acronym used in a fictional creative work in an unconnected industry, to
the reputation of their organization. The Plaintiff cannot claim any
monopoly over the English letters ‘D-R-L’ beyond its purported limited
right under the Act, much less restrict the fundamental right of the
Defendant proffered under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India. The
Plaintiff has neither made a case for infringement of its trade mark, nor of
disparagement of ‘DRL’, so as to be entitled to an interim injunction. In fact,
the Plaintiff has never used the alleged registered mark in relation to the
goods registered in Class 05 i.e. pharmaceutical preparations. Without
prejudice, Mr. Sethi submitted that the Defendants are not using the letters
‘DRL’ as a trademark in relation to some goods and services. The use is for
denoting a made-up entity, in a work of fiction, and that cannot possibly
amount to infringement of the trademark ‘DRL’ or the disparagement of the
Plaintiff’s mark or brand.
8.     Next, Mr. Sethi strongly objected to the Plaintiff asserting its right
over the acronym ‘DRL’ in toto, and handed over a list across the board to
show that the said letters/acronym have been registered as trademarks under
several other categories and classes by several other entities, a few of which,
for the sake of illustration, are reproduced hereinbelow:
9.     Next, Mr. Sethi also laid emphasis on the aspect of delay on the part
of the Plaintiff in approaching this Court. He submitted that on this ground
alone, without going into the other aspects, the Court should deny the relief
of injunction. He submitted that as per the Plaintiff’s own case, it discovered
the portrayal/use of the mark ‘DRL’ in the official teaser of the movie
sometime in the last week of February, 2020, which prompted it to issue a
notice dated 3rd March, 2020 calling upon the Defendants to immediately
delete the scenes in the movie. However, thereafter, radio silence was
observed on part of the Plaintiff for a whole year, and now, just before the
release of the movie, slated for 26th March, 2021, the Plaintiff has filed the
present suit and injunction application. Mr. Sethi submitted that there are
several authorities on the proposition that a Plaintiff who approaches this
Court at the eleventh hour seeking interim injunction against the release of a
movie, is disentitled to such a relief. In support of this submission, Mr. Sethi
urged that recently, this Court by way of a detailed judgment in John Hart
JR and Anr. v. Mukul Deora and Anr., 3 had rejected an application seeking
interim injunction on this ground. In the said judgment, the Court has
extensively delved on the question of delay in approaching the Court for
injunctive relief by relying upon several other decisions on this aspect,4 and
authoritatively reinforced the law on the aspect of delay in approaching the
court for injunctive relief.
10.     Mr. Sethi submitted that the Plaintiff’s reliance on Section 29 of the
Dated 21st January, 2021 in CS(COMM) 38/2021; Also at MANU/DE/0100/2021.
Such as Kanungo Media (P) Ltd. v. RGV F ilm F actory, 138 (2007) DLT 312: MANU/DE/7193/2007;
Biswaroop Roy Choudhary v. Karan J ohar , 131 (2006) DLT 458 : MANU/DE/2753/2006; Warner Bros.
v. Harinder Kohli & Ors., 155(2008)DLT56:MANU/DE/1333/2008 and Vinay Vats v. F ox Star Studios
Act is misplaced as it is specifically pertains to advertising, and is thereby
restricted in its scope to acts where an advertiser is inviting its potential
customers to use its goods or services by comparing itself to a competitor’s
goods using the competitor’s trademark. Even in such cases of advertising,
under trademark law, comparison is permissible, as long as it is not
disparaging or denigrating. Thus, if the law permits the use of trademark
within advertisements, it certainly permits its use as a fictional term within a
fictional movie, and such use, by no means, can be considered misleading,
deceptive or disparaging.
11.      Mr. Sethi further submitted that the case before this Court presents a
larger issue, regarding whether the fundamental right of the Defendant, as
enshrined under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India for free speech
and expression, can be taken away at the instance of a Plaintiff on specious
pleas. He submitted that freedom of speech certainly allows the Defendant to
use the acronym/letters ‘DRL’ in creative fictional works. The movie is not a
documentary, but a feature film and does not relate or aver to pharmaceutical
companies in the slightest. In support of this contention, Mr. Sethi relied
upon the judgments of Tata Sons Ltd. v. Greenpeace International & Anr.,5
Prakash Jha v. Bata India Ltd., 6 and Bata India Ltd. v. Prakash Jha
Productions. 7 As an arguendo, Mr. Sethi submitted that if the Defendant’s
actions cannot be construed as infringement, then Plaintiff could, at max,
contend that the action of the Defendants amounts to defamation of the
Plaintiff. On this aspect also, the law is well established that in matters
relating to publication of allegedly defamatory content, the Courts are
extremely reluctant in granting injunctive relief. The Plaintiff could rather
pray for adequate monetary compensation of the alleged loss occasioning on
account of injury to its reputation, in case the content is proven to be actually
defamatory.
12.    Lastly, Mr. Sethi submitted that words ‘DRL’, ‘DRL Township’ and
‘DRL Group’ have been used at several instances in the movie, and it would
impracticable, if not next to impossible, for Defendant No. 1 to sift through
and edit the entire movie, at such a short notice. The movie in question is
due to release within a week; the Defendant has spent crores on the project;
and has also created several third-party rights in the process. The balance of
convenience thus lies in its favour, and if the Court were to grant an
injunction, it would gravely prejudice the Defendant, cause humongous
losses, and also dent its image in its industry.
13.    Having heard the arguments of the parties at length, the contentions
advanced by the parties can be dealt with, under the following heads:
14.    Plaintiff claims to be the proprietor of the registered trademark ‘DRL’
in relation to goods in Class 05 i.e., pharmaceutical preparations. However,
along with the plaint, no evidence has been placed on record to show the use
of the registered trademark ‘DRL’, in respect of the pharmaceutical
preparations or otherwise. The Plaintiff has not filed any advertisement
extracts, invoices, product packaging etc. that could indicate to the Court
that the Plaintiff is using ‘DRL’ in relation to its products/services. The
application for registration was under ‘proposed to be used’ category. The
Plaintiff is unable to show the use of the registered mark from the date of the
application of the trademark which i.e. 9th February, 2007 till the filing of the
suit. In Corn Products Refining Co. Ltd. v. Shangrila Food Products Ltd.,8
the Supreme Court has held that it is not permissible to draw any inference
as to use from mere presence of the mark on the register. To sustain an
action of infringement, it is imperative to exhibit continuous and sustained
use of the mark, to demonstrate that it has acquired distinctiveness. On this
count, the Plaintiff has failed. Defendants have also brought to the notice of
the Court that during examination, an objection was raised under section 9 of
the Act against Plaintiff’s registration of the acronym DRL, to which the
Plaintiff had submitted that “DRL is part of their trading style and has no
specific meaning or significance to goods covered by the said trademark
application”. Therefore, it appears, prima facie, that the Plaintiff is asserting
its claim on ‘DRL’ in the context of the short-form of its corporate name –
Dr. Reddy Laboratories Limited, and its primary trademarks. Moreover,
registration of the trademark in one class cannot, by itself, give the Plaintiff
an unrestricted right or monopoly over the letters D, R and L, when used in
that order.
15.     In fact, the Plaintiff is trying to establish its association with the word
mark ‘DRL’, not only on the basis of its trademark registration, but
essentially on the basis of news articles published in English newspapers
such as Indian Express, Business Standard and Economic Times, which have
been placed on record. In the said articles, it is noticed, that the reference to
‘DRL’ is simply as an acronym and is also followed or preceded by the full
name of the Plaintiff. Thus, it is observed that these articles do not use
‘DRL’ on a standalone basis, and the authors of the articles have used the
initials of the company in the nature of an abbreviation for mere ease of
reference.
16.     Now the question arises as to what is Plaintiff’s right, if any, in this
acronym. This question will be delved into in detail at the stage of trial.
However, for the limited purpose of deciding the present application for
injunction, in the absence of any material placed on record, it cannot be said
that such an acronym has acquired distinctiveness and is associated only
with the Plaintiff. As is rightly pointed out by the Defendant, there are
several third-party companies whose trade names consist of the acronym
‘DRL’, and the same are in fact registered with the Ministry of Corporate
Affairs (MCA). Plaintiff’s own documents reflect a third-party company
trading as ‘DRL Pharma Private Limited’ which is in the same industry as
that of Plaintiff, i.e. involved in the business of pharmaceutical products.
Even on the register of the Registrar of Trade Marks, ‘DRL’ and its
combinations are shown to be the registered marks of several other entities
in various classes, as evident from the material placed before this Court by
the Defendant (as extracted earlier). It indicates that various third parties are
using and are also registered proprietors of the trademark ‘DRL’ in relation
to several types of businesses. Defendants also contend that ‘DRL’ is a
popular abbreviation for ‘Daytime Running Lamps’ and various entities are
using the acronym for describing the said feature in their products. The
acronym ‘DRL’ is also used by the Defence Research Laboratory, India.
There is no material for the court to hold that DRL is synonym to the
Plaintiff’s corporate name. Thus, prima facie, the Court is unable to opine
that there is any tangible connection or direct association of the acronym
‘DRL’ with the Plaintiff’s trademark / companies / brand. In the absence of
the same, the Plaintiff does not meet the test of establishment of a prima
facie case, so as to be entitled to an injunction.
17.    As the Plaintiff’s registration of the trademark ‘DRL’ is in respect of
pharmaceutical preparations, thus its right, too, on a prima facie basis, is
limited to the said goods. Be that as it may, the use of ‘DRL’ by the
Defendants which is alleged to be infringement, is now called in question.
Defendant No. 1, in its reply to the Plaintiff’s notice, and also before this
Court, has explained that the acronym ‘DRL’ in the movie is not a
standalone use, but a composite term such as ‘DRL Township’, ‘DRL
Township Group’ or ‘DRL - Drishti Refineries Limited’. The extracts of the
18.    Even on a scrutinous comparison, the court finds absolutely no
similarity with the Plaintiff’s business. The fictitious entity of Drishti
Refineries Limited is involved in the business of setting up refinery plants,
which is completely distinct from that of the Plaintiff. The afore-noted usage
of acronym ‘DRL’, has no co-relation with the Plaintiff’s primary trademark
– Dr. Reddy and/or its body corporate i.e. Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories Ltd.
Thus, prima facie, the Court does not find merit in the contention of the
Plaintiff that the aforesaid portrayal would amount to the general populace
drawing an association with the Plaintiff company. Besides, ‘DRL
Township’ / ‘DRL Township Group’ cannot be appreciated, de hors the
context of the movie, wherein the complete name of the fictitious entity,
Drishti Refineries Limited, is stated to have been used explicitly. Moreover,
to address the concern of the Plaintiff, the counsels for the Defendants have
assured this Court that the movie is preceded by a disclaimer to the effect
that “all characters appearing in this work are fictitious. Any resemblance to
real persons, living or dead, is purely co-incidental.” Therefore, in view of
the Court, the prima facie case is not made out in favour of the Plaintiff, to
suggest that the average movie-goer would associate the name ‘DRL
Township’ in the movie as a reference to the Plaintiff’s brand or business.
The well-established ‘ordinary person test’ also leads to the same
conclusion.
19.    The Plaintiff has also contended that environmental issues are
mainstream business, and in the present times, consumers want to buy
products and services of companies that are compliant with environmental,
social and corporate governance principles. As the products of the Plaintiff
company are bought on the trust that consumers repose in them, any
association to the activities of ‘DRL Township’ in the movie which is
portrayed as having no regard for the environment, would be detrimental to
its brand. This argument is clearly far-fetched. The correlation that is being
conceived between the use of ‘DRL’ in the movie, the movie-viewer’s
possible association with the plaintiff, and the likely negative impact on the
Plaintiff’s reputation keeping CSR objectives is mind, is a creative argument
at best, based on assumptions and surmises, and lacks a material foundation
in the first place. Plaintiff is also unable to show any material that the
teaser/trailer of the film, which has been in the public domain for nearly one
year, has made any negative impact in the minds of general public or that the
use of ‘DRL’ has been understood to be as reference to the Plaintiff
20.    Next, we shall deal with Plaintiff reliance’s on Section 29(8) of the
Act. First and foremost, the plaint filed before the court does not even pray
for relief of account of infringement. Plaintiff has however relied upon the
said provision to contend that the use of ‘DRL’ by the Defendants
constitutes infringement, as the advertisement is against the reputation of the
Plaintiff’s trademark. In view of the above discussion, since the Court does
not find any similarity, direct or indirect correlation, or association with the
use of ‘DRL’ by the Defendants with the Plaintiff’s mark/brand, the question
of the usage being against the reputation of the trademark of the Plaintiff
becomes merely speculative. Nevertheless, on a prima facie basis, in the
view of the Court, Plaintiff’s reliance on Section 29(8) of the Act does not
entitle the Plaintiff to a grant of relief of injunction in the facts of the present
case. Section 29, which deals with infringement, has several sub-Sections,
all of which have to be read together in conjunction. The use of a trademark
in the course of trade, and in connection with the sale of goods or services,
constitutes infringement, if it is used in such a manner that it is likely to
cause confusion in the minds of a consumer as to the identity of those goods
or services. Therefore, the use of ‘DRL’ by the Defendants cannot be
examined in vacuum. One can easily notice that the Defendants’ use of
DRL, certainly, is not akin to the use of a trademark, in respect of the
goods/services for which the Plaintiff is the proprietor. Therefore, the Court
does not find a prima facie case of infringement.
21.    This brings us to the judgments relied upon by the Plaintiff on the
proposition that the use of registered trademark in advertising amounts to
infringement if the same is against the reputation of the trademark. The said
judgments are clearly distinguishable on facts. In Hamdard National
Foundation (supra), the Plaintiff therein claimed that the remarks made
against the quality of its beverage, by a character in a cinematographic film,
were detrimental and damaging to its goodwill and reputation, and sought an
injunction on this basis. The Delhi High Court considered the Supreme
Court’s decision in Bata Limited (supra), wherein it was opined that
derogatory remarks against a brand can be put to restrictions and conditions
on a case-to-case basis. While differentiating Bata (supra), it observed that
the facts therein stood on a different footing from the facts before the High
Court, as the usage of the product in Hamdard (supra) was targeted and
specific, through visual as well as spoken depiction, and was avoidable,
uncalled for, and in poor taste. Thus the same was likely to tarnish the
reputation of the brand among its consumers. For such reasons, a partial
restrain was allowed by the High Court, by directing the producers to omit
the objectionable dialogue from the home video version of that film.
However, in the present factual matrix before us, the reference to the
trademarked name ‘DRL’ is ambiguous and representative at best. It, more
importantly, does not specifically show or target the brand or business of the
Plaintiff herein, for which reason, the Hamdard judgment stands
differentiated and cannot support the Plaintiff’s contentions. The judgment
of this court in Hindustan Unilever (supra), was a case of comparative
advertising between Dettol and Lifebouy soaps, and therefore, the tests and
principles applied by the Court therein cannot be of any assistance to the
case sought to be canvassed by the Plaintiff in front of this Court.
22.    This Court also finds merit in the contention of the Defendants that if
the law permits an honest usage of a trademark within an advertisement, the
Court should grant an injunction for use of a fictitious term in a fictional
feature film. In the facts of the instant case, the use of ‘DRL’ by the
Defendant cannot be construed to be comparative, misleading, deceptive
and/or disparaging.
23.    On the aspect of free speech vis-à-vis trademark protection, the stance
of this Court is quite clear. A serious view was taken in Tata v. Greenpeace
(supra), where injunction was sought against Greenpeace’s use of Tata’s
registered logo in a game called ‘Turtles versus Tata’, which was an attempt
to underline the effect of the Dhamra Port Project on Olive Ridley turtles’
“42. The above analysis would show that the use of a trademark, as the
object of a critical comment, or even attack, does not necessarily result in
infringement. Sometimes the same mark may be used, as in Esso; sometimes
it may be a parody (like in Laugh it Off and Louis Vuitton). If the user’s
intention is to focus on some activity of the trademark owners, and is
“denominative”, drawing attention of the reader or viewer to the activity,
such use can prima facie constitute “due cause” under Section 29(4),
which would disentitle the plaintiff to a temporary injunction, as in this
case. The use of TATA, and the ‘T’ device or logo, is clearly denominative.
Similarly, describing the Tatas as having demonic attributes is hyperbolic
and parodic. Through the medium of the game, the defendants seek to
convey their concern and criticism of the project and its perceived impact
on the turtles habitat. The Court cannot annoit itself as a literary critic, to
judge the efficacy of use of such medium, nor can it don the robes of a
censor. It merely patrols the boundaries of free speech, and in exceptional
cases, issues injunctions by applying Bonnard principle. So far as the
argument by the plaintiff that it is being “targeted” is concerned the Court
notes that the defendants submit that the major gains through the port
accrue to the Tatas.
43.    (...) This is because the Courts, the world over, have set a great
value to free speech and its salutary catalyzing effect on public debate and
discussion on  issues that concern people at large. The issue, which the
defendant’s game seeks to address, is also one of public concern. The Court
cannot also sit in value judgment over the medium (of expression) chosen
by the defendant since in a democracy, speech can include forms such as
caricature, lampoon, mime parody and other manifestations of wit. The
defendant may - or may not be able to establish that there is underlying
truth in the criticism of the Dhamra Port Project, and the plaintiff’s
involvement in it. Yet, at this stage, the materials on record do not reveal
that the only exception - a libel based on falsehood, which cannot be
proven otherwise during the trial-applies in this case. Therefore, the Court
is of opinion that granting an injunction would freeze the entire public
debate on the effect of the port project on the Olive Ridley turtles’ habitat.
That, plainly would not be in public interest; it would most certainly be
contrary to established principles.”
24.    Plaintiff perceives the movie to be a “serious representation of
fictional facts which could be a reality” and argues that “untruthful speech is
not protected under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution”. This argument is
twisted and is contrary to the concept of freedom of speech, an unalienable
right guaranteed by the Constitution of India and the most precious of all
liberties. Tata v. Greenpeace (supra) discusses at length, why entertainment,
literature and other art forms should not be critiqued on by the Courts or
pertinaciously restrained from its release to the masses. An artist’s right of
free speech and expression includes their right to criticise and question. Even
if the expression is upsetting for some, the artist cannot be silenced. The
discomfort generated by an artist’s expression cannot be a ground for
silencing ideas at the altar of maintaining a corporate’s goodwill. This would
amount to gatekeeping the debate and keeping uncomfortable ideas out of
bounds. Moreover, environmental damage by humans (dubbed ‘Ecocide’) is
an important issue in the present milieu and requires widespread boost and
dialogue to raise awareness. To that effect, as suggested in the teasers, the
theme of the movie is to bring to light the struggles of communities on the
fringes of the society in their fight against deliberately negligent
organizations, for the protection of animal rights, forest lands and
ecologically sensitive areas. While it is indeed unfortunate, that the acronym
of the fictional corporate entity fashioned by the Defendants in their movie,
coincides with the acronym of the Plaintiff’s corporate name, however, this
in itself cannot be the sole ground for granting an injunction against the
release of a certified feature film. The Plaintiff claims that its brand identity
is sensitive to the negative imagery which will form in the minds of
environmentally-conscious movie-goers, pertaining to a fictitious company
in a fictional movie, which neither appropriates the name, nor the business,
nor any real-world relation to the Plaintiff’s brand. Such an abstract and
far-fetched association, cannot, in the mind of this Court, be sufficient to
tether the freedom of speech and expression granted to the Defendant by the
Constitution. This is nothing but a hypersensitive position taken by the
25.    The Court finds considerable merit in the objection of the Defendants
regarding delay on the part of the Plaintiff in seeking legal relief. The
Defendant has pointed out that the teaser of the movie, which contained the
alleged infringing use, was published in the month of February, 2020 and
has garnered millions of view on YouTube. Yet, the Plaintiff has approached
the doors of justice just days before the release of the movie. In fact, it is the
admitted case of the Plaintiff that upon sighting the alleged use of its mark in
2020, the Plaintiff sent a legal notice dated 3rd March, 2020, but the teaser
was not brought down by the Defendants. The Plaintiff, despite receiving no
response for the same, the Plaintiff did not approach the Court. According to
the justification provided by Mr. Lall, the lack of release of the movie on its
originally set date of 2nd April, 2020, along with the lack response to its
notice, led the Plaintiff to assume that same is an admission of the facts
contained in its notice. Mr. Lall submits that the present suit is timely,
because when the Plaintiff noticed that the Defendants have launched a
trailer video of the movie on YouTube on 4th March, 2021 and was apprised
of its release on 26th March, 2021, the Plaintiff issued the notice dated 8th
March, 2021, which was replied to by the Defendants on 12th March, 2021,
refuting the assertions in the legal notice, and the present suit was filed
without delay on 17th March, 2021. This line of reasoning is not convincing
in the slightest and cannot justify the delay of filing the present action, the
timing which is highly suspect and belated, being just few days before the
date of release of the movie. The cause of action for the Plaintiff to approach
the Court, arose as early as, February, 2020 and the present suit filed after
nearly one year of first coming into the knowledge of the infringing action.
This laxity would disentitle the Plaintiff of the discretionary relief of
injunction, which is based on equity. In this one year, the Defendants have
gone ahead with the preparations for the release of the movie by expending
monies, time and energy and entering into contracts with third parties. This,
as rightly contended by the Defendant, would tilt the balance of convenience
in its favour. The Plaintiff has tried to differentiate the judgment of this
Court in John Hart (supra), by justifying that the belated action was under a
bona fide belief that the movie of the Defendants was not released, however
misplaced. Besides, the judgment of this Court in
Hindustan Pencils (P) Limited v. Indian Stationery Products Co. & Anr.,9
would not advance the Plaintiff’s case, as the facts in the said case are
clearly distinguishable. The said case was regarding trademark infringement,
where the Defendants had continued to do its business by using the
registered device and word mark of the Plaintiff. The Court therein held that
such a use by the Defendants was at its own peril and cannot be set up as a
defense. Further, the Court in the said case noted that it was not in dispute
that the mark used by the Defendants was similar to that of the registered
mark of the Plaintiff and there was, thus, a clear breach of the Plaintiff’s
right under the Act. However in the present factual matrix, the injunction is
being sought against the release of the movie, when the balance of
convenience has clearly shifted in the favour of the Defendants, and thus the
case is distinguishable on facts. In the opinion of this Court, on the ground
of delay itself, the Plaintiff would be disentitled to the relief of injunction as
sought for in the present application.
26.     Thus, on the consideration of the facts and circumstances noted above
and the legal position on the subject, in the considered opinion of this Court,
the Plaintiff has failed to meet the three-pronged test for grant of injunction.
The Plaintiff does not have a prima facie case in its favour, the balance of
convenience is in favour of Defendants and not in favour of the Plaintiff.
The Plaintiff has not been to able make out a case of irreparable loss that it
would suffer if the movie is released. The Plaintiff can always, in such
circumstances, if it succeeds in establishing its case in trial, cement its
claims for compensation and damages. In these circumstances, the present
application is completely devoid of merits and accordingly, the same is
dismissed.