1. Heard Mr. Anil Kumar Pandey, learned counsel for the accused-applicant, as
well as Mr. Akhilesh Awasthi, learned counsel for respondent-NCB, on this
second application for bail, and gone through the entire record.
2. By means of this application under Section 439 CrPC, the accused-applicant
seeks bail in N.C.B. Crime No.18 of 2020, under Sections 8/18/29 NDPS Act,
Challaned by Narcotics Control Bureau Lucknow, District Lucknow.
3. The first bail application, filed by the accused-applicant, being Bail No.8565
of 2020, was rejected by this Court vide order dated 25.01.2021.
4. As per the allegations, 13.8 Kg opium was recovered from Truck No. U.P. 25
DT 4386, which was driven by co-accused Kauser Husain; the truck was coming
from Latehar, Jharkhand to Lucknow via Bareilly; the accused-applicant was the
owner of the truck; co-accused, Kauser Hussain, in his statement under Section
67 of the N.D.P.S. Act, had stated that the accused-applicant was the main
person, who sent his truck to Latehar, Jharkhand to bring the opium, which was
to be delivered to the accused-applicant; call details of the present accused-
applicant and co-accused at Latehar, Jharkhand, from whom the opium was
procured, would demonstrate that the accused -applicant was in constant touch
with the person from whom the opium was brought in truck driven by co-
5. Submission made on behalf of the accused-applicant is that the accused-
applicant has no criminal history; the accused-applicant has been languishing in
jail since 15.07.2020; except for the alleged statement of co-accused, there is no
other evidence against the accused-applicant.
6. This Court vide order dated 21.12.2021 directed the accused-applicant to
bring a demand draft of Rs. 5 Lacs in favour of 'Army Battle Casualty Welfare
Fund' for considering the bail prayer.
7. On behalf of respondent-NCB, it has been submitted that the earlier bail
application of the accused-applicant was rejected on the ground that a huge
quantity of opium was recovered from the truck owned by the accused-applicant
and, the co-accused, in his statement under Section 67 of the NDPS Act, has
specifically named the accused-applicant to whom the opium was to be
delivered, which was brought from Latehar, Jharkhand.
8. Considering the fact as of today, except for the statement of co-accused
recorded under Section 67 of the NDPS Act, there is no other evidence to bring
the charge home against the accused-applicant and considering the provisions of
Section 37 (1-B) of the NDPS Act, it would be appropriate to enlarge him on
bail with the following conditions:-
(i) the applicant shall deposit the said bank-draft in the account of 'Army Battle Casualty
Welfare Fund' and submit a receipt thereof before the trial Court. If the receipt is submitted
then the trial Trial shall enlarge applicant-Rajneesh Kumar Gupta, accused of above-
mentioned crime number, on bail on, his furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each, in
the like amount to the satisfaction of the Court concerned.
(i-a) the applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall not seek any adjournment
on the dates fixed for evidence when the witnesses are present in Court. In case of default of
this condition, it shall be open for the trial court to treat it as abuse of liberty of bail and pass
orders in accordance with law;
(ii). the applicant shall remain present before the trial court on each date fixed, either
personally or through his counsel. In case of his absence, without sufficient cause, the trial
court may proceed against him under Section 229-A of the Indian Penal Code;
(iii). in case, the applicant misuse(s) the liberty of bail and in order to secure his presence
proclamation under Section 82 Cr.P.C. is issued and the applicant(s) fail(s) to appear before
the Court on the date fixed in such proclamation, then, the trial court shall initiate proceedings
against him in accordance with law, under Section 174-A of the Indian Penal Code; and
(iv) the applicant shall remain present, in person, before the trial court on the dates fixed for
(i) opening of the case, (ii) framing of charge and (iii) recording of statement under Section
313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the trial court default of this condition is deliberate or without
sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the trial court to treat such default as abuse of liberty
of his bail and proceed against him in accordance with law.
9. The party shall file self attested computer generated copy of this order
downloaded from the official website of High Court Allahabad. The concerned
Court/Authority/Official shall verify the authenticity of such computerized copy
of the order from the official website of High Court Allahabad and shall make a
declaration of such verification in writing.