For the Appellant:       Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattaharyya, Sr. Adv.,
Heard on: September 24, 2021.
Judgment on: October 01, 2021.
1.     This is an application under Sections 397/401 read with Section
482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure filed by the petitioner challenging
legality, validity and propriety of the order dated 12th November, 2020
passed by the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Alipore, South 24 Pgs in
serial No.119 of 2020, thereby rejecting the petition filed by the petitioner
under Section 156(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (hereafter
described as the Code).
2.     The facts involved in the instant revision are as follows:-
3.     The petitioner was a member of the State Committee of the
Bharatiya Janata Party, in the State of West Bengal. As a person involved
in active politics she has acquaintance with the leaders of state and
national level. On the allegation of rape, he filed a written complaint
before the officer-in-charge, Behala (Women) Police Station against one
Amalendu Chattapadhyay. The said complaint was registered as Case
No.1 of 2018 dated 31st August, 2018 under Sections 417/376/406 of the
Indian Penal Code. The investigation of the said case resulted in filing of
charge-sheet against the above named Amalendu Chattapadhyay. It is
alleged by the petitioner that since the filing of the charge-sheet, she was
pressurized by the opposite party Nos.2, 3 and 4, namely, Pradeep Joshi,
Jishnu Basu, Kailash Vijayvargiya national level leaders of the said party
to withdraw the case against Amalendu Chattapadhyay. On the pretext of
having a discussion over the said matter, the above named opposite
parties asked the petitioner to come to the residential apartment of
opposite party No.4. It is submitted by the petitioner that she tried to
inform the matter to the officer-in-charge of Behala Women Police Station
but the police suggested her to meet them in response to such call. The
petitioner went to the residential apartment of the opposite party No.4 on
29th November, 2018 at about 5 p.m. The opposite party Nos. 1 and 2
were present in the said apartment from before. It is alleged by the
petitioner that the opposite parties committed rape upon the petitioner
against her will one by one. Thus, the petitioner became the victim of
livido of leaders of the said political party occupying position of national
level. After the incident she was threatened with dire consequences. Not
only this, she was threatened by the opposite parties that in the event she
takes any legal step alleging such act against the opposite parties, her son
would also be killed. Subsequently also the petitioner was subjected to
physical assault and mental torture and she lodged complaint against the
opposite parties before the police, vide, Sarsuna P.S Case No.131 dated
20th December, 2019 under Sections 341/506(2)/34 of the Indian Penal
Code     and    Bolepore    P.S     Case    No.18/2020    under     Sections
341/323/325/506/34 of the Indian Penal Code. Over the incident dated
29th November, 2018 she tried to make complaint with the local police
station, but police refused to accept such complaint from the petitioner.
She also informed the matter to the higher authorities of the police but
they also failed to take any action against the opposite parties by
registering an FIR. Finally on 12th November, 2020 she filed an
application under Section 156(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure before
the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Alipore praying for sending the
same to the officer-in-charge of Bhawanipore Police Station for treating
the same as an FIR.
4.     By passing the order impugned the leaned Chief Judicial Magistrate
refused to allow the prayer of the complainant and accordingly it was
5.     The order of rejection of petitioner’s application under Section
156(3) of the Code prompted her to file the instant revision.
6.     Mr. Bikash Ranjan Bhattacharyya, learned Senior Counsel on
behalf of the petitioner submits that the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Alipore acted illegally and failed to exercise his jurisdiction in rejecting the
petitioner’s application under Section 156(3) of the Code on the basis of
the decisions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Lalita Kumari
vs. Government of Uttar Pradesh & Ors. reported in (2014) 2 SCC 1
and Mukul Roy vs. State of West Bengal & Ors. reported in (2019) Crlj
245. It is also submitted by him that the learned Magistrate rejected the
application under Section 156(3) of the Code predominantly on the
ground that there was abnormal delay in alleging of the FIR in initiating
criminal procedure. It was held by him that the alleged incident took place
on 29th November, 2018 and the petitioner lodged the complaint after
elapse of about two years on 12th November, 2020. The explanation of
delay in lodging such complaint was not satisfactory and convincing. It
was also held by him that after the incident, the petitioner lodged the
complaints at Sarsuna P.S and Bolpur P.S and both the complaints was
registered as FIR subsequent to the alleged incident dated 29th November,
2018. The petitioner did not disclose the incident that allegedly took place
on 29th November, 2018 in the said two complaints filed by her before the
police. Thus, he found that the application under Section 156(3) suffers
from false story and veracity of the allegation was not even prima facie
7.     According to Mr. Bhattacharya, both the grounds on the basis of
which the application under Section 156(3) was rejected could not be
considered by the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate considering the
nature of allegation. The learned Magistrate ought to have held that delay
in lodging of complaint in respect of an offence of rape against a woman is
not always fatal for the prosecution especially when she was threatened
by the leaders of higher level of the political party to which she belongs. It
is also submitted by him that the petitioner could not ventilate her
allegation against the opposite parties and the act committed by them out
of fear and apprehension of harm that might be caused not only to her
but also to her son. Therefore, in subsequent two complaints she did not
narrate anything about the incident dated 29th November, 2018. However,
it is on record that prior to filing of the application under Section 156(3) of
the Code she sent the complaint to the local police station and also to the
Higher Authority of police. As they did not take any action against the
opposite parties, she was compelled to file the application under Section
156(3) of the Code.
8.     It is also submitted by Mr. Bhattacharya that the learned
Magistrate failed to appreciate the ratio of Lalita Kumari (supra) and
9.     Mr. Sekhar Kr. Basu, learned Senior Counsel on behalf of the
private parties at the outset draws my attention to the provision of Section
156(3) of the Code. The said provision runs thus:-
10.    156(3) – any Magistrate empowered under Section 190 may order
such investigation as part mentioned. He next has placed the provision of
Section 190 of the Code which deals with cognizance of offences by
190. Cognizance of offences by Magistrates.—(1) Subject to the
provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate of the first class,
and any Magistrate of the second class specially empowered in
this behalf under sub-section (2), may take cognizance of any
(a) upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitute
(c) upon information received from any person other than
a police officer, or upon his own knowledge, that such offence
has been committed.
(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any Magistrate
of the second class to take cognizance under sub-section (1) of
such offences as are within his competence to inquire into or
11.    Referring the above mentioned provision of the Code, it is submitted
by Mr. Basu that both in sub-Clause (3) Section 156 and Clause (1) of
Section 190 the word “may” is used by the legislature, thereby providing
judicial discretion upon the learned Magistrate either to direct a police
officer to investigate into a cognizable case or to take cognizance upon a
complaint, or police report etc, as the case may be. If a person is
aggrieved against an order of the Magistrate, rejecting an application
under Section 156(3) of the Code and files criminal revision, the power of
Revisional Court is only limited to consider as to whether reasonable,
logical discretion was applied by the learned Magistrate or not while
passing the order.
12.    With the above introduction he draws my attention to the impugned
order passed by the learned Magistrate. It is submitted by him that in
paragraph 15 of the impugned order the learned Magistrate recorded that
the petitioner lodged complaint against the accused persons vide,
Sarsuna P.S Case No.131 dated 20th December, 2019 and Bolpur P.S
Case No.89/2020. Both the said two police cases were registered after the
incident dated 29th November, 2018, but the petitioner was conspicuously
silent while about the incident dated 29th November, 2018 while lodging
complaint and registration of the above mentioned two police cases.
Therefore, the learned Magistrate did not commit any wrong in holding
that the application under Section 156(3) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure dated 12th November, 2020 alleging certain incidents dated 29th
November, 2018 is an afterthought, concocted, false and frivolous and
was made only to malign the opposite parties.
13.    Mr. Basu next refers to the paragraph 120.6 of the decision of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Lalita Kumari vs. Government of
U.P reported in (2014) 2 SCC 1. Paragraph 120.6 states as follows:-
120.6. As to what type and in which cases preliminary
inquiry is to be conducted will depend on the facts and
circumstances of each case. The category of cases in which
e) Cases where there is abnormal delay/laches in
initiating criminal prosecution, for example, over
3 months delay in reporting the matter without
satisfactorily explaining the reasons for delay.
The aforesaid are only illustrations and not exhaustive of all
conditions which may warrant preliminary inquiry.
14.   It is submitted by Mr. Basu that the Hon’ble Supreme Court
directed the police authority to conduct a preliminary inquiry in respect of
cases where there is abnormal delay/laches in initiating criminal
prosecution, for example, over three months delay in reporting the matter
without satisfactorily explaining the reasons for delay. In the instant case
the petitioner filed the application under Section 156(3) of the Code after a
lapse of about two years from the date of occurrence. In paragraph 17 of
the said application it is stated by the petitioner that on 27th October,
2020 she filed a written complaint before the concerned police station
against the opposite parties, but the police personnel did not take any
action against them. Subsequently, they also made another complaint to
the Deputy Commissioner of Police, South Division on 4th November,
2020. The said complaint also received the same fate as that of earlier
complaint dated 27th October, 2020. It is submitted by Mr. Basu that even
if the statement made by the petitioner in paragraph 17 and 18 of the
application under Section 156(3) of the Code is held to be true, in such
case also it is found that the petitioner made the allegation of commission
of rape upon her by the opposite parties for the first time on 27th October,
2020, i.e., after a lapse of almost two years.
15.    Having heard the learned Senior Counsels on behalf of the
petitioner and private opposite parties and on careful perusal of the
impugned order passed by the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Alipore, I
find that the learned Magistrate rejected the application under Section
156(3) of the Code on the ground that there was inordinate delay in
lodging the complaint. It is needless to say that in Lalita Kumari (supra)
requirement of preliminary inquiry by the police before registering a
cognizable case is delineated and some category of cases in which
preliminary inquiry may be made by the police authority are narrated. In
sub-paragraph with all paragraphs 120.6 it is stated that the police
should conduct preliminary inquiry when there is abnormal delay over
three months in reporting the matter for initiating criminal prosecution
without satisfactorily explaining the reasons for delay. Lalita Kumari
(supra) never empowers the Magistrate to outright dismiss an application
under Section 156(3) of the Code on the ground of delay. The said
decision is about the power and responsibility of the police in dealing with
cognizable offence. The learned Magistrate held, inter alia, that as no FIR
was registered either at Behala Police Station or at Bhawanipore Police
Station on the basis of the complaint dated 27th October, 2020 filed by the
petitioner, “an inference can be drawn that the officer-in-charge of
Behala Police Station and officer-in-charge of Bhawanipore Police
Station did not find enough substance in the allegations to register
an FIR after conducting preliminary inquiry as per the guidelines laid
down in the aforesaid case reference of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of
India”. The above finding made by the learned Magistrate in the
impugned order is passed on surmise and conjecture in view of the fact
that at any stage of inquiry, investigation or trial of a criminal proceeding
there is no scope to draw an inference without verifying any such
document in support of the ultimate decision made by the court.
16.    Moreover, paragraph 120.6 of Lalita Kumari’s case cannot be read
in isolation of other directions contained in Paragraph 120.1 to 120.8.
Paragraph 120.1 states that registration of FIR is mandatory under
Section 154 of the Code, if the information discloses commission of an
cognizable offence and no preliminary inquiry is permissible in such a
situation. At Paragraph 120.2, a preliminary inquiry by police may be
conducted if the information received does not disclose a cognizable case
but indicates the necessity for an inquiry to ascertain whether cognizable
offence is disclosed or not. Paragraph 120.5 states that the scope of
preliminary inquiry is not to verify the veracity or otherwise of the
information received but only to ascertain whether the information reveals
any cognizable offence.
17.    Careful reading of Paragraph 120 of the Lalita Kumari (supra) culls
(a) If the complaint discloses cognizable offence, registration
of FIR is mandatory for the police.
(b) If there is any doubt as to whether cognizable offence is
disclosed or not the police will conduct a preliminary
inquiry in case of certain types of cases like matrimonial
disputes/family disputes, commercial offences, medical
negligence cases, corruption cases and cases where there
is   abnormal      delay/laches     in   initiating criminal
prosecution, for example, over three months delay in
reporting the matter without satisfactory explanation for
the delay, preliminary inquiry may be made by the police
and report should be prepared within seven days from the
date of initiation of preliminary inquiry.
(c) Preliminary enquiry by police is no to verify the veracity of
the complaint, but to ascertain if a cognizable case is
made out.
18.     It is needless to say that unexplained delay in lodging complaint in
most of the times proves fatal for the prosecution. At the same time, there
are plethora of decisions of the Apex Court where it is held that in a case
of sexual assault and rape delay in lodging FIR by itself is not a ground to
discard the written complaint. The delay in lodging FIR is not of much
significance as the victim has to muster courage to come out in open and
express herself in a conservative social milieu. In cases of rape, the delay
in filing FIR by the prosecutrix in all circumstance is not of significance.
Sometimes the fear of social stigma and on some occasions fear from the
accused persons that she may be subjected to further assault of like
nature and absence of physiological inner strength to undertake a legal
battle against the man of money, muscle and power are the reasons for
delay in lodging complaint.
19.   In the case of State Of Himachal Pradesh vs. Shree Kant Shekari
: (2004) 8 SCC 153, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held as hereunder:
17. The High Court has also disbelieved the prosecution
version for the so-called delay in lodging the FIR. The
prosecution has not only explained the reasons but also led
cogent evidence to substantiate the stand as to why there was
delay. The trial Court in fact analysed the position in great
detail and had come to a right conclusion that the reasons for
the delay in lodging the FIR have been clearly explained.
18. The unusual circumstances satisfactorily explained the
delay in lodging of the first information report. In any event,
delay per se is not a mitigating circumstance for the accused
when accusations of rape are involved. Delay in lodging first
information report cannot be used as a ritualistic formula for
discarding prosecution case and doubting its authenticity. It
only puts the court on guard to search for and consider if any
explanation has been offered for the delay. Once it is offered,
the Court is to only see whether it is satisfactory or not. In a
case if the prosecution fails to satisfactory explain the delay
and there is possibility of embellishment or exaggeration in the
prosecution version on account of such delay, it is a relevant
factor. On the other hand satisfactory explanation of the delay
is weighty enough to reject the plea of false implication or
vulnerability of prosecution case. As the factual scenario
shows, the victim was totally unaware of the catastrophe
which had befallen to her. That being so, the mere delay in
lodging of first information report does not in any way render
prosecution version brittle. These aspects were highlighted
in Tulshidas Kanolkar v. State of Goa.
20.    Similar view was taken in Sohan Singh & Anr. vs. State Of Bihar :
2010 (1) SCC 68 ; Deepak vs. State of Haryana : (2015) 4 SCC 762 ;
State of Himachal Pradesh vs. Sanjay Kumar : (2017) 2 SCC 51.
21.    At the stage of dealing with an application under Section 156(3) of
the Code, the learned Magistrate is not in a position to see the veracity of
the complaint. This is the precise reason for which the learned Magistrate
is empowered to direct the police authority to treat the complaint as an
FIR and register a specific case and cause investigation of the same. If the
police authority on investigation does not find any evidence in support of
the prosecution case, it is open for the investigating officer to file report in
final form.
22.    Mr. Basu, learned Senior Counsel on the behalf of the private
opposite parties relies on the decision of this Court in the case of Mukul
Roy vs. State of West Bengal & Ors reported in (2019) Cri.L.J 245
(Cal). The said report is pronounced by a Hon’ble Single Judge of this
23.    In Paragraph 59 of the Mukul Roy’s case (supra) the Hon’ble Single
Judge passed the following guidelines while invoking power under Section
156(3) of the Code.
“59. Therefore, I direct that Learned Registrar General shall
take immediate steps for issuance of suitable guidelines to all
Metropolitan Magistrates, Judicial Magistrates through the
District   Sessions    Judges   and    Metropolitan    Magistrates,
Calcutta of all the Districts of the State of West Bengal, which
guidelines are laid down for application of judicial mind by the
Learned      Judicial    Magistrate    while     invoking    power
1. The learned Magistrate would be well advised to
verify the truth and the veracity of the allegations,
regard being had to the nature of allegations of the case.
2. There has to be prior applications under Section
154(1) and 154(3) while filing a petition under Section
156(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
3. Both the aspects should be clearly spelt out in the
application and necessary documents to that effect shall
be filed which are the sine qua non for application
under Section 156(3) of the Code.
4. An application under Section 156(3) of the Code
should be supported by an affidavit so that the person
making the application should be conscious and also
endeavour to see that no false affidavit is made.
5. A number of cases pertaining to fiscal sphere,
matrimonial      dispute/family    disputes,     commercial
offences, medical negligence cases, corruption cases and
the cases where there is abnormal delay/laches in
initiating criminal prosecution, as are illustrated in Lalita
Kumari are being filed.
6. Learned Magistrate would also be aware of the
abnormal delay in lodging of the FIR in initiating criminal
prosecution.”
24.   In Mukul Roy (supra) the Hon’ble Single Judge in sub-paragraph 1
of the Paragraph 59 directs that the Magistrate shall verify the truth and
veracity of the allegations, record being had to the nature of the
allegations of the case. With all humiliation and greatest respect to the
Hon’ble Judge the said direction is not in conformity with the direction
made by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Lalita Kumari (supra) in
Paragraph 120.5 of Lalita Kumari, the Hon’ble Single Judge clearly directs
that the scope of preliminary inquiry is not to verify the veracity or
otherwise of the information received, but only to ascertain whether the
information reveals any cognizable offence. When the police authority in
case of preliminary inquiry prior to the registration of a case concerning
cognizable offence is not entitled to verify the veracity, how would a
Magistrate be able to verify the truth and veracity of the allegations
contained in the application under Section 156(3) of the Cr.P.C. In view of
what has been stated above and applying the ratio of Lalilta Kumari, this
court holds that sub paragraph (4) of Mukul Roy’s case is not a correct
guideline to be followed by the Magistrate while dealing with an
application under Section 156(3) of the Code.
25.   All other points mentioned in Paragraph 59 of the decision of Mukul
Roy are culled out from the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the
case of Priyanka Srivastava & Anr vs. State Of U.P. & Ors reported in
26.   Coming to the instant case it is found that the directions of the
Priyanka Srivastava were prima facie complied with by the petitioner
before filing of an application under Section 156(3) of the Code.
27.   Upon receiving an application under Section 156(3) of the Code two
alternative courses of action are open to the Magistrate. The Magistrate
can under Section 190 of the Code, before taking cognizance ask for
investigation by police under Section 156(3) of the Cr.P.C. Secondly, if the
Magistrate thinks fit he can take cognizance upon the petition of
complaint and follow the procedure contained in Section 202 of the Code.
He cannot draw an inference that because of delay of lodging complaint it
could be inferred that the application could not be treated as FIR on the
ground of inordinate delay.
28.   Before I part with, I am tempted to mention the effect of delay in
lodging FIR. In a criminal case the FIR is the earliest statement of
commission of a cognizable offence. It is not a substantive piece of
evidence and it can be used in trial either for corroboration or
contradiction. Delay in lodging complaint is treated as a ground of false
narration of the incident, embellishment and suppression of material fact.
29.   All such points are to be decided by the Court during the trial of a
case. While dealing with an application under Section 156(3) of the Code,
the Magistrate cannot decide the effect of delay in lodging complaint.
Lalita Kumari empowers the police authority to conduct preliminary
inquiry over inordinate delay in lodging the complaint. The Supreme
Court never directs in Lalita Kumari to throw an application away under
Section 156(3) of the Code on the ground of delay without sending it to
the police authority for either preliminary inquiry or investigation treating
the same as FIR.
30.    In the light of the above discussion, the impugned order passed by
the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate on 12th November, 2020 is liable to
be set aside.
31.    Accordingly, the instant criminal revision is allowed on contest
however, without cost against the private opposite party and ex-parte
against the State of West Bengal.
32.    The learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Alipore, South 24 Pgs is
directed to reconsider the application filed by the petitioner under Section
156(3) of the Code in the light of the observation passed herein above and
pass a reasoned order within seven days from the date of receipt of such
33.    Parties are at liberty to act on the server copy of the order.