Application seeking ad-interim directions
The case pertains to (Please tick/check the correct box)
O Central Act: (Title):Constitution of India
o Impugned Final Order/Decree: (Date): NA
6. (a) Similar disposed off matter with citation, if any, & case
Details:- No similar disposed off matter.
(b) Similar pending matter with case details:- No similar pending
matter.
(a)   Whether accused/convict has surrendered:NA
(e)   Period of Sentence Undergone (Including period of
(a)   Date of Section 4 Notification: NA
(b)   Date of Section 6 Notification: NA
(c)   Date of Section 1 Notification: NA
9. Tax Matters: State the tax effect: NA
11. Vehicle Number (In case of Motor Accident Claim matters): NA
SN                Particulars            Page no. of part    Remark
7.  Writ Petition (Civil) along with                 1-37
supporting Affidavit.
21.    I.A. No. _____ of 2020 Application           66-68
seeking ad-interim directions.
The Petitioner is a retired Assistant Commissioner of Police, and is
constrained to approach this Hon’ble Court invoking its extra ordinary
jurisdiction under Article 32 of Constitution of India interalia in Public
interest seeking Writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate Writ, order
or direction to the Respondents to make provisions for the payment
‘risk and hardship’ allowance, incentives in form of bonus, additional
salary to the police officers who are presently serving on the frontline
in view of the present lock down situation due to the COVID 19
situation in the country.
The death of police personnel’s due to COVID-19 in Madhya Pradesh,
Ludhiana and several cases of COVID-19 positive cases of Police across
the country is a clear indication that ‘even a protector needs protection
and safety’ and its time that Government must take effective measures
and steps ensure good health and safety of the Police personnel’s
across the country and boost/encourage their morals by at least extend
some financial support to all such officers and their families who are
instrumental in containing the spread of COVID-19
The Petitioner is retired Assistant Commissioner of Police, Crime Branch
and has been the first Indian police officer to have received 430
awards including the Presidents Police Medal for Meritorious Service by
President of India and an International award for action against
terrorists called the ‘Survivors Club Membership’ is filing the present
Petition in larger public interest and for the welfare of the police
personnel across the Country. The Petitioner has been actively involved
in various social activities and has closely accessing the work of police
officers not only of State of Maharashtra but police personnel’s across
the nation during this pandemic.
Currently, the country is faced with an unprecedented situation due to
the global breakout of the COVID 19 virus, commonly known as the
Corona virus. Under these circumstances, the entire country has been
kept in lockdown, and the citizenry have been forced to keep indoors.
It is submitted that the police officials who have been thus deployed
are not only responsible for maintaining law and order situation, but
also to ensure that the lock down is followed strictly. This is putting the
police personnel, along with health officials, directly in the front line,
and making them vulnerable to contracting COVID 19. In other words,
they (and through them their family members) are directly in harm’s
way and face grave risk at contracting COVID 19.
As per WHO guidelines older adults and people of any age who have
serious underlying medical conditions might be at higher risk for severe
illness from COVID-19 hence such officer above 48 years with above
medical conditions be not deployed in any stressful working
environment which comes in direct contact with COVID-19 patients. It
is submitted that as per the reports published in various news paper
the officials who have died are above 50 years of age. The Petitioner in
this regard seeks urgent interim directions to State to identify such
police officials and exempt them from COVID-19 related duties and be
put on any administrative work which has no or limited exertion.
The present petition is being filed to ensure that the various
Government of the State incentivize them for taking the risk and facing
the hardship. This more so, when some of the zones in the country,
especially    in  Delhi, Pune,   Mumbai,   etc.  have    been   declared
containment areas, and over 170 districts of 19 States in Country have
been designated red zones/Hotspot therefore increasing the need and
responsibility of the police personnel to ensure that these areas
continuously remain under lockdown, strictly. This is going to lead to a
further work force by the police personnel to ensure that the COVID 19
is not spread, thereby subjecting their own person to risk.
It is submitted, although some State viz State of Haryana and State of
Telangana have sought to encourage and appreciate the efforts of the
Police personnel’s by paying them double salary, at the same time
other States have, infact, in a way penalised the officers by deducting
their salaries upto 25% to 35% which is detriment to the interest and
moral of several officers who are on field trying to contain this deadly
virus which has taken several lives across the Globe.
It is respectfully submitted that the police force across the country is
working over-time, and is working in hazardous conditions. It is
submitted that the police personnel are being subject to immediate risk
of the disease being on the frontline, next only to doctors and medical
staff. It is submitted that the police personnel are charged not only
with the duty of the ensuring the conditions of the lock down are
maintained, but also to ensure that the law and order is maintained,
thus putting not only their persons at high risk, but their families. While
the medical staff and doctors are being provided with all the protective
gear, etc. Whereas, the police personnel are often found only wearing
mask and patrolling, while baring the onset of the summer heat, to
ensure that things are smooth.
It is submitted that the Respondents are under an obligation to protect
the rights of the police personnel under Articles 14, 19, and 21 of the
Constitution. Further, it is submitted, the Respondents have also a duty
to, not only provide incentives to the police personnel, but also to
ensure that they are incentivised for the additional duty of ensuring the
proper implementation of the lockdown.
It is submitted that benefits of Hazard or Risk pay, are not novel and
are already extended to the officers working in high-active field areas
such as the country’s borders/naxalite areas or where there is an
epidemic or ongoing counter-insurgency operation. It is submitted that
risk and hardship allowance is a form of extra compensation given to
employees for performing dangerous duties.
Presently, there is no such scheme that would secure hazard pay or
any additional compensation for the police personnel, who are rising
their lives, as well as the lives of those who come into contact with
them (like family members), to fight the said disease and to ensure
that the people at large, across the country are safe. It is submitted
that those persons who are serving on the frontline, are at the highest
risk to be exposed to COVID 19.
Unfortunately, it is submitted that it has come to light that several
police officials are contracting COVID 19. Not only this, the police
officials in some parts of the country have come under attack and
suffered bodily harm while imposing the stringency of the lock down.
There have been several reports of the police being attacked by
persons for attempting to enforce the lock down. Further, there are
several reports of the police personnel who are contracting COVID 19.
It is submitted that by the very nature of their work, not only are police
personnel but also their respective families are at risk of contracting
COVID 19. The police personnel are also coming under tremendous
stress and no steps are taken for their mental well being. The present
petition is being filed to ensure that the morale of the police personnel
is boosted with incentives, especially due to the current COVID 19
i.     Police are providing security to doctors who are termed to be the
first responders, and officers are deployed in the designated
isolation units for treatment of COVID-19 hence police officers
are also susceptible to COVID-19.
ii.     That as many as 30 Delhi Police officers have opted for self-
quarantine after it was found that they came in contact with a
policeman who tested positive for novel coronavirus. It is
submitted that the policeman in question was deployed at the All
India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in Delhi.1 In fact, as
per news paper reports, the Delhi Police has directed one third of
its staff to go into quarantine for a period of ten days.
iii.     In Maharashtra2 35 police officers are quarantined and one police
officer has been tested positive for Covid-19,
iv.      An assistant commissioner of police tested positive for virus in
https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/dcp-south-west-30-cops-self-quarantine-after-asi-posted-at-aiims-
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-nation/maharashtra-fights-covid-19-thane-
v.    If reports are to believed there are cases reported in various
social media platforms and news portals that there are incidents
in which Police officers have been spat on, coughed on or
otherwise assaulted by individuals claiming to have been
diagnosed with the coronavirus or otherwise.
There are numerous such incidents. It is also submitted that the police
officials are coming under tremendous stress and are being over-
worked under conditions of hardship. As per a news report dated 13th
July 2018, India’s ratio of police personnel per one lakh citizens is
138:1 lakh – which was the 5th lowest in the world. Pandemics do not
spare those who have a duty to keep the law and order situation and
therefore are on the frontline and come in contact with infected
persons. The police personnel are also over-worked, and some of them
have more than 14 hour shifts in various parts of the country and are
coming under tremendous stress. In fact, being unable to deal with the
pressures of the pandemic, as per a news report dated 14.04.2020, a
36 year old constable shot himself owing to work stress due to the
break out of the pandemic. Further, on 19th April, a 45 year old police
officer, who was active on the frontline, succumbed to Covid 19.
While the police personnel across the country are doing a very good
job at keeping the coronavirus at bay, and also put their own lives (and
as a consequence the lives of their families) at risk, there is an urgent
https://www.businessinsider.in/india/news/police-officer-tests-positive-for-covid-19-in-
need to boost their morale by giving them hardship allowances. This
would only be in furtherance of their fundamental rights under Articles
14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution.
Further, owing to the serious shortage of police personnel, and the fact
that police personnel are also contracting COVID 19, it is quintessential
for the Respondents to, on ad hoc basis, recruit persons to man the
law and order situation. The present petition is being filed seeking
further direction to all the State Governments to, on ad hoc basis
recruit persons who are physically fit, to ensure that the police officials
are not burdened. This will help ease some of the pressure and stress
that is being thrust upon the police personnel currently, and in
furtherance of their rights under Articles 14, 19 and 21.
It is submitted that this Hon’ble Court in the case of Prakash Singh v.
Union of India, (2006) 8 SCC 1 gave several directions to ensure
the efficient functioning of the police machinery in various states. This
was done in a public interest litigation, primarily to maintain the rule of
law and due to legislative/executive inaction. While the police
personnel, being instrumentalities of the State, must only owe their
allegiance to the rule of law, the State had a responsibility to those
persons who are police personnel, to ensure that their fundamental
rights under Articles 14, 19 and 21 are protected, and that their
morale, especially in difficult times such as the present, to ensure that
they are financial compensated for putting their lives are risk and in
harm’s way. This is the minimum duty that the State owes to its police
officials, especially those that are in the frontline. It is submitted that a
direction to all the Respondent States to grant risk and hardship
allowance to police personnel on the frontline is a necessary step to
ensure that the police personnel are adequately compensated for their
Moreover, apart from heightened risk of infection, anxiety and being
separated from their families, they are also increasingly dealing with
social ostracism, harassment and even assault. Further, many police
personnel on the frontline are the sole earning members of their
families and/or their family members have no income due to COVID-
19, therefore, the State is duty bound to ensure that they are well
taken care of.
In view of the aforesaid circumstances and moreover considering the
ongoing situation, it becomes imperative that these aforesaid police
personnel’s are duly compensated for the period of pandemic by way
of “ risk and hardship Allowance” or any other remuneration in form of
bonus, incentive, additional salary and moreover protected from any
illegal deductions.
It would not be out of place to highlight that the concept of “Risk and
Hardship Allowance” is not a novel one and has been in practice for a
while now. Attention of this Hon’ble Court is drawn to the following
(i)    As per the United Nations (Salaries, Allowances, Benefits &
Job Classification) reports, Hazard pay is a form of
compensation granted to staff members who have been
requested to remain and report for work in duty stations
where very hazardous conditions including epidemic.
(ii)   Several countries are already considering paying Hazard
pay to first responders of COVID 19 and considering the
magnitude of COVID-19 have also passed legislation to this
effect as per the report available in public domain which is
A. Birmingham — The Birmingham City Council approved a
5% hazard pay raise for about 2,000 city employees,
including those in the fire and rescue and police and
corrections departments.
Commission approved a request from the Baldwin
County Sheriff's Office to provide hazard pay for
deputies,      corrections         officers     and     communications
officers. Across the department, 279 employees will
https://www.ems1.com/coronavirus-covid-19/articles/local-governments-providing-hazard-pay-stipends-
for-first-responders-Oe7UtIA42phouiP4/        https://www.ems1.com/coronavirus-covid-19/articles/local-
receive an additional $240,000 total per pay period; the
precise amount to be received by each employee was
not reported.
C. Atlanta — Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms issued
an executive order providing $500 a month in hazard
pay for public safety, sanitation and other front-line
workers during the pandemic.
(iii)  According to the 7th Pay Commission recommendations
hazard or risk pay is a form of extra compensation given to
employees for performing dangerous duties. The relevant
portion of the report of 7th Pay Commission is extracted
“8.10.42 Risk Allowance is presently given to
employees engaged in hazardous duties or
whose work will have deleterious effect on health
over a period of time. Risk Allowance is also paid
to Sweepers and Safaiwalas engaged in cleaning
of underground drains, sewer lines as well as to
the employees working in trenching grounds and
infectious diseases hospitals.”
It is submitted that there is news reported from some parts of the
Country regarding police personnel’s and their family members tested
positive of novel virus. In such circumstances there is always anxiety
and phobia amongst the officials performing on field duty of being
infected of the virus and hence regular check up of the officials
deployed on field be carried out and an arrangement for such officials
who come direct in contact with the Covid Patients be made in special
facilities/accommodation so as to avoid further transmission to the
family members.
It is submitted that arrangements of protective gears such as masks,
gloves and sanitizers for police personnel’s must also be made on
priority. It will not be out of place to mention that amid the pandemic,
the police personnel’s are trying to strike a balancing act between
protecting civilians, public safety, and public health and protecting
Hence the present petition in public interest is being filed under Article
32 of the Constitution of India.
April 2017     In the Report of the Committee on Allowances, i.e. the 7th
Central   Pay   Commission,    submitted   to    the  Central
Government a provision for the payment of Risk and
Hardship allowance was made, and the same is to be
governed by the Risk and Hardship Matrix explained in the
13.07.2018 As         per    a    news    report   dated    13.07.2018     in
economictimes.indiatimes.com,     India’s  ratio   of  police
personnel per one lakh citizens is 138:1 lakh – which was
the 5th lowest in the world.
2020    The World was hit by the pandemic by the wide spread of
the novel coronavirus, leading to the spread of COVID-19 in
the entire world.
March 2020 The Union of India and the other Respondent States began
taking steps to prevent the spread of the coronavirus in
India by a compulsory screening of persons, and by
advocating     and   popularising   the   concept of  social
distancing.
22.03.2020 The Prime Minister of India announced that on 22.03.2020
the country would observe “Janta Curfew” by which the
whole country was closed down from 7 am to 9 pm on
22.03.2020. It was successfully implemented.
24.03.2020 The Prime Minister announced a nationwide lock down for
21 days beginning 25.03.2020.
25.03.2020 As per a news report in the Hindu www.thehindu.com
dated 25.03.2020, the Delhi Police asked 33% of its staff to
go into isolation for a period of 10 days.
April 2020 Containment Plan for Large Outbreaks as published by the
Ministry of Health in April 2020 and family welfare the
extent of role of Police to contain the outbreak/spread of
07.04.2020 As   per   a   news    report  in www.indiatoday.in   dated
07.04.2020, a 56 year old head constable in Hyderabad was
detected with Covid 19, and had been admitted to a local
hospital for treatment.
08.04.2020 As    per    a    news     report  dated    08.04.2020    in
www.livemint.com, a traffic policeman in Delhi was tested
positive for Covid 19.
10.04.2020 As    per    a    news     report  dated    10.04.2020    in
timesofindia.indiatimes.com, a 57 year old constable in
Virar, Mumbai, was tested positive for Covid 19.
As    per    a    news     report  dated    10.04.2020    in
www.hindustantimes.com, a 52 year old inspector in Thane
was tested positive for Covid 19.
12.04.2020 As    per    a    news     report  dated    12.04.2020    in
timesofindia.indiatimes.com, after two police officers tested
positive for Covid 19, that the police officials on duty were
made to stay at hotels.
13.04.2020 As    per     a    news    report   dated     13.04.2020    in
www.indiatoday.in, it was noted that an ASI of the Delhi
Police who was posted at AIIMS tested positive for Covid
19, and thereafter over 30 police personnel had to be
placed in quarantine.
As    per     a    news    report   dated     13.04.2020    in
www.deccanherald.com, an assistant commissioner of
police in Ludhiana was tested positive for Covid 19.
14.04.2020 As    per     a    news    report   dated     14.04.2020    in
www.indiatoday.in, a police constable aged 36 shot himself
being unable to deal with stress due to the out break of the
pandemic.
19.04.2020 As per a news report dated 19.04.2020 in indiatvnews.com,
a police officer in Indore died due to Covid 19.
21.04.2020 As    per     a    news    report   dated     21.04.2020    in
economictimes.indiatimes.com, a police inspector in Indore
died due to the Covid 19 after having served in Ujjain, a
declared containment area.
23.04.2020 Hence the present writ petition in public interest is being
filed under Article 32 of the Constitution.
1.  The Petitioner is a retired Assistant Commissioner of Police, and
is constrained to approach this Hon’ble Court invoking its extra
ordinary jurisdiction under Article 32 of Constitution of India
interalia in Public interest seeking Writ of Mandamus or any
other appropriate Writ, order or direction to the Respondents to
make provisions for the payment ‘risk and hardship’ allowance,
incentives in form of bonus, additional salary to the police
officers who are presently serving on the frontline in view of the
present lock down situation due to the COVID 19 situation in
the country.
2. That Petitioner No. 1 joined the force in 1985 as a Sub-
Inspector. The Petitioner is retired Assistant Commissioner of
Police, Crime Branch and has been the first Indian police officer
to have received 430 awards including the Presidents Police
Medal for Meritorious Service by President of India and an
International award for action against terrorists called the
‘Survivors Club Membership. He served in Mumbai till 2006.
During his service in Mumbai, he was involved in actions against
19 gangsters and criminals. He was also part of the anti-
terrorist operations, in which four operatives of a Khalistani
terrorist group were killed by police in Mumbai in 1995. His
actions in Mumbai also included seizure of huge amount of RDX
and 220 kg of brown sugar, which was valued at Rs 220 crore.
It is submitted that the Petitioner has received more than 430
rewards in his entire career in the Department. The detailed
career graph/ profile and achievements of the Petitioner is
annexed as APPENDIX          for reference and perusal of this
Hon’ble Court. The details of Petitioner, (Permanent Account
No. AENPB8007K, AADHAR No. 309685102662, Email id:
bsbarge@gmail.com). Copies of PAN card, AADHAR card and
bank account details have been enclosed along with the
vakalatnama.
3. The Respondent No. 1 is union of India and Respondent No. 2
to 35 are the State Governments of the various States in the
country, and the police personnel come under their control.
Further, it is submitted that police personnel functioning in the
country fall under the control and responsibility of the
Respondent. It is submitted that the present petition is being
filed in public interest seeking a direction to the Respondents for
the release of hardship and risk allowance to the various police
personnel in the country, and to ensure that their salaries are
not, under any circumstances, subject to reductions.
4. It is submitted that there is no civil, criminal, or revenue
litigation involving the Petitioner which has or could have a legal
nexus with the issues involved herein. It is further stated that
the Petitioner is preferring the present Petition are larger public
interest for the benefit of all the frontline police officers
working across the nation dealing with the pandemic and
Petitioner since retired has no personal interest.
5. Currently, the country is faced with an unprecedented situation
due to the global breakout of the COVID 19 virus, commonly
known as the Corona virus. Under these circumstances, the
entire country has been kept in lockdown, and the citizenry
have been forced to keep indoors. It is submitted that the police
officials who have been thus deployed are not only responsible
for maintaining law and order situation, but also to ensure that
the lock down is followed strictly. This is putting the police
personnel, along with health officials, directly in the front line,
and making them vulnerable to contracting Covid 19. In other
words, they (and through them their family members) are
directly in harm’s way and face grave risk at contracting COVID
19. The present petition is being filed to ensure that the various
Government of the State incentivize them for taking the risk.
This more so, when some of the zones in the country, especially
in Pune, Mumbai, Delhi, etc. have been declared containment
areas, therefore increasing the need and responsibility of the
police personnel to ensure that these areas continuously remain
under lockdown, strictly. This is going to lead to a further work
force by the police personnel to ensure that the Covid 19 is not
spread, thereby subjecting their own person to risk.
i.   In April 2017, the Report of the Committee on Allowances,
i.e. the 7th Central Pay Commission, was submitted to the
Respondent No. 1. As per the Commission, a provision
was made for the payment of Risk and Hardship
allowance, which were to be governed by the Risk and
Hardship Matrix explained in the Report.
ii. As     per   a    news      report     dated    13.07.2018   in
economictimes.indiatimes.com, India’s ratio of police
personnel per one lakh citizens is 138:1 lakh – which was
the 5th lowest in the world.1 A true copy of the news
report dated 13.07.2018 in economictimes.indiatimes.com
is annexed herewith and marked as Annexure P/1
iii. The World was hit by the pandemic by the wide spread of
the novel coronavirus, leading to the spread of COVID-19
in the entire world. As on date, more than 25 lakh people
have been affected, and about 1.85 lakh people have
succumbed to the disease.
iv.  The Union of India and the other Respondent States
began taking steps to prevent the spread of the
coronavirus in India by a compulsory screening of
persons, and by advocating and popularising the concept
of social distancing.
1     https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/defence/indias-ratio-of-138-
v.  On 22.03.2020 The Prime Minister of India announced
that on 22.03.2020 the country would observe “Janta
Curfew” by which the whole country was closed down
from 7 am to 9 pm on 22.03.2020. It was successfully
implemented.
vi.  The Prime Minister announced a nationwide lock down for
21 days beginning 25.03.2020.
vii.  As per a news report in the Hindu www.thehindu.com
dated 25.03.2020, the Delhi Police asked 33% of its staff
to go into isolation for a period of 10 days. A true copy of
the news report in the Hindu www.thehindu.com dated
25.03.2020     is  annexed     herewith   and   marked    as
viii. As per a news report in www.indiatoday.in dated
07.04.2020, a 56 year old head constable in Hyderabad
was detected with COVID 19, and had been admitted to a
local hospital for treatment. A true copy of the news
report in www.indiatoday.in dated 07.04.2020 is annexed
herewith and marked as Annexure P/3 [Pages 42 to
ix.   As    per     a    news       report    dated    08.04.2020     in
www.livemint.com, a traffic policeman in Delhi was tested
x.   As    per     a    news       report    dated    10.04.2020     in
timesofindia.indiatimes.com, a 57 year old constable in
Virar, Mumbai, was tested positive for Covid 193. A true
copy      of     news       report     dated     10.04.2020     in
timesofindia.indiatimes.com is annexed herewith and
marked as Annexure P/4 [Pages 44].
xi.   As    per     a    news       report    dated    10.04.2020     in
www.hindustantimes.com, a 52 year old inspector in
Thane was tested positive for COVID 19. A true copy of
www.hindustantimes.com            is   annexed    herewith   and
marked as Annexure P/5 [Pages 45].
xii.   As    per     a    news       report    dated    12.04.2020     in
timesofindia.indiatimes.com, after two police officers
tested positive for COVID 19, that the police officials on
duty were made to stay at hotels4. A true copy of the
2   https://www.livemint.com/news/india/delhi-traffic-police-cop-tests-positive-
3      https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/mumbai/police-constable-tests-
4   https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/jaipur/coronavirus-in-jaipur-after-
timesofindia.indiatimes.com is annexed herewith and
marked as Annexure P/6 [Pages 46 to 47].
xiii.   As    per     a    news      report    dated     13.04.2020    in
www.indiatoday.in, it was noted that an ASI of the Delhi
Police who was posted at AIIMS tested positive for COVID
19, and thereafter over 30 police personnel had to be
placed in quarantine.5 A true copy of the news report
dated     13.04.2020     in   www.indiatoday.in      is  annexed
herewith and marked as Annexure P/7 [Pages 48 to
xiv.    As per a news report dated 19.04.2020 in Times of India,
an Assistant Commissioner of Police in Ludhiana was
tested positive for Covid 19 and died.6 A true copy of the
news report dated 19.04.2020 in Times of India                  is
annexed herewith and marked as Annexure P/8 [Pages
50 to 52 ].
xv.    As    per     a    news      report    dated     14.04.2020    in
www.indiatoday.in, a police constable aged 36 shot
5           https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/dcp-south-west-30-cops-self-
6   https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/city/chandigarh/punjab-ludhiana-acp-
himself being unable to deal with stress due to the out
xvi.   As per a news report dated 19.04.2020 in Times of India,
a police officer in Indore died due to Covid 19. A true copy
of news report dated 19.04.2020 in Times of India is
annexed herewith and marked as Annexure P/9 [Pages
53 to 54].
xvii.  As    per    a    news      report    dated     21.04.2020   in
economictimes.indiatimes.com,         a   police   inspector in
Indore died due to the Covid 19 after having served in
Ujjain, a declared containment area. A true copy of the
economictimes.indiatimes.com is annexed herewith and
marked as Annexure P/10 [Pages 55 to 57]
xviii.  Other countries have already announced the allowance
towards Risk and Hardship and some have also enacted
legislation to this effect8. True copy of article published on
EMSI titled Local governments providing hazard pay,
7 https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/cop-shoots-self-in-bhopal-was-
8     https://www.ems1.com/coronavirus-covid-19/articles/local-governments-
providing-hazard-pay-stipends-for-first-responders-Oe7UtIA42phouiP4/
https://www.ems1.com/coronavirus-covid-19/articles/local-governments-
providing-hazard-pay-stipends-for-first-responders-Oe7UtIA42phouiP4/
stipends for first responders         is annexed hereto and
marked as ANNEXURE P/11 [page 58 to 63]
xix. In 21 April 2020 the Ministry of Health and family welfare
published Containment Plan for Large Outbreaks and the
extent of role of Police to contain the outbreak/spread of
COVID-19 and list of hotspot areas. True copy of article
published in Economic Times in April on 21.04.2020 is
annexed hereto and marked as ANNEXURE P/12
xx.  As per WHO guidelines older adults and people of any age
who have serious underlying medical conditions might be at
higher risk for severe illness from COVID-19 hence such officer
above 48 years with above medical conditions be not deployed
in any stressful working environment which comes in direct
contact with COVID-19 patients. It is submitted that as per the
reports published in various news paper the officials who have
died are above 50 years of age. The Petitioner in this regard
seeks urgent interim directions to State to identify such police
officials and exempt them from COVID-19 related duties and
be put on any administrative work which has no or limited
exertion.
a. Because the police officials who have been thus deployed
are not only responsible for maintaining law and order
situation, but also to ensure that the lock down is followed
strictly. In other words, they (and through them their
family members) are directly in harm’s way and face grave
risk at contracting COVID 19. The present petition is being
filed to ensure that the various Government of the State
incentivize them for taking the risk.
b. BECAUSE, the country is faced with an unprecedented
situation due to the global breakout of the Covid 19 virus,
commonly known as the Corona virus. Under these
circumstances, the entire country has been kept in
lockdown, and the citizenry have been forced to keep
indoors. It is submitted that the police officials who have
been     thus  deployed   are   not   only  responsible     for
maintaining law and order situation, but also to ensure
that the lock down is followed strictly. This is putting the
police personnel, along with health officials, directly in the
front line, and making them vulnerable to contracting
COVID 19. In other words, they (and through them their
family members) are directly in harm’s way and face grave
risk at contracting COVID 19. The present petition is being
filed to ensure that the various Government of the State
incentivize them for taking the risk. This more so, when
some of the zones in the country, especially in Pune,
Mumbai, Delhi, etc. have been declared containment
areas, therefore increasing the need and responsibility of
the    police  personnel  to   ensure   that  these   areas
continuously remain under lockdown, strictly. This is going
to lead to a further work force by the police personnel to
ensure that the Covid 19 is not spread, thereby subjecting
their own person to risk.
c. BECAUSE although some State viz State of Haryana and
State of Telangana have sought to encourage and
appreciate the efforts of the Police personnel’s by paying
them double salary, at the same time few States have
infact in a way penalised the officers by deducting their
salaries upto 25% to 35% which is detriment to the
interest and moral of several officers who are on field
trying to contain this deadly virus which has taken several
lives across the Globe.
d. BECAUSE the police force across the country is working
over-time, and is working in hazardous conditions. It is
submitted that the police personnel are being subject to
immediate risk of the disease being on the frontline, next
only to doctors and medical staff. It is submitted that the
police personnel are charged not only with the duty of the
ensuring the conditions of the lock down are maintained,
but also to ensure that the law and order is maintained,
thus putting not only their persons at high risk, but their
families.
e. Because the medical staff and doctors are being provided
with all the protective gear, etc. Whereas, the police
personnel are often found only wearing mask and
patrolling, while baring the onset of the summer heat, to
ensure that things are smooth.
f. BECAUSE the benefits of Hazard or Risk pay however, are
not novel and are already extended to the officers
working in high-active field areas such as the country’s
borders/naxalite areas or where there is an epidemic or
ongoing counter-insurgency operation. It is submitted that
risk  and    hardship   allowance  is   a  form   of  extra
compensation     given    to  employees    for  performing
dangerous duties.
g. BECAUSE there is no such scheme that would secure
hazard pay or any additional compensation for the police
personnel, who are rising their lives, as well as the lives of
those who come into contact with them (like family
members), to fight the said disease and to ensure that the
people at large, across the country are safe.
h. BECAUSE those persons who are serving on the frontline,
are at the highest risk to be exposed to COVID 19.
i. BECAUSE it has come to light that several police officials
are contracting COVID 19. Not only this, the police officials
in some parts of the country have come under attack and
suffered bodily harm while imposing the stringency of the
lock down.
j. BECAUSE there have been several reports of the police
being attacked by persons for attempting to enforce the
lock down. Further, there are several reports of the police
personnel who are contracting COVID 19. It is submitted
that by the very nature of their work, not only are police
personnel but also their respective families are at risk of
contracting COVID 19. The police personnel are also
coming under tremendous stress and no steps are taken
for their mental well being. The present petition is being
filed to ensure that the morale of the police personnel is
boosted with incentives, especially due to the current
COVID 19 situation.
k.    Because Police are providing security to doctors who are
termed to be the first responders, and officers are
deployed in the designated isolation units for treatment of
COVID-19 hence police officers are also susceptible to
i.  In New Delhi, three police officers have tested
positive for COVID 19, which has led to more than
30 other officers being in quarantine so as to not
expose others further. In fact, as per news paper
reports, the Delhi Police has directed one third of its
staff to go into quarantine for a period of ten days.
ii.  In Maharashtra9 35 police officers are quarantined
and one police officer has been tested positive for
iii.  An assistant commissioner of police tested positive
for virus in Ludhiana10 .
9                    https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/politics-and-
10  https://www.businessinsider.in/india/news/police-officer-tests-positive-for-
iv.     That as many as 30 Delhi Police officers have opted
for self-quarantine after it was found that they came
in contact with a policeman who tested positive for
novel coronavirus. It is submitted that the policeman
in question was deployed at the All India Institute of
Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in Delhi.11
v.     if reports are to believed there are cases reported in
various social media platforms and news portals that
there are incidents in which Police officers have
otherwise assaulted by         individuals    claiming   to
have been diagnosed with the coronavirus or
l.    BECAUSE the police officials are coming under tremendous
stress and are being over-worked under conditions of
hardship.
m.    BECAUSE as per a news report dated 13th July 2018,
India’s ratio of police personnel per one lakh citizens is
138:1 lakh – which was the 5th lowest in the world.
Pandemics do not spare those who have a duty to keep
11        https://www.indiatoday.in/india/story/dcp-south-west-30-cops-self-
the law and order situation and therefore are on the
frontline and come in contact with infected persons.
n. Because the police personnel are also over-worked, and
some of them have more than 14 hour shifts in various
parts of the country and are coming under tremendous
stress.
o. Because in fact, being unable to deal with the pressures of
the pandemic, as per a news report dated 14.04.2020, a
36 year old constable shot himself owing to work stress
due to the break out of the pandemic.
p. Because the police personnel across the country are doing
a very good job at keeping the coronavirus at bay, and
also put their own lives (and as a consequence the lives of
their families) at risk, there is an urgent need to boost
their morale by giving them hardship allowances.
q. Because owing to the serious shortage of police personnel,
and the fact that police personnel are also contracting
COVID 19, it is quintessential for the Respondents to, on
ad hoc basis, recruit persons to man the law and order
situation. The present petition is being filed seeking
further direction to all the State Governments to, on ad
hoc basis recruit persons who are physically fit, to ensure
that the police officials are not burdened. This will help
ease some of the pressure and stress that is being thrust
upon the police personnel currently, and in furtherance of
their rights under Articles 14, 19 and 21.
r. BECAUSE this Hon’ble Court in the case of Prakash Singh
v. Union of India, (2006) 8 SCC 1 gave several directions
to ensure the efficient functioning of the police machinery
in various states. This was done in a public interest
litigation, primarily to maintain the rule of law and due to
legislative/executive inaction.
s. BECAUSE the police personnel, being instrumentalities of
the State, must only owe their allegiance to the rule of
law, the State had a responsibility to those persons who
are police personnel, to ensure that their fundamental
rights under Articles 14/19/21 are protected, and that
their morale, especially in difficult times such as the
present, to ensure that they are financial compensated for
putting their lives are risk and in harms way.
t. BECAUSE this is the minimum duty that the State owes to
its police officials, especially those that are in the frontline.
It is submitted that a direction to all the Respondent
States to grant risk and hardship allowance to police
personnel on the frontline is a necessary step to ensure
that the police personnel are adequately compensated for
their efforts.
u. BECAUSE apart from heightened risk of infection, anxiety
and being separated from their families, they are also
increasingly dealing with social ostracism, harassment and
even assault.
v. BECAUSE many police personnel on the frontline are the
sole earning members of their families and/or their family
members have no income due to COVID-19, therefore, the
State is duty bound to ensure that they are well taken
care of.
w. BECAUSE it becomes imperative that these aforesaid
police personnel’s are duly compensated for the period of
pandemic by way of “ risk and hardship Allowance” or any
other remuneration in form of bonus, incentive, additional
salary and moreover protected from any illegal deductions.
x. BECAUSE that there is news reported from some parts of
the Country regarding police personnel’s and their family
members tested positive of novel virus.           In such
circumstances there is always anxiety and phobia amongst
the officials performing on field duty of being infected of
the virus and hence regular check up of the officials
deployed on field be carried out and an arrangement for
such officials who come direct in contact with the Covid
patients be made in special facilities/accommodation so as
to avoid further transmission to the family members.
y. BECAUSE that arrangements of protective gears such as
masks, gloves and sanitizers for police personnel’s must
also be made on priority. It will not be out of place to
mention that amid the pandemic, the police personnel’s
are trying to strike a balancing act between protecting
civilians,  public   safety,   and     public  health  and
protecting themselves.
z. Because further, to the misery and desolation, the
Government      of  Maharashtra     vide  resolutions have
proposed salary cuts of the Police personnel’s. It is
reported in an article published in “Times of India” dated
09.04.2020 that Salaries of Class I and II employees will
be cut by 50%. For the Class III employees, bills with
25% salary deduction have been sent to the treasury
department. Similarly, there is dismay in other States as
well against the compulsory deduction of salary without
there being ‘financial emergency’ declared.
aa.   Because deduction of salaries will only act as punitive and
onerous as the officers are working tirelessly to contain
the spread of the disease. It is submitted that such
deduction of salaries is bound to have a negative impact
on the morale of thousands of officers and staff working in
bb.   Because it is imperative that the police officers who have
been always subject to criticism be aptly honoured and
appreciated and encouraged by extending the benefits of
Hardship allowance or incentives in form of bonus and
additional salary.
cc.   Because there is an urgent requirement to protect the
rights and interest of the frontline medical healthcare
medical professionals who form the backbone of medical
healthcare system of any Country.
dd.   BECAUSE       risk  and    hardship      allowance    a   standard
allowance in other jurisdictions as well to persons engaged
in service which is potentially life threatening.
12       https://theprint.in/india/ias-ips-officers-say-50-70-pay-cuts-are-mere-
ee. Because allowances relating to Risk and Hardship (R & H)
are to be governed by a Risk and Hardship Matrix
proposed by the 7th CPC.
ff. BECAUSE the concept of “Risk and Hardship Allowance” is
not a novel one and has been in practice for a while now.
Attention of this Hon’ble Court is drawn to the following:
(i)   As per the United Nations (Salaries, Allowances,
Benefits & Job Classification) reports, Hazard pay is
a form of compensation granted to staff members
who have been requested to remain and report for
work in duty stations where very hazardous
conditions including epidemic.
(ii)  Several countries are already considering paying
Hazard pay to first responders of COVID 19 and
considering the magnitude of COVID-19 have also
passed legislation to this effect as per the report
available in public domain which is as below:
Council approved a 5% hazard pay raise for
about 2,000 city employees, including those in
the fire and rescue and police and corrections
departments.
Commission approved          a    request    from   the
Baldwin      County     Sheriff's   Office to   provide
hazard pay for deputies, corrections officers and
communications           officers.      Across      the
department, 279 employees will receive an
additional $240,000 total per pay period; the
employee was not reported.
Bottoms issued an executive order providing
13    https://www.ems1.com/coronavirus-covid-19/articles/local-governments-
$500 a month in hazard pay for public safety,
sanitation and other front-line workers during
the pandemic.
(iii) According     to    the     7th   Pay    Commission
recommendations hazard or risk pay is a form of
extra   compensation     given  to   employees    for
performing dangerous duties. The relevant portion
of the report of 7th Pay Commission is extracted
“8.10.42 Risk Allowance is presently
hazardous duties or whose work will have
deleterious effect on health over a period
of time. Risk Allowance is also paid to
cleaning of underground drains, sewer
lines as well as to the employees working
diseases hospitals”
gg. Because as per WHO guidelines older adults and people
of any age who have serious underlying medical
conditions might be at higher risk for severe illness from
COVID-19 hence such officer above 48 years with above
medical conditions be not deployed in any stressful
working environment which comes in direct contact with
COVID-19 patients. Because the officials who have died
are above 50 years of age.
hh.   Because although doctors and medical workers are being
rewarded by different States, however Police personnel
have not being considered for such rewards.
ii.   BECAUSE this Hon’ble Court has observed that the
workers fighting the COVID-19 pandemic are "warriors"
who have to be protected. It will not be out of place to
submit that these “warriors” will also need to be
encouraged by extending some incentives in form of “Risk
and Hardship” allowance or any other remuneration as
token of appreciation for the risk they are facing
continuously during this epidemic.
7. The petitioner is filing the present petitioner for common cause
and benefits of the society at large more particularly the police
personnel’s. That the petition, if allowed, would benefit the
police personnel associated with fight against COVID and will
relieve them from insurmountable hardships.
8. The petitioner has not filed any similar petition/case previously
before this Hon’ble Court or before any other High Court.
9. This Hon'ble Court has the jurisdiction to entertain the present
Writ Petition. This writ petition is made bona fide and in the
interest of justice and the Petitioner has no other efficacious
remedy left other than approaching this Hon’ble Court.
10. THAT the Petitioner crave leave of this Hon’ble Court to amend
or alter the grounds at the appropriate stage, as and when
required.
In the facts and circumstances above mentioned the Applicant most
respectfully prays that this Hon’ble Court may graciously be pleased;-
a)     Issue a Writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate Writ,
order or direction to the Respondents to make provisions
for the payment ‘risk and hardship’ allowance, incentives
in form of bonus, additional salary to the police officers
who are presently serving on the frontline in view of the
present lock down situation due to the COVID 19 situation
b)     Issue a Writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate Writ,
order or direction to the Respondents to identify such
officers who are above the age of 48 years with health
conditions such as diabetic etc and direct not to deploy
them in any duty which comes in direct or indirect
contacts with COVID-19 patients; and
c)   Issue a Writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate Writ,
order or direction to the Respondents to withdraw such
notifications/circulars/orders       seeking    compulsory
deduction of the salary of the police personnel’s; and
d)   Issue a Writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate Writ,
order or direction to the Respondents to not to deduct the
salaries of the police personnel’s and in case of any such
deductions full salaries be paid; and
e)   Issue a Writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate Writ,
order or direction to the Respondents to recruit on ad hoc
basis persons who are physically fit, to ensure that the
police officials are not burdened; and
f)   Issue a Writ of Mandamus or any other appropriate Writ,
order or direction to the Respondents to supply basis
personal    protection    gears/equipments   to  all police
g)   pass such other and further order/orders as deemed fit
and proper in the facts and circumstances of the present
case and in the interest of justice.
I, Mr. Bhanupratap Barge S/o Shankarao Barge, aged about 59
years, address; 403, Tulip, Pushpak Park, I.T.I. Road, Aundh, Pune,
Maharashtra 411007, do hereby solemnly declare as under: -
1.  That I am the Petitioner in the instant petition and I am fully
competent and authorized to swear and depose this affidavit and
fully aware of the facts and circumstances of the present case.
2.  I say that I have read and understood the contents of the
Synopsis & List of Dates at pages B to Q and contents of Writ
Petition as contained in paras 1 to 10. I state that the averments
of facts made therein are true to my knowledge, based on
records, information from the news papers and those of
submission of law made in grounds, prayer, and interlocutory
applications are true and correct to the best of my knowledge
and belief.
3.   That the Annexures filed along with the Writ Petition are true
copies of their respective originals.
4.   That the Petitioner (s) are/is preferring the present Petition in
larger public interest for the benefit of all the police officers
working across the nation tireless during this pandemic and
trying their best to contain the spread of the virus and there is no
personal interest of the Petitioner.
5.   That the Petitioner(s) are/is seeking exemption from attestation
of the instant affidavit, since the country is under a lockdown due
to COVID-19 since 24th March 2020 and undertakes to furnish an
attested affidavit at a later stage.
Verified at Pune on this 20th day of April 2020 that the contents
of this affidavit are based on the information derived from the records
and also on the basis of the information received and believed to be
correct. No part of it is false and nothing material has been concealed
or suppressed there from.
The Petitioner is retired Assistant Commissioner of Police, Crime Branch
and has been the first Indian police officer to have received 430 awards
including the Presidents Police Medal for Meritorious Service by President of
India and an International award for action against terrorists called the
‘Survivors Club Membership’ is filing the present Petition in larger public
interest and for the welfare of the police personnel across the Country. The
Petitioner has been actively involved in various social activities and has
closely accessing the work of police officers not only of State of
Maharashtra but police personnel’s across the nation during this pandemic.
 Born in Koregaon Dist. Satara in a family of Army and Police
 Studied in Fergusson Collage, Pune and joined Maharashtra Police
in 1985.
 Posted in Mumbai City from 1986 to 2005 and then, since 2005 in
 Associated with many Social organizations, Students for better
Police relations and Anti Terrorist/Anti National Activities.
1)  President Police Medal for Meritorious Service on 15.08.2009.
2)  First   Indian   Police  officer  who   received  survivors  club
Membership, an International Award for action Against Terrorist.
3)  D.G.s Insignia award by D.G.P Maharashtra. Dt. 24.1.2003.
4)  Till date received more than 430 rewards.
5)  Encounter of Seven gangsters, including Maya Doals were killed
at shootout at Lokhandwala Complex Dt. 16/11/91. (Movie
Shootout at Lokhandwala).
6)  Seizure of 220 k.gm. Brown Sugar valued at Rs. 220cror in
7)  Seizure of 1500 Kg RDX at Mumbai, Thane on 26.03.1993.
8)  Arrest of four Khalisthan Liberation Front Terrorist on Dt.
17.03.93 ( These terrorist planned to Kidnap Late Mr. Dhirubhai
Ambani and Grand Daughter of the Prime Minister of P.V
9)  Five Sikh Terrorist Killed in encounter on Dt. 1/6/95 at Bhandup
Khindipada, Mumbai. This operation was completed after 16
hour in which first time Light Machine Gun was seized from
terrorist.
colour Criminals, Human Trafficking Agents and top Ranking
wanted Naxalites.
11) Refused Security Cover offered by C.P, Pune after ISIS threats.
12) Rescued More than 150 major and minor girls from sex racket
and detected more than 100 cases of high profile Sex racket.
13) First time since Peshwa Era, arranged Deepavali Festival for Sex
workers in Budhvar Peth Red light area in 2013.
14) Performed Body Guard duty to Mr. Balasaheb Thakre, Mr.
15) Delivered talks on TEDex Platform and lectures on Anti
Terrorism & Naxalsim, Woman Security and Motivational Speech
for youth empowerment.
4/23/2020                        India's ratio of 138 police personnel per lakh of population fifth lowest among 71 countries - The Economic Times
Business News › News › Defence                                                                                                   Search for News, Stock Quotes & NAV's
India's ratio of 138 police personnel per lakh of population
BY TNN | UPDATED: JUL 13, 2018, 03.58 PM IST                                                                                                          Post a Comment
Data from the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) shows that in 2013,
India's ratio of 138 police personnel per lakh of population was the fifth lowest among the
71 countries for which the agency collated these figures.
Experts argue that the Indian police system designed in 1861 was best suited for colonial
rule and doesn't meet the requirements of a modern welfare state.
The already understaffed system is also hit by many vacancies. The answer to a recent
question in the Parliament reveals that as on January 2014, there was shortfall of 5.6 lakh
police personnel against the sanctioned strength of 22.8 lakh or about 25 per cent
vacancy.
Experts argue that the Indian police system
designed in 1861 was best suited for colonial rule
and doesn't meet the requirements of a modern
welfare state.
Stay on top of business news with The Economic Times App. Download it Now!
The end of Five-Year Plans: All you need to know
Security personnel celebrate after a            of 30
High alert across India a er Gurdaspur           terror a ack
Security personnel celebrate on the roof of a
4/23/2020                                Coronavirus | Delhi Police orders 33% of its staff to go into isolation for 10 days - The Hindu
Coronavirus | Delhi Police orders 33% of its staff to go
Other of cers to remain in quarantine in rotation: police chief
In a bid to keep police personnel safe from COVID-19 infection, the Delhi police on
Wednesday ordered 25-33% staff from each police unit or station to remain in isolation
or quarantine for at least 10 days.
In a meeting held at the Police Headquarters on Wednesday, Delhi Police
Commissioner S.N. Shrivastava ordered that in the view of the necessity for the
lockdown, a part of the Delhi Police personnel should also remain in isolation or
quarantine for a period of ten days, on a rotation basis. All police stations and other
police units have been advised to send 25 to 33% of staff posted in their office to
isolation.
4/23/2020                                Coronavirus | Delhi Police orders 33% of its staff to go into isolation for 10 days - The Hindu
The order copy reads that before a final decision is taken, all police officers may carry
out an exercise of utilising remaining police force for deployment in their respective
jurisdiction in the form of pickets and patrolling to keep the city safe and carry on
other essential aspect of police work without affecting it in any substantial manner.
Preference should be given to the age group of 50 and ones having other medical
problems, the order stated.
A senior police officer said that police personnel above the age of 50, who have been
suffering from diabetes, respiratory and renal diseases were allowed to take commuted
leave.
“We have distributed masks, gloves and sanitisers to police personnel deployed at
various intersections,” the officer added.
Mr. Shrivastava has also urged its personnel to use precautions during their duty and
maintain a free flow of essential goods vehicles as there has been a restriction of non-
essential services in the country to contain the spread of COVID-19.
Why you should pay for quality journalism - Click to know more
4/23/2020                                Coronavirus in India: Constable tests positive for Covid-29, 17 cops in self-quarantine - India News
Coronavirus in India: Constable tests positive for Covid-29, 17
A 56-year-old constable attached to Saifabad police station is undergoing treatment
at a state-run hospital in Hyderabad, oﬃcials said.
The policeman's family members were also under quarantine at the hospital. (Image for representation: PTI)
head constable of the Hyderabad police has tested positive of novel coronavirus,
oﬃcials said on Tuesday.
The 56-year-old constable attached to Saifabad police station is undergoing treatment at a
state-run hospital in Hyderabad, oﬃcials said.
4/23/2020                                Coronavirus in India: Constable tests positive for Covid-29, 17 cops in self-quarantine - India News
"The constable was admitted to the hospital on late Saturday evening and on Monday
evening his test report conﬁrmed he was infected with Covid-19," oﬃcials said.
The policeman's family members were also under quarantine at the hospital.
Samples of the constable's primary and secondary contacts were collected, they said
adding samples of as many as 17 police personnel                Read More in the Saifabad police station were
collected and they were asked to be under self-quarantine.
For sports news, updates, live scores and cricket ﬁxtures, log on to indiatoday.in/sports. Like us
on Facebook or follow us on Twitter for Sports news, scores and updates.
Get real-time alerts and all the news on your phone with the all-new India Today app. Download from
termlife.policybazaar.com | Sponsored
Born Between 1965-1985? Get Term Life Insurance Worth ₹1 Cr at Rs.1884/month*.
Cancer has made this 5-yr-old look like an adult. Help him
4/23/2020                                                          Police constable tests positive for Covid-19 in Virar - Times of India
Police constable tests positive for Covid-19 in Virar
MUMBAI: A 57-year-old police constable residing in Virar has tested
positive for Covid-19. He had earlier tested negative.
He has been admitted to a private hospital in Nalasopara. His family has
been moved to isolation and his ﬂat has been sealed.
The constable who works at the Marol police station in Andheri was
admitted to the Nagpada police hospital on March 26 after he showed
symptoms of the virus. He had tested negative but was in home
quarantine.
On April 6 he got admitted to the Nalasopara hospital after he
experienced symptoms of the virus. His test report has come positive.
The number of positive cases in the Vasai-Virar region is now 28. Three persons have died of Covid-19 in the region. The
Palghar district death stands at four and positive cases are 29.
The swab results of 115 persons are awaited as on Friday morning.                                                                  1/1
4/23/2020                                               Thane senior cop tests positive for coronavirus - cities - Hindustan Times
india cities coronavirus #WFHLife opinion world cricket entertainment education trending videos tech podcasts health
Learn How to Conceive, Plan and Execute a New Product. Book
Home / Cities / Thane senior cop tests positive for coronavirus
Thane senior cop tests positive for coronavirus
A senior police inspector from Thane commissionerate has tested positive for Covid-19. “The
52-year-old inspector was on a round-the-clock deployment in Thane but went on sick leave to
his Nashik home. In a few days he developed fever. His rst report of Covid-19 was negative;
however, the second report was positive,” said the police.
Thane Municipal Corporation (TMC) said he had come in contact with some members of                                                  Pak
Tablighi Jamaat, who had attended the event in Delhi. TMC deputy commissioner Sandip Malvi
said, “We are yet to nd the number of people he had come in contact with. He used to go to
different areas, asking people to not step out and also speaking to the media about the
situation of the area.”
Enter your email to get our daily newsletter in your
Thane senior cop             Family faces                  UGC tells                      4 Mumbai men                 Ramzan under
tests positive for           boycott over                  researchers:                   recover, no active           lockdown: The
coronavirus                  Covid-19 rumour,              Republishing,                  case in Moga                 indomitable spirit
4/23/2020                                                    Coronavirus in Jaipur: After two cops test positive, officers shifted to hotels - Times of India
Coronavirus in Jaipur: After two cops test positive,
JAIPUR: After two police personnel tested positive for coronavirus in
Ramganj and Manak Chowk police station areas, the police administration
has decided that the cops on duty will stay in hotels which have been
booked for them. Oﬃcials have taken the decision to prevent further
spread of the virus among the cops.
A constable at Manak Chowk police station was found Covid-19 positive
while a head constable of Ramganj police station was found infected on
Ajal Pal Lamba, additional commissioner of police, said, “the hotels or
guesthouses which are suitable for the stay of police personnel have
been booked. Facilities close to the police stations have been chosen.” According to the oﬃcials, the move will ensure that
physical and social distancing is maintained among the cops. “The personnel who are staying in barracks have been asked to
shift to the hotels. We realized that staying in the barracks was not feasible as it did not adhere to the parameters of social
distancing. Now, we have very few personnel staying in the barracks,” added the oﬃcial.                                                                1/2
4/23/2020                                                    Coronavirus in Jaipur: After two cops test positive, officers shifted to hotels - Times of India
This facility has been provided to all the police stations while it was started for Manak Chowk police station staﬀ on Friday.
Moreover, several personnel from Ramganj police station were also shifted to hotels on Saturday.
Jaipur police has deployed 4,500 personnel in the Walled City which is under strict curfew. The medical teams are carrying out
door-to-door screening after more than 90 positive cases of coronavirus emerged from the area. Additionally, two police
personnel are escorting every medical team which is engaged in screening. The cops are ensuring that residents get home
delivery of essential goods.
4/23/2020                           Delhi Police DCP, 30 cops self-quarantine after ASI posted at AIIMS tests positive for Covid-19 - India News
News / India / Delhi Police DCP, 30 cops self-quarantine after ASI posted at AIIMS tests positive for
Delhi Police DCP, 30 cops self-quarantine after ASI posted at
Delhi Police revealed that the ASI attached to Safdarjung Enclave police station
attended duty last on April 9.
File photo of a Delhi Police personnel deployed to enforce lockdown (Photo Credits: PTI)
Delhi has more than 1,500 conﬁrmed cases of Covid-19 to date
Three Delhi Police oﬃcers have tested positive for the infection
4/23/2020                           Delhi Police DCP, 30 cops self-quarantine after ASI posted at AIIMS tests positive for Covid-19 - India News
DCP (South West) Devender Arya also came in contact with the ASI who tested positive
s many as 30 Delhi Police oﬃcers along with Deputy Commissioner of Police (South-
West) Devender Arya have opted for self-quarantine after it was found that they
came in contact with a policeman who tested positive for novel coronavirus on Sunday.
The policeman in question is an assistant sub-inspector deployed at the All India Institute
of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in Delhi.
Attached to the Safdarjung Enclave police station, the ASI is a resident of Shyam Nagar in
Okhla Phase-1. He was tested after oﬃcials noticed that he was showing symptoms of the
infection. His samples were sent for testing and came back positive for Covid-19 on April
Delhi Police revealed that the ASI attended duty last on April 9. His family members,
neighbours and all policemen who came in contact with him will be screened for the novel
coronavirus. The ASI is the third policeman in Delhi to have tested positive for Covid-19.
Most recent inputs suggest that barracks of Delhi Police personnel are being evacuated to
avoid further spread of the infection among them. Hotels and guest houses are being
arranged for them. This is also being done to accommodate personnel who reside in
various parts of Uttar Pradesh, Haryana and Rajasthan and commute to Delhi for work.
Barracks are also being evacuated because it is not possible for the inhabitants to observe
or practice social distancing norms owing to the compact nature of these structures.
READ | Delhi Police ASI tests positive for coronavirus
ALSO READ | Maharashtra Police gives corona twist to nursery rhyme Johnny Johnny
WATCH | Uruguayan diplomat ﬂouts lockdown rules in Delhi, ﬁghts with cops
4/23/2020                                                        Punjab: Ludhiana ACP in ICU since April 7 dies of Covid-19 - Times of India
Punjab: Ludhiana ACP in ICU since April 7 dies of Covid-
LUDHIANA/CHANDIGARH: Ludhiana assistant commissioner of police Anil
Kohli (52), who had contracted Covid-19, died of multiple organ failure on
Saturday afternoon. He is survived by his wife, who too was conﬁrmed to
have contracted the virus on Friday, and two sons.
“Anil joins the hallowed ranks of over 1,800 Punjab policemen who gave
their lives for their motherland,” DGP Dinkar Gupta tweeted on Saturday
afternoon.
The chief minister Captain Amarinder Singh too condoled his demise
along with that of kanungo (revenue oﬃcer) Gurmel Singh, who died of
Covid-19 on Friday. Amarinder announced Rs 50 lakh ex gratia to the next
of kin of both the oﬃcers and said similar amount will be paid to kin of any oﬃcer who dies in the line of duty due to novel
coronavirus.
“Deeply saddened to lose two of my oﬃcials to #Covid19. Have decided to pay Rs 50 lakh ex-gratia to their next to kin. While I
pray such an incident shouldn’t happen, but if it does, state govt will pay Rs 50 lakh to NoK of oﬃcials who die in line of duty
4/23/2020                                                        Punjab: Ludhiana ACP in ICU since April 7 dies of Covid-19 - Times of India
due to #Covid19,” he tweeted.
Kohli was directly involved in contact tracing and area containment in Ludhiana and also helped ensure so cial distancing was
implemented at Ludhiana sabzi mandi after imposition of lockdown across the country.
The police oﬃcer had visited the outpatient department of SPS Hospital at 2pm on April 7, complaining of fever and
breathlessness. He was admitted to its Covid-19 ICU the same day but his ﬁrst test came negative. His second test conﬁrmed
that he had contracted Covid-19 on April 12. He was on ventilator since April 11. His security guard and a station house oﬃcer
also tested positive for coronavirus on Friday.
The Punjab government had on Friday given its permission for clinical use of convalescent plasma therapy for the police oﬃcer.
The Mohali district had on Saturday morning sent a fully-recovered coronavirus patient to Ludhiana for donating plasma to treat
the police oﬃcer. However, his condition deteriorated and the plan was dropped.
Giving details, senior consultant Dr Gautam Agarwal at the hospital where he was being treated said the police oﬃcer's health
deteriorated on Saturday afternoon and he died due to multi-organ failure. He was on dialysis on Friday night and his BP
dropped further. We gave whatever medications needed but his condition did not improve.”
Dr Gurpreet Singh of the same hospital said the oﬃcer had developed kidney dysfunction two days back. The survival of
Covid-19 patients with multi-organ dysfunction and on ventilator is not that hopeful and good, he said.                               2/3
4/23/2020                                                        Punjab: Ludhiana ACP in ICU since April 7 dies of Covid-19 - Times of India
“As Covid-19 is a new disease with no clear-cut treatment or an eﬀective anti-viral drug, treatment for critically sick Covid-19
patients at present is best of supportive intensive care and trial medication.”
According to the ACP’s family, the police oﬃcer was cremated by his son with full state honours at the gas crematorium in
Ludhiana. His cremation was attended by Ludhiana police commissioner Rakesh Agarwal and local MP Ravneet Singh Bittu.
SAD president Sukhbir Singh Badal too condoled his death. “Saddened to hear Ludhiana ACP Anil Kumar Kohli lost his battle to
#Covid-19 just few minutes back. He served the state police for about 30 years. May Gurusahib grant peace to the departed
soul. My thoughts and prayers are with the bereaved family & friends,” he tweeted.
Born in Jalandhar, Anil Kohli had joined the Punjab police as assistant sub-inspector on February 19, 1990 in Patiala district
when terrorism was at its peak. In his career of over 30 years, Kohli earned many commendation certiﬁcates and was promoted
as deputy superintendent of police on April 29, 2016. He served as DSP in district Khanna, Ferozepur, Patiala, Fatehgarh Sahib,
SBS Nagar, Hoshiarpur and Ludhiana City.
4/23/2020                                                       Police officer infected with Covid-19 dies in Indore - Times of India
Police oﬃcer infected with Covid-19 dies in Indore
INDORE: A police inspector, who had tested positive for Covid-19 a
fortnight ago and was undergoing treatment at Indore’s Aurobindo
Hospital, died on Sunday. The 43-year-old became the second policeman
in the country, after an ACP in Ludhiana, to lose his life to coronavirus.
Chief minister Shivraj Singh Chouhan oﬀered his condolences to the
bereaved family and announced that the inspector’s wife will be given Rs
50 lakh compensation and compassionate appointment as a sub-
inspector of police.
The inspector was the ﬁrst police oﬃcer to be detected with Covid-19 in
Madhya Pradesh. He is believed to have contracted the disease while
performing his duties. He was admitted to hospital after complaining of
breathing problems on March 31.
IG Vivek Sharma said that the oﬃcer was away from duty owing to bad health since March 19 and had been living in the family
quarters in his police station area.
The inspector's lungs were badly damaged due to the deadly viral infection and he was also stricken with acute pneumonia,       1/2
4/23/2020                                                            Police officer infected with Covid-19 dies in Indore - Times of India
Dr Vinod Bhandari, who was treating him, said that he died of pulmonary embolism. “He was admitted on March 31 but his
condition did not improve till April 10, following which we took opinion of other doctors and gave him an injection. His condition
improved eventually. He tested negative on April 16 and 17 and we were going to discharge him soon, but on Saturday night,
his condition again started deteriorating. We suspect that he died of pulmonary embolism,” said Dr Bhandari.
4/23/2020                                              Coronavirus: Ujjain Police inspector dies in Indore - The Hindu
Coronavirus: Ujjain Police inspector dies in Indore
He contracted the illness while on duty, says of cial
A 59-year-old incharge of a police station in Ujjain died of COVID-19
on Tuesday morning while undergoing treatment at a hospital in
“He had contracted the illness during the course of his duty,” said A.G.
Sinha, Ujjain Chief Medical and Health Officer. She added that the
inspector was posted at the Neelganga station, which fell under one of
the containment areas, where infected cases had been reported.
The official, who died at 5.10 a.m. on Tuesday, was admitted to a private
hospital in Indore 10 days ago in a serious condition. “He had bilateral
pneumonia and difficulty in breathing. Despite continuous treatment,
4/23/2020                                              Coronavirus: Ujjain Police inspector dies in Indore - The Hindu
he didn’t show improvement,” said Vinod Bhandari, a doctor who
oversaw his treatment.
Towards the end, he was put on a ventilator. “But he had acute
respiratory distress syndrome of a severe variety. So, despite all efforts
we couldn’t save him,” said Dr. Bhandari.
Condoling his death, Vivek Johri, Director General of Police, said the
official sacrificed his life while fighting the courageous battle against
the disease. “By making the sacrifice, he upheld the sentiment that for
the State police public service comes first,” he said.
On Sunday, the incharge of a police station in Indore died while
undergoing treatment for the illness. He too was suspected to have
4/23/2020                                              Coronavirus: Ujjain Police inspector dies in Indore - The Hindu
been infected while on duty.
Ujjain has reported 27 cases, of which seven have succumbed so far,
while five have recovered. The district administration has drawn up 14
containment areas where the cases have been detected. The toll owing
to the disease stands at 77 in Madhya Pradesh now.
As of April 21, as many as 1,503 cases have been reported in the State
and Indore, with 915, registering more than half of them. Bhopal has
recorded 254 cases.
Why you should pay for quality journalism - Click to know more
Printable version | Apr 23, 2020 1:50:25 PM |
https://www.thehindu.com/news/national/other-states/coronavirus-
police-inspector-dies-in-ujjain/article31394087.ece
4/23/2020                                           Local governments providing hazard pay, stipends for first responders
COVID-19: Breaking news; action items for EMS
Several local governments have implemented hazard pay and
stipends for rst responders and other front-line workers during
In March, U.S. Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin said hazard pay for rst responders
could be considered for future legislation to address the COVID-19 national emergency.
As federal o cials continue working to implement the third COVID-19 stimulus package,
several local governments have already passed their own legislation to provide hazard
pay and stipends for rst responders and other front-line workers.
Mayor Randall Wood n and the Birmingham City Council approved $500,000 to provide hazard pay for nearly 2,000
city employees on Tuesday, April 7. (Photo/Mayor Randall Wood n Facebook)
Below is a list of municipalities, counties and other local governments that have
implemented hazard pay, stipends or other bene ts for front-line workers during the
COVID-19 crisis. This list will be continually updated as new information becomes
available.
Attalla — Attalla re ghters, police o cers and dispatchers will receive an additional $2
per hour in hazard pay for a four-week period, and public works employees will receive
an additional $1 per hour for the same time period.
4/23/2020                                           Local governments providing hazard pay, stipends for first responders
Birmingham — The Birmingham City Council approved a 5% hazard pay raise for about
2,000 city employees, including those in the re and rescue and police and corrections
departments.
Baldwin County — The Baldwin County Commission approved a request from the
Baldwin County Sheri 's O ce to provide hazard pay for deputies, corrections o cers
and communications o cers. Across the department, 279 employees will receive an
additional $240,000 total per pay period; the precise amount to be received by each
employee was not reported.
Boaz — The Boaz City Council approved hazard pay of $200 per month for police and re
department employees.
Daphne — The Daphne City Council approved $3 per hour in hazard pay for rst
responders for a four-week period, as well as a $250 one-time payment for all public
safety personnel.
Rainbow City — The Rainbow City Council approved hazard pay of $2 per hour for police
o cers, investigators and re ghters for a three-week period.
Summerdale — The Summerdale council approved $1.50 per hour in hazard pay for city
police o cers, excluding overtime hours.
Vestavia Hills — Vestavia Hills city employees who are considered essential, including
rst responders, building and engineering inspectors and administrative employees who
work with the public, will receive a 5% pay increase for 30 days due to the COVID-19
pandemic.
Atlanta — Atlanta Mayor Keisha Lance Bottoms issued an executive order providing $500
a month in hazard pay for public safety, sanitation and other front-line workers during
the pandemic.
Augusta — The city of Augusta implemented an additional $5 per hour in hazard pay for
about 1,400 essential critical infrastructure employees, including re ghters, law
enforcement, EMS, dispatchers and sanitation workers. On April 21, the city commission
voted to terminate the hazard pay policy on May 1 in response to the planned re-
opening of Georgia's economy.
Barrow County — The Barrow County Board of Commissioners approved hazard pay for
182 emergency services employees and sheri 's deputies. The eligible employees will
receive an additional $250 per month for the duration of the statewide emergency.
Carrollton — The city of Carrollton approved up to 10 weeks of hazard pay for critical
employees who are not working from home, including re ghters, police o cers, public
works employees, sanitation workers, City Hall cashiers, treatment plant workers and
4/23/2020                                           Local governments providing hazard pay, stipends for first responders
sewer infrastructure employees. Full-time employees will receive $200 every two weeks
while those working on reduced hours will receive a proportional amount.
Cherokee County — The Cherokee County Board of Commissioners has authorized three
months of hazard pay for front-line workers. Employees with an "elevated risk" of
exposure to COVID-19 will receive an additional $250 per month and those with a
"signi cantly elevated risk" will receive an additional $500 monthly.
Henry County — The Henry County Board of Commissioners approved an additional
$2.50 per hour in hazard pay for employees who have the potential of direct contact with
the public on a daily basis and an additional $1.50 per hour for employees working in
county o ces rather than teleworking.
Savannah — Savannah Mayor Van Johnson announced that most city employees will
receive hazard pay in the form of an extra $2.50 per hour, or about $100 per week.
Smyrna — The Smyrna City Council voted to implement hazard pay for city employees
who "have the potential to come into contact with the public," including rst responders,
community development employees and public works employees. The eligible
employees will receive an additional $2 per hour.
Walton County — Walton County commissioners voted unanimously for a $100-per-week
stipend for re ghters, EMTs, paramedics, deputies, jail employees, public works
employees and animal control o cers.
Woodstock — The Woodstock City Council unanimously approved two months of
retroactive hazard pay for re ghters and police o cers going back to March 16 and
ending on May 15. Fire ghters and police o cers assigned to primary assigned duties
will receive $500 for each month, or $1,000 total, and o cers assigned to secondary
assigned duties will receive $250 per month. O cials may vote to extend the plan in the
future.
The U.S. territory of Guam implemented hazard pay for essential government
employees, including rst responders. The bill passed by the Guam Legislature creates
three categories of di erential pay; details about the categories and amounts of
additional pay were not reported.
Sedgwick County — Sedgwick County commissioners have approved hazard pay of $200
per month for county employees, including rst responders. The provision will last for at
least two pay periods and can be extended by a later vote.
4/23/2020                                           Local governments providing hazard pay, stipends for first responders
Statewide — Maine Gov. Janet Mills' administration agreed to implement between $3 to
$5 per hour in hazard pay for 800 employees represented by the American Federation of
State, County and Municipal Employees Council 93, which includes corrections o cers
and mental health workers.
Baltimore — The city of Baltimore will be providing re ghters, EMS providers and police
o cers with a $200 biweekly stipend during the pandemic, as well as a $100 biweekly
stipend for other "mission critical" employees.
Montgomery County — The International Association of Fire Fighters (IAFF) Local 1664,
Fraternal Order of Police (FOP) Lodge 35 and United Food and Commercial Workers
(MCGEO) Local 1994 have reached an agreement with Montgomery County that will
provide an additional $10 per hour for county employees represented by the IAFF and
FOP and either $10 or $3 more per hour for MCGEO-represented employees depending
on whether or not they regularly interact with the public.
Statewide — More than 6,000 state healthcare workers represented by the American
Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) Council 93 in
Massachusetts will receive hazard pay of up to $10 per hour after an agreement between
union and state o cials.
Statewide — About 6,000 corrections o cers represented by the Michigan Corrections
Organization will receive an additional $750 per pay period in hazard pay after about 360
of the state's 38,000 prisoners and 151 of its 12,000 corrections department employees
have tested positive for COVID-19.
Detroit — Detroit Mayor Mike Duggan announced that the city's rst responders and
other employees that work with the public will receive about $800 per month for the
duration of the state emergency.
Macomb County — Macomb County Executive Mark Hackel announced that all county
employees who are deemed essential will receive hazard pay of $1 or $2 more per hour
depending on whether they regularly interact with the public.
Clarksdale — Clarksdale's mayor announced that 147 city employees, including rst
responders and public works employees, will receive hazard pay in the form of a 5%
raise for at least two pay periods.
4/23/2020                                           Local governments providing hazard pay, stipends for first responders
Charlotte — Charlotte employees who have frequent, direct contact with the public,
including rst responders, will receive hazard pay of 5% over their base pay until the
Mecklenburg County stay-at-home order is lifted.
Charleston County — Charleston County has activated its Emergency Conditions Pay
Program for the rst time in at least 30 years, providing an additional $100 per week for
salaried workers and an additional $250 per week for hourly workers. The program
applies to all county employees considered essential, including rst responders and
public works employees.
Collin County — The Collin County Commissioners Court approved emergency
compensation for county workers for the duration of the county's emergency period.
Workers considered "mandatory" will receive a stipend of $6 per hour and those
considered "not mandatory" will receive a $3 per hour stipend.
Dallas County — The Dallas County Commissioners Court will temporarily increase pay
for rst responders and healthcare workers. The amount and duration of the pay
increase was not published.
Denton County — The Denton County Commissioners Court approved hazard pay of up
to $80 per week for its critical employees, mostly detention o cers, sheri 's deputies
and constables. The pay increase will remain until the county's disaster declaration is
lifted.
Donna — The Donna City Council unanimously approved an additional $700 per
month in hazard pay for 29 patrol o cers and three re ghters in the city. The provision
is currently set to last for six weeks but could be extended, o cials said.
Glen Heights — The Glenn Heights City Council unanimously approved hazard pay for
frontline workers, including rst responders and public works employees. Eligible
employees will receive a pay increase of $2 per hour until the city's disaster declaration is
lifted.
Mayor Muriel Bowser announced April 14 that all employees required to physically
report to work during the pandemic will receive $14 per day per diem as long as the city
can a ord to pay it.
Treasury secretary says rst responders could receive COVID-19 hazard pay
4/23/2020                                           Local governments providing hazard pay, stipends for first responders
Roundtable: Should EMS providers be given hazard pay during the COVID-19
Beyond the scope or part of the job? EMS providers weigh in on COVID-19 hazard pay
FFs react: Should rst responders receive hazard pay during a pandemic?
Tags       Bene ts •         Coronavirus (COVID-19) •               Fire ghters •           Government •
IAFC launches survey to measure                         COVID-19: How public safety
companies are assisting the frontline
Please sign in or register to write your own comments below.
Before commenting, please read EMS1 's Commenting Policy
Posted by medic0930           Apr 10, 2020 at 5:18 AM
Nor Indiana. My partner just passed her national registry for paramedic
and the state is holding up her shit because she had a DUI 19 years ago
which has already been reported to the state. Way to have our backs state
of Indiana! We have too deal with the everyday stress of this job and the
state of Indiana adds additional stress on its responders for no reason.
Oh look...Florida is NOT on that list, not surprised though I guess
Posted by mikebuzz           Apr 9, 2020 at 2:45 AM
Stipends and Hazard pay for this pandemic is great! But what about
providing such all year around regardless of whether or not we're in a
pandemic or not? EMS puts their lives on the line every single day,
pandemic or not. They respond to violent calls, mass casualty, shootings,
stabbings, etc, etc. This is great for the current pandemic, but why not
4/23/2020                                               Govt identifies 170 Covid-19 hotspots: Here's the full list - The Economic Times
Business News › News › Politics and Nation                                                                                 Search for News, Stock Quotes & NAV's
Govt identifies 170 Covid-19 hotspots: Here's the full list
BY ET ONLINE | UPDATED: APR 21, 2020, 09.13 AM IST                                                                                               Post a Comment
Detailing the govt's plan to contain local outbreak of coronavirus, Lav Agarwal, Joint
Secretary, MoHFW, underlined that the affected areas have been divided into two zones-                     RELATED VIDEO
Containment zone and Buffer Zone. The containment zone has been divided into sectors
with 50 houses each (30 houses in difficult areas) emphasised Agarwal. The cluster-
containment strategy has yielded positive results, said the official.
Containment zones are created to map the local transmission of the disease and prevent
the contagion from spreading. The rapid response team (RRT) identifies containment
zones based on the extent of cases/contacts listed and mapped by them, added Agarwal.
He also said that if required, based on the mapping of contacts and cases, the
containment zone is refined.
COVID-19: Government identifies 170 hotspot
In order strengthen government's efforts to contain the novel coronavirus, country's
districts will now be classified into three categories—hotspot districts which report a large
number of positive cases, non-hotspot districts which record a few coronavirus cases and                   Big Change:
The end of Five-Year Plans: All you need to know
green zones which have not reported fresh cases for some time. The ministry has
identified 170 districts as hotspots, and 207 districts as non-hotspots.
A buffer zone of an additional 5-kilometre radius (7 Kms in rural areas)/administrative boundary of including neighbouring districts/per-
urban zone shall also be identified. The efforts are in consonance with government's micro plan to contain local coronavirus
transmission.
'Hotspot (Red zone) classification'- to focus attention on districts/cities reporting large
number of cases/high growth rate.
*Highest case load districts contributing to more than 80% of cases in lndia or
*Highest case load districts contributing to more than 80% of cases for each state in
*Districts with doubling rate less than 4 days (calculated every Monday for last 7 days,
to be determined by the state government)
Subject to the following exclusion criteria
* No new confirmed cases for last 28 days (Green zone)
North, Central, New Delhi, East and South
health ministry                                        *Gujarat: Ahmadabad, Surat, Bhavnagar,
4/23/2020                                          Govt identifies 170 Covid-19 hotspots: Here's the full list - The Economic Times
Stay on top of business news with The Economic Times App. Download it Now!
of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India;
1.    The Petitioner is preferring present Application seeking urgent
ad-interim directions to the Respondents to take necessary steps
so far as it relates to the directions to Respondents to exempt
police officer above 48 years with above medical conditions be
not deployed in any stressful working environment which comes
in direct contact with COVID-19 patients.
2.    The present Application is being preferred This more so, when
some of the zones in the country, especially in Delhi, Pune,
Mumbai, etc. have been declared containment areas, and over
170 districts of 19 States in Country have been designated red
zones/Hotspot therefore increasing the need and responsibility of
the police personnel to ensure that these areas continuously
remain under lockdown, strictly. This is going to lead to a further
work force by the police personnel to ensure that the COVID 19
is not spread, thereby subjecting their own person to risk.
3.    It is in this regard imperative that urgent interim directions be
issued to Respondents to interalia take immediate.
4.    The present Application is made bonafide and interest of justice.
In the facts and circumstances above mentioned the Applicant most
respectfully prays that this Hon’ble Court may graciously be pleased;-
a)     Issue ad-interim directions to the Respondents direction to
the Respondents to identify such officers who are above
the age of 48 years with health conditions such as diabetic
etc and direct not to deploy them in any duty which comes
in direct or indirect contacts with COVID-19 patients;
b)   Issue ad-interim directions to the Respondents to recruit
on ad hoc basis persons who are physically fit, to ensure
that the police officials are not burdened; and
c)   pass such other and further order/orders as deemed fit and
proper in the facts and circumstances of the present case
and in the interest of justice.
I BELOW MENTIONED in the above W.P./Appeal/Petition Reference do
hereby appoint and return Mr. AMIT PAI, Advocate, Supreme Court
of    India,   to   act    and    appear     for   me/us       in   the above
W.P./Appeal/Petition/Reference and on my/our behalf to conduct and
prosecute (or defend) the same and all proceedings that may be taken in
respect of any application connected with the same or any decree or Order
passed therein, including proceedings, taxation and application for review,
to file and obtain return of documents and to deposit and receive money
on my/our behalf in the W.P./Appeal/ Reference and in application for
review to represent me/us and to take all necessary steps on my/our
behalf in the above matter. I/we agree to ratify all acts done by the
aforesaid Advocate in pursuance of the authority.
Accepted, Identified, verified, Certified and satisfied.
Please enter my appearance on behalf of the Petitioner(s)/
Appellant(s)/Intervenors/Respondent(s) in the above matter.
The address for service of the said Advocate is:              PAI AMIT
Statement of Account No :315010100014058 for the period (From : 01-04-2019 To : 31-03-2020)
315010100014058:Int.Pd:01-04-2019 to 30-06-
315010100014058:Int.Pd:01-07-2019 to 30-09-
11-11-2019                  BRN-SALARY PAYMENT-By salary                                                  1000.00             4374361.49 101
315010100014058:Int.Pd:01-10-2019 to 31-12-
315010100014058:Int.Pd:01-01-2020 to 31-03-
Unless the constituent notifies the bank immediately of any discrepancy found by him/her in this statement of Account, it will be taken that
he/she has found the account correct.
The closing balance as shown/displayed includes not only the credit balance and / or overdraft limit, but also funds which are under clearing. It
excludes the amount marked as lien, if any. Hence the closing balance displayed may not be the effective available balance. For any further
clarifications, please contact the Branch.
We would like to reiterate that, as a policy, Axis Bank does not ask you to part with/disclose/revalidate of your iConnect passord,login id and
debit card number through emails OR phone call Further,we would like to reiterate that Axis Bank shall not be liable for any losses arising
from you sharing/disclosing of your login id, password and debit card number to anyone. Please co-operate by forwarding all such
suspicious/spam emails, if received by you, to customer.service@axisbank.com
380006.This is a system generated output and requires no signature.
ICONN-Transaction trough Internet Banking
VMT-ICON-Visa Money Transfer through Internet Banking
AUTOSWEEP-Transfer to linked fixed deposit
REV SWEEP-Interest on Linked fixed Deposit
SWEEP TRF-Transfer from Linked Fixed Deposit / Account
TIP/ SCG-Surcharge on usage of debit card at pumps/railway ticket purchase or hotel tips
RATE.DIFF-Difference in rates on usage of card internationally
EDC-Credit transaction through EDC Machine
SETU -Seamless electronic fund transfer through AXIS Bank
Int.Coll-Interest collected from the customer