The hearing has been conducted through hybrid mode (physical and
virtual hearing).
1. Seasons may come and seasons may go but some entities remain
recalcitrant to abide by the law of the land. Despite a passage of 57
years, many National Sports Federations (‘NSFs’) have not complied
with the Government of India’s National Sports Code, 2011 (Sports
Code), the 1975 Circular, the 2001 Guidelines and the judgments of
courts. Generations of youth have turned to middle age and into senior
Digitally Signed By:KAMLESH W.P.(C) 8691/2020                                                     Page 1 of 10
citizens, without having had the benefit or availability of even
minimum sports infrastructure or fair opportunities for participating or
excelling in or enjoying the sports discipline of their choice.
Compliance is to be ensured largely by the Government of India which
grants recognition to sports bodies as NSF. Non-compliance, with the
regime of law, is clearly against public interest.
2. In essence, this writ petition seeks compliance by NSFs with the Sports
Code and orders passed by the courts. The petitioner says that despite
more than a decade having gone by, many NSFs continue to breach the
Sports Code and its strict mandates, while simultaneously they continue
to enjoy governmental grants, concessions and recognition. There have
been, however, notable instances when the Government of India has
acted strictly against non-compliance by erring NSFs and the latter
have promptly fallen in line.
3. On 08.01.2021 and 22.01.2021, this court had directed the respondent
1.          On 06.11.2020, the Court had passed the following order:
Allowed, subject to all just exceptions.
1. The petitioner has filed the present petition
praying inter alia for several reliefs against the
respondent/Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports,
UOI including issuance of a writ in the nature of
mandamus directing the respondent to grant
Digitally Signed By:KAMLESH W.P.(C) 8691/2020                                                     Page 2 of 10
compliant with the National Sports Development
Code of India, 2011 duly notified by UOI and
mandatorily applicable to all NSFs. Strict
adherence to the Code has been insisted upon by
the UOI in various proceedings before this court
as well as before the Supreme Court.
2. We are of the opinion that before hearing
submissions on admission, Mr. Anil Soni,
learned CGSC appearing for the Union of India
be called upon to assist this court by indicating
as to whether all the 41 NSFs referred to in para
8.32 of the writ petition are in compliance with
the Sports Code, in terms of the letter dated
07.08.2020, addressed by the UOI to them, more
specifically, in terms of the performa annexed to
the said letter (Annexures K and M), placed at
3. Mr. Anil Soni, states that he will prepare a
tabulated statement alongwith copies of the
replies submitted by all the 41 NSFs, in terms of
the letter dated 07.08.2020 issued by the
Ministry and the latter’s satisfaction apropos the
requirements. The same be filed in the Registry
initially for the perusal of this court. Thereafter,
on directions to be issued, the said details shall
be shared with the petitioner. Needful shall be
done within two weeks.
4. List on 08.01.2021”
2. This order has not been complied with by the respondent.
Instead, the respondent has filed a short affidavit, wherein it
is stated that Mr. Anil Soni, Standing Counsel, did not have
instructions as he appeared in the matter on the first date. It
is stated that the submissions of Mr. Soni may not be treated
as representation/stand of the respondent.
3. We reject this affidavit of the respondent for the reason
Digitally Signed By:KAMLESH W.P.(C) 8691/2020                                                       Page 3 of 10
that in the aforesaid order, no submission of Mr. Soni as
such, was recorded. The Court had proceeded to direct the
respondent to file an affidavit with a tabulation indicating
the status of compliance of the National Sports Development
Code of India, 2011 by the 41 National Sports Federations
(NSFs) to whom recognition is granted by the respondent.
That information is still not forthcoming.
4. We are dismayed that the National Sports Code – which
has been formulated and authored by the Government of
India itself, is not being implemented with any seriousness
in respect of the National Sports Federations, including in
relation to the Indian Olympic Association. This is despite
the fact that this Court had already directed compliance of
the National Sports Code in respect of the Archery
Association of India. Furthermore, vide order dated
9.5.2014 in WP(C) No.2310/2014 this Court has held that
the National Sports Code is applicable to all NSFs without
exception. We are informed that the respondent’s challenge
to the said order is pending adjudication before the
Supreme Court in C.A. No.003246/2019, but no interim
order has been passed staying the decision of this Court.
5. We grant one last opportunity to the respondent to
comply with the directions issued in our earlier order dated
06.11.2020, failing which, we direct the Secretary (Sports),
Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports, Government of India, to
personally remain present during the next hearing. The said
affidavit be filed positively within the next ten days.
6. Issue notice returnable on 22.01.2021.
On 22.01.2021, the following order was passed:
1. The respondents have filed a compilation of
documents stated to be in compliance of our last order. The
said compilation is bereft of any affidavit to explain those
documents. By our last order, we had required the
respondents to file an affidavit. That has not been done.
During the hearing, the said compilation has been
Digitally Signed By:KAMLESH W.P.(C) 8691/2020                                                    Page 4 of 10
forwarded by email to Mr. Mehra.
2. We have heard Mr. Mehra, as well as Mr. Dutta at some
length. Mr. Mehra has drawn our attention to Annexure-K
(page 1033 of the record), and Annexure-L (page 1054 of
the record), which are two tabulations prepared by him in
respect of the Indian Olympic Association and several
National Sports Federations, in which the compliances/
non-compliances of the various salient features of the Sports
Code have been tabulated. It is also pointed out from
Annexure-N that the constitution of several Sports
Federations are themselves are in violation of the National
3. The respondents have filed the tabulation stated to be in
terms of our previous order, from which it appears that the
respondents have extended the recognition granted to the
National Sports Federations and have sought to grant them
6 months to a year’s time to comply with the Sports Code.
4. The directions to ensure compliances with the National
Sports Code were passed by this Court initially in the year
2014 in W.P.(C) 2310/2012, and again in the year February
2020 in W.P.(C) 195/2010. In this background, for the
respondents to grant further time to the Sports Federations
is not justified. In any event, to test the intentions and bona
fides of the respondents, and to ensure that this extension
does not turn out to be as mere a futility as the earlier ones,
we have decided to closely monitor the progress that the
National Sports Federations make to comply with the Sports
Code. It shall be for the respondents to follow up with all
the concerned Sports Federations on a regular basis and
call for compliance reports with regard to all aspects of the
Sports Code. The Sports Federations which do not fall in
line and comply with the Sports Code do not deserve and
would not be entitled to receive any grants from the Central
5. We, therefore, direct the respondents to file an affidavit
Digitally Signed By:KAMLESH W.P.(C) 8691/2020                                                       Page 5 of 10
along with tabulation in the formats contained in Annexures
K and L to the writ petition (pp.1033 and 1054) in respect of
each of National Sports Federation. Such tabulation/ charts
shall be filed by the respondents every fortnight after
gathering the information/ status from the National Sports
Federations, as aforesaid, so that the same available to the
Court at each hearing to ascertain the progress made by the
respective Sports Federations apropos compliance with the
provisions of the Sports Code. We also direct the
respondents to put all the Sports Federations to notice of
these proceedings, and of the orders passed by this Court in
this and other related proceedings. It should be made clear
to each of them that they would run the risk of them not
being recognised/ de-recognised and their grants being
stopped, in case they do not comply with the provisions of
the National Sports Code.
6. Mr. Mehra has also drawn our attention to the
compendium of instructions on Scheme of Assistance to
National Sports Federations, including Indian Olympic
Association issued by the Government of India ever since
6th August, 2014. He has placed on record the documents
which show that from time-to-time different volumes have
been issued of the said compendium up to January, 2018,
whereafter they have neither been issued nor uploaded on
the website. Mr. Mehra submits that this practice should not
be discontinued since access to all the relevant rules and
regulations framed by the Government from time to time is
essential for National Sports Federations to comply with,
and also for all others interested to become aware of. We
see no reason why the said practice should be discontinued.
Mr. Dutta wishes to take instructions and report in this
regard on the next date of hearing.
7. List on 19.02.2021.”
4. Three affidavits have been filed in the past 15 months. The essence of
the affidavits is that the government is in the process of ensuring
compliance. The writ petition is pending since 2020. The aforesaid
Digitally Signed By:KAMLESH W.P.(C) 8691/2020                                                     Page 6 of 10
orders regarding compliance were passed in January, 2021. Surely,
fifteen months is a long time to ensure compliance, otherwise, it was
always open to the respondent to suspend the recognition of NSFs
which are in blatant breach of the ‘governing regime’ apropos
administration and recognition of NSFs.
5. Mr. Anil Soni, the learned CGSC submits that notices have been issued
to all NSFs calling upon them to put their house in order, in strict
conformity with court orders. He further submits that some more time
may be granted to the respondents to ensure robust compliance with
and conformity with the legal regime governing sports administration.
Let Secretary, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, Government of
India ensure that the constitution of NSFs concerned Gymnastics,
Handball, National Yogasana, Tennis Volleyball, Mallkhamb and
Motor Sports as well as Equestrian, Rowing, Golf, Squash Racket,
Yachting, Polo is made available by them to the Ministry by the
coming Monday. The same will be examined preferably during the
course of the week and to the extent that they are not in compliance
with the Sports Code, directions/ notices shall be issued apropos
suspension of their recognition. An affidavit in this regard shall be filed
by a Joint Secretary in the said Ministry with the prior approval of the
6. The petitioner says that in addition to the above identified NSFs, as per
Union of India’s own affidavit dated 11.11.2021, most NSFs do not
meet the mandatory 25% representation of sports persons in the
Managing Committee of their respective NSFs.
7. Various judgments have held that compliance with the Sports Code is a
Digitally Signed By:KAMLESH W.P.(C) 8691/2020                                                     Page 7 of 10
must. It is the sine qua non for grant of recognition as a NSF and for
access to the corollary benefits that flow from such status. The benefits
are in various forms: tax benefits, travel concessions, accommodation
and hospitality accorded to players and officials of NSFs, use of
government-owned stadia and sports facilities, etc. All this expense is
made from public funds. The beneficiary of such funds and facilities
must qualify in law, to access it. Unless a NSF/sports entity/registered
society/Association strictly adheres to and fully complies with the
Sports Code and the court orders, it would disentitle itself from any
such benefit. There can be no let-up or latitude in this regard, as
relaxation would be arbitrary, illegal and lend to dilution of the Sports
Code. No NSF or Sports Entity should be seen to be receiving benefits
which are unjust. Fairness and legitimacy need to imbue all
governmental affairs. Therefore, it is prudent, indeed imperative that
no further exemptions be granted to or lenience be shown to non-
compliant NSFs. There comes a stage in the affairs of governance when
the recalcitrant have to be called-out and there has to be cessation of
their unlawfully enjoying government largesse, a privilege for which
they do not qualify. Nor can they be allowed with their faulty NSF
status to generate revenues from other sources. Twelve years is a long
time to enable sports bodies to conform to the Sports Code. The time to
stop is now.
8. The follow-up action by the respondent apropos the shortcomings as
detailed in the chart (Annexure R-3) annexed to the aforesaid affidavit,
too shall be specified in the affidavit to be filed before the next date.
9. Renotify on 02.06.2022.
Digitally Signed By:KAMLESH W.P.(C) 8691/2020                                                       Page 8 of 10
10.At this stage, the court would take into consideration that all over the
city the lack of easy access to stadia, sports fields and other sports
facilities for the ordinary citizens, is well known. This could well be
remedied and facilitated, in the first instance, by making available
playgrounds of government schools or other schools owned or
managed by statutory authorities. Such neighbourhood sports facilities
would be convenient for children and sports enthusiasts. In the
circumstances, let the Government of NCT of Delhi (GNCTD),
Municipal Corporation of Delhi and Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan
(under the Union Ministry of Education), examine the matter and file
their affidavits apropos opening of sports grounds in schools under
their respective jurisdictions and for making them available for optimal
use for the larger public good; if possible, on a pay-and-play basis
and/or any other scheme; while all along ensuring that the said schools
retain all their rights in the land and its students too benefit from the
additional sports facilities as may be created in their lands.
11.The authorities concerned would bear in mind that the opening of
stadia and sports facilities is primarily for the benefit of sports persons.
The duration for which such facilities would be kept open requires to
be structured around the needs of sports-persons and the climatic
conditions (longer evening time in summer to overcome the exhausting
heat during practice and play). The timings followed in countries, that
have a rich tradition in sports (including countries having tropical
climate) may be considered.
12.To begin with, let GNCTD, Sports Authority of India (‘SAI’) and the
other authorities which own and/or manage many stadia in the city,
Digitally Signed By:KAMLESH W.P.(C) 8691/2020                                                        Page 9 of 10
consider opening of the following stadia: Thyagaraj Sports Complex,
Chhatrasal Stadium, Shivaji Stadium and Punjabi Bagh Stadium, from
5 am to 10 pm in the summer months.
Digitally Signed By:KAMLESH W.P.(C) 8691/2020                                                Page 10 of 10