4.The Additional Director General of Police,
7.The Deputy Superintendent of Police,
Crime No.347 of 2020.
PRAYER : Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of Constitution of India for
issuance of Writ of Mandamus, directing the Respondents 1 to 2 to transfer the
case in Crime No.2/2020 on the file of the 8th Respondent to the file of the 3rd
Respondent Special Investigation Team of CBI headed by the committee of the
Hon'ble retired Judges of the Madras High Court to have a fair and thorough
investigation under the direct monitoring of this Court and to complete the
investigation within a time limit that may be specified by this Court by
considering the petitioner's representation dated 22.10.2020.
(Order of the Court was delivered by N.KIRUBAKARAN, J)
"An aura of reverence is attached to the name of Central Bureau
of Investigation (CBI).
There is always a clamour for CBI investigation."
Whenever any sensitive, heinous crimes are committed and there is no proper
investigation by the local police, there is a demand for CBI investigation and
the said demand for CBI investigation is increasing day by day due to the
credibility of the Central Bureau of Investigation. People revere CBI as a
premier trust worthy agency, which could investigate the cases impartially and
fairly and prosecute the case before the Court efficiently and properly. When
such is the trust and faith of the people, very sadly CBI is dragging its feet,
whenever there is a demand for CBI enquiry on the ground that resources and
man power available with CBI are very restricted and therefore, it cannot
conduct investigations. This is the usual stereotype version/defence of the CBI
before the Courts.
2.The aforesaid version has been parroted before this Court that CBI
has no resources and man power to investigate the case, which is sought to be
referred to CBI by the Petitioner in this case. When the matter came up on
08.12.2020, this Court passed the following order:
''This Writ Petition has been filed as a Public Interest Litigation
seeking for issuance of a Writ of Mandamus to direct respondents 1 and
2 to transfer the case in Cr.No.2 of 2020, on the file of the eighth
respondent to the file of the third respondent - Special Investigation
Team of CBI headed by the Committee of the Hon'ble Retired Judges of
the Madras High Court to have a fair and thorough investigation under
the direct monitoring of this Court and to complete the investigation
within a time limit that may be fixed by this Court by considering the
petitioner's representation dated 22.10.2020.
2. The contention of the petitioner is that one Company called
BULLION FINTECH LLP, having its office at Ramanathapuram Sathak
Centre, collected deposits to the tune of Rupees Three Hundred Crores
from 750 victims with an attractive advertisement stating that the
money will be doubled in one year. It is stated that most of the
depositors are teachers.
3. Since the amounts, after maturity, had not been returned, a case has
been registered in Cr.No.347 of 2020 for the offences under Sections
406, 420 and 506(ii) I.P.C., on 09.06.2020, by the Inspector of Police,
Bazar Police Station, Ramanathapuram, on the basis of the complaint
given by one Thulasimanikandan. Yet another case in Cr.No.41 of 2020
for the offences under Sections 406, 420 I.P.C., has been registered on
27.06.2020 against the very same BULLION FINTECH LLP Company,
on the basis of the complaint given by one Karpagalilly, to the
Superintendent of Police, Ramanathapuram. The Superintendent of
Police, Ramanathapuram in turn forwarded the same to the District
4. When things stand so, one Pradeep Chakravarthi filed a Criminal
Original Petition in Crl.O.P.(MD)No.8830 of 2020 before this Court to
transfer the case from the second respondent police to the Economic
Offences Wing, Madurai. During the pendency of the Criminal Original
Petition, the second respondent viz., the Director General of Police
transferred the case to Economic Offences Wing, Madurai, on
01.09.2020 and the same is investigated by the Economic Offences
Wing. A status report is also said to have been filed before this Court in
that Criminal Original Petition on 14.10.2020.
5. When that is the position, now the petitioner has come before this
Court by filing this Writ Petition making so many allegations against
the         Deputy Collector and    the   Superintendent    of   Police,
Ramanathapuram, not convinced with the investigation done by the
Economic Offences Wing and therefore, he seeks investigation by the
Central Bureau of Investigation-third respondent herein.
6. The learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner would submit that
believing the attractive advertisement, more than 750 people deposited
about Rupees Three Hundred Crores. The investigation is not properly
done by the Economic Offences Wing and only movables worth about
Rupees Five Crores alone have been attached when the deposit is to the
tune of Rupees Three Hundred Crores. Hence, he seeks the transfer of
the case to the CBI.
7. Mr.Sricharan Rangarajan, learned Additional Advocate General
assisted by Mr.M.Muthugeethaiyan, learned Special Government
Pleader appearing for the respondents 1, 2 and 4 would submit that the
case is properly investigated by the respondent police, especially the
Economic Offences Wing and according to the investigation done by
the Economic Offences Wing, movable properties worth about Rupees
Five Crores have already been seized and four persons have been
arrested and they have come out on bail. Based on the confession
statements given by the accused, about 19 immovable properties have
been identified and the same will be attached by moving the TANPID
Court. The statements of the depositors are being recorded under
Section 161(3) Cr.P.C., and the investigation is under process.
8. Heard the parties and perused the records. It is relevant to extract
hereunder the paragraph Nos.4 to 10 of the status report filed by the
respondent          police    in   Crl.O.P.(MD)No.17716            of   2020,      dated
“4.In this case accused Anand (A2) and Neethimani (A3) were arrested on
09.06.2020 by Ramanathapuram Police and based on the basis of their
confessions statements, the movable properties of A3 Neethimani viz. gold
jewels of 99.5 sovereign (791.950 gms) Silver articles of 244.650 gms, cash
Rs.2,49,050/-, wrist watch, documents, 6363 Singapore dollars and 3162
Malaysian ringits were seized under a cover of athachi on the same day.
Both the accused were remanded to judicial custody. Accused Menaka (A4)
was arrested on 10.06.2020 and released on station bail by the
Ramanathapuram police. Accused Neethimani was taken into police
custody from 19.06.2020 to 23.06.2020 and Anand from 23.06.2020 to
27.06.2020. Based on the confession of A3, 2 Cellphones, Laptop, foreign
Passport, Pan Card, debit card and documents were further seized.
Similarly on the confession of A2-Anand 5 Cellphones, 2 Foreign
Passports, Debit cards, Visa Card, document, Cash Rs.40 Lakhs and 3
vehicles bearing Registration No.1.TN-65 X2985 waganor Car, 2.
TN-65AW 0006 Innovacar, 3.TN-65 AV 0006 Hyundai Elantra car were
also seized. They were re-remanded to judicial custody. So far 452 petition
have submitted their petitions to the district crime branch,
Ramanathapuram on 15.09.2020 to the tune of Rs.100 Crores
approximately. Based on the confession statement of A3 Neethimani,
Cenima producers 7G Siva (A4), Gnannavelraja (A5) and Muruganantham
(A6) have been added as accused for having received money from the A3
Neethimani. And, based on the confession statement given by the A2
Anand, at the time of police custody taken by the Ramanathapuram Police,
the accused Raju (A7). Mahash (A8) and Boopesh (A9) were added as
accused in Bazaar P.S. Crime No.347/2020 for extortion of Rs.30 Lakhs
from the accused Anand for the purpose of suppressing matters and not
publishing the same in their channels. Hence the sections of Law of the
case has been altered into 406, 420, 294(b), 506(ii), 109 I.P.C. by the
5) I most respectfully submit that the respected Director General of Police
vide proceedings in Rc.No.613743/Crime 3(2)/2020, dated: 01.09.2020
passed order transferring the above said 3 cases to Economic Offences
Wing-II, Madurai for further investigation. The same has been further
ordered to root down to the actual Deputy Superintendent of Police EOW-
II, Madurai, through the proceedings of the Superintendent of Police,
EOW-II, Chennai, in RC.No.C2/EOW/ 5640/2020, Dated 15.09.2020,
RC.No.C2/EOW/5643/ 2020, Dated 29.09.2020, for continuing the
investigation.
6) It is humbly submitted that according to the orders of the superior police
officials, the case in Crime No.2/2020 under Sections 406, 420, 120-B of
IPC and Section 5 of TANPID Act was registered by me on 12.10.2020,
and received the case diaries of crime No.41/2020 and 347/2020 from the
hands of Ramanathapuram police. Subsequently, the case diaries of crime
No.6/2020 was also received from Sivagangai police. The movable
properties which were recovered by the Ramanathapuram police were
taken over by us on 22.10.2020.
7)It is further submitted that so far 56 petitions have been received for the
cheated amount at about 4.5 crores and all the petitioners were enquired.
During the course of the investigation, the following immovable properties
belong to the accused person were identified and requisition letter has
been sent to Inspector General of Registration for confirmation and to get
the details of more property details which are belonged to accused persons
and in the name of their benomy. And, the concerned banks
wherein the accused persons are having accounts are
requested to stop transaction for the purpose of investigation. On
23.10.2020, we have published advertisements in daily newspapers about
the transfer of the investigation of the cases and requesting the depositors
to lodge their complaints with EOW, Madurai. ...................
10)During the course of investigation, it was revealed that there are 20
team leaders and nearly 200 against are in the above said defaulted
company. Who re the main reason became the public as victims, the list of
team leaders and against is submitted here with and they are being
enquired.”
This Court is convinced with the submissions made by the learned
Additional Advocate General appearing for the respondents 1, 2 and 4
regarding the investigation made by the Economic Offences Wing. A
reading of the status report would reveal that the Economic Offences
Wing seized movables, identified about 19 immovable properties based
on the confession statements of the arrested accused. Hence,
investigation is progressing well and no transfer is required.
9. Mrs. Victoria Gowri, learned Assistant Solicitor General of India
appearing for the third respondent relying upon the Full Bench
Judgment of the Honourable Supreme Court of India, in STATE OF
ORS., reported in 2010(3) SCC 571 FB, would submit that the power
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, in extraordinary
circumstances, is to be used to refer the matter to the Central Bureau of
Investigation. Only serious offences should be investigated by the
Special Investigation Agency, like, Central Bureau of Investigation,
otherwise it will lose its credibility. She opposed the petition
contending that CBI is not having enough resources and personnel to
investigate the cases.
10. If the investigation done by the Economic Offences Wing, which was
previously done by the District Crime Branch, is transferred, definitely
the investigation will be affected. Further investigation would be
prolonged and it will not be in the interest of the depositors. Therefore,
the prayer sought for by the petitioner cannot be granted. This Court
hopes that the Economic Offences Wing will swiftly investigate and
attach the immovable properties and file a charge sheet at the earliest
possible.
11. However, if the petitioner has got concrete evidence for the
allegations against the Deputy Collector and the Superintendent of
Police, Ramanathapuram, this order will not prevent the petitioner to
take appropriate proceedings seeking investigation.
12. Since the plea of referring the matter to Central Bureau of
Investigation is opposed by the learned Assistant Solicitor General of
India appearing for the third respondent by submitting that the Central
Bureau of Investigation does not have the required strength, this matter
is taken up as a Public Interest Litigation to decide about the necessity
to have more resources and more personnel including modern
infrastructures for CBI. This Court suo motu impleads the following
officials as eleventh and twelfth respondents in this writ petition:
“(i) The Union of India, represented by its Secretary to Government,
Ministry of Home and Affairs, North Block, New Delhi-110001”
(ii) “The Union of India, represented by its Secretary to Government,
Ministry of Personnel and Training, Public grievances, New
Mrs.Victoria Gowri, learned Assistant Solicitor General of India takes
notice for the newly impleaded eleventh and twelfth respondents.
13. Mrs.Victoria Gowri, learned Assistant Solicitor General of India,
who takes notice for the third respondent, would oppose the writ
petition for transferring the case by stating that the Central Bureau of
Investigation does not have the required man power and resources to
investigate all the cases, which are sought to be referred to the Central
Bureau of Investigation. In support of her contention, she would rely
upon the Full Bench Judgment of the Honourable Supreme Court of
India,       in   STATE       OF      WEST      BENGAL        &     ORS.     Vs.THE
WEST BENGAL & ORS., reported in 2010(3) SCC 571 FB. It is
relevant to extract hereunder paragraph No.46 of the said judgment:
''46.Before parting with the case, we deem it necessary to emphasise that
despite wide powers conferred by Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution,
while passing any order, the Courts must bear in mind certain self-imposed
limitations on the exercise of these Constitutional powers. The very plenitude
of the power under the said Articles requires great caution in its exercise. In
so far as the question of issuing a direction to the CBI to conduct
investigation in a case is concerned, although no inflexible guidelines can be
laid down to decide whether or not such power should be exercised but time
and again it has been reiterated that such an order is not to be passed as a
matter of routine or merely because a party has levelled some allegations
against the local police.This extra-ordinary power must be exercised
sparingly, cautiously and in exceptional situations where it becomes
necessary to provide credibility and instil confidence in investigations or
where the incident may have national and international ramifications or
where such an order may be necessary for doing complete justice and
enforcing the fundamental rights. Otherwise the CBI would be flooded with a
large number of cases and with limited resources, may find it difficult to
properly investigate even serious cases and in the process lose its credibility
and purpose with unsatisfactory investigations.''
14. However, when serious cases are coming up before Courts, there is
always a glamour to seek for transferring the cases to the Central
Bureau of Investigation, as the Central Bureau of Investigation has got
a reputation as a premier investigation agency. It is known for
investigating economic offences, corruption cases and sensitive cases.
However, many cases which are investigated by the Central Bureau of
Investigation, even serious cases, have ended in acquittal. It badly
reflects upon the investigation of CBI. Hence, time has come to look
into problems faced by CBI. Investigation of CBI needs to be improved
by adding experts and modern gadgets.
15. It is not known as to whether the Central Bureau of Investigation is
doing recruitment of their own Officers independently or it is
depending upon the Officers deputed from other sources.
16. The white collar crimes, like, Bank offences are mainly investigated
by the Central Bureau of Investigation. When such serious
investigations are being undertaken by the Central Bureau of
Investigation, it is stated that CBI depends upon the police officials
deputed from various other sources, like State Police, CISF and CRPF
and there is a likelihood of investigating officers going back to their
parent force during investigation. If it is true, the Officials from CISF
and CRPF may not have experience in investigation. To investigate
white collar crimes, especially, Bank offences, financial offences, larger
magnitude, the officials with qualifications of CA, ICWA, ACS, are
essential for investigation. otherwise the very purpose of investigation
will be frustrated, because of lack of expertise in that particular field.
17. When there is always a glamour for investigation by Central
Bureau of Investigation, the Central Bureau of Investigation cannot
oppose by stating that it does not have the required man power and
resources and it has to increase the number of officials, as more
number of cases are being referred to the Central Bureau of
Investigation. More over, CBI should have expert officials with special
knowledge in various fields, as various types of cases involving
different fields are referred viz., Bhopal Gas Tragedy, Bofors scam, 2G
Spectrum Scam, Coal Scam, Hawala Scandle, Phurlia Army dropping
case, Sathyam Scandle, Sarada Chit Scandle, Nithari Killings, Sushant
Singh Rajput suicide case, Taj Corridor case, Vyapam case....''
While declining to refer the subject case to CBI, this Court raised 15 queries,
regarding the resources, man power, investigating skills, infrastructural
facilities available with CBI in the interest of the public. The queries raised in
the interim order dated 08.12.2020 is extracted as follows:
(a) Whether the Central Bureau of Investigation recruits their
own officials independently or through some other agencies,
(b) Why not CBI recruit their officials and train them
(c) Whether the Central Bureau of Investigation is depending
upon only the police officials drawn from various agencies like
State Police, CISF and CRPF for investigation ?;
(d) What is the strength of the CBI in 2000, 2010,2015 and as on
date?(cadre wise strength viz., Constable to higher levels to be
(e) Why not increase the man power in CBI to handle more case?
(f) Why not CBI recruit more officials with degrees in CA, ACS,
ICWA, Cyber Science Law, as more economic offences are
(g) Whether allotment of fund made by the Central Government is
(h) Why not Central Government allot more funds to CBI for
modern investigation and to increase man power?
(i) Whether the CBI has got all modern infrastructures including
modern gadgets, machines available in its Central Forensic
Sciences Laboratory at New Delhi as available in CFSL
(j) How many cases have been referred to the Central Bureau of
Investigation for the past 20 years? (year wise details to be
(k) What is the status of those cases?(year wise details to be
(l) How many cases ended in acquittal?(year wise details to be
(m) How many cases ended in conviction?(year wise details to be
(n) What is the rate of conviction?(year wise details to be given);
(o) What are all the reasons for enormous delay in concluding
investigations by CBI?”
3.The above queries have been answered by the CBI. It is evident
from the said response that CBI has very limited man power available with
them viz., 5796 officials in the year 2000 and 7273 as on 14.12.2020. The
details given are usefully extracted as follows:
Cadre            31.12.2000 31.12.2010 31.12.2015            As on
4.The number of police officials in the cadre of Inspector of Police is
highest in CBI, as per the response given for query No (c) raised by this Court.
The mode of recruitment would also denote that 50% of the Inspectors of
Police (1024) is by way of deputation from the State Police. The relevant table
of the response is usefully extracted as follows:
Additional Superintendent Filled 100% by promotion
Inspector of Police (1024)     Filled          by           50:50
Sub-Inspector (480)            Filled by 70:15:15
5.Though it has been stated that sufficient fund has been allotted, it
has not specifically stated about the year wise allotment of the funds. The total
number of cases registered from the year 2001 to 2020 and the number of cases
which ended in acquittal, conviction and the rate of conviction have been given
Year         Total number of Total number of Total number of Conviction rate
cases registered cases acquitted cases convicted in percentage (%)
Year           Total number of Total number of Total number of Conviction rate
cases registered cases acquitted cases convicted in percentage (%)
6.It is stated in the response to query No (e) raised by this Court that
a proposal dated 09.09.2020 for comprehensive cadre review and restructuring
of CBI and for creation of 734 additional posts in different ranks is pending
with the Central Government. Therefore, The Central Government is
directed to take a decision on the comprehensive proposal for cadre review
and restructuring of CBI within a period of one month.
7.With regard to the reasons for enormous delay in concluding the
investigation by CBI, in response, it is stated as follows:
“There is huge pendency in CFSL which invariably results in
long delay in receiving the opinion of the experts upon the
forensic examination of the exhibits”
When there is a huge pendency in CFSL, either the infrastructure of CFSL has
to be augmented or another CFSL should be established. Therefore there shall
be a direction to the Central Government to enhance the infrastructural
facilities available with CFSL in Ghaziabad, Uttarpradesh or to establish
CFSL, zone wise, so that there would not be any delay in getting the
opinion of the experts. The Central Government should establish atleast
one CFSL in each zone viz., South, East, West within one year.
8.Officials and staff should be independently recruited and they
should be given proper training in the academy of CBI as well as in the foreign
countries if necessary. Experts in cyber laws, Chartered Accountants and other
experts in various fields should also be recruited, instead of getting them on
deputation. It is also stated that the officers inducted in CBI (are by way of)on
deputation from State police and CPOs with fixed tenure and it is also one of
the constraints of the CBI. Hence, there is a necessity for inducting and
recruiting their own officials, instead of depending upon deputation from Police
force and other forces. Therefore, in this regard the CBI shall send a
comprehensive proposal to the Central Government for approval.
9.India is a thickly populated country with more than 130 crore
people, the second largest in the World, next only to China. More offences are
being committed including serious offences, corruption cases, act of terrorism
having international ramifications. In view of that the facilities in the premier
agency have to be enhanced, so that it could be equated, with the Federal
Bureau of Investigation (FBI) of United States of America and Scotland Yard
of United Kingdom.
10.No doubt, the conviction rate of the cases conducted by CBI is
more than 60%, CBI needs to the enhanced and more resources should be made
available to it. Especially, the independence of CBI is necessary for an
impartial, neutral, credible investigation of the cases investigated by it. The
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Hawala case viz., Vineet Narayanan Vs. Union of
India, observed that “CBI” is a caged parrot speaking in its master's voice. The
said observation of the Hon'ble Supreme Court is fortified by the statement
made by the CBI Director before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Coal allocation
case that a former Law Minister meddled with the statement of CBI filed before
the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
11.In an effort to free the CBI from political interference, the Director
is being selected by High Profile Appointment Committee consisting of the
Hon'ble Prime Minister, Chairperson, leader of opposition in Lok Sabha and
Chief Justice of India or nominated Judges, as per the amendment through
Lokpal and Lokayukta Act 2013.
12.CBI has its origin in the British era, originally set up in the year
1941 as Special Police Establishment to investigate bribery and corruption in
transaction with the War and Supply Department of India. Thereafter, the
Delhi Special Police Establishment Act was brought into force in 1946. This
Act transferred the superintendence of the SPE to the Home Department and its
functions were enlarged to cover all the departments of Government of India.
Its jurisdiction was restricted to investigate economic, special crimes, cases of
corruption and other cases in the Central Government departments and Union
territories.         On request from any State, the CBI could take over the
investigation of any special case. CBI has got its nomenclature through Home
Ministry resolution dated 01.04.1963. CBI has three wings viz., Anti
corruption, economic crimes and special crimes
13.Numerous sensitive cases of larger ramifications like Jain Hawala
Scandal, Bofors Scam, Sohrabuddin case, Sant Singh Chatwal case, Foder case,
Bhopal gas tragedy, 2G Spectrum case, Coal allocation scam, Noida double
murder case, Nithari multiple murders, Rajiv Gandhi Assassination case.
However, the premier investigating agency's work is restricted only to a few
cases, due to lack of man power and resources as admitted by the Central
Government before this Court as well as before various other Courts.
Therefore, there is a need to increase the resources and man power to
investigate more cases. For that there is a necessity to have a special Act by
which the CBI could be granted a statutory status. Though, very sensitive and
complicated cases are being investigated or handled, the number of cases
handled by CBI is just equivalent or less than the case handled by a single
police station in the country. Therefore, CBI has to take up more cases by
increasing its man power and other resources.
14.The Assam High Court by judgment dated 06.11.2013 held that
the constitution of CBI itself is unconstitutional and does not hold legal status
and the said judgment has been stayed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the
Appeal is still pending before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. The above said
judgment of the Assam High Court has only echoed the necessity of having a
special Act for CBI, with more power and special budgetary allocation for its
resources.
15.The CBI Director is being chosen by a high power committee with
fixed tenure of two years as per the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of Vineet Naryanan Vs. Union of India, in which some directions have
been given to insulate the CBI. The said directions are usefully extracted as
1. The Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) shall be given statutory
status.
2. Selection for the post of Central Vigilance Commissioner shall be
made by a Committee comprising the Prime Minister, Home Minister
and the Leader of the Opposition from a panel of outstanding civil
servants and others with impeccable integrity to be furnished by the
Cabinet Secretary. The appointment shall be made by the President on
the basis of the recommendations made by the Committee. This shall
be done immediately.
3. The CVC shall be responsible for the efficient functioning of the
CBI. While Government shall remain answerable for the CBI's
functioning, to introduce visible objectivity in the mechanism to be
established for over viewing the CBI's working, the CVC shall be
entrusted with the responsibility of superintendence over the CBI's
functioning. The CBI shall report to the CVC about cases taken up by
it for investigation; progress of investigations; cases in which
chargesheets are filed and their progress. The CVC shall review the
progress of all cases moved by the CBI for sanction of prosecution of
public servants which are pending with competent authorities,
specially those in which sanction has been delayed or refused.
4. The Central Government shall take all measures necessary to
ensure that the CBI functions effectively and efficiently and is viewed
as a non-partisan agency.
5. The CVC shall have a separate section in its Annual Report on the
CBI's functioning after the supervisory function is transferred to it.
6. Recommendations for appointment of the Director, CBI shall be
made by a Committee headed by the Central Vigilance Commissioner
with the Home Secretary and Secretary (Personnel) as members. The
views of the incumbent Director shall be considered by the Committee
for making the best choice. The Committee shall draw up a panel of
IPS officers on the basis of their seniority, integrity, experience in
investigation and anti - corruption work. The final selection shall be
made by Appointments Committee of the Cabinet (ACC) from the
panel recommended by the Selection Committee. If none among the
panel is found suitable, the reasons the reasons thereof shall be
recorded and the Committee asked to draw up a fresh panel.
7. The Director, CBI shall have a minimum tenure of two years,
regardless of the date of his superannuation. This would ensure that
an officer suitable in all respects is not ignored merely because he has
less than two years to superannuate from the date of his appointment.
8. The transfer of an incumber Director, CBI in an extraordinary
situation, including the need for him to take up a more important
assignment, should have the approval of the Selection Committee.
9. The Director, CBI shall have full freedom for allocation of work
within the agency as also for constituting teams for investigations.
Any change made by the Director, CBI in the Head of an investigative
team should be for cogent reasons and for improvement in
investigation, the reasons being recorded.
10. Selection/extention of tenure of officers upto the level of Joint
Director (JD) shall be decided by a Board comprising the central
Vigilance Commissioner, Home Secretary and Secretary (Personnel)
with the Director, CBI providing the necessary inputs. The extension
of tenure or premature repatriation of officers upto the level of Joint
Director shall be with final approval of the Board. Only cases
pertaining to the appointment or extension of tenure of officers of the
rank of Joint Director or above shall be referred to the Appointments
Committee of the Cabinet (ACC) for decision.
11. Proposals for improvement of infrastructure, methods of
investigation, etc. should be decided urgently. In order to strengthen
CBI's in-house expertise, professionals from the revenue, banking and
security sectors should be inducted into the CBI.
12. The CBI Manual based on statutory provisions of the Cr. P.C.
provides essential guidelines for the CBI's functioning. It is imperative
that the CBI adheres scrupulously to the provisions in the Manual in
relation to its investigative functions, like raids, scizure and arrests.
Any deviation from the established procedure should be viewed
seriously and severe disciplinary action taken against the concerned
officials.
13. The Director, CBI shall be responsible for ensuring the filing of
chargesheets in courts within the stipulated time limits, and the matter
should be kept under constant review by the Director, CBI
14. A document on CBI's functioning should be published within three
months to provide the general public with a feedback on investigations
and information for redress of genuine grievances in a manner which
does not compromise with the operational requirements of the CBI.
15. Time limit of three months for grant of sanction for prosecution
must be strictly adhered to. However, additional time of one month
may be allowed where consultation is required with the Attorney
General (AG) or any other law officer in the AG's office.
16. The Director, CBI should conduct regular appraisal of personnel
to prevent corruption and/or inefficiency in the agency.
1. A Selection Committee headed by the Central Vigilance
Commissioner and including the Home Secretary, Secretary
(Personnel) and Revenue Secretary, shall prepare a panel for
appointment    of   the  Director,    Enforcement   Directorate. The
appointment to the post of Director shall be made by the Appointments
Committee of the Cabinet (ACC) from the panel recommended by the
2. The Director, Enforcement Director like Director, CBI shall have a
minimum tenure of two years. In his case also, premature transfer for
any extraordinary reason should be approved by the aforesaid
Selection Committee headed by the Central Vigilance commissioner.
3. In view of the importance of the post of Director, Enforcement
Directorate, it shall be upgraded to that of a Additional
Secretary/Special Secretary to the Government.
4. Officers of the Enforcement Directorate handling sensitive
assignments shall be provided adequate security to enable them to
discharge their functions fearlessly.
5. Extensions of tenure upto the level of Joint Director in the
Enforcement Directorate should be decided by the said Committee
headed by the Central Vigilance Commissioner.
6.   There   shall   be  no    premature   media   publicity  by  the
7. Adjudication/commencement of prosecution shall be made by the
enforcement Directorate within a period of one year.
8. The Director, Enforcement Directorate shall monitor and ensure
speedy completion of investigations/adjudications and launching of
prosecutions. Revenue Secretary must review their progress regularly.
9. For speedy conduct of investigations abroad, the procedure to
approve filing of applications for Letters Rogatory shall be
streamlined and, if necessary, Revenue Secretary authorised to grant
10. A comprehensive circular shall be published by the Directorate to
inform the public about the procedures/systems of its functioning for
the sake of transparency.
11. In-house legal advice mechanism shall be strengthened by
appointment of competent legal advisers in the CBI/Directorate of
12. The Annual Report of the Department of Revenue shall contain a
detailed account on the working of the Enforcement Directorate.
1. A Nodal Agency headed by the Home Secretary with Member
(Investigation), Central Board of Direct Taxes, Director General,
Revenue Intelligence, Director, Enforcement and Director, CBI as
members, shall be constituted for coordinated action in cases having
politico-bureaucrat- criminal nexus.
2. The Nodal Agency shall meet at least once every month.
3. Working and efficacy of the Nodal Agency should be watched for
about one year so as to improve it upon the basis of the experience
gained within this period.
1. A panel of competent lawyers of experience and impeccable
reputation shall be prepared with the advice of the Attorney General
Their services shall be utilised as Prosecuting Counsel in cases of
significance. Even during the course of investigation of an offence,
the advice of a lawyer chosen from the panel should be taken by the
2. Every prosecution which results in the discharge or acquittal of the
accused must be reviewed by a lawyer on the panel and, on the basis
of the opinion given, responsibility should be fixed for dereliction of
duty, if any, of the concerned officer. In such cases, strict action
should be taken against the officer found guilty of dereliction of duty.
3. The preparation of the panel of lawyers with approval of the
Attorney General shall be completed within three months.
4. Steps shall be taken immediately for the constitution of an able and
impartial agency comprising persons of unimpeachable integrity to
perform functions akin to those of the Director of Prosecutions in
U.K. On the constitution of such a body, the task of supervising
prosecutions launched by the CBI/Enforcement Directorate shall be
entrusted to it.
5. Till the constitution of the aforesaid body, Special Counsel shall be
appointed for the conduct of important trials on the recommendation
of the Attorney General or any other law officer designated by him.”
Only when CBI is given a statutory status, the autonomy of CBI would be
ensured. Secondly it should have a dedicated cadre of officers on its own
without getting the officials on deputation. The CBI should have an autonomy
as that of Comptroller and Auditor General of India, who is only accountable to
16.It is also stated that the CBI lacks sufficient financial
administrative powers and CBI should be vested with ex-officio powers of the
Secretary to the Government of India, who is reporting directly to the Ministry
without having to go through the DoPT.
17.Having faith in the CBI, the constitutional Courts like the
Supreme Court and High Courts started entrusting the investigation of cases
with CBI, without a State’s consent also. Otherwise, State’s consent is
necessary for CBI investigation.
18.In view of the above, the following directions are given in the
interest of the Institution/CBI as well as public who have got enormous faith
(1)Government of India is directed to consider and take a
decision for enactment of a separate Act giving statutory status
with more powers and jurisdiction to CBI at the earliest.
(2)CBI shall       be made more independent         like Election
Commission of India and Comptroller and Auditor General of
(3)Separate budgetary allocation shall be made for CBI.
(4)Director of CBI shall be given powers as that of the Secretary
to the Government and shall directly report to the Minister/Prime
Minister without going through DoPT.
(5)Central Government shall make CBI independent with
functional autonomy without administrative control of the
(6)CFSL shall have more modern facilities and should be
augmented on par with the facilities available to Federal Bureau
of Investigation in United States of America and Scotland Yard in
(7)DoPT is directed to pass orders on the CBI restructuring letter
dated 09.09.2020 after consulting with other departments if
necessary, within a period of six weeks from the date of receipt of
a copy of this order.
(8)CBI should file a well thought out Policy within a period of six
weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order, for
permanently recruiting (i) Cyber Forensic experts and (ii)
Financial Audit experts, so that all the branches/wings of CBI
should have these experts available with them and not on case to
case basis.
(9)DoPT should clear all the pending proposals pertaining to
CBI's   infrastructure   development     e.g. land   construction,
residential accommodation, upgradation of available technical
gadgets etc., within a period of six weeks.
(10)CFSL attached to CBI should clear all the pending cases as
on 31.12.2020. Similarly, other FSLs should also offer their
Forensic opinion pending as on 31.12.2020 within a period of six
weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
(11)The details of cases wherein charges have not been framed by
the Trial Courts despite the charge sheets having been filed by
CBI for more than one year, should be shared by Director, CBI
with the respective Registrar Generals of the High Courts.
(12)Since CBI itself has stated in reply to Para ‘O’ that CBI has
to work within the constraints of shortage of manpower, Director,
CBI should send another detailed proposal seeking further
increase in the divisions/wings as well as strength of Officers in
CBI to the Government of India within a period of six weeks
from the date of receipt of a copy of this order and Government of
India should pass orders on the same within a period of three
months of its receipt.
19.With the above directions, this Writ Petition is disposed of. No
costs. Consequently, connected Miscellaneous Petition is closed.
This order is an attempt to release the "Caged Parrot" (CBI).
20.Call the matter after six weeks for filing compliance report or for
appearance of the Director, Central Bureau of Investigation, New Delhi.
1.The Principal Secretary to Govt. of Tamil Nadu,
4.The Additional Director General of Police,
7.The Deputy Superintendent of Police,
Crime No.347 of 2020.