1.         Heard Sh. Rajdeep Singh Thakur, learned counsel for the petitioners;
and Sh. Ravinder Gupta, learned AAG appearing for respondents 1 to 3 &
Sh. S S Nanda, learned Senior AAG for respondent No.4.
2.         The petitioners claim that they are residents of Village Batroo, Tehsil
Pogal Paristan (Ukhral) in District Ramban and are owners of land measuring 2
kanals and 3 marlas with nine walnut trees.
3.         They allege that the aforesaid land with trees was utilized by the
Government in the year 2012-13 for the construction of multi-purpose
community hall in Village Batroo but without any lawful authority. The land
was not acquired and no consent of the petitioners was taken to use it. The
petitioners were not even paid any compensation.
4.         It is also alleged by the petitioners that initially, 1 kanal and 2 marlas
of the land with two walnut trees was sought to be acquired but subsequently,
Assistant Commissioner (Revenue), Ramban submitted a report revealing that
the entire 2 kanals and 3 marlas of land with all nine walnut trees would be
needed for the purpose of construction of the multi-purpose community hall.
Accordingly, a notification
1990 (for short ‘the Act’) was issued on 09.01.2018 notifying the proposal to
acquire 2 kanals and 3 marlas of the aforesaid land for the construction of
community hall at Batroo in Village Dhanmasta. In respect of the said
acquisition, a tentative cost of the land with walnut trees was notified to be
₹15,00,000/- but the indenting department only deposited a sum of ₹4,50,000/-
with the result till date no compensation for the land has been paid to the
5.         The petitioners further allege that beside issuing the notification
under Section 4 of the Act, till date no notification has been issued under
Section 6 of the Act or Section 9 or Section 17 of the Act but even then
possession of the land had been taken over and the hall has been constructed.
6.         In the above facts and circumstances, the petitioners have preferred
this writ petition seeking a direction for the release of the compensation in
respect of the above land.
7.         Respondent No.4, Collector Land Acquisition, Ramban has filed
objections to the writ petition stating that an indent was placed by the Assistant
Commissioner      (Development),      Ramban      on  28.12.2017   for   initiating
proceedings for the acquisition of the above 2 kanals and 3 marlas of land for
the construction of the community hall. Accordingly, notification under
Section 4(1) of the Act was issued on 09.01.2018. Thereafter, the case was
submitted to the District Collector/Deputy Commissioner, Ramban for issuing
necessary declaration under Sections 6, 7 & 17 of the Act. The matter for final
acquisition of the land stands submitted to the Government and the notification
under Section 6 of the Act would be issued once a decision in this regard is
taken by the Government.
deposited a sum of ₹4,50,000/- only against the demand of ₹15,00,000/- raised
by the Collector Land Acquisition for the purposes of the above acquisition.
9.         Reply to the writ petition has been filed by respondents 1 to 3 stating
that the matter regarding the acquisition of the above land stands submitted to
the Government for issuance of the notifications under Sections 6, 7 and 17 of
the Act but a declaration under Section 6 of the Act has not yet been issued.
The land is needed for public purpose of constructing a multi-purpose
community hall and that the indenting department has already deposited a sum
of ₹4,50,000/- as against the tentative cost of acquisition calculated by the
Assistant Commissioner (Revenue), Ramban to the tune of ₹15,00,000/-.
10.        On the above pleadings, it is crystal clear that the land of the
petitioners has been utilized for the construction of a multi-purpose community
hall but without there being a formal acquisition inasmuch as till date no
declaration under Section 6 of the Act has been issued and published. The hall
stands constructed without acquisition of land and without payment of any
compensation. The stand of the respondents is that the matter regarding
completion of acquisition proceedings stands submitted to the Government and
they would be paying the compensation once the proceedings are complete and
the final award is pronounced. They accept that as against the estimated cost of
acquisition of ₹15,00,000/-, the indenting department has deposited a sum of
₹4,50,000/- only but even that has not been distributed to the lawful owners of
the land.
11.        Right to Property/Land used to be a fundamental right but now it has
been recognized as a constitutional right vide Article 300A of the Constitution
of India. It provides that no one can be deprived of his property save by
authority of law. The aforesaid constitutional right has been acknowledged to
be akin to a fundamental right and more importantly a basic human right. Thus,
no one can be deprived of his property without following the procedure
prescribed in law and payment of adequate compensation.
12.        The proceedings for acquisition of any land commences with the
issuance of notification under Section 4 of the Act proposing to acquire the
land for public purpose. Once the Government is satisfied on consideration of
the report of the Collector that the land is needed for public purpose, it directs
for issuance of a declaration under Section 6 of the Act. Such a declaration is
the conclusive proof of the acquisition of the land.
13.        In the case at hand, till date no declaration under Section 6 of the Act
has been issued and published, meaning thereby that the land has not been
finally acquired and there is simply a proposal to acquire the said land. In such
circumstances, when the land has not been finally acquired, the respondents
could not have taken possession of the said land and utilized it for construction
purposes. The action of the respondents in constructing a community hall on
the land in question without waiting for the final acquisition of land and in the
absence of the invocation of the urgency clause, is nothing but an abuse of the
process of law depriving the petitioners from their valuable right to possess
14.        In the above circumstances, the respondents are clearly guilty of
violation of the human rights of the petitioners and they are liable to
compensate them for such infringement. At the same time, since the
community hall has already been constructed and the land cannot be restored to
the petitioners, it is desirable that the respondents complete the acquisition
proceedings at the earliest and make a final award so that the petitioners may
be compensated in a fair manner as per the market-value.
15.        In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we issue a writ in
the nature of mandamus commanding the respondents to forthwith distribute
the estimated cost of acquisition of the aforesaid land which has been worked
out to be ₹15,00,000/- within a period of one month from today and to
conclude the acquisition proceedings by issuing a declaration under Section 6
of the Act and pronouncing the final award within a period of three months
from today and to pay the compensation as per the award to the petitioners
forthwith subject to any reference or appeal that may be preferred against the
16.        A further writ in the nature of mandamus is issued to the respondents
to pay a token compensation of ₹10,00,000/- to the petitioners for illegally
depriving them of their land without any authority of law and thus violating
their human rights. This amount shall be paid to the petitioners within a period
of two weeks from the date a certificate copy of this order is placed before the
Secretary, Rural Development Department, Government of J&K.
17.        The writ petition is allowed as aforesaid with costs.