Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 1763 of 2022
Counsel for Appellant :- Amarendra Pratap Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.
(1)   Heard Shri A.P. Singh, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Shri
Amarendra Pratap Singh, learned counsel for the appellants,
Shri S.N. Tilahari, learned AGA for State-respondent and
perused the material on record.
(2)   The brief facts of the case are that First Information Report was
lodged against the petitioners by Anti-Terror Squad, Lucknow
(hereinafter referred to as "ATS") on 16.12.2021 on the basis of
a written report of informant namely, Shri Hemant Bhushan
Singh, Inspector, Special Task Force (hereinafter referred to as
"STF"). The two appellants were arrested by ATS, Lucknow on
16.02.2021 and a recovery of various items was made from
their possession.
(3)   From Ansad Badruddin (appellant no.1) following items were
(i) One pistol 32 bore along-with six live cartridges;
(ii) One mobile phone having BSNL SIM Card;
(iii) a purse containing voter card, PAN card, ATM Card of
(iv) two pocket diaries;
(v) one railway ticket dated 11.02.2021 and 11 printed tickets of
(vi) two receipts of Hotel Lee International and Silver Inn;
(vii) a bag containing five small pages of diary;
(viii) one big page diary;
(x) nine rods of high quality explosives;
(xi) two explosive devices (with electric battery detonator).
(4) From Firoz (appellant no.2) following items were recovered:-
(i) one mobile phone having SIM of Idea Company;
(x) bag containing bank receipt of Nadakkuthazha Service Co-
(xi) seven rods of high-quality explosive;
(xii) one bundle red color D.P. Wire.
(5) The Investigating Agency after thorough investigation has
submitted charge sheet against the appellants for the offence
under Sections 120-B, 121-A I.P.C., Sections 13, 16, 18, 20 of
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, Sections 3/4/5
of the Explosive Substance Act, 1908 and Sections 3/25 Arms
Act, 1959 and First Information Report was submitted under
the same offences. The appellants are facing trial for the
offences in question and the trial is for framing of charges
against them.
(6) Learned counsel for the appellants has argued that instant
appeal has been filed on behalf of the appellants under Section
21 of the National Investigation Act, 2008 against the impugned
order dated 24.06.2022 passed by learned trial Court on the
ground that the said order is illegal, unjust and improper. It has
been further argued by learned counsel for the appellants that
the appellants are the residents of State of Kerela and the
members of Popular Front of India (hereinafter referred to as
"PFI"), which is a registered organization registered under the
Societies Registration Act and not a banned organization, hence
assembly of two or more than two persons is not unlawful.
Further, the FIR lodged against the appellants is based on a
recovery memo dated 16.02.2021 on the written complaint of
the informant and so far as joint recovery of contraband articles,
which has been made from the possession of the appellants, is
concerned there appears to be no independent or public
witnesses as all the eighteen witnesses as per the chargesheet
are witnesses of police, hence the recovery is a false and
planted one. Details of recovery memo is mentioned in
paragraph no.22 to the bail application. Moreover, the
appellants have no role to play in the commission of alleged
offence as their role was of ferrying the passengers to their
destination. It has been lastly submitted that the appellants are
in jail since 17.02.2021 and though they have criminal history
of five cases, but the same are registered at Kerela and are of
minor offences. Thus, from the perusal of the statements and
material recorded in case diary, no cognizable offence is made
out against the appellants.
(7) Learned AGA for the State-respondent submitted that a team
was constituted and on the information of the informer that the
members of the PFI will meet at Lucknow Kukrail Picnic Spot
in order to commit the murder of people and Office Holders of
Hindu Religious Organizations and for creating fear and terror
in the Society and to commit blast in different programs of
Hindu Religion and the Police team arrested the accused-
appellants at 18:30 hours on 16.02.2021 and at the time of the
arrest of the appellants, one pistol 32 bore, 6 live cartridges, 9
rods of high quality explosive, 11 IRCTC railway ticket, one
mobile phones, 2 Explosive ER FO Devices with battery,
electronic detonator, diary written in Malayalam language,
drive etc. was recovered from accused appellant no.1- Ansad
Badruddin and 7 rods of high quality explosive, one bundle of
red colour DP wire, one mobile phone and cash was recovered
from the possession of accused appellant no.2- Firoz.
(8)  Further the appellants had admitted that they are active
members of PFI and their aim and object is of giving training to
the people for fighting against Hindu religious organizations
and to promote the ideology of PFI. A diary written in
Malayalam language was also recovered from the possession of
accused appellants disclosing their aim, object and ideology. In
the diary "attack", "burning", "US", "Ram Mandir" like words
were mentioned in code words. Further the words "defense",
"enemy know everything", "we should prepare", "Muslims are
strong", "the root of coming our area leader", "conspiracy" like
words were also written.
(9)  It was further pointed out that information was received by the
ATS regarding a complaint made by the PFI to attack on the
Senior Leader of different Hindu religious Organizations,
important and sensitive places of Uttar Pradesh and on the said
information the arrest of the accused appellants was made with
huge quantity of explosives, etc. which shows that the
appellants with an intent to achieve goal of PFI had made a
conspiracy for committing the offences. It was further pointed
out that explosives recovered from the appellants had been sent
for examination, which were found to be high explosive PETN
(Penta Erythnitol Nitrate) in the report of the Forensic Science
Laboratory, Agra. A copy of the same has been annexed as
Annexure no. CA-4 to the counter affidavit.
(10) Further, the bank statement of accused appellant no.1- Ansad
Badruddin shows that transaction of amount from his account to
the account of PFI on different dates. The statement of the
appellants was also recorded during investigation under Section
161 Cr.P.C. and they have confessed their guilt.
(11) Learned AGA has next argued that appellants had earlier filed a
bail application before the Courts below but the same was
rejected on 15.07.2021 and after rejection of the bail application
the appellants preferred bail application under Section 439
Cr.P.C. before this Court and the same was again rejected by
Co-ordinate Bench of this Court vide order dated 06.05.2022
with liberty to file an appeal against the said order under
Section 21 of National Investigation Agency Act, 2008. That
after dismissal of the said bail application the appellants
preferred second bail application before the lower Court and the
same was dismissed vide order dated 24.06.2022. Thus, the
instant appeal has been preferred against the order dated
24.06.2022. It is next stated that it is true that PFI was not a
banned organization at the relevant point of time, but the same
does not give to the appellants a liberty to indulge in any sort of
antisocial activities.
(12) After having heard the submissions of learned counsel for the
parties and considering the fact that the recovery being made
from the appellants of seized objectionable articles including
explosive substances, which was to be used by them to attack
on Senior Leader of different Hindu Religious Organization and
to blast different sensitive places of Uttar Pradesh, for which no
satisfactory explanation has been given by the appellants, thus,
it cannot be said that the involvement of the appellants in their
nefarious designs could be ruled out and further looking into
their criminal antecedents and the fact that the trial is in
progress, which is fixed for framing charges against the
appellants by the trial Court, we are not inclined to grant bail to
the appellants and the same is accordingly refused.
(13) Accordingly, while affirming the impugned order dated
24.06.2022, the instant criminal appeal of the appellants- Ansad
Badruddin and Firoz, involved in Case Crime No.04/2021,
under Sections 120-B, 121-A I.P.C., Sections 13, 16, 18, 20 of
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, Sections 3/4/5
of the Explosive Substance Act, 1908 and Sections 3/25 Arms
Act, 1959 at police station ATS Lucknow, District Lucknow, is
dismissed.
(14) The trial court is directed to expedite the trial of the present
case and conclude the same expeditiously preferably within a
period of one year from the date of production of a certified
copy of this order, if there is no legal impediment.
(15) The learned counsel for the parties shall place a copy of this
order before trial Court for necessary information and
compliance.