“Criminals / Convicts are to be treated with respect,
even though they may not deserve it.”
The present Habeas Corpus Petition is filed to call for the entire
records   in    connection     with  the     detention    order   passed in
C.O.C.No.12/2022 dated 28.1.2022 on the file of the 2nd respondent
herein and set aside the same as illegal and direct the respondents to
produce the body or person of the petitioner's wife namely Muthulakshmi,
w/o Manokaran, female, aged 38 years, who is detained in Special Prison
for Women, Tiruchirappalli before this court and set her at liberty.
2. It is the case of the petitioner that his wife was detained in
preventive detention pursuant to the order passed by the second
respondent dated 28.1.2022 as a "Bootlegger".
3. The petitioner had raised the following grounds for setting aside
the detention order:-
i) The detenue was arrested and produced before the Judicial
Magistrate I, Nagapattinam on 8.12.2021, but, the detaining authority
had passed the detention order against the detenue on 28.1.2022 with a
delay of 50 days and that too without mentioning reasons for the delay.
ii) The sponsoring authority has failed to inform the arrest of the
detenue in ground case to the family members of the detenue, which is in
violation of Article 22(1) of the Constitution of India and the dictum laid
down by the Apex Court in D.K.Basu vs. State of West Bengal (1997)
iii) Despite the fact that the bail petition filed on behalf of the
petitioner   in   Crl.M.P.No.33  of  2022    before  the  Sessions   Court,
Nagapattinam was dismissed, the detaining authority has erred in
observing that there is a real and imminent possibility of the detenue
coming out on bail, which is a clear case of non-application of mind on
the part of the detaining authority.
iv) The detention order came to be passed on 28.1.2022, however,
the booklet was issued after five days without following the procedures
contemplated under Section 8(1) of the Act 14/1982.
4. When the matter came up for hearing on 21.7.2022, it was
brought to the notice of this court by the learned Additional Public
Prosecutor that the Advisory Board has opined that there is no sufficient
cause for detention and thereby the order of detention has been revoked
by the Government. However, it was represented by the learned counsel
for the petitioner that the Government order of revocation had not been
communicated to the petitioner till date and the detenue was in continued
detention. Finding some seriousness in the issue, the matter was listed
on   25.7.2022   to   enable  the  Additional  Public Prosecutor  to  get
5. On 25.7.2022, when the matter was taken up for hearing, the
Government order of revocation dated 22.7.2022 was produced by
the respondents, a perusal of which revealed that the matter was placed
before the Advisory Board and the Advisory Board, as early as          on
16.3.2022 had opined that there is no sufficient cause for detention of
the petitioner's wife Muthulakshmi, however, the revocation order came
to be passed only on 22.7.2022 that too, after the indulgence of this
court and thereby the detenue had been detained illegally/unauthorisedly
for more than four months from 16.3.2022.
6. This court, while ordering for immediate release of the detenue,
directed the first respondent to file a Report stating the reason for the
delay in passing the revocation order and identifying the person, who is
responsible for the delay.
7. When the matter was called on 28.7.2022, a non-speaking
Affidavit was filed by the respondents neither disclosing any reason for
the delay nor pointing out name of any official, who is responsible for the
delay, but, merely contending that there is no intention on the part of the
first respondent to disobey the orders of this court            and    that
departmental     action has been initiated against the Assistant Section
Officer and Section Officer concerned. Hence, by way of one more
opportunity, time was granted to file a better affidavit.
8. Accordingly, an Affidavit dated 3.8.2022 came to be filed by the
first respondent contending as under:-
"(ii) It is further submitted that the Advisory Board
heard the case on 15.03.2022 and opined that there is
no     sufficient    cause     for   the    detention    of
Tmt.Muthulakshmi and the report of the board was
received in Government on 16.03.2022.         The file was
submitted immediately to revoke the detention of
Tmt.Muthulakshmi by the Assistant Section Officer and
Section Officer on 16.03.2022 and it was approved by
the Under Secretary and Deputy Secretary on the same
day itself.   Then the file was circulated to the Minister
(Electricity, Prohibition and Excise) 16.03.2022 and the
Minister approved the file on 17.03.2022, but the file
was received by this department only on 22.07.2022.
It is also submitted that action has been initiated
and Thiru.A.Venkatesan, Section Officer under relevant
rule of the Tamil Nadu Civil Services (Discipline and
Appeal) Rules, for failing to follow up file with the
Minister's   office  for  getting  back  the  file  bearing
C.No.2133/Home, Prohibition & Excise (XV)/2022 which
was circulated to the Minister's office on 16.03.2022.
After duly following the stipulated procedures, necessary
further action will be taken against erred staff."
9. In such a background, learned counsel appearing for the
Petitioner Mr.K.A.S.Prabhu would submit his arguments as under:-
i) The impugned detention order did not stand the test of the
Advisory Board and it was opined by the Advisory Board on 16.3.2022
that that there is no sufficient cause for detention of the petitioner's wife
Muthulakshmi, however, the revocation order came to be passed only on
22.7.2022, in clear violation of Article 21 of the Constitution of India
which protects the life and personal liberty of a citizen
ii) When the Constitution assures that no person shall be deprived
of his personal liberty except according to procedure established by law,
in this case, the petitioner's wife had been unnecessarily and illegally
detained for a period of 128 days without any authority of law and
thereby, the detenue is entitled to award of compensation.
iii) The detenue is a victim, who has suffered illegal detention on
account of lapses on the part of the Government and the petitioner has
filed the Habeas Corpus Petition, which itself is a public law proceedings
and thereby, the detenue is entitled to compensation.
iv) It is an obligation of the State, to ensure that there is no
infringement of the indefeasible rights of a citizen to life, except in
accordance with law while the citizen is in its custody and the precious
right guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution of India cannot be
denied to convicts, under trials or other prisoners in custody, except
according to procedure established by law and in such event, the High
Court, being a protector of the civil liberties of the citizen, has not only
the power and jurisdiction to release the prisoner but also an obligation to
grant relief of compensation for unlawful and illegal detention in exercise
of its jurisdiction under Articles 226 of the Constitution to the victim.
10. Mr.Mohamed Ali Jinnah, learned Public Prosecutor assisted by
Mr. M.Babu Muthumeeran, learned Additional Public Prosecutor would
submit that there was some administrative delay on the part of the
officials in getting the file approved for passing the order of revocation
after the receipt of opinion from the Advisory Board. He would further
submit though no intention could be attributed on the part of the officials,
the erring officials have been proceeded with departmentally for
dereliction and appropriate action would be taken against them.            He
would further submit that the petitioner could very well pursue           the
remedy in seeking compensation under the civil law and the relief of
compensation in this petition can be rejected.
11. Heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and
perused the materials available on record.
12. Since the order of detention passed against the petitioner
stands revoked as of now and the petitioner has been released, this court
feels that it need not harp on the validity and correctness of the detention
order. It is a case where the detenue was detained pursuant to an order
dated 28.01.2022. However, in the opinion of the advisory board dated
16.03.2022 that no sufficient cause is available for the detention of the
detenue, the Government order of revocation came to be passed only on
22.07.2022. What has to be seen here is whether the detenue is entitled
to any compensation and if so, the quantum of such compensation ?
"Those who deny freedom to others, deserve it not
for themselves" -Abraham Lincoln.
13. The sequence of events in the case on hand reveals beyond any
doubt that it is a classic case of bureaucratic lethargy and slumber, which
has played a lot in depriving the personal liberty of a citizen guaranteed
under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. To understand the gravity of
the scenario, we need to have a look into the relevant legal provisions
and the guidelines and restrictions thereupon.
14. Section 12(2) of the Tamil Nadu Act        14 of 1982 reads as
"(2) In any case where the Advisory Board has reported
that there is, in its opinion, no sufficient cause for the
detention    of   the   person     concerned,  the   State
Government shall revoke the detention order and cause
the person to be released forthwith."
15.   As per Section 12(2) of Act 14 of 1982, when the Advisory
Board opined and reported that there is no sufficient cause for detention
of the person concerned, the State Government shall revoke the
detention order and cause the person to be released forthwith,
whereas, in this case, as stated above, the petitioner has been released
after a period of 128 days.
"No freedom is higher than personal freedom
and    no   duty    is  higher     than   to   maintain   it
16. Personal liberty of a citizen has been very much guaranteed
under Article 21 of the Constitution of India, which reads as under:-
"21. Protection of life and personal liberty.
No person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty
except according to procedure established by law."
17. A bare perusal of the above provision makes it clear that the
protection extended by it covers all Persons. The expression "Person"
is not to be confined only to citizens but, it extends to every person
regardless of the circumstance in which a person is placed.      It implies
that the protection guaranteed under the above provision extends even to
persons who are undergoing imprisonment as a convict prisoner and he
does not lose his fundamental rights merely because he is convicted
either as a convict prisoner or detained pursuant to a preventive
detention order.
18.  A person, if at all, could be deprived of his life or personal
liberty only in accordance with the procedure established by law. The
scope of Article 21 appears to had been a bit narrow till 1950s and
thereafter, it was expanded gradually. The procedure established by law
to deprive of life or personal liberty of a person cannot be arbitrary,
unfair, unreasonable one or it cannot be whimsical and fanciful.
19. The terms "shall revoke" and "released forthwith" in
Section 12(2) of Act 14 of 1982 read together express a strong
assertion of the legislature in protecting the personal liberty as
guaranteed under the Constitution of India. Whether such intention has
been properly appreciated by the respondents in the case on hand is the
question posed before us.
20. We can least appreciate if the delay had occurred in various
levels to end with the revocation order, whereas, the records produced
before us and the submission made on behalf of the respondents reveal
that on receipt of opinion from the Advisory Board 16.3.2022, the file was
immediately circulated for approval and it was, accordingly, approved by
the Ministry on 17.3.2022, however, the revocation order was passed by
the office only on 22.7.2022 after the matter was seized of by this court
and only after the displeasure shown by the court on 21.7.2022 and not
prior to that especially, when the Habeas Corpus Petition stands admitted
and notice was ordered on 22.2.2022 itself and it was directed to be
listed on 19.4.2022.
21. The sequence of events speaks much despite the slumber on
the part of the bureaucracy, which had taken away the personal liberty of
the petitioner. The Hon'ble Division Bench of the Delhi High Court in a
case of similar circumstances in Pramod Kumar Garg @ Ravinder
Chandhok vs. Union of India and others (1994) 29 DRJ (DB) 464;
1994 SCC online Del 346 has held as under:-
"10. It has been held that the Act is valid under
Article 22 of the Constitution, and, therefore, one has
to refer to the provisions of the Act itself for the
purpose of passing of the order of detention, the
detention, the opinion of the Advisory Board, and
action on that by the detaining authority. It is
apparent, therefore, that the moment opinion of the
Advisory Board is received that there is no sufficient
cause for the detention of the detenu, the detaining
authority” shall revoke the detention order and cause
the person to be released forthwith”. The law as laid
does not contemplate any exceptions and we cannot
read into this law the case put by the respondents
that in spite of opinion of the Advisory Board that
there is no sufficient cause for the detention of a
person, the detaining authority has, no doubt, to
revoke the detention order but that could be done
within three months of the date of detention of the
detenu irrespective of the fact when opinion of the
Advisory Board was received, and that once the
detention order is revoked it is for the jail authorities
where    the  person   is   confined   to  release   him
“forthwith”. We do not think such proposition could
ever have been advanced by the respondents. Of
course, we are not unmindful of the fact that once the
opinion of the Advisory Board is received the detenu is
not to be released at once and time is required to
meet   administrative   exigencies.   As  to  what   the
expression   “as  soon    as  may    be”  or  the  word
“forthwith” mean, the Supreme Court has already laid
down the guidelines."
In this case as stated above the administration has acted with utmost
lethargy, thereby keeping the detenue unnecessarily in prison for four
22. In Nilabati Behera vs. State of Orissa (1993) 2 SCC 746, a
Three Judges Bench held as under:-
"This Court and the High Courts, being the protectors of
the civil liberties of the citizen, have not only the power
and jurisdiction but also an obligation to grant relief in
exercise of its jurisdiction under Articles 32 and 226 of
the Constitution to the victim or the heir of the victim
whose fundamental rights under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India are established to have been
flagrantly infringed by calling upon the State to repair
the damage done by its officers to the fundamental
rights of the citizen, notwithstanding the right of the
citizen to the remedy by way of a civil suit or criminal
proceedings. The State, of course has the right to be
indemnified by and take such action as may be available
to it against the wrongdoer in accordance with law
through appropriate proceedings. Of course, relief in
exercise of the power under Article 32 or 226 would be
granted only once it is established that there has been
an infringement of the fundamental rights of the citizen
and no other form of appropriate redressal by the court
in the facts and circumstances of the case, is possible.
The decisions of this Court in the line of cases starting
with Rudul Sah v. State of Bihar and Anr., [1983] 3 SCR
508    granted   monetary     relief  to  the  victims   for
deprivation of their fundamental rights in proceedings
through petitions filed under Article 32 or 226 of the
Constitution   of   India,   notwithstanding    the  rights
available under the civil law to the aggrieved party
where the courts found that grant of such relief was
warranted. It is a sound policy to punish the wrongdoer
and it is in that spirit that the Courts have molded the
relief by granting compensation to the victims in
exercise of their writ jurisdiction. In doing so the courts
take into account not only the interest of the applicant
and the respondent but also the interests of the public
as a whole with a view to ensure that public bodies or
officials do not act unlawfully and do perform their
public    duties   properly     particularly   where    the
fundamental rights of a citizen under Article 21 is
concerned. Law is in the process of development and
the process necessitates developing separate public law
procedures as also public law principles. It may be
necessary to identify the situations to which separate
proceedings and principles apply And the courts have to
act firmly but with certain amount of circumspection and
self restraint, lest proceedings under Article 32 or 226
are misused as a disguised substitute for civil action in
private law."
23. In D.K.Basu vs. State of W.B. (1997) 1 SCC 416, the Apex
Court has held as under:-
"The     claim  in  public law   for compensation    for
unconstitutional deprivation of fundamental right to
life and liberty, the protection of which is guaranteed
under the Constitution, is a claim based on strict
liability and is in addition to the claim available in
private law for damages of tortious acts of the public
servants. Public law proceedings serve a different
purpose than the private law proceedings. Award of
compensation for established infringement of the
indefeasible rights guaranteed under Article 21 of the
Constitutions is remedy available in public law since
the purpose of public law is not only to civilise public
power but also to assure the citizens that they live
under a legal system wherein their rights and interests
shall   be   protected    and   preserved.    Grant    of
compensation in proceedings under Article 32 or 226
of the Constitution of India for the established
violation or the fundamental rights guaranteed under
Article 21, is an exercise of the Courts under the
public law jurisdiction for penalising the wrong door
and fixing the liability for the public wrong on the
State which failed in the discharge of its public duty to
protect the fundamental rights of the citizen."
24. In a recent decision in the case of Bhola Kumhar vs. State of
Chhattisgarh, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 837 the Hon'ble Apex Court has
held that when a person is detained beyond reasonable date it would be
imprisonment or detention sans sanction of law and would thus not only
violate Article 19(d)   but also Article 21 of Constitution of India and
thereby held such a person is entitled      for compensation in terms of
money. The Apex Court has also without making any observation as to
civil remedy has passed an order granting compensation to be paid by
the State in terms of money holding it vicariously liable for the act
committed by its officers in the course of employment.
25. While it is the duty of the court to see that any individual, who
crosses the boundaries carved out by law is dealt appropriately, it is also
the foremost duty of the courts to uphold the dignity of personal liberty.
Taking cue from the above judgements and having found that the
detenue has been kept in illegal detention for 128 days, we direct the
State to pay a sum of Rs.5,00,000/- to the detenue Tmt. Muthulakshmi
w/o Thiru. Manokaran residing at North Nalliyanthottam, Velipalayam &
post, Velipalayam police station limit, Nagapattinam taluk, Nagapattinam
District, to the detenue towards compensation within 6 weeks from the
date of receipt of copy of this order and such amount can be adjusted
towards any amount which may be awarded to the detenue by way of
damages in the event of the detenue filing any Civil Suit. With the above
observation and direction, the Habeas Corpus Petition is closed.
Home, Prohibition and Excise Department,