1.   Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned
judgment and order dated 14.09.2020 passed by the High
Court of Delhi at New Delhi in Bail Application No.2442 of
2020 by which the High Court has allowed the said
has directed that he be released on bail in connection with
FIR No.128 of 2019 PS Economic Offences Wing in New
Delhi for the offences under Sections 409, 420, 467, 468,
471 and 120B IPC, the original complainant has preferred
the present appeal.
2.     That the appellant herein a non­banking financial
company      (NBFC)   lodged   an  FIR/complaint     with the
Economic Offences Branch, New Delhi against the company
M/s Sri Aranath Logistics Limited (formerly known as M/s
LMJ Logistics Limited), Respondent No.2 herein Jayant
Kumar Jain – Managing Director and others for the offences
under Sections 409, 420, 467, 468, 471 and 120B IPC. It
was alleged against the accused – Respondent No.2 herein
that he is the Managing Director of M/s Aranath Logistics
Limited engaged in the business of multi­commodity trading
of agricultural and non­commodities agricultural. That by
way of written agreement accused availed loan credit
facilities to the tune of Rs.25 crores for a term of 180 days
from the complainant company. It was alleged that the said
amount of Rs.25 crores was disbursed in the year 2017. It
was alleged that the said amount of Rs.25 crores was
required to be used by the company for its own purpose. It
was further alleged that for the purpose of repayment of
loan, no stock statement was submitted and mortgage was
also not created as agreed between the parties.      It was
further alleged that instead of using the amount for the
purpose mentioned in the agreement the same was
transferred to several fake/shell companies. It was further
alleged that at the time of availing the loan the accused
misrepresented to the complainant about the financial
health of the company of the accused. It was further alleged
that the amount of around Rs.8 crores stated to have been
diverted into such shell companies which were created by
the accused in the name of his employees and bank account
was opened for transaction of those companies by using
forged and fabricated documents of identities of those
employees and the said amount was further siphoned off to
other companies which were connected to the accused. It
was further alleged that Directors of those shell entities
have stated that they have not opened the bank account in
the said name or said firm and their KYC form was misused
by the accused. It was further alleged that a sum of Rs.15
crores   was   transferred  to   another company    –   LMJ
International Ltd. and the said amount was used for the
purpose of setting off against the previous liability of the
said company with the Corporation Bank, Calcutta.       That
after the preliminary investigation on the complaint of the
appellant herein – original complainant, the Economic
Offences Wing having found a prima facie case against
Respondent No.2 and others, FIR being FIR No.128 was
registered.  The Respondent No.2 came to be arrested on
03.07.2020.    The Respondent No.2 filed an application
before the learned Metropolitan Magistrate seeking bail
under Section 437 Cr.P.C. One another bail application for
regular bail being Bail Application No.903 of 2020 was
moved on behalf of the Respondent No.2 – Accused before
the Court of Sessions Judge, Patiala House Courts, New
Delhi. The said bail application was opposed by the I.O. A
status report was filed pointing out how the amount of 25
crores was siphoned off and transferred to other shell
companies and how the said amount was used by the
Respondent No.2 for other companies.       Vide order dated
04.08.2020 by a detailed speaking order, the learned
Sessions    Judge  dismissed    the bail  application.  That
thereafter, respondent no.2 – accused filed the present bail
application before the High Court. The detailed status report
was filed on behalf of the I.O. It was also submitted that the
charge­sheet has been filed against Respondent No.2 and
other co­accused.      The detailed status report was filed
pointing out how a sum of Rs.25 crores to be used by M/s
LMJ Logistic Limited was transferred to shell and other
companies such as M/s LMJ Logistic Limited and how a
systematic fraud was committed. Despite the above, by the
impugned judgment and order, the High Court has directed
to release Respondent No.2 on bail merely on the ground
that the case arises out of a commercial transaction and is
based on documents already seized.
3.    Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned
judgment and order passed by the High Court directing to
release Respondent No.2 – accused on bail, the original
complainant has preferred the present appeal.
3.1   At the outset, it is required to be noted that after this
Court directed to issue notice to the respondents vide order
dated 17.12.2020 and thereafter the matter was adjourned
from time to time, on 08.01.2022 the petitioner(appellant)
moved     an   application    being  Criminal    Miscellaneous
Application    No.4818    of   2022   seeking  permission     to
withdraw the present Special Leave Petition submitting that
during the pendency of the present Special Leave Petition, a
settlement agreement has been entered into between the
petitioner(appellant) and Respondent No.2 on 08.01.2022
and    therefore,  the   Petitioner(appellant)  is  no   longer
interested in pursuing the present Special Leave Petition in
view of the settlement. The said application was heard by
this   Court   on   10.01.2022.      This   Court   shown    its
disinclination to permit the petitioner(appellant) to withdraw
the    Special   Leave   Petition   by   observing   that   the
petitioner(appellant) cannot be permitted to withdraw the
Special Leave Petition in view of the serious allegations
against Respondent No.2 and others.        That thereafter the
learned     counsel     appearing     on    behalf    of    the
petitioner(appellant) withdrew the said application.       That
thereafter the present Special Leave Petition was adjourned
to 17.01.2022, at the request of the learned counsel for the
respective parties to consider the present Special Leave
Petition on merits.
4.    Shri    Mukul    Rohatgi,   learned    Senior   Advocate
appearing on behalf of Respondent No.2 has made the
following    submissions   in   support  of   his prayer  and
requested not to cancel the bail granted by the High Court.
4.1   It is vehemently submitted by Shri Rohatgi, learned
Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of Respondent No.2
that in the facts and circumstances of the case and
considering the fact that the dispute is of a civil nature
arising out of commercial transactions and the investigation
is concluded and the case rests on documentary evidence
already collected by the Investigating Officer during the
investigation which have been seized and that the impugned
order passed by the High Court releasing Respondent No.2
on bail is as far as back on 14.09.2020 and thereafter there
are no allegations that Respondent No.2 has misused the
liberty in between and that during the investigation
Respondent       No.2  has    cooperated    and   neither  the
complainant nor the State are opposing the bail application
seriously, this Court may not cancel the bail.
4.2   It is further submitted by Shri Rohatgi, learned Senior
Advocate for Respondent No.2 that in the present case out
of Rs.25 crores, Rs.15 crores were transferred to the sister
concern LNJ International Limited and the sister concern
paid off its loan which cannot be said to be an offence.
4.3   Shri Rohatgi, learned Senior Advocate on behalf of
Respondent No.2 – accused has heavily relied upon the
decisions of this Court in the case of Dolat Ram vs. State
of Haryana, (1995) 1 SCC 349; X vs. State of Telangana,
(2018) 16 SCC 511; Prabhakar Tewari vs. State of U.P.,
(2020) 11 SCC 648 as well as the decision of this Court in
the   case     of  Gurcharan    Singh    vs.   State    (Delhi
Administration) (1978) 1 SCC 118 in support of his
submissions that once the bail has been granted by the
High Court and/or the Court below the same may not be
cancelled unless it is found that the accused has violated
any of the terms and conditions of the bail order and/or has
misused any liberty shown to him while releasing him on
bail and/or there are any other peculiar circumstances.
4.4. Making the above submissions it is prayed to dismiss
the present appeal.
5.    Present appeal is opposed by learned Counsel on
behalf of Respondent – State. A status report on behalf of
the State has been filed in which it is stated that the State
had filed a status report on 09.09.2020 before the High
Court and before the High Court, the State vehemently
opposed the bail of Respondent No.2.       However, at that
stage,   further   investigation  was    underway     and   a
supplementary charge­sheet was yet to be filed. The same
has now been filed.         The State shall abide by the
directions/order passed by this Hon’ble Court.
6.    In the status report it has been pointed out how
systematic fraud has been committed by Respondent No.2
and others siphoning off huge amount of Rs.25 crores
through other Shell Companies who are found to be fake
and non­existent.    A supplementary charge­sheet is also
filed on further investigation. A detailed status report has
been filed pointing out how shell entities were used as
conduit entities to transfer money to the main company of
the accused i.e., LMJ Logistics Limited.
7.    We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of
the respective parties at length.
8.   Having gone through the impugned judgment and
order passed by the High Court directing to release the
Respondent No.2 on bail it appears that the High Court has
directed to release the Respondent No.2 on bail mainly on
the ground that the case arises out of a commercial
transaction and is based on documents already seized.
Para 16 contains the only reasoning while releasing
Respondent No.2 on bail, which reads as under:
“16. Coming to the facts of the present case, it is an
admitted fact that the co­accused namely Navin
Kumar Jain and Hulash Chand Jain were the other
Directors and shareholders of SALL as well as LMJIL.
They also signed/undertook personal guarantee to the
complainant company in their capacity as Directors of
the SALL against the “Working Capital Demand Loan”.
Navin Jain had also signed the Tripartite Off­take
Agreement in the capacity of Director of LMJIL. Both
of them were not even arrested and the charge sheet
against them was filed without arrest. During two
years of enquiry/investigation, the petitioner joined
investigation on multiple occasions. After his arrest,
the EOW sought only one day PC remand. Neither in
the Status Report nor during the course of arguments,
any apprehension was shown that the petitioner is a
“flight risk”. The case arises out of a commercial
transaction and is based on documents that already
stand seized. The petitioner has already approached
assets/properties has been declared and an IRP has
been appointed.      The complainant has already
approached NCLT.”
9.   From the aforesaid it can be seen that while releasing
the Respondent No.2 on bail the High Court has not at all
adverted to and/or considered the nature of accusation and
the   material    found/collected  during    the  course    of
investigation and the serious allegations of siphoning off the
huge amount through various shell companies. The High
Court has not at all dealt with and/or considered any of the
allegations and/or material collected during the course of
the investigation which were specifically pointed out and
mentioned in the status report filed by the I.O. From the
status report and even the charge­sheet/supplementary
charge­sheet papers it has been found during the course of
the investigation that a sum of Rs.25 crores was disbursed
by the complainant to Respondent No.2 and its company
M/s LMJ Logistics Limited.          The said amount was
disbursed for its own use.        During the course of the
investigation, it has been found that the said amount was
debited to the various companies/entities as under:
9.1  During the course of the investigation, it has been
found that Rs.15 crores was transferred to another
company/LMJ International Limited through some of the
fake companies and the said another company – M/s LMJ
International Limited used that amount to clear its dues of
Corporation Bank, Kolkata. During the investigation it has
been found that a sum of Rs.2,49,25,720/­ was transferred
to one Sairam Agrocorp Pvt. Ltd. and it was further
transferred to LMJ International Limited on the same day.
Similarly, the amount of Rs.2,51,30,176/­ was transferred
in the account of Vasudev Agro Foods Pvt. Ltd. out of which
Rs.1.82 crores approximately was transferred into account
of Aldera Traders Pvt. Limited and it was further transferred
to LMJ International Limited on the same day. During the
course of the investigation, it has been found that an
amount     of  Rs.99,98,874/­    and   Rs.98,74,563/­    were
transferred in the account of Sairam Agrocorp Pvt. Ltd. and
consolidated amount of Rs.1,98,72,914/­ was further
transferred to LMJ International Limited on the same day.
It has been further found that an amount of Rs.99,96,387/­
was transferred to Vasudev Agro Foods Pvt. Limited and it
was further transferred to LMJ International Limited on the
same day. Thus, it has been found that the credit facility to
the tune of Rs.25 crores availed by M/s LMJ Logistics
Limited were not used for any business purposes i.e., sale
purchase of agri or non­agri products but it has been
rotated through shell entities and immediately transferred
to other company M/s LMJ International Limited to square
off the liabilities through the shell companies. During the
course of the investigation/further investigation it has been
revealed that Sairam Agrocorp Pvt. Ltd. and Vasudev Agro
Foods Pvt. Ltd. are fake and shell companies and they do
not exist at the registered address. During the course of the
investigation, it has been found that some of the employees
were made directors without their knowledge and their KYC
and    other    documents    were   misused    without   their
knowledge. As per the charge­sheet/supplementary charge­
sheet it appears that the investigation revealed that the
accounts in question were created to inflate the turnover of
the company so that they could avail the credit facility from
various banks. It further reveals that the shell companies
were created to misappropriate/siphoned off the money
entrusted to them as a loan to the tune of Rs.25 crores. It
has been revealed that there was no genuine transaction of
sale and purchase but it was simply routing and re­routing
of the amount received from the complainant to different
entities which were in actual being operated by Respondent
No.2.    All these aforesaid allegations and the material
collected during the course of the investigation which are
being part of the charge­sheet and supplementary charge­
sheet are not taken note of by the High Court and the High
Court has just simply ignored the same and has released
Respondent No.2 on bail by simply observing that case
arises out of a commercial transaction and the dispute is of
a civil nature.    Therefore, the High Court has not at all
taken into consideration the relevant considerations while
grant of bail. Even the High Court has not at all taken note
of the reasoning given by the learned Sessions Court while
rejecting the bail application of Respondent No.2.
9.2   In the light of the above facts, it is required to be
considered whether the High Court is at all justified in
releasing Respondent No.2 on bail.
10.   At this stage few decisions of this Court on the
relevant considerations to be considered by the High Court
while grant of bail are required to be referred to. In the case
of Prasanta Kumar Sarkar vs. Ashis Chatterjee and Anr.,
(2010) 14 SCC 496, while cancelling the bail and quashing
and setting aside the order passed by the High Court
granting the bail to the accused it is observed in para 9 to
“9. We are of the opinion that the impugned order
is clearly unsustainable. It is trite that this Court does
not, normally, interfere with an order passed by the
High Court granting or rejecting bail to the accused.
However, it is equally incumbent upon the High Court
to exercise its discretion judiciously, cautiously and
strictly in compliance with the basic principles laid
down in a plethora of decisions of this Court on the
point. It is well settled that, among other
circumstances, the factors to be borne in mind while
considering an application for bail are:
(i) whether there is any prima facie or
reasonable ground to believe that the accused
(ii) nature and gravity of the accusation;
(iii) severity of the punishment in the event
(iv) danger of the accused absconding or
(v) character, behaviour, means, position
(vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated;
(vii) reasonable apprehension of the
(viii) danger, of course, of justice being
thwarted by grant of bail.
[See State of U.P. v. Amarmani Tripathi [(2005) 8 SCC
21] (SCC p. 31, para 18), Prahlad Singh Bhati v. NCT of
Delhi [(2001)       4    SCC     280],   and Ram     Govind
Upadhyay v. Sudarshan Singh [(2002) 3 SCC 598].
10. It is manifest that if the High Court does not
advert     to    these   relevant    considerations    and
mechanically grants bail, the said order would suffer
from the vice of non­application of mind, rendering it to
be illegal. In Masroor [(2009) 14 SCC 286], a Division
Bench of this Court, of which one of us (D.K. Jain, J.)
was a member, observed as follows: (SCC p. 290, para
“13. … Though at the stage of granting bail
an elaborate examination of evidence and
detailed reasons touching the merit of the
case, which may prejudice the accused,
should be avoided, but there is a need to
indicate in such order reasons for prima facie
concluding why bail was being granted
particularly where the accused is charged of
having committed a serious offence.”
11. We are constrained to observe that in the instant
case, while dealing with the application of the accused
for grant of bail, the High Court completely lost sight
of the basic principles enumerated above. The
accused, in the present case, is alleged to have
committed a heinous crime of killing an old helpless
lady by strangulation. He was seen coming out of the
victim's house by a neighbour around the time of the
alleged occurrence, giving rise to a reasonable belief
that he had committed the murder. We feel that under
the given circumstances, it was not the stage at which
bail under Section 439 of the Code should have been
granted to the accused, more so, when even charges
have not yet been framed.
12. It is also pertinent to note that, as stated above,
the Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate had rejected
three bail applications of the accused but the High
Court did not find it worthwhile to even make a
reference to these orders. In this regard, it would be
useful to refer to the following observations echoed
in Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v. Rajesh Ranjan [(2004) 7
“12. In regard to cases where earlier bail
applications have been rejected there is a
further onus on the court to consider the
subsequent application for grant of bail by
noticing the grounds on which earlier bail
applications have been rejected and after
such consideration if the court is of the
opinion that bail has to be granted then the
said court will have to give specific reasons
why in spite of such earlier rejection the
subsequent application for bail should be
granted.”
10.1 In the case of Neeru Yadav vs. State of UP & Anr.,
(2016) 15 SCC 422, it is held by this Court in para 11 as
“11. It is a well­settled principle of law that while
dealing with an application for grant of bail, it is the
duty of the Court to take into consideration certain
factors and they basically are: (i) the nature of
accusation and the severity of punishment in cases of
conviction and the nature of supporting evidence, (ii)
reasonable apprehension of tampering with the
witnesses for apprehension of threat to the
complainant, and (iii) prima facie satisfaction of the
Court in support of the charge. (See Chaman
Lal v. State of U.P., (2004) 7 SCC 525)”
10.2 In Anil Kumar vs. State (NCT of Delhi), (2018) 12
SCC 129, it is observed and held by this Court that while
granting bail, the relevant considerations are, (i) nature of
seriousness of the offence; (ii) character of the evidence and
circumstances which are peculiar to the accused; and (iii)
likelihood of the accused fleeing from justice; (iv) the impact
that his release may make on the prosecution witnesses, its
impact on the society; and (v) likelihood of his tampering.
10.3 In the case of Prahlad Singh Bhati vs. NCT of Delhi
& Ors., (2001) 4 SCC 280, it is observed and held by this
Court that the jurisdiction to grant bail has to be exercised
on the basis of well settled principles having regard to the
circumstances of each case and not in an arbitrary manner.
“The jurisdiction to grant bail has to be exercised on
the basis of well settled principles having regard to the
circumstances of each case and not in an arbitrary
manner. While granting the bail, the court has to keep
in mind the nature of accusations, the nature of
evidence in support thereof, the severity of the
punishment which conviction will entail, the
character, behaviour, means and standing of the
accused, circumstances which are peculiar to the
accused, reasonable possibility of securing the
presence of the accused at the trial, reasonable
apprehension of the witnesses being tampered with,
the larger interests of the public or State and similar
other considerations. It has also to be kept in mind
that for the purposes of granting the bail the
Legislature has used the words ‘reasonable grounds
for believing’ instead of “the evidence” which means
the court dealing with the grant of bail can only satisfy
it as to whether there is a genuine case against the
accused and that the prosecution will be able to
produce prima facie evidence in support of the
charge.”
11.  Applying the law laid down by this Court in the
aforesaid decisions to the facts of the case on hand and the
grounds on which the High Court has released the
Respondent No.2 on bail, we are constraint to observe that
in the instant case while dealing with the application of the
accused for grant of bail, the High Court has completely lost
sight of the basic principles enumerated above. The High
Court has not at all considered the modus operandi adopted
by the accused in commission of serious offence of
siphoning and/or transferring the huge sum to another
company through shell companies.         The High Court has
also not taken into consideration the status report filed by
the I.O. in which in detail it has been pointed out how
systematically the accused have committed the offence and
misappropriated/siphoned off the huge sum through shell
companies. Thus, it appears that the High Court has not
adverted to the relevant considerations and has granted the
bail mechanically by observing that the case arises out of a
commercial transaction.
12.   Now so far as the submission on behalf of the accused
that as the accused has been released on bail as far as back
on 14.09.2020 and that thereafter there are no allegations
of misusing the liberty and therefore the bail may not be
cancelled and reliance placed upon the decisions of this
Court referred to hereinabove more particularly in the case
of X (Supra) are concerned at the outset it is required to be
noted that this is a case where it is found that the order
passed by     the High Court releasing       the accused –
Respondent No.2 on bail has been passed mechanically and
without adverting to the relevant facts and without
considering the nature of accusation and allegations and
the nature of the gravity of the accusation.     Even in the
decisions which are relied upon by Shri Rohatgi, learned
Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of Respondent No.2,
there is no absolute proposition of law laid down by this
Court in the aforesaid decisions that once the bail is
granted by the High Court, though the High Court could not
have granted the bail, in absence of any allegation of misuse
of liberty and/or breach of any of the conditions of the bail,
the bail cannot be set aside when grant of bail is itself
subject matter of challenge in appeal/revision.
12.1 What is observed and held is that the rejection of bail
in a non­bailable case at an initial stage and cancellation of
bail so granted has to be dealt with and considered on
different basis and that very cogent and overwhelming
circumstances are necessary for an order directing the
cancellation of the bail already granted. Therefore, on very
cogent and overwhelming circumstances the bail can be
cancelled.   At this stage the decision of this Court in the
case of Mahipal vs. Rajesh Kumar alias Polia and
Another, (2020) 2 SCC 118 is required to be referred to.
In the said decision, it is observed and held by this Court
that though this Court does not ordinarily interfere with the
order of the High Court granting bail, however, where the
discretion of the High Court to grant bail has been exercised
without due application of mind and in contravention of the
directions of this Court, such an order of granting bail is
liable to be set aside.       Thereafter after drawing the
distinction between the power of an appellate court in
assessing the correctness of an order granting bail and an
application for the cancellation of the bail, in paragraph 16
“16. The considerations that guide the power of an
appellate court in assessing the correctness of an
order granting bail stand on a different footing from an
assessment of an application for the cancellation of
bail. The correctness of an order granting bail is tested
on the anvil of whether there was an improper or
arbitrary exercise of the discretion in the grant of bail.
The test is whether the order granting bail is perverse,
illegal or unjustified. On the other hand, an
application for cancellation of bail is generally
examined on the anvil of the existence of supervening
circumstances or violations of the conditions of bail by
a person to whom bail has been granted.
In Neeru Yadav v. State of U.P., (2014) 16 SCC 508],
the accused was granted bail by the High Court
[Mitthan Yadav v. State of U.P., 2014 SCC OnLine All
16031]. In an appeal against the order [Mitthan
Yadav v. State of U.P., 2014 SCC OnLine All 16031] of
the High Court, a two­Judge Bench of this Court
surveyed the precedent on the principles that guide
the grant of bail. Dipak Misra, J. (as the learned Chief
Justice then was) held: (Neeru Yadav case [Neeru
Yadav v. State of U.P., (2014) 16 SCC 508], SCC p.
cancellation of bail after it is granted because
the accused has misconducted himself or of
some supervening circumstances warranting
such cancellation have occurred is in a
different compartment altogether than an
order granting bail which is unjustified, illegal
and perverse. If in a case, the relevant factors
consideration    while     dealing    with    the
application for bail have not been taken note
of, or bail is founded on irrelevant
considerations, indisputably the superior
court can set aside the order of such a grant
of bail. Such a case belongs to a different
category and is in a separate realm. While
dealing with a case of second nature, the
Court does not dwell upon the violation of
conditions by the accused or the supervening
subsequently. It, on the contrary, delves into
the justifiability and the soundness of the
order passed by the Court.”
12.2 Thus, as per the law laid down by this Court where a
Court while considering an application for bail fails to
consider the relevant factors, an Appellate Court may
justifiably set aside the order granting bail. Appellate Court
is thus required to consider whether the order granting bail
suffers from a non­application of mind or a prima facie view
from the evidence available on record.
13.   From the aforesaid it emerges that while releasing
Respondent no.2 on bail, the High Court has not at all
considered the relevant factors including the nature and
gravity of accusation; the modus operandi and the manner
in which the offences have been committed through shell
companies and creating the false/forged documents and/or
misusing the PAN Cards, Aadhar Cards and KYCs of the
employees and showing them as Directors of the fake and
shell companies. As observed hereinabove, the High Court
has not at all considered and taken into consideration the
status report and the evidence collected during the course
of the investigation. Therefore, the impugned judgment and
order passed by the High Court releasing Respondent No.2
on bail is unsustainable as the High Court while releasing
Respondent No.2 on bail has not exercised the jurisdiction
judiciously and has not considered the relevant factors
which are required to be considered while grant of bail.
14.   In view of the above and for the reasons stated above,
the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court
releasing Respondent No.2 on bail deserves to be quashed
and set aside and is accordingly quashed and set aside.
Now on quashing and setting aside the impugned judgment
and order passed by the High Court releasing Respondent
No.2 on bail and consequently the bail being set aside, the
Respondent no.2 – accused to surrender before the
concerned Court/Jail Authority forthwith. Present Appeal is
accordingly allowed.
However, it is made clear that any observations by this
Court in the present order shall not affect the trial and the
observations made in the present order be treated to be
confined to the impugned judgment granting bail.           It is
further observed that after surrender it will be open for
Respondent No.2 to move an appropriate application for bail
before the High Court afresh after a period of three months,
which shall be considered by the High Court in accordance
with law and on its own merits and after taking into
consideration the relevant material collected during the
course of the investigation which is part of the charge­
sheet/further charge­sheet and taking into consideration
the relevant factors to be considered while grant of bail.