1.     This is an appeal filed under Section 37 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act,1996 (for short ‘the Act’) assailing an ex-parte order 8
October 2021 passed by the learned Sole Arbitrator on a Section 17
application filed by the respondent. By the impugned order, the learned
Sole Arbitrator has granted ex-parte ad-interim reliefs in terms of prayer
clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) of the respondent’s application, which read
(a)     Restrain the Respondent and its agents, servants, employees,
directors, officers, representatives and/or any one claiming through
or under the Respondent, from dealing with, alienating, encumbering,
creating third party rights or selling the unsold flats/inventories of
Residential Zone-II in any manner whatsoever, without
express/written permission or consensus of the claimant and sharing
of the Gross Sales Revenue thereof with the Claimant in accordance
with terms agreed upon between the parties, pending adjudication of
the present proceeding by the Hon’ble Tribunal;
b)       Restrain the Respondent from deducting the alleged pending
D. M. Fees towards ‘Facilities Agreement’ and ‘Villa DMA’ or any other
claim/s from the Gross Sales Revenue of the unsold inventories or any
other receivables from Flat purchasers in the Residential Zone-II
Project, pending adjudication of its claims by the Hon’ble Tribunal
and without express permission to the effect being granted by the
Hon’ble Tribunal, in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the
c)       Direct the Respondent to disclose all the transactions made by
it in respect of all the inventories of Tower ‘F’ or any other part of the
Residential Zone-II, and also to provide copies of all Deeds, Sale
Agreements etc. in respect of all such transactions, which are yet not
d)       Direct the Respondent to disclose all the actions
performed/taken by it in pursuance to the Power of Attorney granted
by the Claimant to the Respondent on 05/10/2012 in respect of the
Residential Zone-II and not to use the said Power of Attorney for any
purpose, whatsoever without express permission of the Claimant, in
the facts and circumstances of the present matter, pending
adjudication of the present dispute by the Hon’ble Tribunal ;”
2.     The relevant facts are :- By an order dated 22 January 2021 passed
by this Court in Commercial Arbitration Application (lodg) No.6975 of
2020, by consent of the parties, the learned Sole Arbitrator came to be
appointed to adjudicate the disputes between the parties. The learned Sole
Arbitrator entered arbitral reference. Applications under Section 17 praying
for interim measures were filed by both the parties. On 8 September 2021
and thereafter on 12 September 2021, these Section 17 applications were
reserved for orders, which are awaited.
3.      It is the appellant’s case that subsequent to 12 September 2021 there
was an exchange of e-mails between the parties in regard to sale of unsold
flats in Tower F in Residential Zone II and in regard to the DM Fees,
facilities agreement, Villa DMA etc. On this backdrop, on 7 October 2021 at
6 p.m. the appellant received an e-mail, from the Advocates for the
respondent, which was a copy of the email addressed by the respondent to
the learned Arbitrator, enclosing therewith a second application being filed
by the respondent under section 17 of the Act. The respondent recorded in
the email that it was compelled to move such application for the reasons as
set out in the said application. It was stated that the appellant was trying to
arbitrarily sale the balance inventories of Tower ‘F’, without sharing the
Gross Sales Revenue with the respondents. It was stated that the appellant
was high-handedly threatening appropriation of the share of the
respondent/claimant, towards the alleged pending D.M.Fees of “Facilities
Agreement” and “Villa DMA”, although the issue pertaining to the
entitlement of the appellant was pending adjudication before the tribunal.
By the said email on behalf of the respondent, the following request was
“Therefore, while tendering an apology for the inconvenience which is being
caused to Hon’ble Tribunal, the Claimant is requesting the Hon’ble Tribunal
for fixing an early date for the hearing of the said application, so that the
Claimant is in a position to demonstrate to the Hon’ble Tribunal the
illegalities on the part of the Respondent and request for grant of appropriate
4.    The learned Arbitrator immediately on the next day i.e. on 8 October
2021 and suo moto, considered the respondent’s section 17 application,
even without hearing the respondent/applicant on the said application
much less the appellant, and passed the following ex-parte order:-
The arbitral Tribunal is in receipt of the second application u/s. 17 of
the A&C Act, 1996 filed by the Claimant.
Let the Respondent file Reply to the application in 10 days. Subject to
the reply being filed, the Tribunal can hear this application on
20.10.2021 from 11.30 am to 1.30 pm and 2.30 pm to 4.30 pm.
Learned Counsel for the parties are requested to block the above date
for hearing on the application and confirm to the undersigned if they
are agreeable for such hearing. The date 23-10-2021 (time 5 to 7 pm)
already appointed, may not permit hearing on this application being
accommodated.
The parties are aware that one application u/s. 17 A&C Act filed by
the Claimant and two application u/s. 17 A&C Act filed by the
respondent have been heard and the Order on the applications is
under consideration of the Tribunal. Looking at the nature of the
grievance raised in the application, an ad interim direction in terms of
prayers (a), (b), (c), (d) of the application is granted ex parte which
order shall remain in operation till the application is taken up for
haring bi parte.
The order is being granted ex-parte primarily persuaded by the
consideration that the facts set out in the application call for status
quo being maintained till the application is heard lest the delay in
hearing should render the application itself infructuous.”
5.    Being aggrieved by the above ex-parte ad-interim order passed by the
learned Sole Arbitrator on the respondent’s section 17 application the
appellants have filed, this appeal , under Section 37 of the Act.
6.    Dr.Saraf, learned Senior Counsel for the appellant has made the
(i)   It is submitted that when the parties were already before the
arbitral tribunal, it is a legitimate expectation of the parties and
certainly of the appellant in the present facts, that the arbitral
tribunal would hear the parties, before any order on any fresh
Section 17 application was passed by the arbitral tribunal. It is
submitted that this was a requirement in law as postulated
under Section 18 read with sub-section (2) of Section 24 of the
(ii)   It is submitted that a perusal of the respondent’s averments in
the second Section 17 application would clearly demonstrate
that it was never the prayer of the respondent to seek any ex-
parte ad-interim order.
(iii) Placing on record a copy of the said e-mail dated 7 October
2021, the contents of which are discussed above, it is submitted
that the only request made to the arbitral tribunal was that the
arbitral tribunal should fix a date for hearing of the section 17
application.
(iv)  It is submitted that it is alien to the arbitration jurisprudence
and/or that it is not a practice in our country, that an arbitral
tribunal would pass exparte ad-interim orders or pass orders
without notice to the parties involved in the arbitral
proceedings. In supporting this        submission, Dr.Saraf has
submitted that there is an express departure from what has
been adopted in the year 2006 under the UNCITRAL Model
Law on International Commercial Arbitration (for short “the
UNCITRAL Model Law”). In this regard reference is made to
Section 2 of the 2006 amendment to the UNCITRAL Model
Law, which was adopted by the Commission at its thirty-ninth
session in 2006, to incorporate the provisions interalia on
Interim measures and Preliminary orders by Section 2 thereof,
whereby Article 17B providing for ‘applications for preliminary
orders and conditions for granting preliminary orders ’ came to
be inserted. Sub Article (1) of Article 17 B provided that unless
otherwise agreed by the parties, a party may, without notice to
any other party, make a request for an interim measure
together with an application for a preliminary order directing a
party not to frustrate the purpose of the interim measure
requested. Sub-article (2) provided that the arbitral tribunal
may grant a preliminary order provided it considers that prior
disclosure of the request for the interim measure to the party
against whom it is directed risks frustrating the purpose of the
measure.       Referring to these amendments to the UNCITRAL
Model Law it is submitted that although an occasion arose for
the Indian legislature to consider     amending Section 17 in
terms of what has been adopted under the UNCITRAL Model
Law, the legislature did not accept such a change to be
incorporated in Section 17 of the Act, as clearly seen from the
2015 Amendment Act as brought into effect from 23 October
2015 as also the subsequent 2019 Amendment Act.
(v)     Dr.Saraf has also referred to the extract of Commentary of
Michael W.Buchler and Thomas H.Webster from the Handbook
of ICC Arbitration wherein the insertion of Article 17 B under
the UNCITRAL Model Law, by the 2006 amendment, has been
criticized on the ground that such provision is generally not
available in most arbitration laws and therefore, there is an
issue as to its enforceability.
(vi)   Also regarding the approach which the arbitral tribunal is
required to adopt in passing any interim order or ex-parte
order, reliance is placed on the decision of the learned Single
Judge in Vendhar Movies Vs. S.Mukundchand Bothra.1
(vii)     It is next submitted that even if it is assumed that an exparte
ad-interim relief is prayed the requirements as prescribed by
Order 39 Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure need to be
followed, which were also not satisfied by the respondent’s
application for any ex-parte orders, of the nature passed by the
arbitral tribunal.    In support of this contention reliance is
placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in “Shiv Kumar
Chadha Vs. Municipal Corporation of Delhi & Ors.”2.
(viii) It is thus submitted that the ex-parte order of a nature having
such serious consequence ought not to have been passed
without hearing the appellants and/or parties.
7.     On the other hand Mr.Dewani, learned Counsel for the respondent in
supporting the impugned order passed by the arbitral tribunal, has drawn
my attention to the contents/averments as made by the respondent in the
Section 17 application, to submit that, the cause to move such application,
was to prevent the appellant to frustrate any orders which will be passed by
the arbitral tribunal on the pending Section 17 application, as seen from the
specific prayers made in the respondents section 17 application. He submits
that the requirement of sub-rule (3) of Order 39 of the CPC also stood
satisfied as per the averments in paragraphs 49 and 52 of the application, to
the effect that if the reliefs as prayed for are not granted by the arbitral
tribunal, and if an award is made, it would be rendered a paper award as
also there is likelihood of multiplicity of proceedings. Mr. Dewani has also
referred to the contents of the impugned order to submit that the learned
Arbitrator has indicated a clear concern, that the parties were heard earlier
on the initial Section 17 applications and orders on such applications were
under consideration of the arbitral tribunal. It is submitted that in such
context, looking at the nature of the grievance as raised in the Section 17
application, the learned Arbitrator has recorded that he was “persuaded by
the consideration that the facts set out in the application call for status quo
being maintained till the application is heard. ” It is Mr.Dewani’s submission
the parties would now be heard by the arbitral tribunal on the adjourned
date of hearing, and the parties would be at liberty to assert their respective
pleas before the arbitral tribunal. He has accordingly prayed for dismissal of
this appeal.
8.      I have heard learned Counsel for the parties, as also I have perused
the record and the impugned ex-parte order passed by the arbitral tribunal.
The issue which arises for consideration is as to whether in the facts of the
case, was it appropriate for the learned Arbitrator to pass an ex-parte ad-
interim order on the Respondent’s Section 17 application ?
9.     At the outset the scheme of the Act and primarily the provisions of
Act falling in Chapter V which deals with “the Conduct of the Arbitral
Proceedings” are required to be seen. The relevant provisions in the present
context are the provisions of Section 18 which provides that the parties
shall be treated with equality and each party shall be given a full
opportunity to present his case; Section 19 which provides for
determination of rules of procedure and Section 24 which provides for
‘Hearings and written proceedings’.
10.    On a reading of these provisions it can be gathered that the Act
postulates that in conduct of the arbitral proceedings the fundamental
requirement would be that the parties are not only treated with equality but
each party ‘shall be’ given a full opportunity to present his case. This would
be more imperative when the parties are already before the arbitral
tribunal. Sub-section (2) of Section 19 recognizes the role of the parties
when it provides that the parties are free to agree on the procedure to be
followed by the tribunal in conducting its proceedings, which places an
arbitral tribunal in a different position from that of a Court, when it confers
such choice on the parties. The crucial provision however, is of Section 24.
Sub-Section (2) of Section 24 interalia mandates that the parties ‘shall be’
given sufficient advance notice of ‘any hearing’,. The provisions of Section
18, 19 and 24 would be required to be read in conjunction, as there is a
common thread passing through these provisions in relation to the conduct
of the arbitral proceedings, which is to the effect that the parties need to be
fairly treated at all stages of the arbitral proceedings, and an adequate/
sufficient opportunity is made available to them to present their case on any
proceedings before the arbitral tribunal, which would also include before
any order ad-interim, interim or final is to be passed by the arbitral tribunal.
In my opinion such provisions certainly make it incumbent upon the arbitral
tribunal to give sufficient notice of any hearing to the parties before it. If
this is what is plainly reflected from the said provisions of the Act, it would
be unknown to law and quite peculiar for an arbitral tribunal to pass an ex-
parte ad-interim order, on the mere filing of a Section 17 application,
without hearing even the party making the application, much less the
contesting respondent, who would certainly be affected and/or prejudiced
by an ex-parte order. It may be that the arbitral tribunal is of a firm
opinion in the facts of a given case, that some urgent orders are required to
be passed to protect the arbitral interest of the parties, however, fairness of
the procedure and more particularly as reflected by the provisions, as
discussed above, would not permit an arbitral tribunal to pass an exparte
order on a section 17 application and moreso when the parties are
sufficiently before the arbitral tribunal.
11.     It is seen that the Indian legislature has kept away and/or not
accepted as to what was inserted by the 2006 Amendment in the UNCITRAL
Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration. It clearly appears that
under the UNCITRAL Model Law, upto the year 2006, there was no
provision for any preliminary orders to be passed in arbitral proceedings.
However a departure was made when the following amendments were
inserted in the year 2006 by insertion of Chapter IV-A, providing for ‘interim
measures and preliminary orders’ which reads thus:-
(As adopted by the Commission at its thirty-ninth session, in 2006)
(1)     Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral tribunal
may, at the request of a party, grant interim measures.
(2)     An interim measure is any temporary measure, whether in the
form of an award or in another form, by which, at any time prior to
the issuance of the award by which the dispute is finally decided, the
(a)     Maintain or restore the status quo pending determination of
(b)     Take action that would prevent, or refrain from taking action
that is likely to cause, current or imminent harm or prejudice to the
(c)     Provide a means of preserving assets out of which a subsequent
(d)     Preserve evidence that may be relevant and material to the
resolution of the dispute.
Article 17 A. Conditions for granting interim measures
(1)      The party requesting an interim measure under article 17(2)
(a), (b) and (c) shall satisfy the arbitral tribunal that :
(a)      Harm not adequately reparable by an award of damages is
likely to result if the measure is not ordered, and such harm
substantially outweights the harm that is likely to result to the party
against whom the measure is directed if the measure is granted; and
(b)      There is a reasonable possibility that the requesting party will
succeed on the merits of the claim. The determination on this
possibility shall not affect the discretion of the arbitral tribunal in
making any subsequent determination.
(2)      With regard to a request for an interim measure under article
17(2)(d), the requirements in paragraphs (1)(a) and (b) of this article
shall apply only to the extent the arbitral tribunal considers
appropriate.
Article 17 B Applications for preliminary orders and conditions for
(1)      Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a party may, without
notice to any other party, make a request for an interim measure
together with an application for a preliminary order directing a party
not to frustrate the purpose of the interim measure requested.
(2)      The arbitral tribunal may grant a preliminary order provided it
considers that prior disclosure of the request for the interim measure
to the party against whom it is directed risks frustrating the purpose of
the measure.
(3)      The conditions defined under article 17A apply to any
preliminary order, provided that the harm to be assessed under article
17A(1)(a), is the harm likely to result from the order being granted or
not.”
12.    The amendment of such nature as incorporated under the UNCITRAL
Model Law, does not appear to be a common feature in the arbtiral
jurisprudence prevailing in many countries, as observed in the commentary
of Michael W. Buhler and Thomas H. Webster titled                     ‘Handbook of ICC
Arbitration” on the subject “ex parte orders”. The learned authors have
observed such amendment as incorporated in the UNCITRAL Model Law, to
be the most controversial part of the modification. They observe that an ex
parte order as passed under the amended provisions of the UNCITRAL
Model Law, does not appear to reflect the accepted practice in the major
centres of arbitration. It is stated that a tribunal needs to carefully consider
whether it has the power to issue an ex parte preliminary order, in
particular under the law of the place of arbitration. It is also observed that
such provisions are not generally available in most arbitration laws and
therefore, there is an issue as to enforceability of such orders. It is profitable
to reproduce the relevant extract of the said commentary which reads thus:-
23-21           The most controversial part of the modification to the
UNCITRAL Model Law relates to exparte orders. Article 17 B provides
“(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a party may, without
notice to any other party, make a request for an interim measure
together with an application for a preliminary order directing a party
not to frustrate the purpose of the interim measure requested.
(2)     The arbitral tribunal may grant a preliminary order provided it
considers that prior disclosure of the request for the interim measure
to the party against whom it is directed risks frustrating the purpose of
the measure.
(3)     The conditions, defined under Article 17A apply to any
preliminary order, provided that the harm to be assessed under Article
17A(1)(a), is the harm likely to result from the order being granted or
not.”
23-22           The initial question is whether the Rules constitutes an
“agreement to the contrary” so as to preclude ex parte orders. Despite
various procedural safeguards, the better view appears to be that that
is not the case. However, with respect to ex parte or preliminary
orders, the UNCITRAL Model Law does not appear to reflect accepted
practice in the major centres of arbitration. Therefore, a Tribunal
would have to carefully consider whether it has the power to issue an
ex parte preliminary order, in particular under the law of the place of
arbitration.
23-23          A second question is whether the structure of the Rules
is such as to provide an indication that a Tribunal should not act ex
parte. In this respect, the general, albeit perhaps conservative
reaction is that is is always better to hear both parties. One of the
reasons for this is that, despite the obligation under Art. 17 for
example of disclosure by the applying party of the relevant
circumstances, there is not as yet a well-settled concept in
international arbitration such as the requirement of “full and fair
disclosure” as understood in England for example. In addition,
hearing both sides permits the Tribunal to apprehend or fully
appreciate arguments to which it may not otherwise give adequate
weight.
23-24          Another question is whether a preliminary order would
be effective in the circumstances of the case and how the Tribunal
should act after the preliminary order has been issued. The
effectiveness of a preliminary order will in many instances depend on
enforceability in state courts, a subject that is dealt with in the
UNICTRAL Model Law. As regards the procedure to be followed after
the preliminary order has been issued. Art. 17C of the UNCITRAL
Model Law provides overall guidance. However, a corresponding
provision is not generally available in most arbitration laws and
therefore there is an issue as to enforceability.”
13.    Now coming to the contention as urged by Mr.Dewani pointing out
several paragraph of the Section 17 application, that the respondent’s
application fulfilled the need for an ex parte ad-interim order. It is difficult
to accept Mr.Dewani’s contention on a reading of such application. In my
opinion, the application certainly did not reflect any glaring extraordinary
situation for passing of an ex-parte order of the nature passed by the
arbitral tribunal. Even assuming that there was jurisdiction to pass an ex-
parte ad-interim order (when in there is none), such order was certainly not
warranted considering the nature of the Section 17 application as filed. The
averments in the application and more particularly the averments in
paragraphs 49 and 52, as pointed out by Mr. Dewani does not inspire
confidence that any case of any extreme urgency for passing of an ex parte
order was made out, without issuance of a notice and hearing being granted
to the appellants. Moreover, the nature of the reliefs as prayed for as also
granted by the impugned order, show that these are drastic reliefs which
necessarily ought to have been granted after hearing the parties.           The
reliefs are also not of a nature, that the respondent in the absence of an
exparte order would be placed in such a prejudicial position that no
restitution of such petition was possible.
14.      Dr.Saraf’s submission relying on the provisions of Rule 3 of Order 39
of the CPC that an arbitral tribunal before granting an injunction ought to
have issued a notice, in my opinion, stand recognized by the provisions of
sub-section (2) of Section 24 of the Act. However, in view of the
observations made above, the proviso which deals with the power conferred
on the Court to pass ex parte orders, cannot be applied to arbitral
proceedings, in view of the clear provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 24
read with Section 18 of the Act. Thus, even if the arbitral tribunal is
recognized to have the same power for making orders as that of the Court,
for the purposes of and in relation to any proceedings before it, due
meaning to the provisions of sub-section (2) of Section 24 read with Section
18 would be required to be given when it prescribes that a party shall be
given sufficient advance notice of any hearing and further qualified with an
obligation of the tribunal to treat all the parties equally and that each party
shall be given a full opportunity to present its case, which is required to be
recognized to be applicable at all stages of the proceedings before the
arbitral tribunal. In view of this conclusion, I do not find it necessary to
discuss the decision in Shiv Kumar Chadha Vs. Municipal Corporation of
Delhi & Ors. (supra) as relied by Dr.Saraf which lays down the principles of
law in regard to applicability of sub-rule (3) of Order 39 emphasizing that
reasons to be recorded by the Court to be the basic requirement of the
proviso to sub-rule (3) of Order 39.
15.    In so far as the decision in      Vendhar Movies Vs. S.Mukundchand
Bothra (supra) is concerned, the learned Single Judge of Madras High Court
has observed that proper hearing is required to be granted to the parties in
arbitral proceedings. In this case the Court was examining the contention
that the arbitral tribunal ought not to have proceed ex-parte against a party
to the proceedings. The decision also examines a situation as to when the
arbitral tribunal would proceed ex-parte against a party, when despite
notice the party does not participate in the arbitral proceedings. Such are
not the circumstances in the present case. Thus the principle as discussed in
the said decision may not be applicable in the facts of the present case.
16.     Be that as it may, it appears that even the respondent was not heard
before passing the ex parte ad-interim orders and only on perusal of the
averments in the application, such an order has been passed by the arbitral
tribunal. This could have been certainly avoided by placing the respondent’s
application for hearing even urgently, with notice to both the parties.
17.    As a consequence of the above discussion, the following order would
(I)   The impugned order dated 8 October 2021 is set aside.
(II)  The respondent is at liberty to move the arbitral tribunal on its
second Section 17 application, with notice to the appellant, even
before the returnable date assigned by the arbitral tribunal.
(III) The arbitral tribunal after hearing the parties on the
respondent’s second Section 17 application, may pass appropriate ad-
interim or interim orders.
(IV) All contentions of the parties are expressly kept open.
(V)   Disposed of in the above terms. No costs.
(VI) Needless to observe that the observations as made above, are in
the context of the challenge as raised in the present proceedings and
in no manner are a reflection of anything on the merits of the
respondent’s Second Section 17 application.