        HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE FOR RAJASTHAN
                 D.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 6637/2019
 Lakhpat Ola Son Of Shri Dolaram, Aged About 60 Years, Resident
 Of Choudhary Charan Singh Nagar, Navalgarh Road, Sikar
 (Rajasthan).
 1.      State    Of  Rajasthan,         Through          The   Chief   Secretary,
         Government       Of    Rajasthan,           Government        Secretariat,
         Jaipur (Rajasthan).
 2.      Accountant General Of Rajasthan, Office Of Ag, Janpath,
         Jaipur (Rajasthan).
 3.      Additional Chief Secretary, Public Works Department,
         Government       Of    Rajasthan,           Government        Secretariat,
         Jaipur (Rajasthan).
 4.      District Collector, Sikar, Collectorate Sikar, (Rajasthan).
 5.      Chief Engineer And Additional Secretary (B And R), Public
         Works Department, Government Of Rajasthan, Jacob
         Road, Civil Lines, Jaipur (Rajasthan).
                                                                 ----Respondents
For Petitioner(s)          :    Mr. Saransh Saini
For Respondent(s)          :    Mr. Rajesh Maharshi, AAG through VC
       HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. AKIL KURESHI
             HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SUDESH BANSAL
      In this public interest petition the petitioner has made
allegation that certain officials of the Government have embezzled
public funds by committing irregularities in public works contracts.
The allegations include irregular payments in execution of the
construction work of one Gaurav Path at Sikar during which
                      (Downloaded on 16/02/2022 at 06:39:51 PM)
                                                                           (2 of 2)                    [CW-6637/2019]
                                 according to the petitioner unauthorized over payments were
                                 made.
                                       The   state   authorities      appeared           and    filed  reply   dated
                                 30.08.2019 dealing with each and every allegation of the
                                 petitioner and pointing out that the work as per the contract
                                 awarded or in some cases the extra work as needed was carried
                                 out and payments were made only after due verification and
                                 satisfaction of the authorities. Since two and half years of filing of
                                 the reply, the petitioner has not filed any rejoinder disputing any
                                 of the averments made in the reply.
                                       Even otherwise we find the petition with long pleadings are
                                 long in averments but short in contents. The allegations made in
                                 the petition would require supporting evidence. Even in a public
                                 interest petition the petitioner is not absolved of producing at least
                                 a basic proof of his allegations. When it comes to allegations of
                                 corruption in public life the Court would certainly view the
                                 allegations seriously and deal with them with caution. However
                                 without any supporting materials and particularly when the reply
                                 filed by the Government which covers and denies all averments of
                                 the petitioner and the reply has remained uncontroverted, we do
                                 not propose to carry this public interest petition any further.
                                       The petition is dismissed.
                                                      (Downloaded on 16/02/2022 at 06:39:51 PM)
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)
