1.     The petition has been filed under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. praying
for the quashing of charge-sheet dated 4th December, 2021 emanating from
FIR No.214/2021 dated 30th October, 2021 registered with the Crime
Branch, Rohini, Sector 18, Delhi and all proceedings emanating therefrom.
The FIR No.214/2021 was registered with the Crime Branch, Rohini on
the basis of a complaint that was lodged with them on 19th October, 2020
by the respondent No.2 by way of an email addressed to the Commissioner
of Police, Delhi.
2.     Mr. Tanmay Mehta, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that
the entire case was a product of mala fide, falsehood and absurdity and this
was a case of sheer abuse of the criminal process. It was his contention that
the case was covered by the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of
Haryana and Ors. Vs. Bhajan Lal 1992 Suppl. (1) SCC 335 and this
Court ought to quash the charge-sheet in accordance with the guidelines
incorporated in Para No.102 of the said judgment. It was further submitted
that the entire FIR and the charge-sheet dated 4th December, 2021 was so
absurd and inherently improbable that it was liable to be quashed.
3.     The first contention raised by the learned counsel was that property
bearing No.17/43, Punjabi Bagh, Delhi belonged to Mr. Sunil Datt and Mr.
Ashok Kumar, whereas the complainant who had been divorced by Mr.
Sunil Datt way back in 2000 was claiming a right to the ground floor. She
could produce no document to reflect that she had been in possession of
the ground floor for the last two years. Moreover, after the husband and
wife had divorced, it could not be reasonably believed that 17 years later
the respondent No.2 would have been given the keys of the ground floor
by the ex-husband. It was submitted that Smt. Janak Dulari, the aunt of Mr.
Sunil Datt and Mr. Ashok Kumar, who are brothers, is living in the first
floor of the same property and there were some disputes inter se parties.
The learned counsel contended that the petitioners have been unnecessarily
dragged into these disputes.
4.     The learned counsel further submitted that in the initial complaint
and PCR calls, the petitioners had not been named. The presence of the
petitioner No.2 Ajay Gupta, at the site on 28th January, 2020 was on
account of the fact that the brothers, who were residents of Burmingham,
United Kingdom had asked him to go to the premises at the instance of
Smt. Janak Dulari, their aunt and he had only accompanied the Police.
Therefore, there could be no trespass when the petitioner No.2 had gone to
the property on that occasion. Subsequently, there were other complaints
made to the Police against some others, such as one Mr. Prakash Chand
5.     There were complaints by the respondent No.2 against “Uparwali”
which would be only against Smt. Janak Dulari, who resided on the first
floor. Furthermore, there were conflicting details given in the various
complaints by the respondent No.2, sometimes alleging that Mr. Prakash
Chand Sharma had been sent by Smt. Janak Dulari and sometimes alleging
that he had gone there at the behest of the petitioners. There were other
accusations against Mr. Santosh Kapoor, who is the Chartered Accountant
of Mr. Sunil Datt and Mr. Ashok Kumar and, therefore, the petitioners
have nothing to do with him. These contradictions were sufficient to
falsify the complaint of respondent No.2.
6.     It was submitted by the learned counsel that the FIR had been
registered for the commission of offences under Section 120B, 451, 323,
506, 509, 341 read with Section 34 IPC. Yet, the complainant has not
disclosed any material on the basis of which any of these offences were
made out against the petitioners. Hence, it was submitted that the charge-
sheet be quashed.
7.     Mr. Sanjay Jain, Additional Solicitor General (ASG) for the
respondent No.1/State appearing on advance notice, on the other hand,
submitted that this petition ought to be dismissed at the threshold. Though
the charge-sheet had been filed, cognizance was yet to be taken by the
learned Metropolitan Magistrate. Moreover, all the arguments submitted
by the learned counsel were relevant for determination of the charge that
would have to be framed.
8.     Relying on the judgment of the Supreme Court in K. Neelaveni Vs.
State 2010 (11) SCC 607, the learned ASG for the respondent No.1/State
submitted that since there was discretion vested with the Magistrate to
accept or reject the conclusions drawn by the Investigating Officer, the
petition was premature as it had been filed without waiting for an order to
be passed by the Magistrate in terms of Section 190 of the Cr.P.C. It was
further submitted that the complainant/respondent No.2 is a single woman,
whereas the petitioners were land-grabbers. It is further submitted that
there were 11 accused as per the charge-sheet in the case. Moreover, the
relationship between the complainant/respondent No.2 and her husband
Mr. Sunil Datt was irrelevant to the case at hand. Further, the Investigating
Officer had recorded in the Final Report that the complaint filed by Smt.
Janak Dulari against the respondent No.2 stood closed. The complaint of
respondent No.2 was not being acted upon by the Police of Police Station
Punjabi Bagh, Delhi which prompted her to send a letter to the
Commissioner of Delhi Police. There was no mala fides in such action.
9.     When there were allegations of molestation, the local Police were
bound to have investigated the matter, which they failed to, violating the
directions of the Supreme Court in Lalita Kumari Vs. Govt. of UP & Ors.
2012 (4) SCC 1. Therefore, it was but natural for the Commissioner of
Police, Delhi to mark the complaint to the Crime Branch, and he had acted
completely within the parameters of law as had the Crime Branch, when
they registered the instant FIR. As regards, the minor discrepancies in the
statements of the respondent No.2, she would be able to explain them
anyway at the time of trial. All the 11 accused were connected with one
another, inasmuch as it was found that it was the petitioner No.1 Mr.
Abhishek Gupta who had written down the complainant of Smt. Janak
Dulari in his own hand. Mr. Sunil Datt and Mr. Ashok Kumar were yet to
be arrested in the matter. Thus, investigations too, were pending. As it was
apparently a case in which property was being sought to be usurped from
the possession of a single woman who is living in the ground floor
peacefully with her young son, the Crime Branch rightly charge-sheeted all
of them, including the petitioners.
10.    In rejoinder, the learned counsel for the petitioners has placed
reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Anand Kumar Mohatta
Vs. State (NCT of Delhi) (2019) 11 SCC 706.
11.    Heard learned counsel for the petitioners as well as the learned ASG
and considered the materials on record as well as the cited judgments.
12.    The Supreme Court in Bhajan Lal case (supra), after considering
several judgments, distilled the principles governing the exercise of the
extraordinary power of the court under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India or its inherent powers under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. Several
categories of cases by way of illustrations were also listed out. It would be
useful to reproduce the same for ready reference below:
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various
relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of the
principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series of
decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary power
under Article 226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of
the Code which we have extracted and reproduced above, we
give the following categories of cases by way of illustration
wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse
of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of
justice, though it may not be possible to lay down any precise,
clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of
myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information
report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their
face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima
facie constitute any offence or make out a case against
the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information
report and other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR
do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of
the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within
the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the
FIR or complaint and the evidence collected in support of
the same do not disclose the commission of any offence
and make out a case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute
a cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable
offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer
without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under
Section 155(2) of the Code.
complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on
the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a
just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for
proceeding against the accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in
any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned Act
(under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the
institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or
where there is a specific provision in the Code or the
concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the
grievance of the aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly
attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding is
maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for
wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to
spite him due to private and personal grudge.”
13.    At the same time, the Apex Court also recorded a note of caution in
“103. We also give a note of caution to the effect that the power
of quashing a criminal proceeding should be exercised very
sparingly and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of
rare cases; that the court will not be justified in embarking
upon an enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness or
otherwise of the allegations made in the FIR or the complaint
and that the extraordinary or inherent powers do not confer an
arbitrary jurisdiction on the court to act according to its whim
or caprice.”
14.    It is very clear that the decision to exercise or not to exercise the
inherent powers under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. would be predicated on
the facts of each case but while considering the facts, the court cannot
embark on an inquiry as to the reliability or genuineness or otherwise of
the allegations made in the FIR. When seen on these touchstones, it is clear
that the entire thrust of the arguments of the learned counsel for the
petitioners is on the genuineness of the allegations made against the
petitioners. Thus, there has been an emphasis on the fact that though the
incident had occurred in Punjabi Bagh, it was an year later that the FIR
was registered by the Crime Branch; that the possession of the respondent
No.2 of the ground floor of property No.17/43, Punjabi Bagh (West), Delhi
was unexplained on the basis of documents; that the relationship between
the respondent No.2 and her husband was strained and it was not possible
to believe that he would have permitted her to enter the premises by
handing over the keys to her; that there were contradictions in the various
complaints given to the Police; that the names of the petitioners and others
were randomly taken and that there was mala fide in the registration of the
complaint by the respondents and the entire case was absurd.
15.    Suffice it to note here that these submissions reflecting on the
reliability of the statements of the respondent No.2 or the genuineness of
her complaint cannot be subject matter of the present proceedings. The
court cannot weigh the material in such a fashion to determine the question
of truth in the complaint. As observed in Bhajan Lal case (supra), it is
when the allegations made in the FIR, if taken at face value alongwith
other materials accompanying the FIR, do not disclose an offence, that the
court would be justified in quashing the FIR. If the allegations made in the
FIR or complaint or the evidence collected, though remaining
uncontroverted, do not disclose the commission of an offence, then the FIR
and charge-sheet could be quashed. Finally, if the allegations in the FIR or
complaint were inherently improbable, then the FIR and charge-sheet
could be quashed. None of these situations prevail in the present case.
16.    It is meaningless to argue that the respondent No.2 could not
produce documents for her authorised entry into the premises, as the FIR is
not against her. Admittedly, the petitioner No.2 claims to have gone to the
premises (though alongwith the Police) and had found her there. The inter
se rights of the parties i.e., the respondent No.2, her son and Mr. Sunil
Datt, are for them to resolve. The petitioners cannot question whether or
not Mr. Sunil Datt had allowed the mother and son entry into the ground
floor as the son had sought such a right from his father, as averred by the
respondent No.2 in her complaint.
17.    The respondent No.2 has clearly stated that while she was staying at
property No.17/43, Punjabi Bagh on 28th January, 2020, when she was in
the house with her son Mr. Sahil Datt, petitioner No.2 Ajay Gupta of
Ganpati Builders alongwith his goons forcibly entered her house and
threatened her alongwith Smt. Janak Dulari, intending that they would be
forced to vacate the house. They attempted to physically assault her. There
was a video clipping of the incident and the matter was immediately
reported to the Police vide DD No.50A dated 28th January, 2020. On the
next day, both petitioner No.2 Ajay Gupta and his son petitioner No.1 Mr.
Abhishek Gupta again came to the house and threatened them, again
intending with these threats, that the respondent No.2 and her son would
vacate the premises. The incident was again brought to the notice of the
Police. Another specific incident has been described as having occurred on
4th February, 2020, when one Mr. Prakash Chand Sharma came to threaten
them and when the Police arrived, he apologized and left. There was also
an allegation that the petitioner No.2 had sent one drunken man, namely
Mr. Rajan Makkar, to the house when respondent No.2 was alone in the
house and his vulgar actions had caused her much distress. Smt. Janak
Dulari and her brother had also locked the main gate and abused her. On
20th August, 2020, Mr. Santosh Kapoor of Chattarpur alongwith a lady
whose identity remained unknown, tried to forcibly open the main gate of
the house and abused the respondent No.2 and her son, this time the intent
being also that the respondent No.2 would be forced to withdraw the
existing criminal cases under Sections 468, 467 and 420 IPC against Mr.
Ashok Kanda (her brother-in-law) and the son-in-law of Smt. Janak Dulari
and to accept a fabricated divorce decree.
18.    If these allegations were to be taken at face value or they were to be
treated as uncontroverted, they disclose the commission of various
offences by the accused persons including the petitioners in cohort with
each other. None of these allegations appear to be absurd or inherently
improbable.
19.    Even if the decision of the Supreme Court in Anand Kumar
Mohatta’s case (supra) was to be followed, in that the petition for quashing
under Section 482 can be considered even after the filing of the charge-
sheet, the facts distinguish that case from the present. In that case, there
were several facts and circumstances which on the face of it disclosed a
civil matter regarding refund of a payment of Rs.1,00,00,000/- by the
complainant therein to the appellants therein, where the appellants were the
owners of the immovable property in respect of which a Development
Agreement had been entered into by them with the respondent No.2 and it
was noted that the FIR was based on the allegations of misappropriation
though no actual demand had been made by the respondent No.2 and the
appellants continued to have rights in their property which allowed the
petitioner No.1 to transfer it to his wife without violating the law.
20.    It is clear, therefore, that the facts of each case would determine the
exercise of the discretion vested in the court to quash criminal proceedings
in order to prevent abuse of process of court. As noticed hereinabove, there
is no ground to exercise those powers in the present case. It would be open
for the accused, being the petitioners, to make their submissions on the
material placed before the learned Trial Court to seek discharge, if at all no
offence was made out against them.
21.    In the light of these discussions, no merit is found in the petition
which is dismissed in limine.
22.    The order be uploaded on the website forthwith.