Nirman Sagar Vs. Smt. Monika Sagar Chaudhari and another
Shri Vijay Sundaram, Advocate for applicant.
Ms. Yashodhra Uniya, Advocate for respondents.
This revision under Sections 397, 401 of Cr.P.C. has been filed
against the order dated 25/10/2021 passed by the Additional Judge to
the Court of Principal Judge, Family Court, Gwalior in case
No.234/2019 (new no.367/2021), by which the application filed by
the applicant under Order VII Rule 11 CPC read with Section 126 of
Cr.P.C. has been dismissed.
2.     Since the controversy revolves in a very narrow compass,
therefore, it is not necessary to mention the facts of the case in detail
except that the applicant and respondent no.1 are the husband and
wife, whereas respondent no.2 is the daughter of applicant. The
respondents have filed an application under Section 125 of Cr.P.C.
before the Court of Principal Judge, Family Court, Gwalior. The
applicant filed an application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC read with
Section 126 of Cr.P.C. on the ground that the marriage of the
applicant with respondent no.1 was performed on 29/11/2019 at
Bhopal and they had resided at Bhopal for the last time as husband
and wife. The respondent no.1 is a working woman and is residing in
Delhi alongwith respondent no.2 and with a solitary intention to give
jurisdiction to the Family Court, Gwalior, she has given the address
of her parental home, whereas she is working in Airport Authority of
India and the respondent no.2 is also studying in Delhi. Thus, it was
Nirman Sagar Vs. Smt. Monika Sagar Chaudhari and another
stated that as the Family Court, Gwalior has no jurisdiction to
entertain application under Section 125 of Cr.P.C., therefore, the
application filed by the respondents under Section 125 of Cr.P.C. is
liable to be dismissed being without jurisdiction. It was also
mentioned that in a petition under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage
Act the respondent no.1 had filed her reply, in which she had
disclosed her address as “House No.159, DDA Flats, Pocket-2,
Sector-9, Delhi” and new address “805, Aero View Heights
Delhi” and she has also mentioned that she is working as ATC in
Airport Authority of India. In her application filed under Section 24
of the Hindu Marriage Act she has also disclosed the fact that she is
working in Indira Gandhi International Airport on the post of ATC
and is residing in Delhi and accordingly, it was prayed that this Court
has no jurisdiction to entertain the application filed under Section
125 of Cr.P.C.
3.     The respondents filed their reply and stated that the respondent
no.1 resided with the applicant till 2014 and thereafter, she came
back to her parental home. The respondent no.1 is merely serving at
Delhi and it is not her permanent address. The permanent address of
the respondent no.1 is Gwalior. It was further stated that the
respondent no.1 is already in job much prior to her marriage. Her first
posting was in Calcutta in the year 2010 and from the year 2011 she
is posted in Delhi and after she was deserted in the year 2014, she is
Nirman Sagar Vs. Smt. Monika Sagar Chaudhari and another
residing in her parental home in Gwalior and attends her job at Delhi.
Thus, the contention of the respondent no.1 was that her permanent
address is at Gwalior and, therefore, the Family Court, Gwalior has a
territorial jurisdiction to decide the application.
4.     The Trial Court by the impugned order dated 25/10/2021 has
rejected the application merely on the ground that the parental home
of the respondent no.1 is at Gwalior and her permanent address is at
5.     Challenging the order passed by the Court below, it is
submitted by the counsel for the applicant that Section 126 of Cr.P.C.
governs the jurisdiction of the Trial Court. It is further submitted that
the respondent no.1 herself has admitted that she was already in job
much prior to her marriage and from the year 2011 she is posted in
6.     Per contra, it is submitted by the counsel for the respondents
that since the permanent address of the respondent no.1 is at Gwalior
and she occasionally visits her parental home, therefore, the Family
Court at Gwalior has a jurisdiction to entertain the application filed
under Section 125 of Cr.P.C.
7.     Heard learned counsel for the parties.
8.     Section 126 of Cr.P.C. reads as under:-
126. Procedure.- (1) Proceedings under section 125
may be taken against any person in any district-
(b) where he or his wife resides, or
(c) where he last resided with his wife, or as the
Nirman Sagar Vs. Smt. Monika Sagar Chaudhari and another
case may be, with the mother of the illegitimate child.
(2) All evidence to such proceedings shall be
taken in the presence of the person against whom an
order for payment of maintenance is proposed to be
made, or, when his personal attendance is dispensed
with in the presence of his pleader, and shall be
recorded in the manner prescribed for summons- cases:
Provided that if the Magistrate is satisfied that
the person against whom an order for payment of
maintenance is proposed to be made is wilfully
avoiding service, or wilfully neglecting to attend the
Court, the Magistrate may proceed to hear and
determine the case ex parte and any order so made may
be set aside for good cause shown on an application
made within three months from the date thereof subject
to such terms including terms at to payment of costs to
the opposite party as the Magistrate may think just and
proper.
(3) The Court in dealing with applications under
section 125 shall have power to make such order as to
costs as may be just.
9.    Thus, the proceedings under Section 125 of Cr.P.C. may be
taken against any person in any district where he or his wife resides
or where he last resided with her wife or as the case may be with the
mother of the illegitimate child. It is not the case of the respondent
no.1 that she resided with the applicant for the last time in Gwalior.
Her contention is that Gwalior is her permanent address as her
parents are residing there and she occasionally visits her parents and,
therefore, the Family Court, Gwalior has a jurisdiction to entertain
the application filed under Section 125 of Cr.P.C. The stand taken by
the respondent no.1 cannot be appreciated as the word “resides”
cannot be equated with places where flying visits are made. It is not
the case of respondent no.1 that at the time of filing of the application
under Section 125 of Cr.P.C. she was posted in Gwalior and the
Nirman Sagar Vs. Smt. Monika Sagar Chaudhari and another
Family Court, Gwalior would not lose jurisdiction merely on the
ground that subsequently she was transferred, but the case of
respondent no.1 is that from the year 2011 onwards she is posted in
Delhi. Flying visits to a particular place with a solitary intention to
confer jurisdiction would not satisfy the provisions of Section 126 (1)
of Cr.P.C. The respondent no.1 has relied upon the judgment dated
17/12/2021 passed by Delhi High Court in the case of Asha Devi and
others Vs. Muneshwar Singh @ Munna in Criminal Revision
No.614/2018. Paragraph 7 of the judgment passed in the case of
Asha Devi (supra) reads as under:-
7. It is, further, submitted that a coordinate bench of
this Court in the matter Sachin Gupta vs Rachana
Gupta, Crl. Rev. P. 476/2018, decided on 21st January,
2019, had observed as under: -
“6. In terms of Section 126(1)(b), the respondent
would be entitled to maintain a petition both at the
place where the husband is residing as also at the
place where she is residing. Section 126(1) does
not contemplate a permanent place of residence.
Even a place where the wife is for the time being
residing would confer jurisdiction on such a court,
where she is residing. However, residence
temporarily acquired solely for conferring
jurisdiction would not satisfy the requirements of
Hence, the Petitioner was entitled to proceed
against the Respondent at the place where she was
residing as well as where the Respondent was residing
at the time of application, that is Delhi. Furthermore, it
is submitted that the Respondent was arrested on 11th
May, 2018 from Delhi, which is an affirmation of the
fact that he was residing within the territorial borders of
Delhi and is sufficient to invoke the legal jurisdiction of
the concerned Courts here. Further, placing reliance on
Bhaskar Lal Sharma vs Monica & Ors, (2014) 3 SCC
383, submitted that order of maintenance may be
enforced against the concerned person within the
Nirman Sagar Vs. Smt. Monika Sagar Chaudhari and another
jurisdiction of the Court that has passed maintenance
order, even if he is living outside the country.
The Madras High Court in the case of K. Mohan Vs.
Balakanta Lakshmi reported in 1983 Cr.L.J. 1316 has held as
7. The Corpus Juris Secundum, Vol. LXXVII at page
285 states that the word 'reside' is employed in a wide
variety of significations, that its meaning may differ
according to the connection in which it is used, that the
particular signification of the term in any given instance
depends on the context and the purpose under
consideration and that it should be interpreted in the
light of the object or purpose of its use. It is. further
noted therein as follows:--
It has been said that the word, 'reside' has two distinct
meanings, and that it may be employed in two senses,
and in what is sometimes referred to as the strict legal,
or technical sense, it means legal domicile as.
distinguished from mere residence or. place of actual
abode. In this sense the word 'reside' means legal
residence; legal domicile, or the home of a person in
contemplation of law, the place where a person is
deemed in law to live, which may not always be the
place of his actual dwelling and thus the term may
mean something different from, being bodily present,
and does not necessarily refer to the place of actual
abode. When employed in this sense, the
word,'reside',.includes not only physical presence in a
place, but also the accompanying intent of choosing
that place as a permanent residence.
synonymous with, 'abide', 'dwell; 'to have one's home',
'live', 'lodge?, 'remain', 'residence', 'sojourn', and 'stay'
'Reside' is said to be. usually classed as synonymous,
with 'inhabit'; but not., in strictness, properly so.
9. In the Words and Phrases, Permanent Edn.
Volume 37, at page 308 it is defined thus;
To 'reside' in ordinary acceptation, means to
dwell, or to live...'Reside' means live, dwell, abide,
sojourn , stay, remain, lodge.
10. The above lexicographical meaning of the word,
therefore, takes in both the permanent dwelling and the
Nirman Sagar Vs. Smt. Monika Sagar Chaudhari and another
temporary living in a place and it is therefore capable of
different meanings including 'domicile' in the strictest
and the most technical sense and a temporary residence
in the liberal sense. Whatever meaning is given to it,
one thing is obvious and it is that it does not include a
casual stay in or a flying visit to a particular place. In
short, the meaning of the word would in the ultimate
analysis depend upon the context and the purpose of the
particular statute..
10.    Thus, it is clear that a casual stay or a flying visit to a particular
place cannot be treated as a part of the word “reside”.
11.    It is next contended by the counsel for the respondent no.1 that
the respondent no.2 was earlier residing with her maternal parents at
Gwalior, therefore, the application filed on her behalf is
12.    Considered the submissions made by the counsel for the
respondent no.1.
13.    The submission made by the counsel for respondent no.1 is just
contrary to what it has been averred by her in paragraph no.1 of her
application, which reads as under:-
^^1---------------fookg ds mijkar vkosfndk dza-1 vukosnd ds
vkilh nkEiR; laca/kksa ds ifj.kkeLo:i ,d iq=h n{krk pkS/kjh dk
tUe gqvk tks orZeku esa vkosfndk dz-&1 ds lkFk fuokljr gSA^^
14.    Thus, it is clear that it is the contention of the respondent no.1
that her daughter is residing with her. Admittedly, respondent no.2,
daughter of respondent no.1, is prosecuting her studies in Delhi.
Thus, it is clear that both the respondents no.1 and 2 are residing in
Delhi where respondent no.1 is serving in Airport Authority of India
and is posted as ATC. The respondent no.1 is serving in Delhi from
Nirman Sagar Vs. Smt. Monika Sagar Chaudhari and another
the year 2011. The address which has been shown by them in the
cause-title has been given with a solitary intention to give territorial
jurisdiction to the Family Court, Gwalior and in fact the Family
Court, Gwalior has no territorial jurisdiction to try the application in
the light of Section 126 of Cr.P.C.
15.    Accordingly, order dated 25/10/2021 passed by the Additional
Judge to the Court of Principal Judge, Family Court, Gwalior in case
No.234/2019 (new no.367/2021) is hereby set aside. The application
filed by the respondents under Section 125 of Cr.P.C. before the
Family Court, Gwalior is held to be without jurisdiction. However,
liberty is granted to the respondents that if they so desire, they can
file an application under Section 125 of Cr.P.C. before the Courts
having jurisdiction in the light of Section 126 of Cr.P.C.
16.    With aforesaid, the revision is allowed.