1            This intra-Court Appeal by the Union Territory of J&K is directed
against the judgment dated 27.01.2021 passed by the learned Single Judge [„the
Writ Court‟] in SWP No.1148/2016 titled „All J&K Workers Union SRTC vs.
State of J&K and others‟.
2            Before we advert to the grounds of challenge urged by Mr. A
Haqani learned Senior Advocate in support of the appeal, we find it appropriate
to give brief resume of the factual antecedents leading to the filing of this
3             The respondent-Association of Road Transport employees [writ
petitioners] filed a writ petition claiming, inter alia, a direction in the nature of
mandamus to the appellants herein to treat them as Government employees and
consequently hold them entitled to all retiral benefits available to the
Government employees of the UT of J&K and those extended to the similarly
situate employees of erstwhile Government Transport Undertaking [GTU]. The
writ petitioners also sought the relief prayed for in the writ petition on the
analogy of employees of JK Industries. The case projected by the writ
petitioners before the Writ Court       was predicated on the following factual
4             The public transport in the erstwhile State of J&K was earlier
managed and run by the GTU which was a limb of the Government of Jammu
and Kashmir.The employees serving in the GTU on substantive basis were
treated as Government employees for all purposes including post retiral benefits.
In the year 1950, the Parliament enacted Central Road Transport Corporation
Act 1950 [„the Act of 1950‟] which was extended to the State of Jammu and
Kashmir w.e.f 01.09.1976. The extension of the Act of 1950 paved way for
establishment of a Road Transport Corporation in the State of Jammu and
Kashmir.     Accordingly,     the   J&K    State   Road     Transport    Corporation
[„Corporation‟] came to be incorporated vide Notification No. SO 263 (E) dated
01.04.1976. This was followed by the issuance of Government Order No. 25-TR
of 1979 dated 27.03.1979, which, inter alia, provided that the employees of
erstwhile GTU, which had been converted into a Corporation, would be treated
as on deputation to the Corporation. The relevant extract of the Government
Order (supra) reads thus:
“(i) the Government servant placed at the disposal of RTC was to
exercise option whether to continue in the services of the
(ii) A government servant exercising option not to continue in the
services of the Corporation was to further opt for any of the
following consequences:
(a) seek for retirement from the Government service if he is
permanent in service or has more than five years qasi
permanent services and receive the pensionary benefits as
admissible under Rules.
(b) Seek for discharge from service, if he is a temporary
Government servant or has less than five years quasi
permanent services (not contributing to CP Fund) and
receive the terminal gratuity benefits as admissible under
(c) Seek for termination from service if he is temporary,
contributing to CP Fund and receive the entire CP Fund
contributions along with interest.
(iii) A government servant exercising his option for rendering his
services in RTC was also to opt:
(a) To retain his pensionary benefits available under the
Government Rules or be governed by the rules of RTC in
so far as the same relates to benefits consequent upon
retirement in such eventuality such government
employees would receive his pension under the Pension
Rules as may be in force to the Government at the time of
his retirement.
(b) Such Government servant retaining his pensionary
benefits under the Government will not be allowed
employees Contribution on Provident Fund on the date of
his retirement and his services rendered by him in the
Corporation after option would qualify for pension.
(c) In the event of death of such Government servants while
in service of the Corporation, family pension/death-cum-
retirement gratuity will be admissible in terms of
5             As per the Government Order (supra), the Government servants
earlier serving in the GTU and whose services were placed at the disposal of
the Corporation were called upon to exercise their option, whether to continue in
the services of the Corporation or not. The Government order also provided the
consequences that would ensue to a government servant exercising option not to
continue in the services of the Corporation. Even the Government servants
exercising option for rendering services in the Corporation were given further
option to either retain their pensionary benefits available under the Government
Rules or be governed by the Rules of the Corporation. This Government Order
was followed by the Government Order No. 38-GR(TR) of 1986 dated
03.10.1986 giving the benefit of exercising option in terms of Government order
dated 27.03.1979 (supra) to even temporary employees of erstwhile GTU.
6            From a reading of both the Government Orders (supra), it clearly
transpires that the choice of making option, either to retain their status as
Government employees or to become the employees of the Corporation was
given only to those employees who had been employed by the erstwhile GTU.
7     The writ petitioners are the employees directly recruited by the
Corporation in accordance with the Jammu and Kashmir State Road Transport
Corporation Service Condition Rules and Regulations, 1979 [„the the Rules and
Regulations of 1979‟]. The writ petitioners in their writ petition specifically
contended that though, they were all appointed in the Corporation after 1976
and were the employees of the Corporation, yet they were all along treated on a
par with those employees of erstwhile GTU who had opted for the services of
the Corporation and were given all the benefits available to the Government
employees. The writ petitioners claim to have been appointed in the Corporation
between 1976 to 1986. Claiming parity with the employees of erstwhile GTU
for the purpose of service benefits including post retiral benefits, the petitioners
approached the Government for extending the similar treatment and treating
them on par with the employees of erstwhile GTU, who, upon exercise of
option, had also become the employees of the Corporation forming same class
with the petitioners. They also sought the benefit of judgment rendered by this
Court in SWP No. 1250/2002 in the case of Employees Association of JK
8            The writ petition was resisted by the appellants before the Writ
Court primarily on the ground that the writ petitioners were the employees
appointed in the Corporation by the Corporation and, therefore, were not, in any
manner, similarly situated with the employees of erstwhile GTU. It was
submitted that the two did not form the same class and, therefore, the allegation
of the writ petitioners that they had been given discriminatory treatment, was
without any substance. The writ petitioners also filed a rejoinder affidavit before
the Writ Court and placed on record a communication of the Corporation dated
17.02.2020. On the basis of the said communication, the writ petitioners pleaded
that even the Board of Directors of the Corporation had, at one point of time,
considered the matter and resolved to take up the matter with regard to grant of
pensionary benefits in favour of the employees of the Corporation with the
Finance Department through the Administrative Department.,
9            The Writ Court, after considering the rival contentions and having
gone through the record, found substance in the case set up by the writ
petitioners and vide judgment impugned, allowed the writ petition and held the
writ petitioners entitled to all retiral benefits on a par with and on the analogy of
section of employees of Corporation who were earlier the employees of
erstwhile GTU and had opted for the services of the Corporation. The Writ
Court also drew analogy from the similarly situated employees of JK Industries
who too had been held entitled to pensionary benefits by this Court. The Writ
Court, however, issued a mandamus to the Government of Jammu and Kashmir
to consider the request of the Corporation made through its Managing Director
vide his communication No. JKRTC/MD/PS/J/GMA/870 dated 15.06.2020
within a period of four months from the date copy of the judgment was served
upon the Government. The writ petitioners were also held entitled to arrears of
necessary dues as might be payable to them from the date of their retirement. It
is this judgment of the Writ Court which is called in question before us in this
10           Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
material on record, we find that the impugned judgment is founded primarily on
(i). That the Board of Directors of the Corporation being the Apex
Body has taken a decision in its 81st meeting held on 05.03.2020 to
take up the matter for grant of pensionary benefits to the
Corporation borne employees with the Finance Department through
Administrative Department and therefore, it is obligatory for the
Finance Department to consider the request of the Corporation
conveyed by the Managing Director of the Corporation vide his
communication dated 15.06.2020;
(ii) that the writ petitioners are entitled to all retiral benefits
including the pension, gratuity etc., on a par with and on the
analogy of the section of employees of the Corporation who were
earlier the employees of the erstwhile GTU and had opted for the
services of the Corporation and also on the analogy of their
counterparts in JK Industries and other Corporations and that the
pension was not an ex-gratia payment but was in the nature of
compensation for the past service rendered and, therefore, it was
incumbent upon a social welfare State to provide such post retiral
benefits.
11           We have carefully analyzed the impugned judgment rendered by
the Writ Court and given our anxious consideration to the rival contentions. We,
however, regret our inability to approve the view of the Writ Court. The
direction issued by the Writ Court to the appellants herein to grant pensionary
benefits to the writ petitioners on the analogy of the employees of erstwhile
GTU who, later on opted to serve the Corporation as also on the analogy of the
employees of other Corporations is not supported by any reasons or any material
on record. It is not understandable as to how the two i.e the employees of
erstwhile GTU who later opted the services of the Corporation and the
petitioners, who were directly recruited to the Corporation, could be treated as
one class.
12           As noticed above, the Government Transport Services in the
erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir were being managed and run by the
GTU which, admittedly, was a limb/department of the Government.
Indisputably, the employees appointed and serving in the GTU were the
Government employees, thus, entitled to all service benefits including the post
retiral benefits on a par with the Government employees serving in other
Departments of the Government. With the incorporation of the Corporation by
conversion of GTU on 01.09.1976, all the Government employees serving in the
GTU were taken to the Corporation on deputation. With a view to regulate
effectively the service conditions of the employees of erstwhile GTU, whose
services had been placed at the disposal of Corporation, the Government issued
Government Order dated 27.03.1979. The said Government order gave option to
these employees of GTU to either opt for the services of the Corporation or seek
retirement/discharge from the service or face termination as the case may be.
The employees of GTU, who opted for the services of the Corporation, were
also given option to retain their status as Government servants and avail the
benefits including the retiral benefits available to the Government employees
under the Government Rules or be governed by the Rules of the Corporation.
Many of the employees of the erstwhile GTU opted to serve the Corporation by
retaining their status as Government employees.
13            There is absolutely no dispute with regard to the entitlement of
such Government employees to the pensionary benefits on a par with the
Government employees serving in other Government Departments. So far so
good, but it appears that due to subsequent developments which are neither
elaborated by the appellant, nor these discernible from the record produced
before us, the Secretary to the Government. Department of Transport issued
Government Order dated 03.10.1986 by virtue of which, all the temporary
employees of erstwhile GTU who had earlier opted for temporary services of
the Corporation as also those employees of erstwhile GTU, who had opted to
serve the Corporation as employees thereof, were given a fresh option for
retaining the pensionary benefits which they had already availed of from the
Corporation or refund those benefits along with interest and opt to draw the
benefits available to permanent Government employees working in the
Corporation in lieu thereof. It seems that taking the benefit of the order of 1986,
many employees of the erstwhile GTU, who had opted the service benefits
available to the Corporation employees, were given fresh option to retain the
benefits including post retiral benefits available to the Government employees
serving in the Corporation. Three months‟ period was available to such
employees to make the option.
14           From a plain reading of Government order of 1986 (supra), it
becomes abundantly clear that the benefits envisaged under Government Order
of 1986 were only meant for the employees of erstwhile GTU and not for the
benefit of the Corporation borne employees. Needless to say that the
Corporation borne employees, like the petitioners and many others are governed
by the Rules and Regulations of 1979 and as per Regulation No. 31, the service
in the Corporation is declared as non-pensionable. Neither the Writ Court has
given any reason or justification, nor have learned counsel appearing for the writ
petitioners been able to convince us as to how the two i.e the writ petitioners
and the employees of erstwhile GTU, who were given the right to exercise
option in the year 1979 and 1986, form a single class. It is, however,
vehemently contended by Mr. Momin Khan, learned counsel representing the
writ petitioners that the employees of erstwhile GTU, who had opted to be the
employees of the Corporation pursuant to Government order of 1979, form a
single class with the petitioners who were directly appointed in the Corporation
and, therefore, there could not have been any further classification within class.
15            We have given our anxious consideration to this aspect of the
matter also and we find the contention of learned counsel not tenable for more
than one reason. First, there is not enough material placed on record by the writ
petitioners to show similarity in all respects with the employees of erstwhile
GTU who were given option in the year 1986 to opt for the services of the
Corporation retaining their status as Government employees. We find clear and
subtle distinction between these two classes of employees. Indisputably, the
petitioners are the Corporation borne employees i.e the employees recruited to
the Corporation and, therefore, cannot by any stretch of reasoning, claim the
status of government employees. The employees of erstwhile GTU were
admittedly the Government employees and entitled to all service benefits
including pensionary benefits available to the Government employees serving in
16            True it is that they were given option to be the employees of the
Corporation and retain their status as Government employees. Many exercised
this option, but there was a class of GTU employees who opted for the services
of the Corporation along with the service benefits available to the Corporation
employees. This happened in the year 1979, but, later on, the Government while
extending the benefit of similar option to the temporary employees of erstwhile
GTU also gave another opportunity to the employees of GTU for exercising
fresh option. It seems that some of the employees, who had earlier opted for the
services of the Corporation with the service benefits available to the Corporation
borne employees, changed their option and decided to retain the service benefits
of the Government employees. This happened in the year 1986. The petitioners
did not agitate the matter in the year 1986, though some of the petitioners claim
to be in service at that point of time. Similarly, the writ petitioners all along
knew that they are the employees appointed by the Corporation in the
Corporation and are governed by the Rules and Regulations of 1979 which
unequivocally declare the service of the Corporation as “non-pensionable”, yet
did not raise any grievance at any point of time. It is only after they rendered the
entire services to the Corporation and retired on superannuation, they decided to
rake up the issue and claim benefit of pension which was never available to the
Corporation borne employees. They were perhaps embolden to approach this
Court when similar writ petitions filed by the retired employees of various other
Government owned Corporations, came to be allowed by the Writ Court.
17            It may be relevant to point out that the judgment passed in favour
of employees of various other Corporations, like J&K State Financial
Corporation, JK Industrial Development Corporation etc., was set aside by
Division Bench of this Court vide judgment dated 11.11.2021 passed in
LPASW No. 10/2019 and other clubbed matters. The employees similarly
situated with the petitioners working in the other corporations too have been
held not entitled to the pensionary benefits. This Court, while taking note of the
delay in filing the writ petitions by the writ petitioners seeking declaration of
their entitlement to pension after their retirement, in paragraph 32 of the
“32. Delay is equally an important factor which cannot be ignored.
The respondents knew full well that Rules and Regulations of the
SIDCO did not envisage payment of pension and that they being
on non-pensionable establishment, were obliged to subscribe to
EPF. They not only made contributions to EPF but at
superannuation they also accepted the accumulated sum in their
accounts which include matching contribution made by SIDCO,
without any protest or demure. Filing petitions in the year 2017,
that too after the implementation of judgment in JKI case, is hit by
delay and laches. Hon'ble the Supreme Court in Narayan Singh
Solanki v. Union of India, (2000) 9 SCC 321, in para 3 held thus:-
"3. Learned Counsel for the Appellant reiterated the
argument urged before the Tribunal. His case is that the
case of the Appellant is covered by Rule 102 of the Rules.
We are not inclined to go into the merits of the matter as we
are of the view that the Appellant having resigned from the
service and accepted his Provident Fund in the year 1963
and thereafter remained silent for nearly 28 years, and
therefore, demand for change in option in the year 1992 did
not deserve to have entertained. In fact the Appellant was
guilty of latches and, therefore, not entitled to change his
option for pension. On this short question we dismiss this
appeal. .............."
18            Having found the writ petitioners not similarly situated with the
class of employees of the erstwhile GTU who were given fresh opportunity to
make option in the year 1986, we are convinced that the view of the Writ Court
holding the writ petitioners entitled to pensionary benefits, more particularly
when the Rules and Regulations of 1979 applicable to the writ petitioners
declare their service „non-pensionable‟, is totally erroneous and unsustainable.
While we do not dispute the power and competence of the Corporation to
modify, amend or cancel the regulations as is provided in Regulation No. 6, but
this power has to be exercised within the purview of the Act of 1950 and the
rules framed thereunder. We also do not dispute the power of the Corporation to
take an informed decision with regard to the service benefits including the post
retiral benefits to be given to its employees. This would all depend upon the
policy decision in this regard, to be taken by the Corporation, having regard to
several factors including its financial health. This Court cannot issue a
mandamus to the Corporation to provide or not to provide a particular service
benefit. The 1979 Regulations are elaborate on the subject and the clear position
that emerges from reading of the regulations, in particular Regulation No. 31 is
that the employees appointed to the Corporation (Corporation borne employees)
are not entitled to superannuation pension. They, however, are entitled to certain
other post retiral benefits in lieu of pension. The decision of the Board of
Directors taken in its 81st meeting and the communication of the Managing
Director sent to the Government fall in the realm of only recommendations
which are yet to fructify into a concrete decision by the competent authority.
The decision of Board of Directors taken in its 81st meeting only accepts, in
principle, the plea of the writ petitioners to have pensionary benefits on a par
with the Government employees and recommends that the matter be taken up
with the Finance Department        of UT of Jammu and Kashmir through the
Administrative Department of Transport for consideration. The communication
issued by the Managing Director only reiterates the decision of the Board of
Directors. It is, thus, best left to the Government to take note of the
communication        of the Corporation and convey its decision as it finds
appropriate, provided the same has not already been conveyed. Needless to say
that the Corporation is also free if it so chooses to provide any service benefits
to its employees including pension by acting strictly within the mandate of the
Act of 1950 and rules and regulations framed thereunder by the Corporation.
We, however, do not countenance the issuance of writ of mandamus to the
official respondents to necessarily concede the request of the Corporation, nor
do we uphold the view of the writ Court that the writ petitioners though
appointed in the Corporation and by the Corporation are entitled to retiral
benefits like pension and gratuity on a par with the government employees
serving in other Government Departments.
19            For the foregoing reasons, we find merit in this appeal.
Accordingly, the appeal is allowed and the impugned judgment is set aside.
Consequently, the writ petition shall also stand dismissed.
In view of the detailed reasons rendered in LPA No. 39/2021, this appeal
is also allowed and judgment of the Writ Court set aside. Consequently, writ
petition shall also stand dismissed.