Counsel for Applicant :- Rishad Murtaza,Aishwarya Mishra,Syed Ali Jafar Rizvi
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
1.     Heard Shri Rishad Murtaza, learned counsel for the applicants, Shri
Aniruddha Kumar Singh, learned A.G.A. for the State and           Ms. Madhulika
Yadav, learned counsel for the private respondent nos. 2 to 5.
2.     This application has been filed seeking quashing of the order dated
03.03.2022 passed by Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate V, Lucknow,
whereby Domestic Incident Report has been called for. A further prayer has
been sought to direct the court concerned to proceed in Complaint Case No.
557 of 2022 under the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act.
3.     Learned counsel for the applicants submitted that the marriage of
applicant no. 1 was solemnized with respondent no. 2 as per the Hindu Rites
on 17th June, 2017 and out of their wedlock, applicant no. 2 was born, who is
at present in the care and custody of applicant no. 1 (mother). Respondent
nos. 3 to 5 are the mother-in-law, brother-in-law and sister-in-law respectively.
It has further been submitted that applicant no. 1 was ousted from her
matrimonial house by respondent nos. 2 to 5 on 1st October, 2020, when she
was carrying the pregnancy of almost 7 months of applicant no. 2. Later on,
applicant no. 2 born in Fatima Hospital, Lucknow. It has also been submitted
that since the private respondents were not taking care of the applicants,
applicant no. 1 made complaint in local police station, but no assistance was
provided to her from the local police. Thereafter, she preferred application
under Section 12 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act,
2005 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act, 2005’) in the court of ACJM V,
Lucknow, which was registered as Complaint Case No. 557 of 2022.
Submission of the learned counsel for the applicants is that in place of issuing
notice on the aforesaid application, the Presiding Officer called for the report of
Protection Officer, i.e., Domestic Incident Report (for short ‘DIR’) and fixed the
matter for 3rd March, 2022. As the report of the Protection Officer was not
received, the applicants, while relying on the decision of this Court in the case of
Manoj Kumar yadav Vs. State of U.P. & Ors. (Appilcation u/s 482 Cr.P.C. No. 2384
of 2020), moved application to the court below to proceed without calling for the
DIR. However, the court below vide impugned order dated 3 rd March, 2022, in spite
of issuing notice to the respondents, dismissed the said application with the order
for calling the report of Protection Officer.
4.      It has been submitted by the learned counsel for the applicants that the DIR
is not mandatory for adjudicating the matter under Section 12 of the Act, 2005. It
has further been submitted that this controversy has already been decided by the
Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Prabha Tyagi Vs. Kamlesh Devi, (2022) SCC
Online SC 607. It has, thus, been submitted that indulgence of this Court is
necessary. The impugned order dated 03.03.2022 is liable to be set aside and the
court below may be directed to proceed in the matter and conclude the same
5.      Learned A.G.A. as well as learned counsel for the complainant vehemently
opposed the prayer of the applicants and submitted that without DIR of Protection
Officer, the correct picture of the incident will not be clear to the court below and,
therefore, there is no illegality in the impugned order passed by the court below by
calling for the DIR. However, they have no objection if the court below is directed
to proceed in the matter expeditiously.
6.      Considering the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the
applicants, learned A.G.A. as well learned counsel for the private respondents and
going through the impugned order and other relevant documents, it is undisputed
fact that the complaint under Section 12 of the Act, 2005 was filed on 25 th January,
2022 and the court concerned called for the DIR from the Protection Officer and
fixed the matter for 3rd March, 2022. It is also undisputed that since the report was
not made available, another application was moved by the applicants with the
prayer to proceed in the matter and issue notice to the private respondents, but
the court below rejected the said applicant and called for the DIR.
7.      Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Prabha Tyagi (supra) has already
answered the issue, whether before proceeding in the matter, the DIR is
mandatory or not under the provisions of the Act, 2005 in order to invoke the
substantive provision of Sub-sections 18 to 21 and 22 of the Act, 2005. The
Hon’ble Supreme Court held that Section 12 of the Act, 2005 does not make it
mandatory for a Magistrate to consider the DIR filed by the Protection Officer or
the Service Provider before passing any order under the Act, 2005. It has also
been clarified that even in absence of DIR, the Magistrate is empowered to
proceed ex parte and pass interim as well as final order under the provisions of
8.     Relevant portions of the judgment of Prabha Tyagi (supra) are quoted
“25. The submissions of the learned amicus curiae counsel for the
respective sides were on the following points for consideration which
were raised vide order dated 11th February, 2022:
“(i) Whether the consideration of Domestic Incident Report is
mandatory before initiating the proceedings under D.V. Act,
in order to invoke substantive provisions of Sections 18 to 20
(ii) Whether it is mandatory for the aggrieved person to
reside with those persons against whom the allegations have
been levelled at the point of commission of violence?
(iii) Whether there should be a subsisting domestic
relationship between the aggrieved person and the person
against whom the relief is claimed?”
26. For an easy and immediate reference, the following provisions of
the Protection of Women from D.V. Act are extracted as under:
“2. Definitions.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) ‘aggrieved person’ means any woman who is, or has
been, in a domestic relationship with the respondent and
who alleges to have been subjected to any act of domestic
violence by the respondent;
(e) ‘domestic incident report’ means a report made in the
prescribed form on receipt of a complaint of domestic
violence from an aggrieved person;
(f) ‘domestic relationship’ means a relationship between two
persons who live or have, at any point of time, lived together
in a shared household, when they are related by
consanguinity, marriage, or through a relationship in the
nature of marriage, adoption or are family members living
together as a joint family;
(s) ‘shared household’ means a household where the person
aggrieved lives or at any stage has lived in a domestic
relationship either singly or along with the respondent and
includes such a house hold whether owned or tenanted
either jointly by the aggrieved person and the respondent, or
owned or tenanted by either of them in respect of which
either the aggrieved person or the respondent or both jointly
or singly have any right, title, interest or equity and includes
such a household which may belong to the joint family of
which the respondent is a member, irrespective of whether
the respondent or the aggrieved person has any right, title
or interest in the shared household.”
“3. Definition of domestic violence.—For the purposes of this Act, any
act, omission or commission or conduct of the respondent shall constitute
domestic violence in case it—
(a) harms or injures or endangers the health, safety, life, limb or
well-being, whether mental or physical, of the aggrieved person
or tends to do so and includes causing physical abuse, sexual
abuse, verbal and emotional abuse and economic abuse; or
(b) harasses, harms, injures or endangers the aggrieved person
with a view to coerce her or any other person related to her to
meet any unlawful demand for any dowry or other property or
valuable security; or
(c) has the effect of threatening the aggrieved person or any
person related to her by any conduct mentioned in clause (a) or
(d) otherwise injures or causes harm, whether physical or
mental, to the aggrieved person. Explanation I.—For the
purposes of this section,—
(i) ‘physical abuse’ means any act or conduct which is of
such a nature as to cause bodily pain, harm, or danger to
life, limb, or health or impair the health or development of
the aggrieved person and includes assault, criminal
intimidation and criminal force;
(ii) ‘sexual abuse’ includes any conduct of a sexual nature
that abuses, humiliates, degrades or otherwise violates the
(iii) ‘verbal and emotional abuse’ includes-
(a) insults, ridicule, humiliation, name calling and insults
or ridicule specially with regard to not having a child or a
(b) repeated threats to cause physical pain to any person
in whom the aggrieved person is interested;
(a) deprivation of all or any economic or financial
resources to which the aggrieved person is entitled under
any law or custom whether payable under an order of a
court or otherwise or which the aggrieved person
requires out of necessity including, but not limited to,
house hold necessities for the aggrieved person and her
children, if any, Stridhana, property, jointly or separately
owned by the aggrieved person, payment of rental
related to the shared house hold and maintenance;
(b) disposal of household effects, any alienation of assets
whether movable or immovable, valuables, shares,
securities, bonds and the like or other property in which
the aggrieved person has an interest or is entitled to use
by virtue of the domestic relationship or which may be
reasonably required by the aggrieved person or her
children or her Stridhana or any other property jointly or
separately held by the aggrieved person; and
(c) prohibition or restriction to continued access to
resources or facilities which the aggrieved person is
entitled to use or enjoy by virtue of the domestic
relationship including access to the shared household.
Explanation II.—For the purpose of determining whether any act,
omission, commission or conduct of the respondent constitutes ‘domestic
violence’ under this section, the overall facts and circumstances of the
case shall be taken into consideration.”
“12. Application to Magistrate.—(1) An aggrieved person or a
Protection Officer or any other person on behalf of the aggrieved person
may present an application to the Magistrate seeking one or more reliefs
Provided that before passing any order on such application, the
Magistrate shall take into consideration any Domestic Incident Report
received by him from the Protection Officer or the service provider.
(2) The relief sought for under Sub-Section (1) may include a relief for
issuance of an order for payment of compensation or damages without
prejudice to the right of such person to institute a suit for compensation
or damages for the injuries caused by the acts of domestic violence
committed by the respondent:
Provided that where a decree for any amount as compensation or
damages has been passed by any court in favour of the aggrieved person,
the amount, if any, paid or payable in pursuance of the order made by the
Magistrate under this Act shall be set off against the amount payable
under such decree and the decree shall, notwithstanding anything
contained in the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 (5 of 1908), or any other law
for the time being in force, be executable for the balance amount, if any,
left after such set off.
(3) Every application under Sub-Section (1) shall be in such form and
contain such particulars as may be prescribed or as nearly as possible
(4) The Magistrate shall fix the first date of hearing, which shall not
ordinarily be beyond three days from the date of receipt of the application
by the court.
(5) The Magistrate shall Endeavour to dispose of every application made
under Sub-Section (1) within a period of sixty days from the date of its
first hearing.”
“17. Right to reside in a shared household.— (1) Notwithstanding
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, every
woman in a domestic relationship shall have the right to reside in the
shared household, whether or not she has any right, title or beneficial
interest in the same.
(2) The aggrieved person shall not be evicted or excluded from the
shared household or any part of it by the respondent save in accordance
with the procedure established by law.”
“23. Power to grant interim and ex parte orders .—(1) In any
proceeding before him under this Act, the Magistrate may pass such
interim order as he deems just and proper.
(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied that an application prima facie discloses
that the respondent is committing, or has committed an act of domestic
violence or that there is a likelihood that the respondent may commit an
act of domestic violence, he may grant an ex parte order on the basis of
the affidavit in such form, as may be prescribed, of the aggrieved person
under section18, section 19, section 20, section 21 or, as the case may
be, section 22 against the respondent.”
59. We are, therefore, of the view that the High Court was not right in
holding that the application filed by the appellant herein was not
accompanied by a Domestic Incident Report and therefore under the
proviso to Sub-Section (1) of Section 12 of the D.V. Act, the Magistrate
had no authority to issue orders and directions in favour of the appellant.
(i) Following are the judgments where the High Courts have held that the
Domestic Incident Report is not a sine qua non for entertaining or
deciding the application under Section 12 of the D.V. Act by the learned
a) In Nayanakumar v. State of Karnataka, [ILR 2009 Kar 4295],
the High Court of Karnataka (Kalaburagi Bench) while dealing with
Section 12 of the D.V. Act, held that in case a Domestic Incident
Report is received by the Magistrate either from the Protection
Officer or from the Service Provider, then it becomes obligatory on
the part of the Magistrate to take note of the said Domestic
Incident Report before passing an order on the application filed by
the aggrieved party. It was further clarified that the scheme of the
D.V. Act makes it clear that it is left to the choice of the aggrieved
person to go before the service provider or the Protection Officer
or to approach the Magistrate under Section 12 of the D.V. Act.
b) In Abhiram Gogoi v. Rashmi Rekha Gogoi, [(2011) 4 Gau LR
276], the Gauhati High Court held that Section 9(1)(b) of the
D.V. Act makes it clear that it is the duty of the Protection Officer
to make a Domestic Incident Report to the Magistrate upon
receipt of a complaint of domestic violence and forward copies
thereof to the police officer-in-charge of the police station within
the local limits of whose jurisdiction domestic violence is alleged
to have been committed and to the service providers in that
area.
c) In the case of Md. Basit v. State of Assam, [(2012) 1 Gau LR
747], the Gauhati High Court differed with the view taken by the
Madhya Pradesh and Jharkhand High Courts and held that
Section 12 only contemplates as to who can file a complaint
under Section 12 of the D.V. Act, what relief may be sought for,
what the contents of the complaint must be and how the
complaint ought to be examined. That if the complaint conforms
to the said pre-conditions, the same may be taken cognizance
of. The High Court noted that an application under Section 12(1)
of the D.V. Act may be filed either by an aggrieved person
herself, or by a Protection Officer. The Court went on to hold
that the provision does not require a Magistrate to specifically
call for a Domestic Incident Report. That it would only be
mandatory to consider such report, if the same had been filed
by the Protection Officer before the Magistrate. The Gauhati
High Court differed with the view taken by the Madhya Pradesh
and Jharkhand High Courts, to the extent that the latter Courts
observed that the Magistrate would not be obligated to consider
the Domestic Incident Report even if the same was filed by the
d) Delving on the same issue, the High Court of Himachal
Pradesh in Rahul Soorma v. State of Himachal Pradesh, [2012
SCC OnLine HP 2574], held that the purpose of the D.V. Act is to
give immediate relief to the aggrieved person; therefore, it was
wrong to suggest that the Magistrate has no jurisdiction to take
cognizance of the application under Section 12 of the D.V. Act
before the receipt of a Domestic Incident Report by the
Protection Officer or the service provider.
e) Further, the High Court of Andhra Pradesh in A. Vidya Sagar
v.State of Andhra Pradesh, [2014 SCC OnLine Hyd 715], rejected
the contention of the petitioner therein that a domestic violence
case can be instituted and taken cognizance of on the basis of
the Domestic Incident Report only and not otherwise.
f) In its judgment in the case of Ravi Kumar Bajpai v. Renu
Awasthi Bajpai, [ILR 2016 MP 302], the High Court of Madhya
Pradesh speaking through J.K. Maheshwari, J., while discussing
on the legislative intent of the D.V. Act, held that if the
legislative intent was to call for a report from the Protection
Officer as a precondition by the Magistrate to act upon a
complaint of aggrieved person, then it would have expressed
that intention emphasizing the words in the main section. The
High Court relied on various judgments pertaining to the
interpretation of a provision and proviso thereof.
g) The Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi in Shambhu
Prasad Singh v. Manjari, [(2012) 190 DLT 647] speaking through
Ravindra Bhat, J. dealt with the conflicting views of the two
Single Judges on the question whether a Magistrate can act
straightaway on the complaint made by an aggrieved person
under the D.V. Act. It was held that Section 12(1) of the D.V. Act
does not mandate that an application seeking relief under the
said D.V. Act must be accompanied with a Domestic Incident
Report or even that it should be moved by a Protection Officer.
So also, Rule 6 which stipulates the form and manner of making
an application to a Magistrate does not require that the
Domestic Incident Report must accompany an application for
relief under Section 12.
It was further held that an obligation to submit a Domestic
Incident Report is imposed only on the Protection Officers under
Section 9 of the D.V. Act and upon the service providers under
Section 10 of the D.V. Act and the learned Magistrate ‘shall’ take
into consideration, the Domestic Incident Report if it is filed and
not otherwise.
h) In Rakesh Choudhary v. Vandana Choudhary, [2019 SCC
OnLine J&K 512], the High Court of Jammu and Kashmir
rejected the argument of the petitioner therein that the report of
the Protection Officer is sine qua non for issuing process in a
petition under Section 12 of the D.V. Act. The Court held that
the proviso to Section 12(1) of the D.V. Act only stipulates that
the learned Magistrate shall take into consideration the Domestic
Incident Report filed by the Protection Officer or the Service
Provider, but it does not stipulate that a report ‘shall be called
for’ before any relief could be granted.
i) Further, the High Court of Bombay at Aurangabad Bench,
while dealing with a criminal writ petition in the case of Vijay
Maruti Gaikwad v. Savita Vijay Gaikward, [(2018) 1 HLR 295],
observed that if the matter is before the Court and the wife
preferred not to approach the Protection Officer, the Court is not
bound to call the report of Protection Officer.
j) Lastly, in the case of Suraj Sharma v. Bharti Sharma, [2016
SCC OnLine Chh 1825], the High Court of Chhattisgarh while
expressing its view on Section 12 of the D.V. Act also held that
the Domestic Incident Report shall not be conclusive material for
making any order.
61. On an analysis of the aforesaid judgments from various High Courts,
we find that the High Courts of Andhra Pradesh, Bombay, Delhi, Gauhati,
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, and Madhya Pradesh,
are right in holding that if Domestic Incident Report has been received by
the Magistrate either from the Protection Officer or the service provider
then it becomes obligatory on the part of the Magistrate to take note of
the said report before passing an order on the application filed by the
aggrieved party, but if no complaint or application of domestic violence is
received by the Magistrate from the Protection Officer or the service
provider, the question of considering such a report does not arise at all.
As already discussed, the D.V. Act does not make it mandatory for an
aggrieved person to make an application before a Magistrate only through
the Protection Officer or a service provider. An aggrieved person can
directly make an application to the jurisdictional Magistrate by herself or
by engaging the services of an Advocate. In such a case, the filing of a
Domestic Incident Report by a Protection Officer or service provider does
not arise. In such circumstances, it cannot be held that the Magistrate is
not empowered to make any order interim or final, under the provisions
of the D.V. Act, granting reliefs to the aggrieved persons. The Magistrate
can take cognizance of the complaint or application filed by the aggrieved
person and issue notice to the respondent under Section 12 of the D.V.
Act even in the absence of Domestic Incident Report under Rule 5. Thus,
the Magistrate has jurisdiction to take cognizance of the complaint under
Section 12 of the D.V. Act in the absence of a Domestic Incident Report
under Rule 5 when the complaint is not filed on behalf of the aggrieved
person through a Protection Officer or service provider. Such a purposeful
interpretation has to be given bearing in mind the fact that the immediate
relief would have to be given to an aggrieved person and hence the
proviso cannot be interpreted in a manner which would be contrary to the
object of the D.V. Act which renders Section 12 bereft of its object and
purpose.
64. In view of the above discussion, the three questions raised in this
appeal are answered as under:
“(i) Whether the consideration of Domestic Incidence Report
is mandatory before initiating the proceedings under
Domestic Violence Act, 2005 in order to invoke substantive
provisions of Sections 18 to 20 and 22 of the said Act?”
65. It is held that Section 12 does not make it mandatory for a
Magistrate to consider a Domestic Incident Report filed by a Protection
Officer or service provider before passing any order under the D.V. Act. It
is clarified that even in the absence of a Domestic Incident Report, a
Magistrate is empowered to pass both ex parte or interim as well as a
final order under the provisions of the D.V. Act.
“(ii) Whether it is mandatory for the aggrieved person to
reside with those persons against whom the allegations have
been levied at the point of commission of violence?”
9.        As the controversy in question has already been decided by the Hon'ble
Apex Court by holding that for proceeding in the case under Section 12 of the Act,
2005, the DIR of the Protection Office is not mandatory before passing any order.
In view of the above facts and circumstances as well as the law laid down
by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Prabha Tyagi (supra), it is evident that
the court below has committed error in rejecting the application for expedite
disposal of the case by the impugned order and calling for the DIR, in place of
proceeding in the matter.
10.       The impugned order dated 03.03.2022 is hereby set aside. The application
stands allowed.
11.       The court below is directed to proceed in the matter and conclude the same
expeditiously, strictly in accordance with law and the principle laid down by the
Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Prabha Tyagi (supra), without giving any
unnecessary adjournments to either of the parties.
Digitally signed by VIVEK KUMAR