Ms. Vasundhra Asija and Mr. Abhishek Sharma, Advocates, for the
respondent(s).
1.     Whether the permission for change of land use/licence/NOC/any other
permission granted once, would grant immunity to the said land for all
times to come, from its acquisition by the State under the applicable Land
Acquisition Act (In the present case, it is land Acquisition Act 1894), even if
it is required for the “Public Purpose”, is the question posed before us to
answer in the instant civil writ petition.
2.     The genesis of the instant case lies in the era of Land Acquisition Act 1894
(hereinafter to be referred as 1894 Act) which is commonly known as “era
of compulsory acquisition” whose basic foundation was “public interest”
which was given supremacy on “private interest”. It is well known facet of
law that when so ever conflict arises between “public interest and private
interest”, the private interest has to make way for public interest and that is
how, the 1894 Act contributed to the development of this country. The 1894
Act was in itself a complete code and had prescribed the procedure so as to
raise grievance against the action of the State Government to acquire
someone’s land and when so ever Courts found any deviation of State/its
authorities from settled procedure, the interference has been made so as to
come to the rescue of such land owners. Applying the said settled principles
to the factual matrix of the present case, where, the land was acquired for
setting up of the Industrial Model Township wherein the land in question
was not released by the State Govt. on the recommendation of developing
agency i.e. HSIIDC as it was seriously affecting the planning of IMT vis-a-
vis the case put forth by the petitioner of granting it the NOC to set up the
college and land in question (vacant 63K 17M), the question arises is as to
whether, the action of the State Govt to acquire the land in question, can be
termed to be unreasonable, as being sought to be contended by the
petitioner? We find ourselves to agree the same as if we are to hold that
once permission is granted/NOC is granted for setting up of college and
thereafter, State cannot acquire it for all time to come, this may lead to an
anomalous situation which may not be in the larger public interest and
would amount to “public interest” making way for “private interest” which
is not permissible at any costs/under any circumstances.
3.   The petitioners have questioned the acquisition of their land in question
measuring 63k 17M, interalia, on the grounds:- (i) having granted the
permission to set up the school and the NOC being issued to set up the
B.Ed. college and afterwards State cannot turn around and acquire the land
for development of Industrial Model township to be developed as an
Integrated complex for industrial, residential, recreational and other public
utilities; (ii) the land in question though vacant but being reserved for
future expansion will prejudice the future prospects of the educational
institution especially when the claim of planning/developing agency is that
the land in question interferes merely in the proposed vehicle testing track
which as per the petitioner does not constitute any public purpose and thus,
same can be conveniently adjusted in the plan; (iii) recommendations
having been made by the land Acquisition Collector u/s 5A of the 1894 Act
to release the land, the State cannot proceed to acquire the said land; (iv)
Violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India by referring to certain
releases made by the State and setting up the plea of hostile discrimination
on the part of the State.
4.   Certain elemental facts necessary for adjudication of the controversy
involved in the instant writ petition are required to be considered first. The
petitioners have laid challenge to the acquisition proceedings initiated vide
the notifications dated 25.11.2005 and 24.11.2006 issued u/s 4 and 6 of the
1894 Act respectively; followed by the Award u/s 11 of the 1894 Act dated
24.02.2007, thereby acquiring land for the public purpose namely, for
development of Industrial Model township Manesar to be developed as an
Integrated complex for industrial, residential, recreational and other public
utilities. Even though the petition was filed on 20.02.2007 (as appearing
just below the index) but it is not disputed that notice of motion and
interim order of stay on dispossession was passed on 26.02.2007 i.e. after
the Award having been already announced and the possession having been
taken by recording the Rapat Rojnamcha which means after the vesting of
the land in question having taken place in the State.
5.   Mr. Amit Jain Ld. Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioners would
contend that the petitioner nos. 2 to 6 are the owner of land measuring
80K-7M land comprised in Khewat No. 987, Khata No. 1123 and 988/1124,
989/1125, 990/1126, 991/1127, 992/1128, 1103/1380, 1104/1381 and Killa
24/2 (6-16), 23/2 (0-8), 24/1 (0-9), 28 (0-18) and 23/1 (7-12) situated at
village Kasan, Tehsil and District Gurgaon. It is stated that they being the
owner, leased out their land measuring 80K-7M land to the petitioner no. 1
society named Lakshmi Educational Society (Regd.) vide registered lease
deed dated 25.05.2003. The petitioner no. 1 constructed 4 storey school
building over the land bearing Rectangle No. 117, Killa No. 13 (6-0) and 18
(8-0) measuring 14 Marla wherein it is claimed that more than 500
students are studying and the employment is being provided to more than
50 persons. It has been granted permanent recognition for running Classes
1 to 1oth w.e.f. 01.04.2004 vide the letter dated 30.09.2004 by the Director,
6.   It has further been claimed that the petitioner society is also running
Lakshmi College of Education affiliated to Kurukshetra University,
Kurukshetra which require additional area which at present though is
vacant (Area in question sought to be acquired) but is required for the
proposed construction. Besides, they propose to develop an ultra modern
sports complex including swimming pool, badminton hall, Indoor Tennis
Court, Basket Ball Field, squash Court, football and hockey fields over the
land in question, which is sought to be acquired. The society further intends
to set up the laboratories of Physics, Chemistry and Biology over the land in
question and thus, the school building cannot be said to be confined to 14
M only. The society has further applied for NOC for B.Ed. college and the
same is being issued by the competent authority.
7.   That Haryana government through Industries and commerce department
issued a notification u/s 4 of the 1894 Act dated 25.1.2005 thereby
intending to acquire the land for the public purpose namely, for
development of Industrial Model Township Manesar to be developed as an
Integrated complex for industrial, residential, recreational and other public
utilities, in which, the land of the petitioners measuring 63K 17M was also
included (their land measuring 16k 10M including the constructed portion
of 14 M was left out from including in the notification issued u/s 4 of the
1894 Act). The petitioners submitted their objection under Section 5A of
the 1894 Act thereby raising objection to their land in question and
pleading that NOC is being granted to them to set up Bed college over the
land in question and further that the land in question is the integral part of
the aim and objective of their educational society. It is further contended
that the public purpose has already been achieved at the spot and the
proposed acquisition would not only shatter the planning of their proposed
project. Other more suitable land is available with the State. At the end, it
was contended that without prejudice to its rights in any manner, if
releasing the land in question is not possible, then the same area be allotted
to them for setting up its educational institution, in the area proposed to be
developed upon the acquired land.
8.   While referring to the recommendations made by the Land Acquisition
collector u/s 5A of the 1894 Act, it was contended that taking into
consideration       the   objections     raised   by    the  petitioners,  the
recommendations had been made by the LAC to exempt the land from
acquisition. Inspite of positive recommendations having been made, the
State Government decided to acquire the land in question and proceeded to
issue declaration u/s 6 of the 1894 Act thereby including their land in
question as well on 24.11.2006. The petitioners have further contended that
the state authorities have completely adopted the pick and choose
yardsticks when the substantial area has been left out of the acquisition.
Thus, while claiming the notifications issued u/s 4 and 6 of the 1894 Act to
be illegal, arbitrary, malafide, ultra vires the provisions of 1894 Act and
violative of article 14 of the Constitution of India, prayer has been made to
quash the notifications impugned in the petition qua the land in question.
9.   The instant writ petition came up for preliminary hearing before this Court
on 22.02.2007 when, the matter was adjourned to 26.02.2007, enabling
the petitioners to place on record the documents to show that the
mandatory requirement mentioned in Annexure P-4 has been fulfilled. The
directions issued by this Court were complied with by the petitioners by
placing on record the documents vide CM No. 3101 of 2007 which was
allowed and Annexures p-19 to p-27 were taken on record. Taking note of
the contentions raised that acquired land had been earmarked for
construction of Laxmi college of Education, in respect of which, all the
formalities are completed so much so 96 students have already been
admitted, this Court vide order dated 26.02.2007 issued notice of motion
and in the meantime, dispossession of the petitioners was stayed. Suffice to
mention here that initially when the petition was filed, the beneficiary
department i.e., HSIIDC was not impleaded as party which was impleaded
as respondent no. 4 vide order dated 29.11.2007.
10.  Pursuant to notice of motion issued, the State Government filed the
detailed written statement on behalf of respondent no. 1 and 2 thereby
controverting the averments made by the petitioners and justifying the
inclusion of land in question in the declaration issued u/s 6 of the 1894 Act
after duly considering the recommendations made the Land Acquisition
Collector as well as of the recommendations of the Nodal agency to develop
the land to achieve the public purpose i.e. HSIIDC. It has also been asserted
that the award has already been announced on 24.02.2007 and the
possession       stands   taken.      As far  as   the  pleas   of  pick and
choose/discriminatory release of land as being projected by the petitioners,
it was categorically asserted that the said plea of the petitioners is
completely baseless and misplaced as even the instances of release of land
referred by the petitioners are not from the present acquisition but from the
different acquisition.
11.  The instant writ petition was admitted vide order dated 05.02.008 with the
directions to list the matter for hearing on 07.04.2008. Meantime, the
petitioners had also been restrained to raise any construction during the
pendency of the petition. The matter remained pending till 09.02.2017
when owing to the factum of one of the issues to be considered in the
present petition is the effect of stay of dispossession as was being
considered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court, the matter was directed to be
listed after the decision in SLP (c) No. 10742 of 2008 vide order dated
09.02.2017. The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India decided the pending issue
in the case titled as Indore Development Authority versus
Manohar Lal and ors. SLP (c) 9036-9038 of 2016 vide judgment
and order dated 06.03.2020 and it is thereafter, the HSIIDC (respondent
no. 4) filed CM No. 7891 of 2020 for fixing the instant petition for an actual
date of hearing.
12.  In the misc. application, it has been pleaded that post the announcement of
award, the physical possession of the land in question was taken vide Rapat
Roznamcha No. 458 dated 24.02.2007 and even the mutation stands
sanctioned in its favour. Once the possession has been taken, the land vests
absolutely in the State. As far as the compensation amount is concerned, it
has been duly tendered but the same has not been taken by the petitioners
and thus, the state has discharged its liability towards the compensation as
well. Accepting the request made by the HSIIDC, the instant petition has
been taken up for final hearing.
13.  Mr. Ankur Mittal Ld. Additional Advocate General Haryana appearing for
the State of Haryana as well as the beneficiary department i.e. HSIIDC
opened his arguments with vehemence to contend that the instant petition
deserves to be dismissed on the sole ground that even before the interim
order of dispossession stay was granted by this Court on 26.02.2007, the
award had already been announced on 24.02.2007 and the possession had
also been taken by duly recording the panchnama and thus, the vesting had
already taken place. The petitioners ought to have brought this fact to the
notice of this Court at the time of issuance of notice of motion but they did
not do so which depicts their malafide intent. He further argued that even if
it is assumed that they were not aware of announcement of the award on
the said date, the factum of passing of the award was brought on record by
filing the written statement in the year 2007 itself, but still, they did not
make any effort to assail the award till date which also disentitle them to
seek the relief being prayed for.
14.  He further argued that permission for change of land use/licence/NOC/any
other permission granted once, has no relevance, while considering the
validity of acquisition proceedings as if this proposition is allowed to stand,
the same would result into a situation which undoubtedly result into
hampering the larger public interest and thus, cannot be permitted at any
cost. The land is acquired to serve the public purpose which has always
been considered to be wider than public necessity. Development of
infrastructure like the present one is legal and legitimate public purpose for
exercising power of eminent domain. In deciding whether acquisition is for
public purpose or not, prima facie, the Government is the best judge.
Although the decision of the Government is not beyond judicial scrutiny,
normally, in such matters, a writ court should not interfere by substituting
its judgment for the judgment of the Government. He further argued that
so far as grant of NOC/CLU/Licence or any other permission by the State
Government or any of its instrumentalities and thus invoking the principle
of Promissory Estoppel or legitimate Expectation is concerned, the same
cannot stand alone in favour of an individual when mirrored against the
public interest as the same doesn’t require the fulfilment of the expectation
where an overriding public interest require otherwise.
15.  As far as the argument raised by the counsel for the petitioners that the
Land Acquisition Collector having recommended in their favour for
exemption of the land in question from acquisition and thus, the same
could not have been acquired, Mr Mittal made his submission to the effect
that the said argument being raised by the petitioners is meritless and
requires to be rejected. He further argued that no doubt the law is more
than settled that the stage of deciding the objections u/s 5A of 1894 Act is
not a mere formality but requires objective consideration. It goes without
saying that sub section (2) of Section 5 A of the 1894 Act casts an onerous
obligation on the collector to consider the objections in a fair, impartial and
dispassionate manner and to place the same before State Government for
its decision which shall be final. The State Government is supposed to
consider the same keeping in view all the relevant factors including the
object for which the acquisition is being made. This would imply to take
into consideration the objections/suggestions/recommendation of all the
stake holders i.e., of the beneficiary department as well, on whose
shoulders, the responsibilities lie to develop the land so as to achieve the
public purpose which in the case in hand is HSIIDC andhas taken a
categoric stand that the land in question is vacant which if released, would
interfere in the planning i.e. proposed vehicle testing track, therefore,
recommended to acquire the same. Accordingly, the State Government
decided to acquire the land in question which by any stretch of imagination
cannot be held to be bad merely because the LAC had recommended for
release of the land as this issue is no more res Integra that the
report/recommendations made by the LAC are not binding on the state
except the same are required to be considered while taking final decision.
As against the argument raised by the petitioners that the land in question
is required merely for testing track, Mr Mittal has argued that a holistic
approach has to be adopted in such matters. The project for which the land
in acquired should be taken as a whole and must be judged whether it is in
the larger public interest. It can’t be split into different components and to
consider whether each and every component will serve public good. Public
purpose cannot and should not be precisely defined and its scope and ambit
be limited as far as acquisition of land for public purpose is concerned,
therefore, the petitioners cannot be permitted to plead that since their land
is required for merely a testing track, therefore, the same is not required to
be judged on the touchstone of public purpose.
16.  As regards the plea being raised of adopting pick and choose yardsticks and
releases being made in favour of other landowners as being pleaded by the
petitioners on the strength of documents brought on record vide Annexure
P-15 to p-18, Mr. Mittal while referring to the written statement has urged
that the said documents being referred do not relate to the acquisition at
hand and pertains to different acquisition for SEZ and thus, are of no help
to the petitioner. He further argued that moreover, the plea of
discrimination cannot be permitted to be available on the drop of a hat as
the same requires to be pleaded and proved that two equals have been
treated unequally which is on the higher pedestal than of similarly situated.
Further it is well settled that the burden to prove the plea of discrimination
is on the petitioners and they have to produce concrete evidence before the
Court to show that their case is identical to other persons whose land had
been released from the acquisition proceedings. The finding of
discrimination cannot be recorded merely on the basis of vague and bald
assertions as has been made by the petitioners in the instant writ petition
and that too, in respect of some other acquisition. The concept of equality
enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution of India is a positive concept.
The Court can command the State to give equal treatment to similarly
situated persons, but cannot issue a mandate that the State should commit
illegality or pass wrong order because in another case such an illegality has
been committed or wrong order has been passed, even if, it finds that a
wrong order has been passed.
17.  At the end, he urged that the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in Indore
Development Authority (supra) has added certainty to law by holding that
with drawing of Panchnama, it is presumed that the possession is of the
State and anyone retaining the possession thereafter is a “trespasser”. Such
clarity has narrowed down the clouds surrounding the modes of taking
possession of the land to almost negligible and has clarified the stance
when the land vests in the State. Vesting of the land has been held to mean
that the State is endowed with all the benefits that are available to an owner
of the land. As reiterated and explained by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of
India, vesting of the land happens the moment possession of the acquired
land is taken, and on happening of such an event, the title of the landowner
ceases in the land for once and all. The law in this regard is well settled that
after such vesting even if the land has not been utilized for the public
purpose for which it was acquired, erstwhile landowner has no right to seek
re-conveyance of the land. Vesting amounts to an absolute and indefeasible
right which implies that all bundle of rights which were vested in the
erstwhile owner before acquisition fully vests in the State once the
possession of the acquired land has been taken. State becomes the absolute
owner of the land and if after such vesting the possession has been retained
by the erstwhile landowner or anyone else, they are trespassers on the
acquired land. In the case in hand, admittedly the possession of the land in
question was taken vide Rapat Roznamcha No. 458 dated 24.02.2007 i.e.,
prior to passing of interim order in favour of the petitioners on 26.02.2007
and therefore, even thought the land stood vested in the State but yet on the
strength of the interim order of this Court, the petitioners have enjoyed the
land in question and deprived the State from its utilization and in a way,
has hampered the larger public interest which in his submission aloof is
sufficient to dismiss the instant petition so that the State/HSIIDC could
utilise the land towards the public purpose, for which, it was acquired
almost 15 years back.
18.  So far as the plea being raised by the petitioners of rehabilitating them with
the equal land, he has urged that rehabilitation of the land owner in a case
of land acquisition is not the statutory obligation and thus, the same cannot
be equated or can be made a precondition to test the validity of the
acquisition proceedings for a public purpose where the only touch stone is
the larger public interest. The paramount consideration can only be the
comparison of the interest of an individual with the larger public interest
which is being sought to be achieved by the State with the public money
and therefore, any such precondition can only result into hampering into
the public interest. Even otherwise, the rehabilitation of the landowner in a
case of land acquisition is the policy matter, for which, the State
Government has come up with the policies from time to time, thereby,
detailing out the eligibility requirements and the extent of rehabilitation. As
settled the scope for the writ court to interfere in the policy matter is very
limited namely, that where there was a colourable exercise of the power.
The writ court can’t make someone eligible who otherwise is not eligible as
per the policy decision taken by the State or cannot make the rehabilitation
as a precondition of upholding the acquisition as the same would only
frustrate the general interest. He further argued that neither there is any
law nor any such policy decision of rehabilitating the land owner with the
equal land, which had been acquired. Whatever extent is provided in the
State rehabilitation policy, the land owner will be entitled to the same only
and thus, the plea of rehabilitating them with equal land acquired is totally
fallacious and is required to be rejected.
19.  In support of his arguments, Mr. Ankur Mittal has placed reliance on the
judicial pronouncements in the cases titled as State of Haryana vs. M/s
Vinod Oil and General Mills 2014 (15) SCC 410, State of Haryana vs. Eros
City developers private Limited and others (2016) 12 SCC 265, Vivek Coop
House Building Society Ltd vs. State of Haryana and others 2016 SCC
online P & H 15802, Abdul HuseinTayabali and others vs State of Gujrat
and others (1968) 1 SCR 597, M/s Balwant Singh Sher Singh Rice Mills vs
State of Haryana 2007 (3) RCR (Civil) 839, chunni Lal vs State of Haryana
2007 (3) Law Herald 2080, Rajasthan State Industrial Development and
Investment Corporation vs Subash Sindhi Cooperative Housing Society,
Jaipur 2013 AIR SC (Civil) 869, Daulat Singh Surana 7 ors. Vs First Land
Acquisition Collector 7 ors 2007 (1) RCR (Civil) 260, Sooraram Pratap
Reddy 7 ors. Vs Distt. Collector, Ranga Reddy Dist. 7 ors (2008) 9 SCC 552,
Shanti Sports Club Vs. Union of India 2009 (15) SCC 705, Indore
Development Authority vs Manohar Lal and ors SLP © 9036-9038 of 2016
decided on 06.03.2020 and Assam Industrial Development Corporation
Ltd. Vs Gillapukri Tea Company Limited 7 ors etc. SLP © No. 14266-14267
of 2019 decided on 28.01.2021.
20.  Having heard Learned counsel for the parties at considerable length, going
through the respective pleadings made, grounds raised by the petitioners,
arguments put forth on behalf of the State and having bestowed our
thoughtful considerations to the judicial pronouncements cited before us,
we feel that following issues require consideration of this court: -
I.   Whether the permission for change of land use/licence/NOC/any other
permission granted once, would grant immunity to the said land for all
times to come, from its acquisition by the State under the applicable Land
Acquisition Act (In the present case, it is land Acquisition Act 1894), even if
it is required for the “Public Purpose”?
II.  Whether the land in question though vacant but being reserved for future
expansion and may prejudice the future prospectus of the educational
institution especially when the claim of planning/developing agency is that
the land in question interferes merely in the proposed vehicle testing track
which as per the petitioner doesn’t constitute any public purpose and thus,
the same can be conveniently adjusted in the plan, could be a relevant
consideration while deciding the validity of acquisition proceedings?
III. Whether recommendations having been made by the land Acquisition
Collector u/s 5A of the 1894 Act to release the land, the State cannot
proceed to acquire the said land especially when the beneficiary
department is of the view that any such release made will affect the
planning done to achieve the public purpose, for which, the land is being
IV.  Whether the petitioners have made out a case of discrimination within the
Ambit of Article 14 of the Constitution of India by referring to certain
releases made by the State and setting up the plea of hostile discrimination
V)    Whether the land in question has been vested in the State with the
recording of Rapat Roznamcha and the status of landowner has become of
a “trespasser” as held by the Hon’ble Constitution Bench of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India in Indore Development Authority Supra), the
parameters on which, the writ court shall interfere in the acquisition
proceedings at the instance of a “trespasser”?
21.   The issue being raised by the petitioners is no more Res Integra. The
question has been effectively answered by the Supreme Court in State of
Haryana vs Vinod Oil and General Mills (supra) wherein, the
Supreme Court disapproved the decision of this Court in quashing the
acquisition proceedings in similar circumstances on the ground of CLU
having been granted by the State, with the following observations: -
“….8. Permission for change of land use and developing the area as
an industry, in our view, has no relevance while considering the
validity of acquisition. If we are to hold that once permission is
granted for change of land use for developing the area as an
industry and thereafter State cannot acquire it, then a situation
may rise that for all time to come, the particular area cannot be
acquired which may not be in the larger public interest. We are also
unable to agree with the view taken by the High Court that the
action of the respondents/State in approving setting up of a factory
and then acquiring the same is unreasonable. It is not as if the lands
where factories are set up are immune from any acquisition. The
only effect of permission for such change in land use and approval
for construction and developing the area as an industry can be
recognised as valid only to the extent as to confer right upon the
land owners to recover the appropriate compensation.
9.      The land was acquired for development and utilization of the
same for residential and commercial purposes in sector 9 & 11,
Hissar. So far as the purpose of acquisition of land is concerned, the
High Court observed that “the acquisition is not for essential public
services such as development of infrastructure, railways, metro
etc….” High Court was not correct in observing that only
development of infrastructure, railways or irrigation, water
supply, drainage, road etc are primary public purposes. Public
purpose includes a purpose involving general interest of community
as opposed to the interest of an individual directly or indirectly
involved. Individual interest must give way to public interest as far
as public purpose in respect of acquisition of land is concerned.”
22.  Once again, the similar issue came up for consideration before the Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India in the case titled as State of Haryana vs Eros
City Developers (Supra) wherein yet another time, the view taken by
this court of quashing the acquisition proceedings by invoking the principle
of “promissory estoppel”/doctrine of “legitimate expectation, didn’t find
favour from the Hon’ble Supreme Court and thus, while reversing the view
of this Court, it has been observed:
“…15. As far as the argument advanced on behalf of the respondent
relating to the promissory estoppel and legitimate expectation is
concerned, in Monnet Ispat and Energy Ltd. V Union of India, this
Court while enumerating the principles relating to doctrine of
promissory estoppel and legitimate expectation has clearly held
that the protection of legitimate expectation does not require the
fulfilment of the expectation where an overriding public interest
requires otherwise. In other words, personal benefit must give way
to public interest and the doctrine of legitimate expectation cannot
be invoked which would block public interest for private benefit.
16.      In Hira Tikkoo vs UT Chandigarh, this Court explaining the
scope of principle of legitimate expectation has held that the
doctrine cannot be presses into service where the public interest is
likely to suffer as against the personal interest of a party. In para
22 of this Court has observed as under: (SSS p. 777)
“22. In public law in certain situations, relief to the parties
aggrieved by action or promises of public authorities can be
granted on the doctrine of “legitimate expectations” but when
grant of such relief is likely to harm larger public interest, the
doctrine cannot be allowed to be pressed into service. We
may usefully call in aid the legal maxim; “Salus populi est
suprema lex: regard for the public welfare is the higher law.”
This principle is based on the implied agreement of very
member of society that his own individua welfare shall in
cases of necessity yield to that of community. His property,
liberty and life shall under certain circumstances be placed in
jeopardy or even sacrificed for the public good.”
23.  Following the afore noticed judicial pronouncements, this Court in the case
titled as Vivek Coop. House Building Society (Supra) decided on
16.09.2016, has rejected the similar plea set up to challenge the process of
acquisition by invoking the principle of promissory estoppel and legitimate
expectation by categorically holding that in the statute, there is nothing
which could impinge upon the power of the State to acquire the licenced
property in the larger public interest.
24.  Applying the law laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court and agreeing
with the view taken by the coordinate bench of this court to the factual
matrix of the present case, the plea being raised by the petitioner that
having granted the NOC to set up the B.Ed. college, completion of
necessary formalities by the petitioner society and even the admission of
students thereafter and thus, the land in question deserves to be released
from the acquisition proceedings, is liable to be rejected. In Daulat Singh
Surana (supra), the concept of “public purpose” was dealt with in detail by
the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India to observe that whether in a particular
case, the purpose, for which land was needed was a public purpose or not,
was for the Government to be satisfied about. Public purpose cannot and
should not be precisely defined and cannot be static. In the case in hand,
the categoric stand pleaded by the respondents in the written statement
towards acquiring the land for setting up of Industrial Model Township,
clearly falls within the guiding principles laid down by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India to ascertain as to whether a particular purpose can
be said to be public purpose or not. That being so, we have no hesitation to
hold that even if the NOC to set up college had been granted to the
petitioner no. 1 society, the same or for that matter, any permission for
change of land use/licence/NOC/any other permission granted once, would
not grant any immunity to the said land for all times to come, from its
acquisition by the State, if it is required for the “Public Purpose” as the
private interest will have to make way for the public interest, on to the
touch stone of regard for the public interest is the higher law. Similarly, the
doctrine of “legitimate expectation” or the principle of “promissory
estoppel” can’t be pressed into service where the public interest is likely to
suffer as against the personal interest of a party. This issue is answered
accordingly.
25.   Another ground on which, the petitioners have chosen to assail the
acquisition proceedings is that the land in question even though is vacant
but has been reserved for future expansion and setting up B.Ed. college and
the acquisition may prejudice its future prospectus especially when, the
land in question as per HSIIDC itself will merely effect the testing track
which in the assessment of petitioners can’t be said to be affecting the
public purpose. We find ourselves unable to agree with these submissions
made by the petitioners. In Somanvanti vs. State of Punjab (Supra),
the Constitution bench of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India observed
that public purpose must include an object in which the general interest of
the community, as opposed to the particulars of individuals, is directly and
vitally concerned. Public purpose is bound to change with the times and the
prevailing conditions in a given area and therefore, it would not be a
practical proposition even to attempt an extensive definition of it. It is
because of this reason, the Legislature has left it to the wisdom of State
Government. Thus, undisputedly, State is the first judge to determine
whether there exists public purpose or not though the said decision is not
beyond judicial scrutiny. The Courts have the jurisdiction and it is their
duty to determine the matter whenever a question is raised about the
particular purpose being in the interest of public or not. The concept of
“public purpose” was dealt with in detail by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of
India in Daulat Singh Surana (Supra) wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court
‘….73. Public purpose cannot and should not be precisely
defined and its scope and ambit be limited as far as acquisition of
land for the public purpose is concerned. Public purpose is not
static. It also changes with the passage of time, needs and
requirements of the community. Broadly speaking, public purpose
means the general interest of the community as opposed to the
interest of an individual.
74. The power of compulsory acquisition as described by the
term “eminent domain” can be exercised only in the interest and for
the welfare of the people. The concept of public purpose should
include the matters, such as, safety, security, health, welfare and
prosperity of the community or public at large.
75. The concept of “eminent domain” is an essential attribute
of every State. This concept is based on the fundamental principle
that the interest and claim of the whole community is always
superior to the interest of an individual…’
26.  While determining the question whether the acquisition is for public
purpose or not, the facts and circumstances in each case are to be closely
examined. The acquisition in the case in hand is for the purpose namely, for
development of Industrial Model Township Manesar to be developed as an
integrated complex for industrial, residential, recreational and other public
utilities. It is categorically pleaded by the State that it is committed to the
Ministry of Heavy Industries and Public Enterprises, Government of India
to allot 42 Acres of land in continuity to the land already allotted to the
existing testing and development centre set up by the Automotive Research
Association of India for setting up of Testing and Development Centre for
Automotive components at Manesar, Gurgaon by the National Automotive
Testing and R & D Infrastructure Project (NATRIP) of Government of India
with a project cost of Rs. 400 crores. Apart from it, a large number of multi
national companies including Maruti Udyog Ltd, Hero Honda and many
other automobile industries are operating in Gurgaon thereby providing
employment and attracting domestic and foreign investments. The perusal
of these factual matrix makes it clear that the purpose for which the land in
question has been acquired, certainly has the element of general interest of
the community and thus, finding no substance in the plea being raised by
the petitioners, the same is rejected.
27.  The aforesaid conclusion drawn gives rise to another limb of the public
purpose to be taken into consideration i.e. whether the public purpose, for
which, the land has been acquired, can be said to be static. In our opinion,
the answer of this is in negative. As discussed above, the public purpose
cannot and should not be precisely defined and it can change with the
passage of time, needs and requirements of the community. The challenge
made to the acquisition by the land owner on the ground of any change in
public purpose or of even planning, the Hon’ble Courts have repelled such
challenges, on the touchstone of interest of community. It is so because the
1894 Act does not spell the procedure and manner in which the acquired
land is to be utilized, however, the “public purpose” acts as a pole star and a
guiding factor for the State in undertaking the steps for utilization of land.
The decision as regards the manner in which the acquired land is to be
utilized is purely an executive action and a policy decision which is often
executed by way of development plans prepared by the competent
authority. The change in the plans and manner of utilization of land forms
part of planning and expertise of the State government in executing the
development works on the acquired land and is purely an administrative
action. It is settled law that judicial review of such action is permissible
only on the grounds of illegality, irrationality and procedural impropriety.
As far as the preparation of the development plans is concerned, the Court
cannot substitute its opinion and dictate the terms regarding the manner in
which the land acquired for public purpose shall be utilized. Nor can a land
owner dispute the acquisition proceedings on the ground of utilization of
land in one manner or other so long such utilization fulfils the touch stone
of “public purpose”.
28.  More often the acquisition proceedings are challenged on the ground of
change in planning or on the ground of change of public purpose, and
vague pleas are raised that land is no more fit for utilization. A very
pertinent question which arises here is that whether it can be made a
ground to challenge the acquisition proceedings afresh. In our opinion, in
view of settled law, answer is in negative. The genesis lies in the fact that
after the vesting of land, it is the State who is owner of the land,
accordingly, the decision to utilize the land rests with the State only. The
landowner is no one to dictate the terms in which the acquired land shall be
utilized. The only touchstone against which the action of the State while
dealing with acquired land is that of “public purpose” i.e., land acquired can
be utilized in any manner so long it falls within the parameter of “public
purpose”. The pleas with respect to change in planning and change in
public purpose are not the grounds on which the acquisition proceedings
can be challenged or interfered with. Such an approach reflects rigidity and
is nothing less than an obstruction in the development process. This aspect
has been considered by the Courts on numerous occasions and has affirmed
the action of the State in changing the utilization of the land acquired for a
public purpose to another public purpose. The reference in this regard can
be made to the following precedents
a.      In Govt. of A.P v. Syed Akbar AIR 2005 SC 492, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India held as follows:-
aforementioned decisions, it follows that (1) under Section 16
of the Land Acquisition Act, the land acquired vests in the
Government absolutely free from all encumbrances; (2) the
land acquired for a public purpose could be utilised for any
other public purpose; and (3) the acquired land which is
vested in the Government free from all encumbrances cannot
be re-assigned or reconveyed to the original owner merely on
the basis of an executive order….’
b.      In Union of India and others Vs. Jaswant Rai Kochhar and
others (1996) 3 SCC 491 the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India
while dealing with the challenge to the acquisition proceedings on
the ground of its utilization of land for another public purpose held
‘….It is contended for the respondents that since the
acquisition is for housing scheme, the land cannot be used for
commercial purpose, namely, District Center. Therefore, the
learned single Judge and the Division Bench have rightly
disapproved the change of the user contrary to the purpose
notified in section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act. We find no
force in the contention. It is conceded by the learned counsel
that the construction of the District Center for commercial
purpose itself is a public purpose. No doubt it was sought to
be contended in the High Court that in a housing scheme,
providing facilities for commercial purpose is also one of the
composite purposes and that, therefore, acquisition was valid
in law. However, the contention was rejected by the High
Court. We need not go to that part. Suffice it to state that
it is a well-settled law that land sought to be
acquired for public purpose may be used for another
public purpose. Therefore, when the notification has
mentioned that the land is sought to be acquired for
housing scheme but it is sought to be used for district
Center, the public purpose does not cease to be
public purpose and the nomenclature mentioned in
the notification under section 4(1) as housing
scheme cannot be construed to be a colourable one.
The notification under section 4(1) could not have
been quashed on the ground that the land is sought
acquired for a public purpose should serve only the
public purpose of providing facilities of commercial
purpose, namely, District Center as conceded by the
learned counsel in fairness to be a public purpose.
The notification under section 4(1) cannot be quashed on the
ground of change of user. The High Court was wholly wrong
in quashing the notification on the ground of change of user..’
29.  The law is settled even to the effect that if after achieving public purpose,
some land is left unutilized, it can be utilized for any other public purpose
or it can be sold by way of public auction to fetch higher money which
ultimately will be utilized for public purpose and it is not to be re-conveyed
to the original land owner. The reference in this regard is made to the law
settled by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the following judgments:-
(i)          In State of Kerala v. M. Bhaskaran Pillai AIR 1997 SC
2703, the Hon’ble Court held that after vesting of land and
utilization for the public purpose for which it was acquired, if still
land remains unutilized, it is not to be returned to erstwhile
owners. The reference in this regard is made to the following:-
‘…..3. In view of the admitted position that the land in
question was acquired under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894
by operation of Section 16 of the Land Acquisition Act, it
stood vested in the State free from all encumbrances. The
question emerges : Whether the Government can assign the
land to the erstwhile owners ? It is settled law that if the land
is acquired for a public purpose, after the public purpose was
achieved, the rest of the land could be used for any other
public purpose. In case there is no other public purpose for
which the land is needed, then instead of disposal by way of
sale to the erstwhile owner, the land should be put to public
auction and the amount fetched in the public auction can be
better utilised for the public purpose envisaged in the
Directive Principles of the Constitution. In the present case,
what we find is that the executive order is not in consonance
with the provision of the Act and is, therefore, invalid. Under
these circumstances, the Division Bench is well justified in
declaring the executive order as invalid. Whatever
assignment is made, should be for a public purpose.
Otherwise, the land of the Government should be sold only
through the public auctions so that the public also gets
benefited by getting higher value….’
(ii)         Similar observations were made in the case of Leela Wanti and
others v. State of Haryana and others AIR 2012 SC 515.
The relevant observations are reproduced herein below:-
‘……17. A reading of the above reproduced Paragraph of
the Land Administration Manual nowhere suggests that the
State Government is duty-bound to restore the acquired land
to the owners after the purpose of acquisition is
accomplished. It merely mentions that as a matter of grace
the Government is usually willing to restore agricultural and
pastoral land to the owners on their refunding the amount of
compensation. If Paragraph 493 is read in the manner
suggested by the learned counsel for the appellants then in all
the cases the acquired land will have to be returned to the
owners irrespective of the time gap between the date of
acquisition and the date on which the purpose of acquisition
specified in Section 4 is achieved and the Government will not
be free to use the acquired land for any other public purpose.
Such an interpretation would also be contrary to the
language of Section 16 of the Act, in terms of which the
acquired land vests in the State Government free from all
encumbrances and the law laid down by this Court that lands
acquired for a particular public purpose can be utilised for
any other public purpose….’
30.   Therefore, the scope of judicial review as regards the manner in which
acquired land is to be utilized is narrow and limited only to the aspect that
it shall be utilized for a “public purpose”. Change in planning, change in
user and use of land for another public purpose does not call for
interference by the Courts and these can certainly be no ground to
challenge the acquisition proceedings. As a conspectus of above discussion,
the issue no. 2 raised is answered in negative. The land in question has
undoubtedly been acquired for “public purpose” and thus, the private
interest of the petitioners surely will have to make way and thus, while
rejecting the claim being put forth by the petitioners, we unresistingly
upheld the acquisition of the land in question of the petitioners.
31.   As regards the plea that despite recommendations having been made by the
Land Acquisition Collector u/s 5A of the 1894 Act to release the land, the
State proceeded to acquire the said land and thus, the acquisition
proceedings at hand are colourable exercise of power, the Learned counsel
for the petitioner seems to have missed the point that the Land Acquisition
collector does not decide the objections. What has been entrusted upon the
collector by the statute, is to make its recommendations, either in favour or
against the objector. No doubt the law is more than settled that the stage of
deciding the objections u/s 5A of 1894 Act is not a mere formality but
requires objective consideration. It goes without saying that sub section (2)
of Section 5 A of the 1894 Act casts an onerous obligation on the collector to
consider the objections in a fair, impartial and dispassionate manner and to
place the same before State Government for its decision which shall be
final. The State Government is obligated to consider the same keeping in
view all the relevant factors including the object for which the acquisition is
being     made.     This  would       imply to  take    into consideration   the
objections/suggestions/recommendation of all the stake holders i.e., of the
beneficiary department as well, on whose shoulders, the responsibilities lie
to develop the land so as to achieve the public purpose. The decision of
State Government in proceeding with the acquisition by no stretch of
imagination can be held to be bad merely because the LAC had
recommended for release of the land as this issue is no more res Integra
that the report/recommendations made by the LAC are not binding on the
state except the same are required to be considered while taking final
decision.
32.  As regards this argument raised by the petitioner with regard to the
recommendations of the Land Acquisition Collector to exempt the land
from acquisition and yet the State Government not accepting the same, a
reference to the provisions of Section 5A of the 1894 Act is necessary.
Section 5A of the 1894 Act reads as under:
5-A. Hearing of objections.—(1) Any person interested in
any land which has been notified under Section 4, sub-section (1), as
being needed or likely to be needed for a public purpose or for a
Company may, 12[within thirty days from the date of the
publication of the notification], object to the acquisition of the land
or of any land in the locality, as the case may be.
(2) Every objection under sub-section (1) shall be made to the
Collector in writing, and the Collector shall give the objector an
opportunity of being heard 11[in person or by any person authorised
by him in this behalf] or by pleader and shall, after hearing all such
objections and after making such further inquiry, if any, as he
thinks necessary, 13[either make a report in respect of the land
which has been notified under Section 4, sub-section (1), or make
different reports in respect of different parcels of such land, to the
appropriate Government, containing his recommendations on the
objections, together with the record of the proceedings held by him,
for the decision of that Government]. The decision of
the 14[appropriate Government] on the objections shall be final.
(3) For the purposes of this section, a person shall he deemed
to be interested in land who would be entitled to claim an interest in
compensation if the land were acquired under this Act.
33.  A perusal of sub section (2) of Section 5A of the 1894 Act itself makes it
clear that “the decision of the appropriate Government on the objections
shall be final”. Therefore, there is no gainsaying that although the
recommendations were made in favour of the petitioners, yet the same have
not been accepted thereby rendering the acquisition proceedings bad.
Reference in this regard to the observations made by this Court in Balwant
Singh Sher Singh Rice Mills (supra). In another judgment passed by this
Court in Vivek Coop. House Building Society (supra), this Court in
unequivocal terms has held that sub section (2) of Section 5A is not merely
a formality and casts an onerous obligation on the Collector to accord
opportunity of hearing to the objector and consider his objections in a fair,
impartial and dispassionate manner from the stand point of the affected
owner keeping in view all the relevant factors including the object for which
the acquisition is being made. We are in respectful agreement with the view
taken by this Court.
34.  To our mind, the consideration cannot be solitary from the stand point of
the objector as the agency which has been tasked by the State Government
to develop the land acquired to achieve the public purpose cannot be
ignored which is very much essential for the purpose of taking final
decision by the State Government as it is also an essential stake holder in
the process of development of land. In the case in hand, we cannot loose
sight of the fact that pursuant to the recommendations made by the Land
Acquisition Collector to exempt the land in question from acquisition, the
HSIIDC i.e. the implementing agency made its recommendations to the
effect that the land in question is vacant and will interfere in the planning
i.e. it interferes in the proposed vehicle testing track. The scheme of the
1894 Act clearly lays down that a declaration to the effect that land in
required for public purpose is made after the Government is satisfied that a
particular piece of land is needed. Thus, taking into consideration the
recommendations made by the Collector as well as by the implementing
agency i.e. HSIIDC, the State Government proceeded to include the land in
question in the declaration issued and thereafter, acquiring the land in
question, by announcing the award which by stretch of imagination cannot
be held to be bad merely because the LAC had recommended for release of
the     land    as   this  issue       is no more      res Integra      that  the
report/recommendations made by the LAC are not binding on the state
except the same are required to be considered while taking final decision.
Accordingly, we approve the decision of State Government to acquire the
land in question, after considering the report of Collector as well as
35.   As regards the plea of release of land in favour of other land owners is
concerned, we noticed that the said plea has been raised in an absolutely
vague manner wherein no particulars what so ever has been given and
moreover, as pleaded by State the said instances do not even pertain to the
acquisition at hand and relates to another acquisition of SEZ. How and in
what manner, the same has been relied upon to set up the plea of
discrimination and pick and choose yardsticks adopted by the State, lead
only towards the hollow claim of the petitioners. Even otherwise, the plea of
discrimination cannot be raised on the drop of hat and every release made
by the State Govt. does not give rise a cause of action to others to plead
discrimination. The law in this regard is well settled that firstly if the plea of
discrimination/parity is to be raised, it is required to be raised within the
close proximity of the event taken place, based upon which the
discrimination/parity is being sought to be alleged. Secondly, to raise such
plea, the person raising such plea must be identically placed to the one,
with whom, the discrimination plea is being raised. Thirdly, the burden to
prove the plea of discrimination is on the landowner by producing concrete
evidence before the Court to show that their case is identical to other
persons whose land had been released from the acquisition proceedings.
36.  The finding of discrimination cannot be recorded merely on the basis of
vague and bold assertions as has been made by the petitioners in the
instant writ petition especially when, the instances of release given are not
even from the acquisition at hand what else would be the proof of
vagueness of such plea being sought to be set up. Last but not the least,
while claiming discrimination, the important factor to plead is that the
action of the State Government with which discrimination is being pleaded,
is legal and within the for-corners of law because if the action itself is
against the law or wrong, the parity or discrimination cannot be pleaded
with any such action. The reference in this regard, can be made to the
judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Shanti
Sports Club Vs. Union of India (Supra) wherein the Apex Court held
“…The plea of discrimination and violation of Article 14 of the
Constitution put forward by the appellants is totally devoid of
substance because they did not produce any evidence before the
High Court and none has been produced before this Court to show
that their land is identically placed qua the lands on which
Hamdard Public School, St. Xavier School, Scindia Potteries, etc.
exist. In the representations made to different functionaries of the
Government and DDA, the appellants did claim that other parcels
of the land have been de-notified and before the High Court a copy
of notification dated 6.9.1996 issued under Section 48(1) was
produced, but the said assertion and notification were not sufficient
for recording a finding that their case is identical to those whose
land had been denotified. The burden to prove the charge of
discrimination and violation of Article 14 was on the appellants. It
was for them to produce concrete evidence before the court to show
that their case was identical to other persons whose land had been
released from acquisition and the reasons given by the Government
for refusing to release their land are irrelevant or extraneous.
Vague and bald assertions made in the writ petition cannot be
made basis for recording a finding that the appellants have been
subjected to invidious or hostile discrimination. That apart, we are
prima facie of the view that the Government's decision to withdraw
from the acquisition of some parcels of land in favour of some
individuals was not in public interest. Such decisions had, to some
extent, resulted in defeating the object of planned development of
Delhi on which considerable emphasis has been laid by the Full
Bench of the High Court and this Court. This being the position,
Article 14 cannot be invoked by the appellants for seeking a
direction to the respondents to withdraw from the acquisition of the
land in question. Article 14 of the Constitution declares that the
State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the
equal protection of the laws within the territory of India. The
concept of equality enshrined in that Article is a positive concept.
The Court can command the State to give equal treatment to
similarly situated persons, but cannot issue a mandate that the
State should commit illegality or pass wrong order because in
another case such an illegality has been committed or wrong order
has been passed. If any illegality or irregularity has been
committed in favour of an individual or a group of individuals,
others cannot invoke the jurisdiction of the High Court or of this
Court and seek a direction that the same irregularity or illegality be
committed       in    their     favour    by    the  State   or     its
37.   Similar views were expressed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of
Appeal No. 6974 of 2013. Therefore, in view of the principle of law laid
down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court, the vague and bald assertions made
by the petitioners in the petition are of no avail especially when, the
instances recorded are not even from the acquisition at hand and thus, the
plea been sought to be setup of discrimination by the petitioners must fail
and is accordingly rejected.
38.   In the case in hand, another issue arises for consideration which indeed is a
vital aspect to decide the process of acquisition when the same is being
sought to be tested before the writ Court i.e. the stage, when the landowner
chooses to lay challenge to it. Time and again, the Courts have put
emphasis on to the fact that the challenge to the acquisition proceedings
must be immediate and without any loss of time. The Courts have
consistently rejected the challenge to the acquisition proceedings if it is
challenged post announcing the Award. There is a clear reason behind it as
by passing the award, the authorities proceed to take possession and the
land vests in the State. This results into changing the title of the land in
favour of the State and the title of the landowner ceases to operate. If the
landowners’ let the land vest in the State free from all encumbrances, they
cannot thereafter claim that such vesting which is otherwise as per law,
should be reversed. Such an approach towards acquisition is neither
intended in the scheme of 1894 Act nor is approved by the Courts owing to
the fact that such approach would ultimately have an effect of frustrating
the entire public purpose for which land was acquired.
39.  The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in Indore Development Authority
(supra) has added certainty to law by holding that with drawing of
Panchnama, it is presumed that the possession is of the State and anyone
retaining the possession thereafter is a “trespasser”. Such clarity has
narrowed down the clouds surrounding the modes of taking possession of
the land to almost negligible and has clarified the stance when the land
vests in the State. The reference in this regard is made to the following
paragraphs from the judgment:-
‘….342. Section 24(2) is sought to be used as an umbrella so
as to question the concluded proceedings in which possession has
been taken, development has been made, and compensation has
been deposited, but may be due to refusal, it has not been collected.
The challenge to the acquisition proceedings cannot be made within
the parameters of Section 24(2) once panchnama had been drawn
of taking possession, thereafter re-entry or retaining the possession
is that of the trespasser. The legality of the proceedings
cannot be challenged belatedly, and the right to challenge
cannot be revived by virtue of the provisions of Section
24(2). Section 24(2) only contemplates lethargy/inaction
of the authorities to act for five years or more. It is very
easy to lay a claim that physical possession was not
taken, with respect to open land. Yet, once vesting takes
place, possession is presumed to be that of the owner, i.e.,
the State Government and land has been transferred to
the beneficiaries, Corporations, Authorities, etc., for
developmental purposes and third-party interests have
intervened. Such challenges cannot be entertained at all
under the purview of Section 24(2) as it is not what is
remotely contemplated in Section 24(2) of the Act of
343. In matters of land acquisition, this Court has frowned
upon, and cautioned Courts about delays and held that delay is
fatal in questioning the land acquisition proceedings. In case
possession has not been taken in accordance with law and vesting is
not in accordance with Section 16, proceedings before Courts are to
be initiated within reasonable time, not after the lapse of several
decades…’.
40.  The entire genesis of the aforesaid conclusion lies in the “concept of vesting
of land” in the State. Vesting of the land has been held to mean that the
State is endowed with all the benefits that are available to an owner of the
land. As reiterated and explained by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India,
vesting of the land happens, the moment possession of the acquired land is
taken, and on happening of such an event the title of the landowner ceases
in the land for once and all. The law in this regard is well settled that after
such vesting even if the land has not been utilized for the public purpose for
which it was acquired, erstwhile landowner has no right to seek re-
conveyance of the land. Vesting amounts to an absolute and indefeasible
right which implies that all bundle of rights which were vested in the
erstwhile owner before acquisition fully vests in the State once the
possession of the acquired land has been taken. State becomes the absolute
owner of the land and if after such vesting the possession has been retained
by the erstwhile landowner or anyone else, they are trespassers on the
acquired land.
41.  In view of the settled proposition of law, especially in terms of Indore
Development Authority (Supra) wherein the Apex Court has held that once
the possession of the land is taken by the State, person retaining the
possession is merely a “trespasser”, a very pertinent question arises as to
on what parameters the Courts shall interfere in the acquisition
proceedings at the instance of a “trespasser”. A trespasser is a person who
enters or remains in the possession of land of another without a privilege to
do so. In law, a trespasser certainly can neither challenge the title of the
rightful owner nor can claim any better right that the owner might have in
the land. Such a person neither has any animus to take the property and to
control it nor can he aver his title over the property against the State. The
Apex Court has extensively explained the aspect of possession, vesting and
how after vesting the person in possession of the property is considered as
trespasser. As regards the meaning and concept of trespasser, the reference
was made to Mitra’s “Law of Possession and Ownership of property”. The
relevant extract is reproduced herein below:-
‘…248. Mitra’s “Law of Possession and Ownership of
Property”, 2nd Edn., expressions ‘trespass’ and ‘trespasser’ have
been dealt with by the learned Author with the help of Words and
Phrases, Permanent Edition, West Publishing Co. which has also
been quoted with respect to who is a trespasser:
“A “trespasser” is a person who enters or remains upon land
in the possession of another without a privilege to do so
created by the possessor’s consent or otherwise. In re
“A “trespasser” is one entering or remaining on land in
another’s possession without a privilege to do so created by
possessor’s consent, express or implied, or by law. Keesecker
v. G.M. Mckelvey Co., 42 N.E. 2d 223, 226, 227, 68 Ohio App.
land of another without a privilege to do so, is also treated
as a trespasser. On the strength of Full Bench decision of Patna
High Court in S.M. Yaqub v. T.N. Basu AIR 1949 Pat 146, Mitra, has
referred to the observation that the possession should not be
confused with occupation. A person may be in actual possession of
the property without occupying it for a considerable time. The
person who has a right to utilise the whole in any way he likes.
Possession in part is good enough to infer that the person is in
possession of the rest. Learned Author has referred to Jowitt’s
Dictionary of English Law, Ed. 1969, so as to explain what
constitutes possession.
“There are three requisites of possession. First, there
must be actual or potential physical control. Secondly, the
physical control is not possession unless accompanied by
intention hence if a thing is put into the hand of a sleeping
person he has no possession of it. Thirdly, the possibility and
intention must be visible or evidence by external signs for if
the thing shows no signs of being under the control of
anyone, it is not possession.”
251. A person with title is considered to be in actual
possession. The other person is a trespasser. The possession in law
follows the right to possess as held in Kynoch Limited v. Rowlands
(1912) 1Ch 527 .Ordinarily, the owner of the property is presumed
to be in possession and presumption as to possession is in his
favour. In Superintendent and Remembrancer of Legal Affairs,
West Bengal v. Anil Kumar Bhunja&Ors., (1979) 4 SCC 274 , this
Court observed that possession implies a right and a fact; the right
to enjoy annexed to the right of property and the fact of the real
intention. It involves the power of control and intent to control.
Possession is annexed to right of property.
“13. “Possession” is a polymorphous term which may
have different meanings in different contexts. It is impossible
to work out a completely logical and precise definition of
“possession” uniformally applicable to all situations in the
contexts of all statutes. Dias and Hughes in their book on
Jurisprudence say that if a topic ever suffered from too much
theorising it is that of "possession." Much of this difficulty
and confusion is (as pointed out in Salmond’s Jurisprudence,
12th Edn., 1966) caused by the fact that possession is not
purely a legal concept. "Possession," implies a right and a
fact; the right to enjoy annexed to the right of property and
the fact of the real intention. It involves power of control and
intent to control. (See Dias and Hughes, ibid.)
“when a person is in such a relation to a thing that, so
far as regards the thing, he can assume, exercise or resume
manual control of it at pleasure, and so far as regards other
persons, the thing is under the protection of his personal
presence, or in or on a house or land occupied by him or in
any receptacle belonging to him and under his control, he is
in physical possession of the thing.”
15. While recognising that “possession” is not a purely
legal concept but also a matter of fact, Salmond (12th Edn., p.
52) describes “possession, in fact”, as a relationship between
a person and a thing. According to the learned Author the
test for determining “whether a person is in possession of
anything is whether he is in general control of it”
42.  By referring to the aforesaid treatise of law, it has been clarified that the
person with title is presumed to be in possession of the property.
Considering the fact that there can be a case where property may be
occupied by a person other than an owner, the Apex Court distinguished
between the concept of “possession” and “occupation” of the land and
observed that the possession amounts to holding of property as owner and
occupation amounts to keeping the possession by being present in it. The
reference in this regards is made to the following paragraphs from Indore
252. In Ram Dass v. Davinder (2004) 3 SCC 684 , this Court
stated that possession and occupation in common parlance may be
used interchangeably, but in law possession amounts to holding
property as an owner, while to occupy is to keep possession by
being present in it. In Bhinka&Ors. v. Charan Singh, Bhinka&Ors. v.
Charan Singh164, this Court considered the dichotomy between
taking and retaining possession. They are mutually exclusive
expressions and apply to two different situations. The word ‘taking’
applies to a person taking possession of a land otherwise than in
accordance with the provisions of the law, while the word
‘retaining’ applies to a person taking possession in accordance with
the provisions of the law, but subsequently retaining the same
illegally. In Bhinka&Ors. (supra), as to retaining possession, it was
“14. If the appellants did not take possession of the disputed
lands, did they retain possession of the same in accordance with the
provisions of the law for the time being in force? The dichotomy
between taking and retaining indicates that they are mutually
exclusive and apply to two different situations. The word “taking”
applies to a person taking possession of a land otherwise than in
accordance with the provisions of the law, while the word
“retaining” to a person taking possession in accordance with the
provisions of the law but subsequently retaining the same illegally.
So construed, the appellants’ possession of the lands being illegal
from the inception, they could not be described as persons retaining
possession of the said lands in accordance with the provisions of
any law for the time being in force, so as to be outside the scope of
Section 180 of the Act.”
43.  As regards the Scheme of acquisition, the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India
by making reference to Section 16 of 1894 Act categorically held that
vesting of title in the government takes place immediately upon taking
possession of the land and the State becomes the owner of the property
without any condition or limitation either as to the title or to the
possession. After taking of possession of the acquired land and vesting of
the land in State, the person who retains the possession is a “trespasser”.
The reference is made to the following:-
‘…253. Under section 16 of the Act of 1894, vesting of title in
the Government, in the land took place immediately upon taking
possession. Under Sections 16 and 17 of the Act of 1894, the acquired
land became the property of the State without any condition or
limitation either as to title or possession. Absolute title thus vested
in the State.
256. Thus, it is apparent that vesting is with possession and
the statute has provided under Sections 16 and 17 of the Act of 1894
that once possession is taken, absolute vesting occurred. It is an
indefeasible right and vesting is with possession thereafter. The
vesting specified under section 16, takes place after various steps,
such as, notification under section 4, declaration under section 6,
notice under section 9, award under section 11 and then possession.
The statutory provision of vesting of property absolutely
free from all encumbrances has to be accorded full effect.
Not only the possession vests in the State but all other
encumbrances are also removed forthwith. The title of the
landholder ceases and the state becomes the absolute
owner and in possession of the property. Thereafter there
is no control of the land-owner over the property. He
cannot have any animus to take the property and to
control it. Even if he has retained the possession or
otherwise trespassed upon it after possession has been
taken by the State, he is a trespasser and such possession
of trespasser enures for his benefit and on behalf of the
44.  Once the vesting in the aforesaid manner takes place, the petition laying
challenge to the acquisition proceedings on any ground is not maintainable
and rightly so as the landowner has no title to assert his claim as regards
the acquired land as being a trespasser he loses any locus to challenge the
acquisition proceedings since he loses any title in the acquired land itself.
This in fact is the reason why the Courts have consistently refused to
entertain any challenge to the acquisition proceedings after vesting of the
land. Thus, erstwhile landowners are precluded from questioning the
legality of acquisition proceedings after vesting of land as they are only
trespassers and no more owners who can asset any sort of right over the
land of which the State is owner.
45.  Applying the aforesaid principle laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court
of India to the factual matrix of the case in hand, it becomes an additional if
not only ground to reject the challenge made to the acquisition proceedings
at the hands of the petitioners. As noticed above, even though the petition
was filed on 20.02.2007 (as appearing just below the index) but it is not
disputed that notice of motion and interim order of stay on dispossession
was passed on 26.02.2007 i.e. after the Award having been already
announced and the possession having been taken by recording the Rapat
Rojnamcha No. 458 dated 24.02.2007 (as stated by HSIIDC in CM No.
7891 of 2020) which means after the vesting of the land in question having
taken place in the State. So much so, even though, the written statement
was filed in the year 2007 itself, bringing on record the factum of award
having been announced, but still, till date and that too, for good 15 long
years, the petitioners have chosen to not to lay challenge the award so
announced. Be as it may be, the fact that the vesting had already taken
place even before this court issued notice of motion, disentitles the
petitioners additionally, to get the relief being prayed for, hence, the claim
of the petitioners require to be rejected and is thus being rejected.
46.  In the wake of the conspectus of what all has been discussed above, the
issues framed are being answered in the following terms:
Issue 1:- The factum of grant of NOC for establishing the college would not
be an impediment for the State Government to acquire the land in
accordance with the provisions of the applicable land acquisition act. The
grant of NOC/ licence/ CLU or any other permission would not give the
landowner a right to set up a plea of “promissory estoppel” against the
Issue 2:- The definition of public purpose is not capable of being given a
static and definite definition. The state is the first judge to decide the
“public purpose” for which the land is required to be used, though such
decision is subject to judicial scrutiny. The land in question is required for
development of industrial infrastructure which constitutes “public
purpose”. It can be utilized for any allied or connected or even other public
purpose for its optimum utilization. The vague pleas that the use of the land
is not for public purpose are not sufficient to question the validity of the
acquisition proceedings. Since long time has lapsed from the date of
acquisition, even if due to change in the planning, if the land in question is
sought to be utilised for any other public purpose, there would no
impediment for the acquiring agency to proceed with the same in view of
the settled proposition of law.
Issue 3:- The recommendations made by the Land Acquisition Collector to
exempt land from the acquisition proceedings or even to acquire the land
are not binding on the State except that same have to be considered by the
State Government while forming the opinion. In the case at hand, though
the recommendation made by the Land Acquisition Collector was to
exempt the land from the acquisition proceedings, however, since the
release would have affected the planning of the township and especially the
proposed vehicle testing track, we do not find any reason to question the
decision of the State Government to acquire the land of the petitioners.
Issue 4:- In order to plead discrimination, the onus is on the petitioners to
show that they are identically situated to such persons in whose favour
discrimination is being pleaded. In case at hand, except making vague
assertions of discrimination and making reference to instances which does
not even relates to the instant acquisition proceedings, the petitioners have
not placed on any material to support its contention of discrimination.
Further, it is pertinent to add that the withdrawal from acquisition is
impressible in the scheme of Act of 1894 after the possession of the land
stands taken. Even if there is any order vide which the land was released
from the acquisition proceedings after taking its possession by way of rapat
or otherwise, such an order is per se illegal and no parity can be claimed
with illegality having been committed by the State, more so, when in case at
hand the possession of the land stands taken and land stands vested in the
Issue 5:- The undisputed position in the case at hand remains that the
status quo was granted by this court after the award was announced and
possession of the land was taken. This fact was not even brought to the
notice of the court when notice was being issued. In such circumstances,
the fact remains that the possession of the land had already been taken by
the State and as such the land stood vested, therefore, amongst other
grounds as discussed above, the petitioners deserves to be non-suited on
the ground that the land stands vested in the State.
47.  Before parting, we would like to refer to yet another aspect which we
noticed in the objections filed by the petitioners under section 5-A of Act of
1894 that in case the land is required for the acquisition purposes, they
shall be rehabilitated and equal land shall be allotted to them. Such kind of
relief neither is envisaged in the Scheme of Act of 1894 nor can such
directions be issued as a condition precedent for upholding the validity of
the acquisition proceedings. Rehabilitation is a matter of State policy and is
governed by the parameters laid down therein and also by the judgment
passed by this court in Rajiv Manchanda and others Vs. Haryana Urban
Development Authority and another 2018 (4) RCR (Civil) 508. The
landowners cannot claim rehabilitation as a condition precedent for either
dispossessing them from the acquired land or for upholding the validity of
acquisition proceedings, neither can court pass such directions given the
legislative scheme of Act of 1894.
48.    For the reasons aforesaid and finding that the land in question is very much
required for a public purpose in the interest of community at large, the
vesting having been already taken place even before the issuance of notice
of motion, the fair decision taken by the State Government to proceed with
the acquisition of land in question and finding, no case of discrimination at
all, we have no hesitation to hold that the instant writ petition, being devoid
of any merits, is requires to be rejected and the same is accordingly
dismissed. All pending applications if any, stand disposed of. The interim
order passed in favour of the petitioners is hereby vacated.