The accused Naresh Dhankar had been sent by Station House
Officer of Police Station, City, Palwal to face trial for commission of
offences under Sections 302, 307, 332, 353, 186 of Indian Penal Code,
1860 (hereinafter referred to be as 'IPC').
2.           The case of the prosecution is that on 02.01.2018 Sub-
Inspector Jairam along with SPO Satbir Singh and Constable Sudhir
Driver, were present on crime patrolling duty in official vehicle at Minar
Gate, Palwal. Information was received from Police Control Room,
Palwal that a person trespassed the Palwal Hospital, Palwal and has
seriously injured a women with an iron rod and has absconded. The police
party went to the hospital. The victim was in ICU and had already
expired. There were grievous injuries on her head, forehead and eyes. Her
family member Taslim was present there. Telephonic information about
the incident was given to the SHO. On receiving the information, SHO
Police Station City, Palwal along with senior Police Officers reached the
spot with a PCR. Sub-Inspector Jairam went in the PCR to trace the
accused. Subsequently, one more dead body was found in front of
Welfare Trust. There were grievous injuries on the head of the victim. The
dead body was lifted and sent to Government Hospital, Palwal in a PCR.
Subsequently, another dead body was found in front of Moti Park. The
same was lifted and sent to Government Hospital, Palwal in a PCR.
Subsequently, another dead body was found near the shop of Jagan
Kabaadi. This victim had also received head injuries and body was sent to
Government Hospital, Palwal in a PCR. Subsequently, another dead body
was found at Rasulpur Road. This victim had also received head injuries
and body was sent to Government Hospital, Palwal in a PCR.
Subsequently, another dead body was found near Mayur Hotel, Old Sohna
Mod. This victim had also received fatal injuries on the head. The dead
body was sent to Government Hospital, Palwal in a PCR. All the incidents
were of identical nature. Sub-Inspector Jairam along with police staff
went back to the Palwal Hospital where Taslim, the brother-in-law of
deceased Anjum, moved complaint against Dr. Ashish Gupta, Dr.
Sunder, Neeraj Kumar, Kishanwati and the staff of Palwal Hospital. He
submitted that he is a resident of village Buraka, Tehsil Hathin, District
Palwal. Yesterday i.e. on 01.01.2018 at around 4:00 PM, he got admitted
his wife Miskeena in Palwal Hospital, as she was suffering from bleeding.
After the admission at around 10:00 PM, his brother Harish, Lukman,
sister-in-law Rabiya and Rihana went back to village Buraka to arrange
blood. The complainant along with his sister-in-law Anjum remained in
the hospital. Miskeena was admitted in ICU on the second floor. In front
of the gate of the ICU, his sister-in-law Anjum was sleeping on a bench.
At around 11:30 PM, the complainant came on the ground floor. At
around 2:38 AM, he heard a loud noise and he ran upstairs. He found that
his sister-in-law Anjum was lying on the floor and there were serious
injuries on her head and it was profusely bleeding. At that time, one
person came out of the bathroom situated in the front. He had an iron rod
in his hand and he ran towards the complainant and tried to assault him.
The complainant saved himself. Accused went down and started running.
The entire staff of the hospital was awake now. The complainant chased
the accused and also raised hue and cry, and asked the persons present, to
apprehend the accused. However, none of the staff members of the
hospital helped him to apprehend the accused. The accused absconded,
taking advantage of darkness and fog. The complainant came back and
saw that Anjum was in a serious condition. She was also got admitted in
ICU. After sometime, she succumbed to the injuries, during treatment.
The complainant and her family members reached the hospital. In the
morning, they came to know that the same accused has committed 5-6
murders in the night. The entire incident of assault on Anjum is recorded
in the CCTV cameras of the hospital. On account of the negligence of the
staff members of Palwal Hospital, the accused committed murder of his
sister-in-law Anjum. If the security arrangements in the hospital had been
proper, the murder would not have taken place. The staff members were
also involved in the murder. The accused may be identified from the
CCTV footages. Appropriate proceedings be initiated against the Doctors,
staff members of the Hospital and the accused. At that time, the family
members of other victims met Sub-Inspector Jairam, who told the names
of the victims to be Munshi Ram, Sita Ram, Khem Chand, Subhash. One
victim was unidentified and efforts were made to trace his identity. As per
the complaint and the circumstances, Tehrir was sent through SPO Satbir
for registration of FIR under Sections 302, 120-B of IPC. It was directed
that Senior Police Officer be informed and special reports of FIR be
delivered to Senior Police Officers and the Learned Illaqua Magistrate.
Scene of crime team was requested to come on the spot. Sub-Inspector
Jairam along with the police staff took the dead body of Anjum to the
Government Hospital, Palwal, for inquest proceedings of all the dead
bodies.
3.            On the basis of the above-said complaint, FIR was registered
under Sections 302, 120-B of IPC. Investigation was set into motion.
Inquest proceedings were conducted in regard to deceased Anjum,
Munshi Ram, Sita Ram, Khem Chand, Subhash and one unidentified
victim. Scene of crime team reached the spot and also photographer
Sanjay was called on the spot. HC Gurmukh, Finger Print Technician was
called Palwal Hospital. Dr. Vinod Kumar inspected the dead bodies.
Photographer Sanjay clicked the photographs. On completion of inquest
proceedings, the documents were submitted before the Postmortem
4.            The Postmortem Board conducted the postmortem of the 6
dead bodies. Postmortem reports were received. The cause of death was
opined to be shock and hemorrhage due to anti-mortem injuries to vital
organs of the body i.e. head injury, which was sufficient to cause death
under ordinary course of nature, in all 6 Postmortem reports.
5.           The Pulindas were received from the Doctors and seized. The
seizure memo was counter-signed by ASI Rajesh. The SHO Police Station
City, Palwal had already received the CCTV camera footage in his mobile
and viralled the same, as the Senior Police Officers had directed all the
police officers of the District, to search the accused. All the police officers
of the District started searching for the accused. During search,
information was received from public persons that the accused was
present at Adarsh Colony in the street behind the Sukhram Hospital.
Identifying the accused from CCTV footage, the Police Officers, ASI
Constable Lukman and SPO Har Parshad apprehended the accused. While
apprehending, the accused inflicting injuries upon the police officers also.
Residents of Adarsh Colony told the name of the accused to be Naresh
Kumar, who is son-in-law of Dharampal Malik, resident of Adarsh
Colony. While apprehending, accused Naresh fell on the road and
received injury on his head. He was brought to General Hospital, Palwal
and was referred to Safdarjang Hospital, Delhi. At the time of
apprehending the accused Naresh, an iron pipe around 4 feet in length, 1
inch width was seized from him. Same was produced by ASI Ramdiya
before SHO Police Station City, Palwal. The pipe had blood smeared on
one end. The Finger Print Technician HC Gurmukh took the finger prints
from the rod. Jamatalashi of the accused was done and the articles in his
possession were seized. He was sent to Safdarjang Hospital, Delhi along
with the police party. The complainant and eye-witness, Taslim identified
the accused as the person who had murdered Anjum and then absconded
from Palwal Hospital. His supplementary statement was recorded under
Section 161 Cr.PC. Statement of Harish was recorded under Section 161
Cr.PC. The injured police officers ASI Rajesh, HC Sandeep and SPO Har
Parshad got themselves medico-legally examined and submitted their
MLRs before Sub-Inspector Jairam. HC Sandeep had suffered 3 injuries,
SPO Har Parshad had suffered 4 injuries and ASI Rajesh Kumar suffered
2 injuries. Their statements were recorded under Section 161 Cr.PC.
Offences under Sections 186, 332, 353, 307 were added. Statements of
witnesses Raj Kumar, Tejpal, Nanne, Chandi, Arvind, Raghvinder, Satish,
Harish, Ajmal and Rahish were recorded in regard to deceased Sita Ram,
Munshi Ram, Subhash, Khem Chand and Anjum. The unidentified victim
was identified to be Surender and statements of Prince and Surender son
of Shri Ram were recorded in regard to deceased Surender. HC Gurmukh
applied finger-print powder on the iron pipe used in the offence and
finger-prints got visible on the pipe. The same were secured by way of
tape and then collected. The photographs of the finger print were clicked
from the iron pipe recovered from the accused. The iron pipe was seized
and sealed with a seal of 'JRS'. The same was counter-signed by the
witnesses. The dead body of Anjum was handed over to her family
members for the last rites. Sub-Inspector Jairam inspected the scenes of
occurrence and prepared site-plans of each scene of occurrence. HC
Gurmukh collected the finger prints of the accused from glass door of
ICU at Palwal Hospital. The same were secured by way of tape and
handed over to Sub-Inspector Jairam, who seized and sealed the same
with seals of 'JRS'. Statement of HC Gurmukh was recorded under
Section 161 Cr.PC. HC Hemraj, Cyber Cell Incharge, received the CCTV
footage of cameras inside Palwal Hospital and around the same. He
submitted the same before Sub-Inspector Jairam, who seized the same.
The statement of HC Hemraj was recorded under Section 161 Cr.PC. The
DVR along with hard disk of CCTV were received through technician
Shrikant. The same were seized and sealed with seals of 'JRS'. The
statement of technician Shrikant was recorded under Section 161 Cr.PC.
The statements of Mukesh Kumar and Sulepal, the security guards of
Omaxe City, Palwal where accused Naresh resided, were recorded, under
Section 161 Cr.PC. The security guard had seen the accused going out of
his house at 1:20 AM along with an iron pipe. Statement of Jakir was
recorded under Section 161 Cr.PC, as the accused tried to assault him also
with the iron pipe. Statement of Virender son of Pappu was also recorded
as the accused had chased him with the iron pipe. Seema daughter of
Dharampal, wife of accused Naresh, was joined investigation. The
statement of Kapil son of Azad, resident of Adarsh Nagar, Palwal was
recorded, as the accused had tried to kill him also. Statement of Kamlesh
wife of Sumer, resident of New Extension Colony, Palwal was recorded,
as the accused was earlier a tenant in their house and he had asked for
water for washing his hand and feet. Statement of Devi son of Hariya was
also recorded, as the accused had demanded from him, a three-wheeler to
go to Faridabad.
6.           Accused Naresh was got admitted in Safdarjang Hospital,
Delhi by Sub-Inspector Aash Mohammad and ASI Rameshwar. They
received the documents from Safdarjang Hospital and submitted the same
to the Sub-Inspector, who seized and sealed the same. The statements of
Sub-Inspector Mohammad Illiyas and ASI Rameshwar were recorded
under Sections 161 Cr.PC. Constable Lukman and ASI Ramdiya also
submitted their MLRs. Constable Lukman had received 3 injuries and ASI
Ramdiya had received 4 injuries. Statement of ASI Ramdiya was recorded
under Section 161 Cr.PC. The case property was deposited in the
Malkhana. The dead bodies of deceased Subhash, Sita Ram, Khem
Chand, Surender @ Bhikhari Baba and Munshi Ram were given to their
family members for the last rites. Statement of Constable Raj Kumar who
had delivered the special reports, was recorded. On 04.01.2018,
Superintendent of Police, Palwal constituted SIT (Special Investigation
Team), which was consisted of DSP City Abhimanyu, Inspector
Devender, Sub-Inspector Ashwani, Sub-Inspector Jairam and HC Hemraj,
Cyber Cell. The accused was opined by Doctor to be unfit for statement.
The CDRs of mobile phone numbers 9728337859, 9631326749 and
9518118498 of accused Naresh, were received for the period from
01.01.2018 to 05.01.2018. Also, the CDRs of deceased Khem Chand of
his mobile numbers 9812785224 and 9991030138, CDRs of deceased
Munshi Ram of his mobile number 8814064812 and the CDRs of Seema
wife of accused Naresh of her mobile number 8818005922, were received
from Cyber Cell, Palwal. From the CDRs and locations, it was found that
the location of mobile number 9728337859 of accused Naresh was near
Saraswati School, Adarsh Colony, Palwal from 6:05 AM to 7:37 AM. The
location of mobile number 9671326749 of accused Naresh was near
Police Station City, Palwal from 2:21 AM to 4:04 AM. The location of
mobile number 9518118498 of accused Naresh was at Adarsh Nagar,
Palwal from 4:41 AM to 6:25 AM. All the murders had taken place within
the above-said locations, where the accused was present, as per his mobile
phone locations. The CDRs were seized and the statement of HC Hemraj,
Cyber Cell was recorded. On 10.01.2018, accused Naresh was discharged
from Safdarjang Hospital, Delhi. He was arrested. His discharge summary
was received and his disclosure statement was recorded. He was produced
before the Learned Magistrate and 2 days police remand was sought. He
got demarcated the scene of occurrence where he murdered the women
with iron rod. The demarcation memo was counter-signed by HC Sanjay
and HC Virender. Their statements under Section 161 Cr.PC was
recorded. Sub-Inspector Jairam received the service record of accused
Naresh from Agriculture Department, Bhiwani. On 11.01.2018, the
disclosure statement of accused was recorded in the presence of ASI
Manoj and HC Virender and their statements were recorded under Section
161 Cr.PC. 4 days further police remand was received from the Learned
Magistrate. On 12.01.2018, SHO Devender conducted the further
investigation. He went to the Army Headquarter and received the
retirement papers of the accused. On 13.01.2018, DSP City conducted the
investigation. On 14.01.2018, disclosure statement of accused Naresh was
recorded in the presence of ASI Manoj and HC Sanjay. The accused got
demarcated the scene of occurrence at Sohna Road near Mayur Hotel
where victim Subhash was killed. Subsequently, he got demarcated the
scene of occurrence where victim Bhikhari Baba was killed whose name
was known to be Surender. The accused then demarcated the scene of
occurrence in front of Ricco Battery Inverter Store where Chokidar
Munshi Ram was killed. Subsequently, accused demarcated the scene of
occurrence near Ganda Nala where Chokidar Sitaram was killed.
Subsequently, the accused demarcated the place near Rasulpur Chowk,
NH-2 where Khem Chand was killed. The demarcations made by the
accused corroborated the scenes of occurrence. The demarcations were
counter-signed by the accused, ASI Manoj and HC Sanjay. Statement of
ASI Manoj and HC Sanjay were recorded under Section 161 Cr.PC. On
16.01.2018, photographs and CD of the postmortem of the dead bodies
were received from photographer Sanjay. The seizure memo was counter-
signed by Sanjay and his statement under Section 161 Cr.PC was
recorded. The retirement records of accused Naresh were received from
Army Headquarter by SHO Devender. The same were seized. The
statement of HC Anil Kumar was recorded. The statements of eye-
witnesses Virender and Jakir were got recorded before the Learned
Magistrate, as per the provisions under Section 164 Cr.PC. On
10.02.2018, Draftsman HC Sarwan Kumar prepared scaled site-plans of
the scenes of occurrence. His statement was recorded under Section 161
Cr.PC. Dr. Ashish Gupta and Dr. Parvinder Sorout was joined
investigation and it was found that no Doctors or staff of Palwal Hospital
were involved in the offence. Offence under Section 120-B of IPC was
deleted. Scene of crime team report was received from Dr. Vinod and the
case property was sent to SCRB Madhuban along with Pulindas, iron pipe
and the finger prints. The result of the same are awaited and the same
shall be submitted, as and when received. On completion of investigation,
final report was submitted, for trial of the accused.
7.           The copies of the final report and the documents annexed
with it were supplied to the accused, free of cost, as per the provisions
under Section 207 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
8.           Since the offences were exclusively triable by the Court of
Sessions, the Learned Illaqa Magistrate, committed the case for trial by
the Court of Sessions.
9.           Finding a prima-facie case, the accused was charge-sheeted
on 15.05.2018. Subsequently, on 24.09.2018, the charge was re-framed
and the accused was separately and distinctly charged for each offence,
giving all the necessary particulars of date, time and places of occurrence
of each offence of murder and other offences. He was charge-sheeted for
commission of offences under Sections 302, 307, 332, 353, 186 of IPC.
He pleaded not guilty and claimed trial. The earlier evidence was adopted
by the Defence except the evidence of PW3 Taslim, the complainant. He
was summoned again and examined accordingly.
10.         The prosecution in order to prove its case got examined the
following witnesses :
11.          The prosecution in order to prove its case, placed reliance
upon the following documents :
Ex.PW4/A        Affidavit of Dr. Mukesh Sarang.
Ex.PW4/B        Postmortem report of Subhash.
Ex.PW4/C        Postmortem report of Munshi Ram.
Ex.PW4/C        Postmortem report Sita Ram.
Ex.PW5/C        Postmortem report of Surender.
Ex.PW5/D        Postmortem report of Khem Chand.
Ex.PJ           Seizure memo of clothes of accused.
Ex.PW6/K        Seizure memo of DVR along with
Ex.PW6/L      Seizure memo of finger-prints from
iron pipe.
Ex.PW6/N      Application for taking opinion.
Ex.PW6/O      Application moved before Medical
Ex.PW6/P      Seizure memo of CDR of mobile No.
9728337859 of accused Naresh.
Ex.PW6/R to   Disclosure statements of accused.
Ex.PW6/U to   Demarcation memos of place of
Ex.PW6/Y      occurrence.
Ex.PW6/AA     Seizure memo of CDR of mobile No.
9518118498 of accused Naresh.
Ex.PW6/AB     Seizure memo of document regarding
mental condition of accused.
Ex.PW6/AC     Seizure memo of medical fitness of
accused.
Ex.PW6/AF     Handing over memo of dead body of
Ex.PW6/AI     Handing over memo of dead body of
Ex.PW6/AL     Handing over memo of dead body of
Ex.PW6/AQ     Handing over memo of dead body of
Ex.PW6/AV     Application    for    appointment   of
Ex.PW6/AW     Application for providing Doctor.
Ex.PW6/AAA Call detail records.
Ex.PW12/B     Handing over memo of dead body of
Ex.PW13/A     Affidavit of Dr. Charan Singh.
Ex.PW14/A     Handing over memo of dead body of
Ex.PW14/B     Statement of Arvind under Section
Ex.PW16/A     Statement of Prince under Section
Ex.PW18/A     Affidavit of Dr. Shiv Shankar.
Ex.PW18/B     MLR pf ASI Rajesh Kumar.
Ex.PW28/A     Demarcation of place of occurrence.
Ex.PW31/A     Application for supply of copy of
CDR, CAF and certificate.
Ex.PW31/B     Certificate under Section 65-B of
Ex.PW31/E     Certificate under Section 65-B of
Ex.PW31/J     Certificate under Section 65-B of
Ex.PW40/A     Affidavit of Constable Prince.
Ex.PW45/A        Application for recording the
statement of Virender under Section
Ex.PW45/E & Statements under Section 164 Cr.PC.
Ex.PW47/B & Comparison chart of Finger Prints
Ex.PW47/D        Photographs of Finger Prints
Ex/PW48/A        Certificate under Section 65-B of
Ex.PW48/E        Certificate under Section 65-B of
Ex.MO/1 to       Case property; Iron Rod, Clothes of
Ex.MO/13         deceased and Clothes of accused
Ex.MO/X to       Chance Finger Prints
12.        After the evidence of prosecution was closed.
13.        It is pertinent to mention that an application was moved on
behalf of accused under Section 328 read with Section 330 Cr.PC for
postponing the trial of the accused, with the contentions that he was a
psychiatric patient. The application was dismissed vide order dated
18.07.2018 by the Learned ASJ, Palwal with the observation that the
accused did not suffer from mental condition and unsoundness of mind,
making him incapable to take his defence. It was also observed by the
Learned ASJ, Palwal that while the charge was explained to him he took
the plea for not guilty with all awareness with a composed mind. The
accused preferred no appeal against the said order, and the trial continued.
14.          The accused was produced before this Court for the first time
on 29.07.2022 and next on 09.08.2022. He submitted that he was
suffering from some neurological and physical disease and pain in various
parts of body but he did not specify the exact problem. Hence, vide order
dated 09.08.2022, the Superintendent District Jail was directed to get done
thorough examination of the accused, from the Doctors at Jail including
complete diagnosis, the body and mind of the accused and provide the
requisiste medical treatment and submit the report of the same. The
detailed report was submitted by the Superintendent District Jail,
Faridabad on 23.08.2022, to the effect that the requisite treatment is being
given to the accused and his general condition was stable and his
behaviour is normal. Again on 03.02.2023, the Learned Defence Counsel
submitted that the accused suffered from psychiatric disorder and head
injury but requisite treatment is not being given to him. Again the
Superintendent District Jail, Faridabad was directed to get thorough
check-up of the accused and submit report. The report was submitted on
10.02.2023, to the effect that the requisite treatment is being given to the
accused and his general condition was stable and his behaviour is normal
and there was no complaint since 15.01.2018, when he was lodged in the
15.          Assistant Superintendent, District Jail, Faridabad at Neemka
was examined as CW1. This Court witness was called to submit the report
about the physical and mental condition of the accused, the treatment
given to the accused and his behavior and whether there was any
complaint of violence for the entire period of his stay in the Jail since
15.1.2018. As per the report, the general condition of the accused was
stable and his behaviour was normal. The witness submitted the following
reports.
Ex.C1-     Report of the Superintendent Jail
Ex.C-2     Medical report.
16.          After the evidence of the prosecution was concluded and the
Court Witness was examined, the accused was examined as per the
provisions under Section 313 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973.
All the incriminating evidence was put to him. He denied the same and
claimed innocence. He submitted that witnesses were deposing falsely.
The evidences have been fabricated against him. It was a false case and he
has been falsely implicated. He was suffering from psychosis since 2001
till now. The accused wished to lead evidence in defence.
17.          No evidence was led in defence. The defence evidence was
closed by accused on 14.03.2023. Arguments were heard.
18.          The evidence on record, is detailed as below.
19.          PW1 Sub-Inspector Rajesh Kumar, Palwal stated that on
02.01.2018, he was posted as ASI in Police Station City, Palwal, when he
received Tehrir endorsed by Sub-Inspector Jai Ram. He lodged FIR Ex.P1
and made endorsement Ex.P2 on the Tehrir and sent the special report to
the Learned Illaqua Magistrate and Senior Police Officers. He also stated
that on the same day, Sub-Inspector Jai Ram handed over to him, blood
stained clothes of 6 dead persons, which were seized by him vide seizure
memo Ex.P3. The same was sealed with the seals of 'SS'.
20.          PW2 Constable Raj Kumar proved the delivery of special
reports to the Learned Illaqua Magistrate and Senior Police Officers on
21.          PW3 Taslim Khan, eye-witness deposed that on 01.01.2018
his wife Miskina was admitted in Palwal Hospital, Palwal. His sister-in-
law Anjum stayed in the hospital with Miskina. He left Anjum at 11:30
PM in front of ICU on the first floor of the hospital. Anjum was resting on
a bench in front of the ICU. At around 2:30 AM in the intervening night
of 01.01.2018/02.01.2018, he heard the sound of something falling on the
ground. The witness was on the ground floor and he rushed to the first
floor. He found that Anjum was lying on the floor, in a blood pool. She
had injuries on her head. Then he saw the accused Naresh coming from
the toilet with an iron rod in his hand. He attacked on him but he escaped.
Accused tried to run away and the witness chased him to the ground floor
but he absconded on account of darkness and heavy fog. He was seen
going towards the direction of City Police Station. He came back and
picked Anjum and admitted her in the same hospital. She expired after
sometime. If the hospital had adequate facility for security, then the
incident would not have occurred. The incident was recorded in the
CCTV cameras installed in the hospital. In the morning, he came to know
that accused had also killed some other persons. He met the police
officers at hospital and moved complaint Ex.P4. The witness identified
the accused in Court. During cross-examination, the witness stated that he
wrote in the complaint that accused had killed 5 other persons, on the
basis of information given by the Police Officers. No other person in the
hospital was hurt by the accused. All the employees of the hospital fled
away due to fear of the accused. After the incident, he saw the accused for
the first time, while deposing in the Court. He admitted that he did not see
the accused assaulting Anjum. However, he immediately saw him with a
rod. He was in a state of anger. The witness could not comment whether
the mental condition of the accused was normal or not. The witness was
suggested that the accused had killed many street dogs and he claimed
ignorance about this fact. He was suggested that he was a planted witness
and he made complaint on asking of the police. The witness denied the
same.
Hospital, Palwal deposed that on 02.01.2018, he along Dr. Deep Kishore
conducted the postmortem of deceased Subhash, Munshi Ram and Sita
Ram. The Doctor proved the postmortem reports; Ex.PW4/B of deceased
Subhash, Ex.PW4/C of deceased Munshi Ram and Ex.PW4/D of
deceased Sita Ram. In the opinion of the Board, the cause of death was
shock and hemorrhage as a result of ante-mortem head injury.
Palwal deposed that on 02.01.2018, he along with Dr. Yatinder conducted
the postmortem of deceased Anjum, Surender, Khem Chand and one
unidentified person. He proved the postmortem reports; Ex.PW5/B of
deceased Anjum, Ex.PW5/C of deceased Surender and Ex.PW5/D of
deceased Khem Chand. The cause of death in all the cases was shock and
hemorrhage due to ante-mortem head injuries.
24.          PW6 Sub-Inspector Jai Ram, Investigating Officer deposed
that in the intervening night of 01.01.2018/02.01.2018, he was on crime
patrol duty along with SPO Satbir Singh and Constable Sudhir in police
vehicle. He received the telephonic message from Police Control Room,
Palwal that a person caused grievous injuries to someone in Palwal
Hospital, Palwal and has absconded. The police party went to the Palwal
Hospital, Palwal. He found that a lady was admitted in ICU. She had
received grievous injuries on her eyes, forehead and head and was found
to be dead. He met one Taslim, who was relative of deceased Anjum.
Sub-Inspector Jai Ram gave information to SHO Police Station City,
Palwal, who came to the hospital along with the other Police Officers.
The SHO Police Station City, Palwal searched the CCTV footages and
took the photographs of accused Naresh from the CCTV footage and
circulated the same on the Whatsapp of all Police Officers of Palwal.
When he was going towards Police Station City Palwal, he found 5 dead
bodies near Geeta Welfare Trust, T-Point Sohna Road, shop of Jagan
Kabaadi, Rasulpur Turn and Mayur Hotel, Palwal. All the dead bodies
were sent to mortuary of General Hospital, Palwal. All the Police Officers
of District Palwal were deployed in the search of accused, as he had
earlier been arrested by Police Station Camp, Palwal in another FIR.
When he reached back at Palwal Hospital, Palwal, complainant Taslim
moved complaint Ex.P4 and he made endorsement Ex.PW6/A and sent
the same for registration of FIR. He called the photographer and Forensic
Science Expert and Scene of Crime Team, who inspected the dead bodies.
Photographs were clicked by Photographer Sanjay. Inquest proceedings
were conduct. The deceased were identified as Subhash, Munshi Ram,
Sita Ram, Anjum, Surender and Khem Chand by the persons known to
them. The postmortems of the dead bodies were conducted at Government
Hospital, Palwal and Pulindas were received from the Doctors vide Ex.P3.
Then he came to know that accused Naresh has been arrested from Adarsh
Colony, Palwal and he has suffered injuries while he was apprehended.
He has been referred to Safdarjung Hospital from Government Hospital,
Palwal. ASI Ramdiya handed over the iron pipe used by the accused, in
the commission of offences. The same was seized vide Ex.PW6/B, in the
presence of witnesses. Finger Print Expert Gurmukh clicked the
photographs of finger-prints on iron rod and those lifted from Palwal
Hospital. Then he visited each and every spot of murders and prepared
site-plans Ex.PW6/C to Ex.PW6/H. He visited the spot where the accused
was arrested and recorded the statement of Seema wife of accused Naresh
Dhankar. He also recorded the statement of one Kapil on whom accused
attacked, to commit his murder. He also recorded the statement of one
lady Kamlesh, from whom accused Naresh demanded water to wash his
hand and feet, which were blood stained. He also recorded the statement
of a person from whom accused tried to hire a three-wheeler to abscond
from Palwal. He also recorded the statements of 2 security guards of
Omaxe City, Palwal from where the accused had proceeded with iron
pipe. ASI Rameshwar handed over him clothes of accused Naresh
Dhankar. The same were blood-stained and were seized vide memo
Ex.PJ. Siri Kant, technician handed over to him, DVR along with hard
disk of CCTV from Palwal Hospital, Palwal, which was seized vide
ExPW6/K. HC Gurmukh handed over the finger-prints of accused
collected from Palwal Hospital, Palwal and from the iron rod, which were
seized vide memo Ex.PW6/C. HC Hemraj, Incharge Cyber Cell,
Superintendent of Police, Palwal, handed over a pen-drive containing the
footage of CCTV camera installed at various places from where accused
Naresh Dhankar passed with an irod rod, which was seized vide
Ex.PW6/M. The CD of the CCTV is Ex.MO/1. The pen-drive was
Ex.MO/2. Vinod Kumar, Senior Scientific Officer of Crime Team
submitted his report to him. Police Officers ASI Ramdiya, Constable
Lukman, ASI Rajesh, HC Sandeep, SPO Har Parshad and Mohammad
Illiyas were medico-legally examined at Government Hospital, Palwal as
the accused caused injuries to them, when they were trying to apprehend
him. Accordingly, offence under Sections 186, 332, 353, 307 of IPC were
added. The accused was formally arrested on 02.01.2018. Superintendent
of Police, Palwal constituted Special Investigation Team including DSP
Incharge Cyber Cell and the witness himself. On 04.01.2018 and
05.01.2018, he moved applications before the Doctors at Safdarjung
Hospital, Delhi but the accused was unfit for statement. On 09.01.2018,
accused was discharged from Safdarjung Hospital, Delhi. He was arrested
and intimation was given to his wife. He made his disclosure statement
Ex.PW6/R. Police remand was sought from the Learned Magistrate. The
witness went to Bhiwani for receiving the service record of the accused.
On 11.01.2018 accused made second disclosure statement recorded vide
memo Ex.PW6/S. On 14.01.2018 he made third disclosure statement
Ex.PW6/T and got demarcated the spots where he had murdered Munshi
Ram, Khem Chand, Surender, Sita Ram and Subhash. On 16.01.2018,
Sanjay, Photographer handed over the photographs of the deceased and
CDs of postmortem vide memo Ex.PW6/Z. He got recorded the statement
of witnesses Virender and Mukesh under Section 164 Cr.PC before the
Learned Magistrate. On 10.03.2018, he moved an application Ex.PW6/P
before the Nodal Officer of Idea and Vodafone for receiving and
preserving the CDs, location charts and call details of the phone numbers
9728337859, 9518118498 and 9671326749 of the accused. He collected
the documents of discharge of the accused from Army vide Ex.PW6/AB
and his certificate of fitness while joining of the Government Service vide
Ex.PW6/AC. He identified the blood-stained iron rod Ex.MO/6 recovered
from the accused when he was apprehended. He also identified the blood
stained clothes of the 6 deceased and the accused. He identified the
accused in Court. During cross-examination, he stated that he could not
tell about the name of the person, who gave information to the Police
Control Room about the first incident at the Palwal Hospital, Palwal. He
admitted that there was no eye-witness, who saw the accused assaulting
the deceased. He stated that he receiving the opinion of the Doctors of
Safdarjung Hospital, in regard to the mental health of the accused on
09.01.2018. The accused was not found to be insane and thereafter, he
arrested the accused on 09.01.2018. He was suggested that he did not take
care for proper examination of the mental health of the accused from the
board of Doctors to ensure whether the offences were committed by him,
on account of unsoundness of mind. The witness denied the same. He was
suggested that he had pressurized the Doctors to give the mental fitness
report of the accused. The witness denied the same. He admitted that no
independent witness was joined during proceedings of demarcation and
disclosure statements, as nobody cooperated. He was suggested that the
murder of the 6 persons was committed by someone else and not the
accused. The witness denied the same. He was suggested that he took the
advantage of poor and mentally retarded condition of the accused and
falsely arrested him. The witness denied the same.
25.           It is pertinent to mention that the witness was recalled for
examination vide order dated 10.02.2023 under Section 311 Cr.PC. He
further proved the inquest proceedings of the 6 dead bodies and handing
over of the dead bodies. During cross-examination, he could not tell the
name of the Police Officers, who handed over to him, the iron rod. He
was suggested that the accused was mentally unstable and he was
implicated by police as there was no clue regarding the blind murders.
The witness denied the same.
26.           Again the witness was recalled on 21.02.2023. He further
proved 3 CDs and 1 pen-drive vide memos Ex.MO/1 and Ex.MO/2,
which were the CCTV footage received from the Palwal Hospital and one
house at Panchwati Chowk. He identified the accused in the CDs and pen-
drive, which was played in Court. He deposed that accused entered at
2:37 AM on 02.01.2018 and exited the hospital at around 2:49 AM. He
was also visible moving with the iron rod at around 1:20 AM. All these
CCTV footage were of time period from 1:20 AM to 2:49 AM. He also
proved CDRs of the 3 mobile phones of the accused, already exhibited
Ex.PW31/D, Ex.PW31/G, Ex.PW48/C. He also proved the location charts
of 3 mobile numbers vide Ex.PW6/AAA. He tendered the requisite
certificate under Section 65-B of The Indian Evidence Act, 1872. He
further deposed that as per the location charts, the accused was present in
the close vicinity where the 6 victims were murdered on the intervening
night of 01.01.2018/02.01.2018. He was present in the same vicinity from
1:20 AM to 7:37 AM, having a radius of 500 meters at Adarsh Colony,
Nagar, Arya Nagar, where the 6 persons were murdered. He further
deposed that murder was committed in a similar manner by repeated
blows of the iron rod. When the accused was arrested, his pants were
blood-smeared and iron rod recovered from him was also blood-stained.
There was no other complaint against any other person for committing the
above-said murders. As per          his investigation, all 6 murders were
committed by accused Naresh because of the similar nature of injuries,
similar manner and since the locations and call records of the accused
tallied with the incidents and immediately after the incident the accused
was apprehended with the blood-smeared iron rod and blood-smeared
clothes. During cross-examination, he was suggested that as per the
discharge papers of the accused from the Army Base Hospital, Delhi, he
needed psychiatric treatment on account of psychosis. The witness denied
the same. He was suggested that he had collected false evidence against
the accused despite the knowledge that he was insane. The witness denied
the same and stated that accused was totally sane and was in service at the
time of the incident. He had been regularly attending his duties at
Bhiwani, where he was posted at the time of incident. He was suggested
that the accused was falsely connected with the blind murders by the
police, as the police could not trace the real offender(s) and since the
accused was insane. The witness denied the same.
27.          PW7 ASI Sarwan Kumar, Draftsman proved scaled site-plan
of the various scenes of occurrences vide Ex.PW7/A.
28.          PW8 Ajmal proved that he identified the dead body of his
niece Anjum, at Palwal Hospital, Palwal.
29.          PW9 Satish deposed that he identified the dead body of his
brother-in-law Khem Chand at Government Hospital, Palwal.
30.          PW10 Surender deposed that on 02.01.2018, he identified the
dead body of Surender @ Baba, who was a hermit and well known to
31.          PW11 Raj Kumar son of Sita Ram deposed that on
02.01.2018, he identified the dead body of his father Sita Ram at
32.          PW12 Nanhey Ram stated that on 01.01.2018 at around 9:00
PM, his brother Munshi Ram had gone to Old GT Road to perform of his
duty of Watchman at Jain Battery. When he did not return in the morning,
they inquired and found that his dead body was kept at mortuary of
Government Hospital, Palwal. The accused committed the murder of a
lady and then his brother Munshi Ram, as he saw his photo in CCTV
camera installed in the hospital. He identified the dead body of his
brother. He was brutally murdered with assaults on his head with iron rod.
Police Officer recorded his statement Ex.PW12/A. He identified the
accused present in the Court. During cross-examination the witness stated
that the employees of the hospital showed him CCTV footage and then he
saw the accused in the Police Station. He admitted that he was not present
on the spot when the injury was caused to his brother Munshi Ram. He
also admitted that he did not notice anyone committing the murder of any
person in the CCTV footage.
33.          PW13 Dr. Charan Singh proved the MLR of ASI Ramdiya
vide Ex.PW13/C and MLR of Constable Lukman vide Ex.PW13/E.
34.          PW14 Arvind stated that on 02.01.2018, he received
information that his brother-in-law Subhash @ Shiv Nath has been
murdered by an unknown person and his dead body was kept in Civil
Hospital, Palwal. He went to the hospital and found that 5-6 other persons
also simultaneously murdered. He identified the dead body of Subhash
and received the same. He proved his statement Ex.PW14/B. Later, he
came to know that Subhash has been murdered by accused Naresh,
through CCTV footage. Subhash was murdered by inflicting injuries with
iron rod on his head. During cross-examination, he admitted that he is not
an eye-witness to the incident.
35.          PW15 EASI Ram Diya stated that on 02.01.2018, he was
posted in Police Station Camp, Palwal. He along with Constable Lukman
was present near Rasulpur Chowk when the information was received that
accused Naresh was wandering in the street after 5-6 murders. He went
along with Constable Lukman and overpowered the accused with the help
of other police officials. The accused was wearing the blood-smeared
pants and he was having an iron pipe in his hand. He attacked the police
officials and they received grievous injuries but they escaped from
receiving fatal injuries and overpowered the accused. At the time of
apprehending the accused, he fell down in the drain (Nali) and received
injuries. He was taken to Government Hospital, Palwal. First Aid was
given and then he was taken to Safdarjung Hospital, Delhi. He attacked
HC Sandeep, ASI Rajesh, SPO Ram Prasad, and Constable Lukman also.
All of them received injuries in the attack. The witness identified the
accused in Court. He proved the recovery memo Ex.PW6/B vide which
the iron pipe was recovered. During cross-examination, he stated that he
had received video footage of the accused as sent by the SHO, on his
mobile phone. 10-15 persons from the public were present on the spot, but
they did not help the Police Officer to apprehend the accused. He was
suggested that the accused was of unsound mind. The witness replied that
he cannot say that he was of unsound mind. He was suggested that the
investigation proceedings were tainted and accused had been falsely
implicated, since he was of unsound mind and the actual murderers could
not be traced by the police. The witness denied the same.
36.           PW16 Prince stated that on 02.01.2018, he identified the
dead body of person having a long beard and was aged around 50 years,
in the Government Hospital, Palwal. He had gone there for treatment of
their father. He identified the dead body as the deceased used to come in
his neighbourhood on a tea stall to have tea. He proved the inquest
proceedings Ex.PW16/A in regard to the deceased Surender @ Bhikhari
37.           PW17 Parvesh Kumar stated that on 01.01.2018, his brother-
in-law Subhash @ Shiv Nath had gone for duty at Sohna. In the morning,
he tried to contact him on mobile phone but could not connect. He
inquired from the Cold Store, Sohna where Subhash used to do work and
came to know that he had not returned to duty. Subsequently, he came to
know through the news on TV Channels that one unknown person had
murdered 5-6 persons including one Chowkidar. On receiving
information, he reached Government Hospital, Palwal and found that dead
body of Subhash @ Shiv Nath was kept in mortuary. He saw the
photograph of the accused in CCTV camera at Government Hospital,
Palwal and came to know that his name was Naresh. He identified the
dead body of Subhash. During cross-examination, he admitted that
incident did not take place in his presence.
Hospital, Palwal proved the MLRs of ASI Rajesh Kumar, HC Sandeep
Kumar and SPO Har Parshad vide Ex.PW18/B to Ex.PW18/D. He also
proved the OPD Cards of the above-said Police Officers including
39.           PW19 Shri Kant, technician deposed that he runs the
business of installing CCTV camera for last 10 years. On 02.01.2018, he
received telephonic call from Palwal Hospital, Palwal and he went to the
Hospital and prepared the DVR of the CCTV footage and deposited the
same with Sub-Inspector Jai Ram vide Ex.PW6/K, which bears his
signatures. The witness identified the hard disk, VGA Cable and DVR
produced in the Court. He also identified the accused in photographs
Ex.PW19/A to Ex.PW19/G. He identified the accused present in the
of Crime Team, FSL Madhuban proved his report Ex.PW20/A, in which,
after inspecting the scenes of occurrence, he had directed the Investigating
Officer to conduct the photography, take in possession of all the blood
stained samples, blood-stained caps, lathi and CCTV footage and called
the finger-print expert.
41.           PW21 Sanjay Kumar, Photographer proved the photography
and videography of the 6 deceased and their post-mortems vide Ex.P1 to
42.          PW22 SPO Har Prasad stated that on 02.01.2018, he was
present on Agra Chowk with HC Sandeep, ASI Mohammad Illiyas and
ASI Rajesh. They received information that accused was present in the
lane of Sukhram Hospital, Palwal. They identified the accused from the
photographs viralled on the Whatsapp. He along with the other Police
Officers went to the spot. Another PCR-3 was ahead of their vehicle.
When the PCR stopped and the Police Officers oped the door of PCR,the
accused inflicted iron rod blow on the PCR. Subsequently, all the Police
Officers tried to apprehend the accused. The accused started hitting them
with the iron rod, horizontally. The witness ducked down and entangled
his feet with police danda of fiber. On account of the same, the accused
fell down and sustained injury. One ASI from Police Station City, Palwal
snatched the iron rod. The accused was apprehended and taken in PCR.
The Police Officers could make out that the accused was the killer of the
innocent persons as his trousers were blood-stained. All the Police
Officers, who apprehended him, received injuries and were medico-
legally examined. He proved the recovery memo vide Ex.PW6/B. During
cross-examination, the witness stated that, had he not ducked down, he
would have been the 7th victim of accused, because he gave a wild and
hard blow, horizontally aiming on his head. The accused was not
unconscious but he was in complete grip of Police Officers as he was
trying to get out of the custody, after he was apprehended. They took the
accused to Government Hospital, Palwal.
43.           PW23 HC Gurmukh deposed that on 02.01.2018, he was
posted as Finger-Print Expert at District Police Office, Palwal. He
received the information from SHO, Police Station City, Palwal. He lifted
finger-prints from the glasses of ICU of Palwal Hospital, Palwal and from
the iron-rod used in the offence. He handed over the finger-prints to Sub-
Inspector Jai Ram to be sent to State Crime Bureau, Madhuban for
comparison. On 07.03.2018, he was called in the Court of Learned JMIC
where the accused was present. Finger-Prints of the accused were taken in
the Court. The same were attested. He sealed the same and handed over
the same to the Investigating Officer vide memo Ex.PW6/L. He identified
the finger-prints vide Ex.MO/X to Ex.MO/Z. During cross-examination,
he stated that the iron-rod was not covered and the same was open. He
could not tell how many finger-prints were present on the iron-pipe. He
stated that on the window of ICU of the Hospital some overlapping
finger-prints were also there. However, the finger prints lifted were clear.
44.           PW24 Virender stated that on 01.01.2018, he was present in
Palwal Hospital, Palwal. He was attending his wife Kiran, who had
delivered a baby girl. At about 2:15 AM in the intervening night of
01.01.2018/02.01.2018, he was on the ground floor and his wife was in
ICU. At that time, he heard the sound of something falling on the ground
of first floor. He along with the staff of the hospital rushed to the first
floor and found that one lady was lying on the floor in a blood-pool and
blood was oozing out from her head. Zakir, ambulance driver and he
proceeded towards the ICU. When Zakir opened the gate of ICU, the
accused, who was hiding behind the first door came out. He was holding
an iron-rod and tried to hit Zakir with the iron-rod. Zakir managed to
escape. When he tried to escape from there, the accused tried to hit him
also with the iron-rod. He ran away from there and reached Government
Hospital, Palwal, which is 500 meters away from the Palwal Hospital,
Palwal where he met Naim Singh and narrated the entire incident to him.
He made call to police helpline number 100 and informed about the
incident, which had taken place at Palwal Hospital, Palwal. The police
reached the hospital. A lady Anjum died in the incident the accused was
holding iron rod at the time of incident. His pants had blood stains. The
witness identified the accused in Court. During cross-examination, he was
confronted with his statement Ex.DX, made to the police where it was not
recorded that accused had tried to hit him or chased him. The witness was
suggested that he was a planted witness by the police, in order to solve the
case of blind murders. He denied the same. He was also suggested that he
identified the accused present in the Court as per the photographs
available on social media. The witness denied the same. He was also
suggested that he was seen the accused first time in the Court. The
witness denied the same.
45.          PW25 Zakir stated that he was present in Palwal Hospital,
Palwal and was sleeping inside the hospital, near the entrance gate. At
around 2:15 AM, he heard sound from first floor of something falling on
the ground. The staff of the hospital woke up and they all rushed to the
first floor. He found that a lady was lying on the floor in the pool of
blood,. The blood was oozing out from her head. He along with Virender
proceeded towards ICU. When he opened the first gate of ICU, the
accused who was hiding behind the door came out. He was holding an
iron-rod. He tried to hit the witness. However, he escaped and the iron-rod
struck the ground. The accused ran away towards the ground floor. After
that the police reached there. The whole incident took place in his
presence. The accused was holding the iron-rod and his pants were blood
stained. During cross-examination, he stated that he was working as
Ambulance driver in the Palwal Hospital, Palwal. He admitted that he did
not see the accused assaulting the deceased. He was suggested that he had
not seen the accused physically but only on social media. The witness
denied the same. He was suggested that he was a planted witness by the
police to falsely implicate the accused to solve the blind murder cases.
The witness denied the same.
deposed that in the intervening night of 01.01.2018/02.01.2018 at around
1:00 AM, the accused Naresh, the owner of Flat No. 583 came down and
started going outside. He had some danda-like object in his hand. The
witness asked him as to where he was going, but he did not listen to him
and went away. The witness called another security guard Laxman on his
phone and asked him about Naresh. Then he went back to the guard room.
The witness identified the accused present in Court. During cross-
examination, he stated that he does not make entry in the register about
the exit or entry of anybody. Police did not take into possession any
record of his attendance. He was suggested that he was deposing falsely,
on account of tutoring by the police. The witness denied the same.
47.          PW27 Sub-Inspector Rameshwar Singh deposed that on
02.01.2018, he was posted as Investigating Officer at Police Station
Sadar, Palwal. He remained associated in the investigation of the present
case. He along with Sub-Inspector Mohammad Illiyas reached
Government Hospital, Palwal where the accused was admitted on account
of head injuries. Subsequently, they accompanied the accused while
shifting him to Safdarjung Hospital, Delhi. The Doctors gave him the
clothes of the accused, which were blood-smeared. The same were
deposited by him and Sub-Inspector Mohammad Illiyas to Sub-Inspector
Jai Ram, who converted the same into sealed parcel with the seal of 'JRS'.
The same was taken into his possession vide seizure memo Ex.PJ. The
witness identified the clothes of the accused vide memo Ex.MO/13, which
were blood-stained. During cross-examination, he stated that the Doctors
did not seal the clothes of the accused and he brought the same from the
Hospital in a plastic bag and handed over the same to the Investigating
Officer. He had the receipt of the receiving of clothes from the Doctors.
48.          PW28 Inspector Ashwani Kumar stated that on 02.01.2018,
he was posted as SHO Police Station City, Palwal. He received telephonic
information that one person has caused grievous injuries to someone at
Palwal Hospital, Palwal. He went to the Hospital and found that a lady
Anjum had died on account of injuries on head and eyes. He started
searching the CCTV footage and received the photographs from the same.
Subsequently, he circulated the same to all the Police Stations of Palwal
for search of the accused. He also proceeded towards market for searching
the accused. On 09.01.2048, he along with Sub-Inspector Jai Ram went to
Safdarjung Hospital, Delhi. Accused Naresh was discharged from the
hospital and was arrested by the Investigating Officer. He suffered
disclosure statement in his presence. 2 days police remand was sought.
Accused was taken to Police Line. He got demarcated the scene of
occurrence at Palwal Hospital, Pawal. On completion of investigation, he
submitted the final report. The witness identified the accused. During
cross-examination, he admitted that he did not sign the disclosure
statement recorded by the Investigating Officer on 09.01.2018. No advice
was given to him by the Doctors in regard to the mental condition of the
accused. He did not receive any advice from the Doctors in this regard.
He further stated that the accused was in a normal state of mind as per his
observations and judgment. The witness was suggested that the accused
has been was scapegoat and 6 blind murders have been planted upon him.
The witness denied the same.
49.          PW29 HC Sanjay deposed that he remained associated with
the Investigating Officer when the accused was demarcated the scene of
occurrence at Palwal Hospital, Palwal vide Ex.PW28/A. On 14.01.2018,
accused made disclosure statement Ex.PW6/T and got demarcated the
scenes of occurrence vide Ex.PW6/D, Ex.PW6/U, Ex.PW6/W, Ex.PW6/X
and Ex.PW6/Y. The witness identified the accused in Court. During
cross-examination, he admitted that no independent witness was joined by
the Investigating Officer, at the time of demarcation. He was suggested
that accused was not in a fit mental condition and the Police Officers
implicated him in blind murders. The witness denied the same. He
admitted that the various scenes of occurrence were already known to the
Police Officers, prior to the demarcation by the accused.
50.          PW30 SPO Satbir Singh stated that on 02.01.2018, he along
with Sub-Inspector Jai Ram went to Palwal Hospital, Palwal, after Anjum
was murdered. They shifted the dead body to Government Hospital,
Palwal. Subsequently, 5 other dead bodies were shifted by him and Sub-
Inspector Jai Ram to Government Hospital, Palwal. The Investigating
Officer made endorsement on the complaint and handed over the same to
him for registration of FIR. During cross-examination, he stated that the
first information about the dead body was received at around 1-2:00 AM
of 02.01.2018.
proved the customer application form in the name of accused Naresh vide
memo Ex.PW31/B. He also proved the certified copy of CDR along with
customer application form of mobile No. 9671326749 of the accused from
28.12.2017 to 03.01.2018 vide memo Ex.PW31/C and Ex.PW31/D along
with certificate under Section 65-B of The Indian Evidence Act, 1872. He
also proved the CDR of mobile No. 9728337859 of accused from
28.12.2017 to 03.01.2018 along with customer application form in the
name of accused Naresh Ex.PW31/F. He proved the CDRs vide
Ex.PW31/G and certificate under Section 65-B of The Indian Evidence
Act, 1872 vide Ex.PW31/E.
52.          PW32 Sub-Inspector Manoj Kumar stated that on 09.01.2018
he remained associated with the Investigating Officer. The accused made
disclosure statements Ex.PW6/R and Ex.PW6/T and demarcated the
scenes of occurrence vide memos Ex.PW6/U to Ex.PW6/Y, on
14.01.2018. During cross-examination, he stated that no independent
witness was joined at the time of disclosure statements and demarcations.
He was suggested that the accused was falsely implicated in blind
murders as he was not in a fit mental condition. The witness denied the
same. He was suggested that all the Police Officers knew the scenes of
occurrence prior to the demarcation by the accused. The witness denied
the same.
53.          PW33 ASI Jaiveer Singh stated that on 19.03.2018 on the
directions of Investigating Officer, he visited the office of Vodafone and
collected the CDRs of mobile No. 9671326749 and 9518118498 of the
accused, which were seized by the Investigating Officer vide memo
54.           PW34 HC Raj Kumar stated that on 02.01.2018, the case
property i.e. finger-prints of iron rod and Pulindas of cloths of 6 deceased
and one Pulinda regarding accused Naresh were deposited with him as he
was Malkhana Mohrar. On 15.02.2018, the same were deposited at FSL,
Bhondsi through Constable Prince vide RC No. 103 dated 15.02.2018.
The case property remained intact, while the same was in his custody.
55.           PW35 Seema wife of accused Naresh stated that she got
married to Naresh on 03.02.2007 and they have a son out of the said
wedlock. The accused worked in Indian Army from 1999-2002. He was
discharged on medical grounds that he was unfit for service in the Army.
He joined as ADO in Agriculture Department in the year 2006. He
remained under treatment in the year 2009 from some Doctor of
Ghaziabad and then received treatment from some Maulvi and a
Homeopathic Doctor. His behaviour was not good towards her. He used
to quarrel with her. His behaviour was violent in his office. He was
demoted from the post of SDO to the post of SMS on account of his
behaviour. They got separated in the year 2010.Then, they resided
together in the year 2012 for some period. There were several interval for
such separations and living together. In the year 2013 they purchased a
plot in Omaxe City, Palwal. After 3-4 months, accused turned her out of
the said flat. In the year 2015, accused had some fight at a hotel and an
FIR was registered against him. He remained suspended after the said
FIR. Whenever, he came to her parental house, he abused her and her
family members. In the morning of 02.01.2018 at around 7-7:30 AM, she
was present at her parental house at Adarsh Colony, Palwal. She heard a
lot of noise from outside the house. Many persons, Police Officers and
media persons were present in the street. She does not have any personal
knowledge about the present offences. She identified the accused. She
was declared a hostile witness. During cross-examination by the Learned
Public Prosecutor, she stated that she was B.A., B.Ed.. She was
confronted with her statement Ex.PW35/A in which she had stated that on
29.1.2018(wrongly written as 2017, as the witness was narrating incidents
just before the occurrences of murders) accused called her and demanded
money. On 30.1.2018 (wrongly written as 2017), the accused called her at
around 2:00 PM. He told her that he came to the house in the night and
has got up just now.. She told him to eat something. He asked her to come
to the flat with Anju and his son and bring something to eat. She refused
to come. She denied making this statement. She was confronted with her
statement Ex.PW35/A in which stated that on 31.12.2018(wrongly written
as 2017) at around 1:07 PM, the accused came to the house and brought
fruits, ice-cream and cold-drink for his son. He had lunch at her parental
house and he got aggressive with her father and her sister Anju. The
witness denied making any such statement. She was confronted with her
statement, that on 02.01.2018 at 6:00 AM she heard the voices of her
husband Naresh from outside her house. She denied the same. Similarly,
she denied her statement regarding accused Naresh assaulting their
neighbour Kapil or that she heard from someone that accused had
murdered 6 people in the preceding night. She also stated that the accused
was quarrelsome and used filthy language since 2008. He used to give
beating to her. During further cross-examination by Learned Defence
Counsel, she stated that her husband was mentally sick and had been
roped in blind murders by the police. The Police did not investigate the
matter from the angle that accused was suffering from mental ailment.
56.           PW36 HC Sandeep stated that on 02.01.2018, he along with
Sub-Inspector Mohammad Illiyas, ASI Rajesh and SPO Har Parshad
received information about the accused to be present near Sukhram
Hospital. They reached near the place. The accused was having an iron
rod. His pants were blood stained. When they tried to apprehend the
accused, he attacked them with iron-rod. They received injuries on right
shoulder and left leg. At the time of apprehending the accused, he again
tried to attack them. When the accused tried to run away from there, he
fell down in the drain and received injuries on his head. The Iron-rod was
recovered from him and was submitted to the Investigating Officer, who
seized the same vide memo Ex.PW6/B and it was counter-signed by the
Police Officers. The rod was seized in a plastic pipe. The witness
identified the iron-rod in Court. He also identified the accused present in
Court. During cross-examination, he was suggested that the accused was
falsely implicated in 6 blind murders, since he was a person of unsound
mind. The witness denied the same.
57.          PW37 HC Hemraj stated that on 02.01.2018, he was posted
as Cyber Cell, Incharge, DPO Palwal. He visited the Palwal Hospital,
Palwal and obtained CCTV footage and prepared 3 CDs and one pen-
drive, which were seized by the Investigating Officer vide memo
Ex.PW6/M. The CDs were Ex.MO/1 and the pen-drive was Ex.MO/2.
During cross-examination, he stated that he did not prepare any certificate
under Section 65-B of The Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
58.          PW38 HC Ajay Kumar stated that on 10.03.2018, he went to
the office of Idea Cellular Company and obtained CDR of mobile No.
9728337859, of accused and handed over the same to the Investigating
Officer, who seized the same vide memo Ex.PW6/E.
59.          PW39 Sub-Inspector Mohammad Illiyas stated that on
02.01.2018, he along HC Sandeep, SPO Har Parshad and ASI Rajesh
apprehended the accused from the lane of Sukhram Hospital. The accused
assaulted them and tried to abscond. The accused had a blood-smeared
iron-rod and his pants were also blood-smeared. The rod was snatched
from him and it was seized vide recovery memo Ex.PW6/B. On the same
day, they took the accused to Safdarjung Hospital, Delhi. Doctors of
Safdarjung Hospital handed over blood-stained clothes of the accused to
them, which were converted into a sealed parcel by the Investing Officer.
The same was sealed with the seal of 'JRS'. He identified the accused
present in Court. During cross-examination, he stated that he did not
sustain any injury. He could not tell whether the accused was of unsound
mind. He was suggested that the accused was falsely booked to solve the
case of 6 blind murders, since he was of unsound mind. The witness
denied the same. He also stated that the clothes were brought from
Safdarjung Hospital in a plastic bag and converted into parcel by the
60.          PW40 Constable Prince proved the depositing of the case
property at FSL Bhondsi vide RC No. 103 dated 15.02.2018 and
depositing of receipt No. 72 received from RFSL Bhondsi to MM Police
Station City, Palwal. The case property remained intact while the same
was in his possession.
61.          PW41 Kamlesh stated that she had rented her house at New
Extension Colony, Palwal to accused Naresh, which was vacated by him
in the year 2014. On 02.01.2018 at around 7:00 AM, accused knocked the
door of their house. The door was transparent and she saw the accused
through the door, who was standing outside and was having an iron-rod in
his hand. His pants were blood-smeared. The accused asked about her
husband. Then he asked her to open the gate for washing his feet. She
refused to open the gate and the accused went away. She identified the
accused present in Court. During cross-examination, she could not
produce any rent-deed about the giving of her house on rent to the
accused.
62.          PW42 Kapil stated that he is a resent of Adarsh Colony,
Palwal. On 02.01.2018 he woke up at around 4:00 AM to answer the call
of nature. He saw that accused Naresh was strolling on the street and there
was fog at that time. He again slept and woke up at 6:30 AM.The accused
Naresh started abusive language and raising lalkara for his father Azad
Singh to come outside. At around 7:00 AM, accused started breaking the
gate of his house with an iron-rod. He asked the accused as to why he was
making ruckus. The accused calmed down and stated that he felt shivering
and requested for a cup of tea. The witness refused. Accused requested
him to open the gate. When he opened the gate slightly, the accused tried
to hit him with an iron-rod. The same hit on his hand and the accused
tried to forcibly open the gate. Witness bolted the gate immediately.
Accused started abusing him. He asked him to come outside and
threatened to kill him. Then he went away. The witness called his father
and told about the incident. He tried to call police but was unable to
connect. After sometime, accused Naresh returned back and again started
hitting the gate and broke the design part of the gate and then threw the
part towards him, however he managed to escape. The witness called his
friend Sunil and told him to go to Police Station and arrange telephonic
call with the Police. Then he talked to the Police Officers on the phone,
who told him that accused had brutally murdered 6 persons. They asked
him catch the accused but witness refused because the accused was
having an iron-rod and his pants were blood-stained. He requested the
Police Officers to come and told that in the meanwhile he will keep an
eye on him. Thereafter, accused Naresh proceeded towards the house of
his wife. When the accused saw him on the road, he ran towards him. The
witness ran towards the Highway. At that time, 2 police jeeps arrived and
the accused hit iron-rod on the police jeep and slipped down in the drain
and received injuries. During cross-examination, he stated that they have
a cordial relationship with the in-laws of the accused. Accused Naresh
was living separately from his wife. He sustained injury but he did not get
himself medico-legally examined. The rod of the accused dipped in the
drain, in which water was flowing. He was suggested that he prepared a
false story at the instance of Police Officers. The witness denied the same.
63.           PW43 Devi Ram deposed that he was present at his house at
New Extension Colony, Palwal. At around 7:00 AM, accused came to his
house and called his son Raju, but he came outside and saw that accused
was having an iron rod of around 4 feet. He asked him as to what is the
matter. The accused asked him to drop him at Ballabgarh. The witness
said that he did not have any vehicle. Then accused went away. The
witness did not notice any blood on clothes of the accused. He was
suggested that he was deposing falsely at the instance of the police. He
denied the same.
proved the CDR Exx.PW31/D, customer application form Ex.PW31/C of
the mobile No. 9671326749 of accused. Also, he proved the certificate
under Section 65-B of The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 Ex.PW31/B.
65.           PW45 Learned JMIC proved the recording of the statement
under Section 164 Cr.PC of witnesses Virender and Zakir vide
Ex.PW45/E and Ex.PW45/F, respectively.
66.          PW46 ASI Virender Singh stated that on 09.01.2018, he
remained associated in the investigation. The accused was brought from
Safdarjung Hospital to Police Line Palwal. He made disclosure statement
Ex.PW6/R. On 11.01.2018, he made disclosure statement Ex.PW6/S. He
got demarcated the all scenes of occurrence. The witness identified the
accused present in Court. He admitted that no public witness was joined
by the Investigating Officer, at the time of disclosure statements or the
demarcations. He was suggested that accused was falsely implicated in
blind murders, since he was not in a fit mental condition. The witness
denied the same.
67.          PW47 Ramesh Chand, Incharge Finger-Print Bureau proved
the finger-print report Ex.PW47/A and the comparison chart Ex.PW47/B
and Ex.PW47/D. He also proved the photographs of the finger-prints.
During cross-examination, he admitted that the no iron-rod or any other
object from where the chances prints were allegedly to be lifted, were
produced before him.
68.          PW48 Sandeep Sharma, Nodal Officer, Reliance Jio proved
the CDR of mobile No. 9518118498 of accused Naresh from 28.12.2017
to 03.01.2018 vide Ex.PW48/C. He also proved the customer application
form in the name of accused vide Ex.PW48/B and certificate under
Section 65-B of The Indian Evidence Act Ex.PW48/A.
69.          PW49 Gopi Chand stated that on 02.01.2018, he received
information that deceased Surender was having tea at tea stall near Police
Station City Palwal, when the accused Naresh killed him like other
persons. He identified the dead body of Surender. During cross-
examination, he admitted that he did not witness the incident.
Idea Ltd. proved location chart of both the mobile numbers vide
Ex.PW31/H and Ex.PW31/I. He tendered certificate under Section 65-B
of The Indian Evidence Act Ex.PW31/J. It is pertinent to mention that the
witness was recalled under Section 311 Cr.PC to prove the location
charts.. The location chart of the mobile No. 9728337859 was at Bhiwani
till 28.12.2017 and after that there was no call from the said mobile
number. The location of mobile No. 9671326749 was at Rasulpur Road,
near Jama Masjid, Old GT Road from 2:00 AM to 4:00 AM on the
intervening night of 01.01.2018/02.01.2018. From 4:26 AM to 8:33 AM,
the location was at Moti Colony, Agra Chowk, New Colony, Rasulpur
Road etc. places. The location were as per the calls made from the said
mobile numbers.
Bhondsi proved the serology report Ex.PW51/A. As per her report, the
clothes of the deceased and the accused were blood-stained and the blood-
stains were of human origin. Also, the iron-rod had blood-stains, which
were of human origin. During cross-examination, she stated that the blood
groups on the clothes of the deceased were of Group-AB and Group-A
whereas the blood on the clothes of accused was of Ground-B.
proved the call location charts of mobile No. 9518118498 of the accused
vide Ex.PW48/D. He tendered certificate under Section 65-B of The
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 Ex.PW48/E. The mobile phone was located at
Adarsh Colony, Palwal from 4:40 AM to 6:24 AM. The locations were as
per the calls made from the above-said phone number.
Superintendent,     District    Jail,   Faridabad   proved  the  report   of
Superintendent      District   Jail,   Faridabad   Ex.C1   Report   of   the
Superintendent District Jail, Faridabad, Ex.C2 medical report and Ex.C3
treatment records in regard to the accused, who was lodged in District
75.           It has been submitted by Learned Public Prosecutor assisted
by Learned Counsel for the Complainant, that in the intervening night of
01.01.2018/02.01.2018 information was received to PW6 Sub-Inspector
Jai Ram in regard to murder at Palwal Hospital, Palwal, in front of ICU
on first floor of the hospital. The Investigating Officer went to the spot
and found that a lady Anjum has expired. Subsequently, her brother-in-
law Taslim moved a complaint Ex.P4. He was an eye-witness and
identified the accused. He saw the accused immediately after he had
murdered Anjum, his sister-in-law. He also tried to assault PW3 Taslim
with an iron rod. He was hiding in the bathroom and when Taslim came
there, he came out and striked a blow with iron-rod but Taslim escaped.
Similarly, he attacked upon PW 24 Virender,an attendant of a patient,
who was present in the Hospital. He also attacked PW 25 Zakir, the
Ambulance driver of the hospital. These 3 eye-witnesses have clearly
deposed that accused was seen near the dead body of Anjum, which was
lying in pool of blood, immediately after the assault. The accused had
blood-smeared iron-rod in his hand and his pants were also blood-
smeared. PW26 Mukesh, another eye-witness, the Security Guard has
deposed that on 02.01.2018 1:00 AM, accused Naresh came down from
his Flat No.583 and he was going out of the residential society with a
Danda like object in his hand. He asked the accused as to where he was
going but he did not reply. Then he went to Palwal Hospital, Palwal
brutally murdered Anjum and subsequently, committed brutal murders of
5 persons in the vicinity of 500 meters. Then he went in front of house of
his in-laws. His wife was residing with her father and both were
separated. PW42 Kapil, a neighbor of his wife deposed that he saw
Naresh roaming in the street at around 4:00 AM. Then he saw him at
around 6:30 AM having a blood-smeared iron-rod in his hand and his
pants were also blood-smeared. He hit the Gate of house of Kapil with
iron rod and abused him. Subsequently he was pacified and Kapil partly
open the gate. Accused inflicted a rod blow on his hand. He again closed
the gate and accused went away after abusing him. He had also gone to
the house of PW41 Kamlesh, his earlier landlord. He asked for tea and
water to wash his hand and feet. However, Kamlesh refused to open the
door. She also saw him holding the blood-smeared iron-rod and his pants
were also blood-smeared. At the same time, he also went to the house of
Devi Ram, in the same vicinity. He asked Devi Ram to drop him at
Ballabhgarh, Faridabad, but Devi Ram stated that he did not have any
vehicle. The accused went away. There is no cross-examination of
defence on this point that the above-said witnesses did not see the accused
with blood smeared iron-rod and pants. These facts would be deemed to
be admitted by the defence. PW3 ASI Jaiveer Singh collected the call
detail records of the mobile phone of accused from Vodafone and JIO.
PW34 HC Raj Kumar and PW40 Constable Prince deposed the case
property in FSL. They deposed that same remained intact in their custody.
The blood stained clothes of the deceased and accused were produced in
the Court and proved vide Ex.MO/1 to Ex.MO/3. The blood-smeared
iron-rod, which was used in offence was produced in Court and was
proved vide memo Ex.MO/6. PW15 EASI Ramdiya, PW22 SPO Har
Parshad, PW36 HC Sandeep and PW39 Mohammad Illiyas were among
the 6 Police Officers, who apprehended the accused at around 7:30 AM,
from Adarsh Colony, Palwal in front of house of his wife. All the Police
Officers identified the accused. All of them deposed that he was having
blood smeared iron-rod in his hand and his pants were also blood
smeared. He tried to assault them on head with the iron rod, and kill them,
but they escaped any fatal blow. All the Police Officers received injuries
while apprehending the accused. During apprehension, the accused fell
down in the drain and suffered head injury. They proved the recovery of
iron rod from accused vide memo Ex.PW6/B. PW4 Dr. Mukesh Sarang
and PW5 Dr. Raj Kumar proved the postmortem reports of the 6 deceased
namely Anjum, Khem Chand, Surender, Subhash, Munshi and Sita Ram.
The cause of death of all the deceased was ante-mortem head injuries,
sufficient in ordinary course of nature to death. In fact, all the deceased
expired on the spot, on account of multiple injuries on their heads caused
by iron-rod, used by the accused. PW13 Dr. Charan Singh and PW18 Dr.
Shiv Shankar proved the MLRs of 6 Police Officers, who apprehended
the accused and received injuries while apprehending him. The above-
said 6 Police Officers have specifically deposed that accused tried to kill
them also, by aiming assaults on their head, while they were trying to
apprehend him. PW8 to PW12, PW41, PW17 and PW19 are the persons
relating to the deceased, who identified the dead bodies. PW31
Deepak Kumar and PW52 Adesh Chauhan, are the Nodal Officers of
Vodafone and JIO etc. service providers, who duly proved the call detail
records, customer application forms and location charts of 3 mobile
numbers of the accused i.e. 9518118498, 9728337859 and 9671326749.
They specifically deposed that as per the customer application forms, SIM
Cards were issued in the name of accused. All of them tendered the
requisite certificates under Section 65-B of The Indian Evidence Act,
1872. They have proved that the location of the accused 2:00 AM to 7:00
AM was in the same vicinity where all the 6 murders were committed.
The same are within a radius of 500 meters. PW47 Ramesh Chand proved
his finger-print report Ex.PX as per which the finger-prints on the iron
rod, the finger-prints lifted from the glass of the door of ICU and the
specimen finger-prints of the accused matched. The said finger-prints
were lifted and secured by PW23 HC Gurmukh. PW51 Anju Bala, Senior
Scientific Officer Serology proved the serology report Ex.PW51/A, as per
which the clothes of deceased, clothes of accused and iron rod had human
blood on them. The blood groups on the iron rod could not be matched.
She specifically deposed that the same could not be matched, on account
of mixing of blood. The reason being blood of 6 dead persons got mixed
on the iron-rod. Hence, the blood group remained inconclusive. PW20
Vinod Kumar proved the Scene of Crime Report Ex.PW21/A. As per the
report, all the murders were committed by a serial killer in a similar
manner by assaulting similarly injuries. PW46 ASI Virender Singh
proved the disclosure statements of accused Ex.PW6/R and Ex.PW6/S, as
per which, he admitted that he killed the 6 persons and got demarcated all
the scenes of occurrence. Similarly, PW39 Sub-Inspector Mohammad
Illiyas proved the disclosure statements and the demarcations made by the
accused. PW27 ASI Rameshwar received the blood-stained clothes of the
accused. He deposited the same to the Investigating Officer. PW28
Inspector Ashwani deposed that at around 3:00 AM on 02.01.2018, the
Investigating Officer called him and told him about the incident in Palwal
Hospital, Palwal. He immediately reached there and received photographs
of the accused from the CCTV footages of the hospital. The accused was
seen roaming with an iron-rod, in the said footages. The SHO
immediately viralled the photographs on Whatsapp numbers of all Police
Officers. As a result of the same, the accused could be identified after a
span of 4 hours because it was time of night and there was dense fog. The
visibility was extremely poor. PW29 HC Sanjay also proved the
demarcation done by the accused. PW19 Shri Kant, technician proved the
Hard Disk and the DVR of CCTV footages, which was collected from the
CCTV cameras of the Palwal Hospital, Palwal. PW37 HC Hemraj,
Incharge Cyber Cell, District Police Palwal proved that he prepared 3
CDs (Ex.MO/1) and 1 pen-drive (Ex.MO/2), from the above-said CCTV
footages, in which the accused is clearly seen entering the Hospital with
an iron-rod and returning afterwards and running away from the hospital
after the murder of Anjum was committed by him. PW21 Sanjay Kumar
proved photographs and videography of the dead bodies and their
postmortem proceedings. PW42 Kapil deposed that the earlier accused
was abusing him and then he acted to have been pacified. Subsequently
when PW Kapil opened the door of his house, he again assaulted and
Kapil closed the door. This conduct shows that the accused was
calculative and was of sound mind. The accused was apprehended with
the weapon of offence, which was blood-smeared and his clothes were
also blood-smeared. The depositions of eye-witnesses corroborate the
medical evidence as well as locations of the mobile phone of the accused
from 1:25 AM, when the accused came from the society till the time, he
was apprehended at around 7-7.30 AM. He was seen by various witnesses
along with weapon of offence and blood-smeared clothes. He also
committed deadly assault with rod on the heads of Police Officers but
they ducked and saved themselves. He attempted to kill them also. Thus,
the prosecution proved each and every aspect of the case that the accused
Naresh committed 6 murders between 1:20 AM to 7:00 AM within the
same vicinity. The prosecution has proved its case beyond any reasonable
doubt. The accused deserves to be convicted for the charges levelled
against him under for commission of offences punishable under Sections
302, 307, 332, 353, 186 of IPC.
76.          Rebutting the above-said arguments, it has been submitted by
Learned Defence Counsel, that the entire case of the prosecution is based
on circumstantial evidence, as none of the witnesses saw the accused
assaulting any deceased. The mobile locations are not sufficient to
connect the accused with the offence of murder. The witnesses are planted
witnesses. The police was unable to trace the actual murderer and 6 blind
murders were falsely planted on the accused because he was as insane
person. There is no direct evidence against the accused. Even if the
accused is connected to the murders by way of evidence, the fact that he
was insane can be culled out from the evidence led by the prosecution
itself, which includes the medical evidence. Even the depositions of the
witnesses show that the accused was of unsound mind when they saw
him. Ex.PW6/A is the proceedings of police, on the complaint of PW3
Taslim. The same was started at 11:00 AM on 02.01.2018 i.e. after 8
hours of the receiving of information by the Police Officers. The FIR was
belated and was registered at 11:00 AM. The said delay of 8 hours has not
been explained by the Investigating Agency.
77.           PW3 Taslim, the complainant says that he chased the accused
at Palwal Hospital, Palwal whereas PW25 Zakir says that accused chased
him. Thus, there is contradiction in the testimonies of both the witnesses.
In fact, the complaint made by the complainant is tutored by the Police to
falsely implicate the accused in 6 blind murders. The Complainant Taslim
has admitted in his cross-examination that the fact in the complaint
regarding the murders of other 5 persons was written by him as told to
him by the police. He also admitted that he saw the accused for the first
time, while making deposition in the Court. He could not specify, where
the CCTV cameras were installed in the hospital. He admitted that he was
not visibile in the CCTV footage. He could not comment whether the
mental condition of the accused was normal. He did not notice blood on
his clothes. No assault on PW3 Taslim is visible in the CCTV footage.
Many dogs were also killed in the said night but the witness did not
depose any such fact. The same shows that he is deposing falsely.
78.           The PW Dr.Mukesh and PW Dr.Raj Kumar, the Doctors who
conducted the postmortem of deceased admitted that no weapon was
shown to them by the Police and they did not send the hearts of the
deceased for viscera report. PW6 Sub-Inspector Jai Ram, Investigating
Officer deposed that medical assistance was provided to the accused by
the Doctors. However, there is no such document which bears the
signature of any Doctor. As per the deposition of Investigating Officer, he
found the 5 dead bodies while searching for the accused. The route of the
accused has been deposed from Omaxe City, Palwal to Panchwati
Mandir, to Old GT Road, to Rasulpur Chowk, to Mayur Hotal and to GT
Road. The same does not tally with the location charts of the mobile
phones of the accused. The Investigating Officer also stated that a case of
assault was registered against accused Naresh at Police Station Camp,
Palwal. The details of the said case have not been proved by the
prosecution.
79.           PW42 Kapil, the alleged eye-witness has admitted that rod
held by the accused dipped in the drain and water was flowing in the
drain. In these circumstances, it is not possible that the finger-prints were
lifted on the rod. All the Police Officer stated that rod was handed over by
ASI Ramdiya to Investigating Officer Jai Ram, the rod was not sealed and
5-6 Police Officers handled it. Thus, it is not possible that the accurate
finger-prints were lifted from the rod. In fact, the weapon of offence was
planted on the accused. The alleged demarcation memos of the place of
occurrences at the behest of accused did not lead to any discovery of any
new fact. Admittedly, all the Police Officers already new the scenes of
occurrences as the Investigating Officer had already made site-plans. PW6
Sub-Inspector Jai Ram has deposed that he inquired about the mental
condition of the accused and received his discharge papers from Army
Base Hospital. The discharge report running in around 50 pages, clearly
shows that accused was suffering from non-organic psychosis. The
alleged medical certificate of the accused of joining of Government
Service again in the year 2006 is a self-declaration and undertaking and it
does not prove that accused was sane at that time. Also, PW6 Sub-
Inspector Jai Ram, the Investigating Officer has made unbelievable
deposition that accused killed Anjum and left hospital at 2:49 AM and he
received the information of other 5 persons at 3:00 AM. It is not possible
that the accused killed 6 persons in 11 minutes. In fact, the accused was
on the same route on which the Investigating Officer was searching for
him, as deposed by the Investigating Officer i.e. Old GT Road. There is
no explanation as to why the Investigating Officer could not apprehend
the accused when he was close by and on the same street. In fact, the
entire story of the prosecution is false. Investigating Officer met the
complainant Taslim at 3:00 AM but still no complaint was received by
him. The presence of Taslim, the complainant at Palwal Hospital, Palwal
is doubtful. Even the Investigating Officer identified the accused from the
photographs seen on Whatsapp, viralled by the SHO after allegedly
receiving them from CCTV footages. There was no other clue with the
Investigating Officer to identify the accused. At 7:00 AM, when the
Police Officers reached the spot, allegedly accused was loudly crying
Savdhaan when the people gathered there. The same shows that the
accused was insane. The fact of his insanity can be culled out, from his
conduct in judicial lock-up and the manner in which he loudly talked
while being produced in the Court and also from the reports from the
Army Hospital and the Jail Hospital.
80.          None of the eye-witness saw any offence of murder. There
were 10-15 persons in the hospital on the ground floor. The accused did
not hit anyone. Even if there is no documentary evidence on the file that
the accused was insane, the same is proved by the nature of events. The
degree of evidence to be led by the accused is of preponderance of
probability that he was insane and not beyond reasonable doubt. His
conduct and the appearance show that he was insane at the time of the
incident. He killed some stray dogs also, in the same night but the Police
Officers concealed this fact deliberately, to show that the accused was of
sound mind. There is no document to prove that the accused was of sound
mind on 02.01.2018. A medical opinion of 09.01.2018 is there but the
same is inconclusive. In fact, the accused should have been thoroughly
examined on 02.01.2018 itself. Even in the report dated 09.01.2018, the
Doctors did not say that the accused was mentally fit. In fact, the accused
was made a scapegoat by the police since he was insane and 6 blind
murders were planted on him. There are material contradictions in the
deposition of witnesses and there is no evidence connecting the accused
with the offences. The Investigating Officer admits that he did not seal the
weapon of offence. The location of the accused are also of Moti Colony,
Agra Chowk, New Colony, Rasulpur Road etc. where no incident took
place. Hence, the version of the prosecution cannot be relied upon. The
other persons present at the hospital were not made witnesses for
prosecution, which is a major lacuna in the investigation. The
Investigating Officer did not receive the CCTV footage along with the
requisite certificate under Section 65-B of The Indian Evidence Act,
1872. He did not show the iron-rod to the Doctors, who conducted the
postmortem. Since, the Investigating Officer came to know that the
accused was suffering from psychosis, he should have got conducted his
check-up from a psychiatrist. The same was incumbent upon the
Investigating Officer. He should have investigated the case from all
angles but he failed to do so. The accused regularly received psychiatric
treatment in the Jail, after few days of his lodging there. Also, in the
discharge papers of the accused of retirement from Army, it is opined that
accused would need psychiatric treatment in future. However, no opinion
was received by the Investigating Officer as to whether the psychosis of
accused has aggravated or diminished.
81.          PW12 Nanhey Ram made his improvements in his deposition
to the effect that he saw the accused committing murder in CCTV camera.
No such CCTV footage is available till date. PW13 Dr. Charan Singh and
PW18 Dr. Shiv Shankar both deposed that the injuries received by the 6
Police Officers were mostly of complaint of pain. They also admitted that
the complaint of pain does not come within the definition of injury.
82.           PW15 ASI Ramdiya, who apprehended the accused has
clearly deposed that he had fallen down at the time of apprehension by
Police Officers and he received head injury. Hence, blood on the pants of
deceased could be his own blood. For the said reason, the blood groups on
his clothes did not match with the blood groups of deceased. The blood
report is inconclusive and cannot be relied upon. PW15 ASI Ramdiya
could not say whether the accused was of unsound mind at the time of
apprehension. In fact, the Police Officers have concealed the fact of
insanity of accused. PW19 Shri Kant stated that he handed over the
CCTV footage to the Investigating Officer Jai Ram, whereas the
Investigating Officer Jai Ram says that same were received by SHO
Ashwani Kumar. The same is a material contraction. PW20 Vinod
Kumar, Senior Scientific Officer stated that one blood-stained lathi was
also present on the spot. However, the same was not seized. In fact, the
said blood-stained lathi may be the weapon of offence. He deposed that
SHO seized the lathi in his presence but the same was not seized or
produced by the police. It is possible that there may be some unknown
person, who used the lathi and committed the murders and the said
murderer could not be traced. PW22 SPO Har Parshad says that the
accused committed the assault on them and they overpowered him
whereas PW39 Sub-Inspector Mohammad Illiyas and PW15 ASI
Ramdiya made a contractory deposition that they overpowered the
accused.
83.           PW23 HC Gurmuk, who lifted the finger-prints stated that on
02.01.2018, he remained with the Investigating Officer from 10:00 AM to
9:00 PM. When the rod was already dipped in the water, no finger-print
could be lifted from the same. He also deposed that he met the accused at
9:00 PM whereas accused was already admitted in Safdarjung
Hospital,Delhi at that time. He also stated that the iron-rod was not sealed
and the rod was in the hands of Police Officers and it was covered with a
cloth. He could not tell whether the said cloth was sealed or not. In these
circumstances, multiple finger-prints should have been detected on the
rod, but the same were never detected.
84.           PW24 Virender has made material improvement in his
deposition before the Court to the effect that, he had stated in the
complaint that the accused tried to hit him and also chased him. No such
fact was mentioned in the complaint. He is an unreliable witness. His
version is totally different from the version of other eye-witness PW3
Taslim and PW25 Zakir. The 3 witnesses materially contradicted each
other in regard to the occurrence alleged at Palwal Hospital, Palwal. In
fact, they are planted witnesses and the accused has been made a
scapegoat in case of 6 blind murders. PW26 Mukesh Kumar could not
prove any attendance register or record that he was present on duty at
Omaxe City, Palwal on the night of incident. He could not prove any
entry or exit record of accused, as alleged by him. PW27 Sub-Inspector
Rameshwar Singh stated that he did not seize the clothes of accused at
Safdarjung Hospital, Delhi but brought the same in plastic bag. In fact, the
Doctors should have sealed the clothes of accused and handed over the
same to the Police Officers. Hence, there are chances of tampering with
the clothes of the accused as no seizure memo was prepared in regard to
the same. Whereas the eye-witness alleged that only pants of the accused
were blood-smeared, as per the serology report all the clothes were blood-
smeared. The same reflects that tampering of the clothes was done by the
Police Officer, to implicate the accused. PW28 SHO Ashwani Kumar
stated that he reached the Hospital at 2:45 AM. As per the case of the
prosecution, the accused was present at the hospital till 2:49 AM. In these
circumstances, the SHO should have apprehended him. The SHO stated
that the disclosure of the accused was recorded at Safdarjung Hospital
whereas the other witnesses says that disclosure was recorded at Police
Line, Palwal. The SHO has wrongly opined that the accused was normal
as per his observation and judgment. Some of the Police Officers says that
accused had bandage on his head, at the time of disclosure statement
whereas the other says that they could not tell the same. Thus, the version
of the prosecution is doubtful. PW29 HC Sanjay, the witness of disclosure
statements and demarcation memos, admitted that no independent witness
was joined at the time of disclosures and demarcations. Admittedly, all
the scenes of occurrence were already known to the Police Officers, prior
to the demarcation by the accused. Hence, the demarcation cannot be
relied upon. PW30 SPO Satbir Singh stated that the Investigating Officer
came to know about the incident at 1/2:00 AM, which is in gross
contradiction of deposition of PW6 Sub-Inspector Jai Ram that he came to
know of the incident at 3:00 AM.
85.          PW32 Sub-Inspector Manoj could not tell about the time of
start and end of investigation. He admitted that no witness was joined at
the time of demarcation by the accused. He admitted that no Doctor was
joined in the investigation.
86.          PW35 Seema, the wife of the accused Naresh deposed that
accused was suffering from psychiatric problem and he received treatment
from some Doctor at Ghaziabad, from a Maulvi and a Homeopathic
Doctor. However, police did not investigate about the mental illness of the
accused. The medical treatment records were there but the Investigating
Officer did not receive the same.
87.          PW36 HC Sandeep, one of the officials, who apprehended
the accused could not depose whether the accused was of unsound mind.
He admitted that an iron-rod was seized from accused but it was sealed
afterwards at Government Hospital, Palwal.
88.          PW37 HC Hemraj admitted that he did not give any
certificate under Section 65-B of The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 while
handing over 3 CDs and 1 pen-drive.
89.          PW39 Sub-Inspector Mohammad Illiyas also stated that he
did not know whether the accused was of unsound mind. He also
corroborated that clothes of the accused were brought from Safdarjung
Hospital, Palwal in a plastic bag. The same implies that the clothes were
not properly seized.
90.          PW41 Kamlesh, the earlier landlord of the accused is a
tutored witness.
91.          PW42 Kapil, the neighbour of the wife of the accused
deposed that the accused started breaking the gate of his house with the
iron rod and abused him. He also admitted that there was no enmity of the
accused with him. This conduct shows that the accused was insane. He
alleged the he received injury on his hand, but no MLR is there. He also
deposed the rod of accused dipped in the drain into flowing water. Hence,
there is no possibility of lifting of finger-prints from the rod. PW43 Devi
Ram another eye-witness did not notice any blood on the rod. The same
raises doubts in regard to the version of the prosecution.
92.          PW47 Ramesh Chand, the finger-print expert deposed that all
the sample photographs of the finger-prints were not returned by him and
only one was sent. Hence, his report is unreliable.
93.          PW51 Anju Bala, Serology Expert admitted that blood on the
iron rod could not be connected to the blood group of any of the deceased.
The blood on the pants of the accused was of blood Group-B. In fact the
same was on account of injury received by the accused, while he was
being arrested.
Jail, Faridabad proved the medical reports of the accused which say that
he was disoriented to time, place and person. The same proves that
accused is a psychiatric patient. The report dated 28.01.2023 of the Jail
says that accused is suffering from bipolar disorder psychiatric disorder.
The same has deteriorated. The report also says that he was disoriented to
time, place and person. Since the time, the accused has been lodged in
Faridabad Jail, he has been regularly receiving psychiatric treatment.
Thus, the entire record and the conduct of the accused proves that he was
insane at the time of incident. The Army discharge report says that
accused would need psychiatric treatment in future. No time period of the
future treatment was mentioned in the report. The same implies that the
treatment was required for an indefinite period. The summary report of
discharge from the Army shows that the accused was irritable,
aggressive,violent and suffered from lack of sleep. The report shows that
there is a family history of mental illness. The accused was suffering from
excitatory psychosis. Thus, it is proved that the accused was falsely
implicated in blind murders due to insanity. There is no direct evidence
against the accused. He is not visible in any footage while assaulting any
victim. No eye-witness saw him committing any assault. The disclosure
of the accused says that he had made up his mind to kill anyone he meets
but he did not so as he did not kill everyone he met on that night. Hence,
the disclosure statement does not match the conduct of the accused.
Though it is not imperative to prove the motive as to why the accused
committed the said offence, still it is an admitted fact that the accused did
not know any of the deceased, and had no motive to kill them. Concluding
the arguments it was submitted that there is no evidence to connect the
accused with the alleged offences.Still, if the Court comes to the
conclusion that the accused committed the murders, he must be given the
benefit of insanity under Section 84 of IPC.
95.          Where a previous history of the insanity of the accused is
revealed, it is the duty of the investigator to get the accused medico-
legally examined immediately and place the evidence before the Court.
The accused taking the defence of insanity is to establish his defence only
by preponderance of probability, like in a civil proceeding. Where the
insanity of the accused at the time of the incident is doubtful, benefit of
Section 84 of IPC should be given to him. In these regards, reliance has
been placed on Devidas Loka Rathod v. State of Maharashtra Criminal
Appeal No. 814 of 2017, Date of Decision 02.07.2018 (SC), Ghana Gogoi
v. State of Assam Crl. Appeal No. 104(J) of 2008, Date of Decision
18.06.2013 (Guhati), Mohan Lal v. State, Through P.P. Criminal Appeal
No. 6 of 2020, Date of Decision 27.01.2022 (Rajasthan) and Kalam Gulab
Patel v. The State of Maharashtra, Criminal Appeal No. 154 of 2014, Date
of Decision 27.09.2017 (Bombay). With these submissions, it was prayed
that the accused deserves to be acquitted of the charges levelled against
96.           I have heard the Learned Public Prosecutor assisted by the
Leaned Counsel for the Complainant and the Learned Defence Counsel
and perused the case file carefully.
97.           The case of the prosecution is that accused Naresh committed
6 murders in the intervening night of 01.01.2018/02.01.2018 by assaulting
the victims on their heads with iron rod and he was apprehended in the
morning. On the other hand, two-fold defence have been taken by the
accused. The first defence is that the 6 murders were blind murders and
the same have been falsely planted upon the accused since the police
could not trace the actual murderer(s). The second defence raised by the
accused is that he was suffering from insanity at the time of the incidents
and he must be given the benefit of insanity under Section 84 of IPC, in
case the Court comes to the conclusion that the accused committed the
offences.
98.           Considering the case of the prosecution and that of defence,
the findings of this Court are as under.
99.          The admitted facts of the case are that in the intervening
night of 01.01.2018/02.01.2018, 6 persons were murdered within a radius
of around 500 meters in Palwal City, in an identical manner i.e. repeated
assaults on the head with a blunt weapon. The skulls of all the 6 victims
were crushed and brain issues were missing. Also, there was fractures on
hands and legs of the victims.
100.         As reflected in the PMRs of the deceased, all injuries were
caused by blunt weapon. The injuries of each victim are detailed below.
Injuries of deceased Anjum:
1.Lacerated wound right side forehead 5x2 inches x bone deep some part
of soft and hard tissue missing.
2.Lacerated wound below right eye over cheek 4x1cmxbone deep.
3.Lacerated wound over forehead over injury No.1 3x1cmxbone.
4.Diffuse swelling over right wrist with a bruise over it.
5.Lacerated wound left leg lower 1/3rd with diffuse swelling.
6.Contusion 2x2 cm surrounded by a bruise 8x6cm over medial aspect left
thigh upper 1/3rd.
8.Abrasion B/L chest with deformity upper 1/3rd.
10.Fracture frontal bone along with maxilla.
11.Fracture right ulna lower end.
12.Fracture both bone lower and left leg tibia and fibula.
13.Fracture 2, 3 and 4th ribs seen, haemothorax seen.
On dissection of above all injuries found extravasation of blood in the soft
tissue with.
1. Crush injury left frontotemporoparietal bone with crushing of
underlying brain with fracture left zygoma, fracture left maxilla, left
eyeball missing from socket, fracture bilateral nasal bones.
2. A 5cm x 3cm lacerated wound over left occipital region.
3. A 2 cm x 1cm lacerated wound over Columbia of upper lip.
4. A 2cm x 1cm lacerated wound over anterior aspect of middle one third
left leg.
1. Crush injury of skull with fracture of bilateral fronto-temporo-parietal
bones with crushing of underlying brain with part of brain missing.
Fracture of left maxilla and bilateral nasal bones.
2. A 5cm x 2cm superficial burn left upper thing anterior aspect.
1. Crush injury of left frontotemporoparietal bone with crushing of
underlying brain tissue with part of brain tissue missing from cranial
cavity and it eyeball sunken in.
2. A 5cm x 4cm lacerated wound right temporal area with fracture of
underlying right temporal bone.
3. A 3cm x 1.5 cm lacerated wound anterior aspect of middle one third
left leg with fracture left tibia present.
4. A 2cm x 2cm lacerated wound over anterior aspect of right leg middle
one third with fracture of right tibia present.
5. A 1cm x 1cm lacerated wound over middle one third right forearm, on
dissection fraction of both bones right forearm present.
Injuries of deceased Surender:
1.A compound injury over forehead and mid parietal region of skull along
with deformity seen, some part of soft and hard tissue missing, brain
tissue contused, multiple blood clots seen.
2.Bruise over right forearm along with deformity in middle.
3.Abrasions upper 1/3rd legs and lower 1/3 thigh B/L.
4.Lacerated wound right foot dorsum 6x1inchexmuscle deep.
On dissection of above all injuries found extravasation of blood in the soft
tissue along with fracture right both bone i.e. ulna and fibula shaft, lower
and of B/L femur and B/L both bone B/L legs upper ends.
1.Lacerated wound over scalp B/L parietal region 4.5inchx1inchxbone
deep, another 5x1inchesxbone deep.
2.Lacerated wound left side of forehead over eyebrow 2cmx1cm and
3x1cmxbone deep respectively.
3.Abrasions right thigh medially 7inchesx1inches approx.
4.Abrasions left thigh lower 1/3rd medialy and patteller region 4x2cm
approx.
101.         On dissection of above all injuries found extravasation of
blood in the soft tissue with multiple fracture scalp bones, some parts of
soft and hard tissue missing, brain tissue contused and multiple clots seen.
102.         Cause of death in all cases was shock and hemorrhage as a
result of ante-mortem head injuries, sufficient in ordinary course to cause
death. All the victims expired on the spot and instantly.
Information and search
103.         The information of the first murder was received to the
Investigating Officer PW6 Sub-Inspector Jai Ram, at around 3 AM, when
he was on crime patrol duty. He reached Palwal Hospital, Palwal, where
Anjum, the attendant of ICU patient was found to be murdered by some
unknown person. The Sub-Inspector informed SHO Police Station City,
Palwal, who immediately came to the spot and checked the CCTV
cameras and he took the photographs of the accused, who was seen
roaming with an iron rod, in the hospital and he was also seen chasing a
few persons in the Hospital corridor, with an iron-rod in his hand. The
SHO took the screen shots of the photographs of the assailant and
circulated the same on Whatsapp of the Police Officers and all the Police
Stations of Palwal. The Police Officers started searching for the accused.
Before the first body could be taken to mortuary, 5 similar dead bodies of
victims murdered in an identical manner, were found in the same vicinity,
of Deceased; Munshi Ram, Surender @ Bhikhari Baba, Subhash, Sita
Ram and Khem Chand. The search for the accused continued during the
night, which was admittedly a dense foggy night and visibility was
extremely poor i.e. up to 5-10 feet only, as deposed by several witnesses.
Eyewitness accounts and CCTV Footages
104.            To prove that the accused Naresh committed the said
murders, the prosecution has got examined 3 eye-witnesses from Palwal
Hospital, Palwal namely PW3 Taslim, who moved the Complaint in the
morning, PW25 Zakir and PW24 Virender. These 3 eye-witnesses have
stated     that   around  2:38    AM       in the  intervening   night   of
01.01.2018/02.01.2018, they were present on the ground floor of hospital
when they heard something falling on the ground. They rushed to the first
floor and saw that Anjum was lying on the floor in a blood pool. Accused
Naresh, who was hiding in the bathroom , suddenly came out and attacked
them with an iron-rod. They ran and saved themselves and the accused
ran away. All the 3 eye-witnesses have corroborated material aspects of
this incident. Their version is further corroborated by the CCTV footages
proved vide Ex.MO/1,CDs and Ex.MO/2,Pen-Drive which were retrieved
from the CCTV system of Palwal Hospital, Palwal. The same was
retrieved by Shri Kant, Technician, from the CCTV system. PW37 HC
Hemraj converted the CCTV footages in 3 CDs and 1 pen-drive, which
were received by the Investigating Officer PW6 Jai Ram and seized and
sealed. The original DVR of the CCTV footages along with the hard-disk
and adapter of VGA were produced in the Court vide Ex.MO/5. The
CCTV footage was played in Court and the Investigating Officer
identified the accused, who was clearly seen in the CCTV footage. That
the accused facing trial is the same person has also been deposed by PW3
Taslim, eyewitness and complainant, PW12 Nanhey Ram, who also saw
the CCTV footage, PW24 Virender, eyewitness and attendant, PW25
Zakir, eyewitness and Ambulance driver of Hospital, PW19 Shri Kant,
Technician and PW28 SHO Ashwani Kumar. Thus, from the testimonies
of the eye-witnesses and the CCTV footage, which has been duly proved
as detailed above, it is proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
was present in the Palwal Hospital, Palwal, when the murder of Anjum
took place. He entered the hospital at 2:37 AM with the iron-rod and was
roaming in the hospital and was seen running out of the hospital after
trying to assault the 3 eyewitnesses, Taslim, Virender and Zakir, at 2:49
105.           The evidence led by the prosecution is not only
circumstantial evidence that the accused was present with a blood-stained
iron-rod near the deceased Anjum, immediately after the murder but this
evidence was also corroborated by direct and scientific evidence of CCTV
footage and eye-witnesses accounts of 3 eye-witnesses, when the accused
tried to kill them, immediately after the murder of Anjum and absconded.
It is pertinent to mention that these 3 eyewitnesses Tahir, Virender and
Zakir were present on the ground floor when they heard something falling
on ground, on first floor of the hospital. They rushed to the first floor on
hearing the sound and at the most they reached the first floor through
staircase, within 15-20 seconds. The accused was present there, close to
the body of Anjum which was lying in pool of blood. The time duration of
15-20 seconds is so less that there is no possibility that anyone else
committed the offence, except the accused present there with blood-
smeared iron rod and clothes. As held by the Honorable Supreme Court in
the case of Ramanand v. State of Himachal Pradesh, 1981 AIR 738(SC)
that Perfect proof is seldom to be had in this imperfect world and
absolute certainty is a myth. The concept of circumstantial evidence
arises because in each case the direct evidence could not be found so the
Court has to rely on circumstantial evidence for deciding upon the matter.
The last seen theory is also based on the same lines as in some criminal
cases when there is no direct or tangible evidence regarding how the
offence has been committed or who committed the offence then the last
resort for deciding the case is this theory based on circumstances of the
case. According to this theory, if a person is the last seen with the
deceased just before his death or within a reasonable period of his death
that no other person could have intervened in between them then the
presumption can be taken that he (the person who was last seen) is the
author of the crime. And thus the burden of proof shifts on him to negate
this fact and if he is not able to give a lucid and sufficient explanation
about his innocence then the presumption becomes even stronger. If the
last seen theory is to be established then the duration of the accused and
deceased last seen together and the recovery of the dead body should be
minimal. So that the possibility of another person interfering could be
ruled out and the possibility of the accused being the author of the crime
could be established. Thus only Accused was found present near the
Victim Anjum, within 15-20 seconds of the murder, alongwith the
weapon of murder which was blood-stained and his clothes were blood-
106.         After the accused left the premises of Palwal Hospital,
Palwal at 2:49 AM. He was seen in front of the house of his wife Seema
by a neighbour PW42 Kapil at 4:00 AM, where he was strolling on the
street. At 6:30 AM. Accused started abusive language and tried to break
the gate of the house of PW42 Kapil. Admittedly, they were known to
each other. PW42 Kapil asked him to calm down and the accused
requested him to give a cup of tea to him and let him inside the house.
When he tried to open the gate, accused striked a rod blow which hit his
hand. Kapil closed the gate and informed the police through his friend
Sunil and also kept eye on the accused. After sometime, 6 Police Officers
arrived in 2 vehicles and apprehended the accused at around 7-7:30 AM.
Out of the said 6 Police Officers, the prosecution has examined PW15
ASI Ramdiya, PW22 SPO Har Parshad, PW36 HC Sandeep and PW39
Sub-Inspector Mohammad Illiyas. All of them have corroborated that the
accused had an iron-rod in his hand, which was blood-smeared. The pants
of the accused were blood-smeared. When they tried to apprehend him,
the accused inflicted murderous blows on them by aiming the blows on
their heads, with the iron-rod. SPO Har Parshad has specifically stated
that the accused inflicted blow on his head but he escaped by sitting down
and he entangled feet of the accused with his fiber stick. The accused was
overpowered and the iron-rod was snatched from him by the Police
107.          5 out of the 6 Police Officers received injuries and they were
medico-legally examined. Their MLRs have been proved by PW13 Dr.
Charan Singh and PW18 Dr. Shiv Shankar. The iron-rod was submitted to
the Investigating Officer. Since the accused had received injuries,he was
taken to Government Hospital, Palwal and was medico-legally examined.
He was further referred to Safdarjung Hospital, Delhi for receiving the
treatment of the head injury. His blood-stained clothes were also seized
by the police, from Safdarjung Hospital, Delhi.
Injured Police officials as witnesses
Sandeep and PW39 Sub-Inspector Mohammad Illiyas received injuries in
the apprehension of the accused. Their injuries are proved by PW13 Dr.
Charan Singh and PW18 Dr. Shiv Shankar. The injuries suffered by the
Police Officers as reflected in their MLRs/OPD Card are detailed below.
Injuries of ASI Ramdiya
1. A bluish discoloration on nasal bridge and both nostril Adv-X-ray
Face ENT opinion surgeon opinion.
2. Complaint of pain right thigh on upper anterior aspect Adv-X-ray
3. Complaint of pain around umblical (no tenderness) Adv-USG
whole Abdomen surgeon opinion.
4. Complaint of pain on right shoulder Adv-X-ray right shoulder
chest X-ray ortho opinion.
1. Complaint of pain right hand thumb base. Adv-X-ray right hand
AP Lateral, ortho opinion.
1. Swelling present over left leg. Adv-X-ray left leg AP Lateral,
ortho opinion.
2. Swelling present over right arm. Adv-X-ray right arm AP Lateral,
ortho opinion.
3. Complaint of pain upper back pain, redness present.
4. Complaint of pain abdomen. Adv-USG whole abdomen, surgeon
opinion.
1. Swelling with redness present over right shoulder. Adv-X-ray
right shoulder AP view, ortho opinion.
2. Swelling with redness present over left leg. Adv-X-ray left leg AP
Lateral, ortho opinion.
3. Complaint of pain. Adv-CXR PA view, surgeon opinion.
Injuries of SI Mohammad Illyas
1. Complaint of pain over right shoulder Adv-X-ray shoulder ortho
opinion.
2. Complaint of pain and slight bluish discoloration over right side of
chest on anterior aspect Adv-Chest X-ray ortho opinion surgeon opinion.
3. Complaint of pain upper abdomen (no tenderness). Adv-USG Whole
Abdomen surgeon opinion physician opinion.
109.           The Police Officers have corroborated the case of the
prosecution that the accused was arrested at 7:00AM which blood-stained
clothes and weapon and he tried to escape the apprehension. Their
credibility has not been impeached by the defence in any manner. They
are public servants and are presumed to be performing their duties
sincerely, and not under a motive of false implication of a an allegedly
insane person, leaving an actual serial killer. In Rohtash Kumar vs State
Of Haryana, (2013) 14 SCC 434(SC) it was held, that the evidence of
police officials cannot be discarded merely on the ground that they
belonged to the police force, and are either interested in the investigating
or the prosecuting agency. However, as far as possible the corroboration
of their evidence on material particulars, should be sought. Thus, a
witness is normally considered to be independent, unless he springs from
sources which are likely to be tainted and this usually means that the said
witness has cause, to bear such enmity against the accused, so as to
implicate him falsely. In view of the above, there can be no prohibition to
the effect that a policeman cannot be a witness, or that his deposition
cannot be relied upon.
110.         PW26 Mukesh, Security Guard of the Omaxe City, Palwal
where the accused used to live has also deposed that the accused is the
owner of Flat No. 583. In the intervening night of 01.01.2018/02.01.2018,
he came down with a Danda like object in his hand. It was a very foggy
night. He asked accused Naresh as to where he was going but the accused
did not respond and went away.
111.         The prosecution has also got examined PW41 Kamlesh, who
resided in the same vicinity where the wife of the accused resided with
her father. She also deposed that at around 7:00 AM, accused knocked the
door of her house. He had an iron-rod in his hand. His pants were also
stained with blood. He asked her to open the gate and give him water to
wash his hand and feet but she refused and told that her husband was not
at home. Similarly, PW43 Devi Ram, who also lives in the vicinity stated
that at around 7:00 AM, accused Naresh came in front of his house and
called his son Raju. When he went outside, the accused asked him to drop
him at Ballabgarh,Faridabad. Accused was having an iron-rod in his
hand. However, the witness told him that he did not have any vehicle and
the accused went away. The above-said testimonies of 1 security guard of
Omaxe City, Palwal, 3 eye-witnesses of the Palwal Hospital, Palwal, 3
neighbours of the wife of the accused and 4 Police Officers proved
beyond any reasonable doubt that the accused went out of his flat at
around 1:00 AM in the intervening night of 01.01.2018/02.01.2018 with
an iron-rod, went to the Palwal Hospital, Palwal and murdered Anjum
lying in front of the ICU, then tried to assault Taslim, Zakir and Virender.
Subsequently, he assaulted PW Kapil, soon before his arrest and 6 Police
Officers, who apprehended him before his arrest. Also, he tried to wash
his blood-stained hand and feet and tried to go to another District i.e.
Faridabad. It is also proved from the testimonies that he tried to escape
from the custody of the police, at the time of arrest and even caused
injuries to the police officers in the said attempt to escape.
112.         The subsequent conduct of accused of attacking the 3 eye-
witnesses, with the iron-pipe, which is clearly captured in the CCTV
footage, of Palwal Hospital, duly proved as detailed above, is an
inculpating conduct among other circumstances.
113.         The asking of accused for water from PW Kamlesh, at
around 7 AM to wash his blood-stained hand and feet are an inculpating
circumstance, which shows his guilty mind and attempt to hide the
genesis.
114.         The asking of accused to PW Devi Ram, at around 7 AM, to
leave him at Ballabhgarh, Faridabad after the murders, is yet another
inculpating circumstance against him.
115.         Also the conduct of the accused of assaulting the Police
Officers as detailed above is an inculpating circumstance.
Section 8 Indian Evidence Act, Preparation and subsequent
conduct.
The Section 8 of The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 says,
8. Motive, preparation and previous or subsequent conduct.
Any fact is relevant which shows or constitutes a motive or
preparation for any fact in issue or relevant fact. The conduct of any party,
or of any agent to any party, to any suit or proceeding, in reference to
such suit or proceeding, or in reference to any fact in issue therein or
relevant thereto, and the conduct of any person an offence against whom
is the subject of any proceeding, is relevant, if such conduct influences or
is influenced by any fact in issue or relevant fact, and whether it was
previous or subsequent thereto.
(i) A is accused of a crime. The facts that, after the
commission of the alleged crime, he absconded or was in possession of
property or the proceeds of property acquired by the crime, or attempted
to conceal things which were or might have been used in committing it,
are relevant.
116.         In the present case the accused came prepared with a deadly
weapon i.e. a 4 feet long iron-pipe, to commit the offences and
subsequently tried to abscond. The very fact of preparation and attempt to
abscond is an incriminating circumstance against the accused.
117.         As held in A.N.Vekatesh and Another vs State of
Karnataka(2005) 7 SCC 714(SC), when the accused attempts to escape on
seeing the police party, the same is a relevant and admissible
circumstance against the accused.
Section 27 and Discovery of location of accused
118.         5 similar dead bodies were found in the said period i.e.
between 3:00 AM and 5:00 AM of Munshi Ram in front of the Welfare
Society near Geeta Bhawan, Surender @ Bhikhari Baba in front of Geeta
Park Sohan Road, Subhash near Mayur Hospital Old Sohna Road, Sita
Ram near Hanuman Mandir Wali Gali Arya Nagar Palwal and Khem
Chand near Rasulpur Road. In the morning the accused was arrested with
the iron-pipe and since he received head injury while trying to escape, he
was admitted in Safdarjung Hospital Delhi.After the accused was
discharged from Safdarjung Hospital, Delhi. He made disclosure
statement Ex.PW6/R on 09.01.2018. He suffered two more disclosure
statements, Ex.PW6/S on 11.01.2018 and Ex.PW6/T on 14.01.2018. The
accused stated that in the intervening night of 01.01.2018/02.01.2018, he
was present at his flat at Omaxe City, Palwal. He got enraged on account
of some family issues. He took an iron-pipe of Nalka (Tap) kept in the flat
and came out of the house. He came out with the intention that he would
kill any person, who would meet him in the way. He disclosed that he
went to Palwal Hospital, Palwal and killed a lady, who was lying on a
bench, then he killed another person near a Petrol Pump. The said person
was having a lathi in his hand. He thought that the person might
apprehend him and thus he killed him with blows of iron-pipe on his
head. Then he went to Sohna Road and killed another person standing
there, in the similar manner. Then he started moving on Sohna road and
he saw a person going, he killed him also in a similar manner. Then he
went towards Rasulpur road, Ganda Nala. A person was sitting near a
bonfire. He killed him also, in a similar manner. Then he went to
Rasulpur Road, a person was going towards Bus Stand and he killed him
also. Then he went to the house of his wife at Adarsh Colony and created
ruckus and a person came out and he tried to hit him also and then he fell
down and received injuries and became unconscious. When he regained
his consciousness, he found himself Safdarjung Hospital, Delhi.
Subsequently, accused the got demarcated all the spots of occurrence in
pursuance of the disclosure statements. Since the disclosure statement was
recorded in the custody of the Police Officers, only those facts which
were discovered in consequence of information would be admissible.
Since the scenes of occurrence were already known to the police, it cannot
be said that they were discovered on account of disclosure of the accused.
Only that part of the disclosure statement can be admissible which leads
to discovery of some fact which is confirmed subsequently, as held in
Pulukuri Kottaya vs King-Emperor, AIR (34) 1947 Privy Council 67,
9.Section 27, which is not artistically worded, provides an
exception to the prohibition imposed by the preceding section, and
enables certain statements made by a person in police custody to be
proved. The condition necessary to bring the section into operation is that
the discovery of a fact in consequence of information received from a
person accused of any offence in the custody of a Police officer must be
deposed to, and thereupon so much of the information as relates distinctly
to the fact thereby discovered may be proved. The section seems to be
based on the view that if a fact is actually discovered in consequence of
information given, some guarantee is afforded thereby that the
information was true, and accordingly can be safely allowed to be given
in evidence.
119.          Also, as held in Deoman Upadhyaya vs State, AIR 1960 All
1             The section is based on the doctrine of Confirmation by
subsequent facts e.g. that so much of the confession as relates distinctly to
the fact discovered by it may be given in evidence because this part at
least of the confession cannot have been False. Sections 25 and 26 bar the
proof of a confession but Section 27 makes an exception in favour of that
part of a confession made by an accused person in custody which is
confirmed to be true by subsequent discovery.
120.          After the disclosures were recorded, the only fact which was
discovered in pursuance of the disclosure statements was that the accused
was present at the scenes of occurrence, at the time of occurrence. The
said fact was confirmed by the location charts of the mobile phones of the
accused which were received subsequent to the disclosure statements. As
per the location charts he was present in the same vicinity of 500 metres
from around 2:21 AM to 7.30 AM on the intervening night of
01.01.2018/02.01.2018, i.e. at Rasulpur Road, Jama Masjid, Old GT
Road, Adarsh Nagar, Moti Colony, Agra Chowk, Rasulpur Road and
finally at Adarsh Colony, from where he was arrested.
121.         He also made calls in the above-said period. From his mobile
number 9671326749 he made 3 calls at 2:21 AM, 1 call at 4:04 AM, 1
call at 4:26 AM, 1 call at 4:40 AM, 1 call at 7:01 AM and 1 call at 7:23
122.         He also made calls from his mobile No. 9518118498 at 4:48
AM to 4:42 AM (2 calls), 5:21 AM to 5:41 AM and 6:24 AM, when he
was situated at Adarsh Colony, Palwal i.e. where his wife used to reside.
123.         The said locations of the above-said 2 mobile phones were
proved by the Nodal Officers of the service providers, PW50 Deepak
Kumar and PW52 Adesh Chauhan. It was also proved that the accused
was the registered owner of the mobile No. 9518118498 as proved by
deposition of PW48 Sandeep Sharma, Nodal Officer vide customer
application form Ex.PW48/B.It was also proved that the accused was the
registered owner of the mobile No. 9671326749 as proved by deposition
of PW50 Sandeep Sharma, Nodal Officer vide customer application form
Ex.PW31/C. The above-said witnesses from the service providers
tendered the requisite certificates under Section 65-B of The Indian
Evidence Act, 1872. The accused has not denied the ownership of the said
mobile or the locations of the accused at the above-said points where
murders were committed. No cross-examination was done at this point
and this fact is deemed to be admitted that the accused was present on the
6 scenes of occurrence as well as the scene of his apprehension by the
police officers. The same is proved by scientific evidence and has not
been denied by any evidence or by way of any cross-examination.
124.         From the serology report Ex.PW51/A duly proved by Ms.
Anju Bala, Senior Scientific Officer Serology, it is proved that the
Exhibits No.2 to 7 are the clothes of the 6 deceased, Exhibit No.8 are the
clothes of accused and Exhibit No.1, is the blood smeared iron rod. All
had blood-stains of human origin. Even if the blood group on the iron rod
could not be matched with the blood group of deceased, since it was
reported inconclusive, the same was explained by the expert. She has
submitted that the human blood on iron rod was of inconclusive blood
group, on account of mixing of blood of different blood groups. She has
also stated that it may be also on account of less quantity of blood. It is
pertinent to mention that she examined the iron rod after 13 days of the
incident and some blood must have dried and evaporated also. It is sufficient
that iron rod was smeared with human blood and so were the clothes of the
125.         In addition to the above-said ocular, scientific and forensic
evidence, the Finger Print Expert PW 47, Ramesh Kumar, Incharge,
Finger Print Bureau proved his report Ex. PW47/A, proved that the finger
prints on the iron rod and the glass door of ICU matched the finger prints
of accused Naresh. The finger prints of his Right middle finger, left
thumb, and right index finger, on the iron pipe and glass door matched
with specimen finger prints taken in Court. Thus from the finger print
science also it is proved that the accused had used the blood smeared rod
and was also present on Palwal Hospital, in the night of the incident. It is
well settled that finger print science is perfect and each individual has a
unique finger print.
126.         There is no merit in submission that, as per the observation of
the PW42 Kapil, the iron-pipe got washed in the drain. The 6
eyewitnesses, the police officers present nearby the accused, do not say
so. Rather PW Kapil was standing at a considerable distance near the
Highway and police officers can give a better eyewitness account of
apprehension of the accused.
127.         As proved by the PW 20, Vinod Kumar, Senior Scientific
Expert vide his report Ex.PW20/A, which he prepared after immediately
inspecting the 6 murder scenes, the murders were strikingly identical and
possibility of serial killer is there. At the end of the report he concluded
(vii) A series of homicidal attacks, all conducted in a similar
manner upon unarmed common people who were easily available at night
and involving their same body part ie the head/skull, by a serial killer
cannot be ruled out in this case. Hence, investigate accordingly.
128.         The cause of death, in the 6 PMRs of the victims was also
same i.e. ante-mortem head injuries, which were multiple injuries on the
skull.
129.         As held in the case of a serial killer in Chandrakant Jha vs
State on 27 January, 2016, (Delhi) Criminal Appeal No. 216/2015 &
6. The legal issue which must be first answered is whether,
when and to what extent similar fact evidence is relevant and would be
admissible? Similar fact evidence principle is an exception to the dictum
that evidence of mere propensity to commit a crime of a certain nature is
inadmissible and should not be allowed to be adduced. Simply put, a
likelihood or proclivity to commit an offence is forbidden and should not
form a part of the chain of reasoning in a judgment. An accused's other
misconduct which could reflect mere tendency by itself, should be
excluded from consideration. Presumption of innocence should be
preserved. This dictum, resonant and known to the Common Law has
exceptions, similar fact evidence', being one. Similar fact evidence as a
Common Law term, refers to evidence that may, because of the degree of
similarity in two or more events where the accused is common to each
event, show improbability of coincidence i.e. this evidence would
elucidate and help in determining, whether the facts alleged were
intended/deliberate, or accidental. This principle can be extended, as
noticed below, to show the identity of the culprit and his involvement in
the actus reus.
7. Similar fact evidence' secured legitimacy way back in
1894 in Makin Vs. Attorney General of New South Wales [1894] AC 57
at 65, wherein the following principle was propounded:
It is undoubtedly not competent for the prosecution to adduce
evidence tending to show that the accused has been guilty of criminal acts
other than those covered by the indictment, for the purpose of leading to
the conclusion that the accused is a person likely from his criminal
conduct or character to have committed the offence for which he is being
tried. On the other hand, the mere fact that the evidence adduced tends to
show the commission of other crimes does not render it inadmissible if it
be relevant to an issue before the jury, and it may be so relevant if it bears
upon the question whether the acts alleged to constitute the crime charged
in the indictment were designed or accidental, or to rebut a defence which
would otherwise be opened to the accused. In this case, John Makin and
his wife were arraigned for murder of an infant, who could not be
identified due to lack of proof. However, this did not negate their
conviction for causing murder of an infant, informally adopted on
payment. In addition to the circumstantial evidence, the prosecution had
adduced and relied on evidence of other mothers, who had placed babies
with the perpetrators. Evidence that bodies of 13 babies were found in
different premises occupied at various times by the persons charged was
led. This evidence was held admissible as to corroborate the
circumstances evidencing, the actus reus and the requisite mens rea
required for the crime charged.
8. Subsequently in 1975, the House of Lords in Boardman
Vs. DPP [1975] AC 421 preferred to adopt the striking similarity test.
The test was described by Lord Salmon in the following words:-
It has never been doubted that if the crime charged is
committed in a uniquely or strikingly similar manner to other crimes
committed by the accused the manner in which the other crimes were
committed may be evidence upon which a jury could reasonably conclude
that the accused was guilty of the crime charged. The similarity would
have to be so unique or striking that common sense makes it inexplicable
on the basis of coincidence.
9. As per aforesaid test, evidence must meet the threshold of
being strikingly similar to the case at hand, before being admissible. The
said somewhat stringent test underwent a recast and in DPP Vs. P [1991]
2 AC 447, the shift was to emphasise on relevance i.e. the relevance of the
evidence to the matter in issue. The striking similarity test, it was
observed, would be one of the criterion on satisfaction of which similar
fact evidence' could be led. The test of striking similarities' is based on the
nature of the crimes, i.e. the signature or special feature of the crimes and
the modus opernadi of the separate incidents, which should be clearly
established. On the other hand, the relevancy test balances degree of
relevancy with proportionate prejudice. Evidence would be admitted if its
probative value is substantially greater and out-weighs the prejudicial
effect. Both principles are predicated and applied on the basis of practical
experience and common sense.
10. The significant development made by the above case law,
enables similar fact evidence to be tendered as admissible to prove the
identity of the perpetrator, to establish the actus and not merely to
demonstrate mens rea of the offence charged. The similar fact evidence
rule, as evolved and perfected, states that evidence of similar facts is often
irrelevant, unless it is admissible under the exceptions, i.e. it is relevant
and the probative value out-weighs the prejudicial effect; striking
similarity test is satisfied; or requisite mental state is in issue. A pragmatic
and a practical approach stands applied and adopted.
17. Generally, the law precludes evidence of previous
offences or convictions and such evidence is inadmissible. Similar facts
are, therefore, ordinarily inadmissible to prove the main fact, a part of the
transaction, or the identity or connection with the accused, as they would
only show a general disposition or habit. However, Sections 14 and 15 of
the Evidence Act do stipulate and covenant exceptions to this axiom.
Similar fact evidence' is admissible if it bears on the question whether the
acts alleged to constitute a crime were designed or mere accidents and
thereby to rebut defences alleging an innocent state of mind. This rule
applies when mental condition of the person with reference to a particular
act is in issue.
18. Similar fact evidence can be led when there is a nexus
between the similar fact and the main fact in issue. Apposite, when
several distinct offences demonstrate a continuity of action, evidence of
previous or subsequent acts would, common sense states, become
relevant. For in such cases proof of cumulative facts may aid in proving
the main fact in a case. A series of transactions or acts are relevant when
they seek to bring about a certain result and obtain certain object. The best
way to apply the similar evidence test' is to ascertain the facts to be
proved (factum probus) and ascertain whether there is sufficient and
reasonable connection or a common link with the evidentiary fact. When
there is a significant and particular connection of the facts to be proved
with the evidentiary fact, i.e., factum probandum, 'similar fact evidence' is
admissible. Mere similarity is not sufficient and is not a common link, but
a pre-existing plan or design and where one transaction forms a part of a
series designed to bring about certain result with a certain object, the
connection envisaged above exists.
130.         In the present case also the manner in which murder of first
victim Anjum is proved to have been committed by the repeated assaults
of the iron-pipe on the skull, the next 5 murders committed in the same
vicinity were committed with same modus operandi and would give rise
to strong presumption against the accused that all the murders were
committed by him, with same intention and same modus operendi and the
similarity was not a coincidence or accident, rather the same was
intentional.
131.         From the above-said evidence, it is proved that the accused
came out from his flat at around 1:00 AM, committed the 6 murders and
was apprehended in front of the house of his wife at around 7:30 AM. He
came out of his flat with an iron-pipe in the night and when he was
apprehended in morning his pants were blood smeared and iron-pipe was
also blood-smeared. His mobile phones were seized from him on the
scene of occurrence vide Fard Jamatalshi Ex.PW6/AT, which has been
proved by PW Sub-Inspector Jai Ram, PW Constable Lukman, PW SHO
Ashwani and PW ASI Ramdiya. Also, the iron-pipe was seized from the
accused when he was apprehended, which has been proved vide
Ex.PW6/B, duly proved by PW Sub-Inspector Jai Ram, PW HC Sandeep,
PW ASI Ramdiya, PW Constable Lukman and PW Sub-Inspector
132.         As held in Sharad Birdhi Chand Sarda vs State Of
the following conditions must be fulfilled before a case against an
accused can be said to be fully established:
(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn
should be fully established.
(2) The facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis
of the guilt of the accused, that is to say. they should not be explainable
on any other hypothesis except that the accused is guilty,
(3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency.
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any
reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent with the innocence of the
accused and must show that in all human probability the act must have
been done by the accused.
These five golden principles, if we may say so, constitute the
panchsheel of the proof of a case based on circumstantial evidence.
133.         The Circumstances proved by cogent evidence, which
unfailingly point to the guilt of accused, and no one else but the accused,
are summarized below.
1. The Accused is proved to be going out of his flat at Omaxe
Society at the dead of night at 1:00 AM in the intervening night of
1.1.18/2.1.18, with an iron-pipe in his hand.
2. The accused is proved to be entering Palwal Hospital,
Palwal at 2:37 AM with an iron pipe in his hand and he exited at 2:49 AM
and he was the only person seen with deceased Anjum, lying on floor in a
pool of blood within 15-20 seconds of assault on hert. His clothes and
iron-pipe in his hand were smeared in blood. Then he absconded after
trying to assault the other persons present in the Hospital.
3. The accused is proved to be present at all the 6 spots of 6
identical murders from 2:37 AM till 5 AM, as per his mobile phones
locations and phone calls. The mobile phones were seized from his
possession, at the time of apprehension. He has not alleged or proved that
he was not using the phones that night. He has not denied his locations on
and around of scenes of murders at the time of murders. The same is also
a deemed admission on account of no cross-examination on this point.
4. The accused was apprehended by police officers at around 7:00 AM
with blood-smeared iron-pipe and blood-stained clothes, with blood of
human origin. The blood was already present on iron-pipe and clothes
before he was apprehended and before his falling on ground, excluding
the possibility of blood-stains of his own blood after falling down.
5. The accused tried to wash his blood stained hands and feet before he
was apprehended.
6. The accused tried to escape by going to another District, before he was
arrested.
7. The accused tried to escape the arrest and assaulted the police officers
in the said process.
8. Finger Prints of accused matched the finger prints on iron-pipe and
glass door of the Palwal Hospital, Palwal.
9. All the killings were strikingly similar as the first murder of Anjum,
which is proved to be done by the accused, beyond any reasonable doubt.
10. All the murders were in the same vicinity, of similarly situated
helpless and innocent victims, totally off the guard.
Statement under Section 313 Cr.PC and No Explanations under Section
134.          All the incriminating evidence including the presence of
accused at Palwal Hospital, Palwal and all the scenes of 6 murders proved
by CCTV footage and his mobile phones location chart as well as the
recovery of blood-stained weapon from him including his blood-stained
clothes at the time of apprehension, were put to him. The accused did not
offer any explanation in this regard. The same completes the
circumstantial chain against him. As held in Ravirala Laxmaiah vs State
15. It is a settled legal proposition that in a case based on
circumstantial evidence, where no eye-witnesss account is available, the
principle is that when an incriminating circumstance is put to the accused
and the said accused either offers no explanation for the same, or offers an
explanation which is found to be untrue, then the same becomes an
additional link in the chain of circumstances to make it complete.
135.          After the prosecution proved its case by leading best ocular,
scientific, medical, forensic evidence that the accused came out of his
house with an iron-pipe and went to Palwal Hospital and murdered Anjum
and then went to the other 5 spots of murder, in the dead of night and was
subsequently apprehended with blood-smeared iron-rod and blood
smeared clothes and his location was that of the scenes of occurrence as
per the telephonic calls made by him, it was for the accused to explain
what he was doing in these places at the dead of night between 1:00 AM
to 5:00 AM, when the murders took place. It was admittedly a very cold
night and densely foggy. It was for the accused why he was not present at
his residential house between 2:00 AM to 7:00 AM, but rather he was
present at the scenes of 6 murders and was subsequently apprehended
with an iron-pipe, the weapon of offence smeared with blood, why his
clothes were smeared with blood. The accused must explain these
circumstances as envisaged under Section 106 of The Indian Evidence
Act, 1872. As held in Trimukh Maroti Kirkan vs State Of Maharashtra
12. If an offence takes place inside the privacy of a house
and in such circumstances where the assailants have all the opportunity to
plan and commit the offence at the time and in circumstances of their
choice, it will be extremely difficult for the prosecution to lead evidence
to establish the guilt of the accused if the strict principle of circumstantial
evidence, as noticed above, is insisted upon by the Courts. A Judge does
not preside over a criminal trial merely to see that no innocent man is
punished. A Judge also presides to see that a guilty man does not escape.
Both are public duties. (See Stirland v. Director of Public Prosecution
1944 AC 315 quoted with approval by Arijit Pasayat, J. inState of Punjab
vs. Karnail Singh (2003) 11 SCC 271). The law does not enjoin a duty on
the prosecution to lead evidence of such character which is almost
impossible to be led or at any rate extremely difficult to be led. The duty
on the prosecution is to lead such evidence which it is capable of leading,
having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case.
Where an offence like murder is committed in secrecy
inside a house, the initial burden to establish the case would undoubtedly
be upon the prosecution, but the nature and amount of evidence to be led
by it to establish the charge cannot be of the same degree as is required in
other cases of circumstantial evidence. The burden would be of a
comparatively lighter character. In view of Section 106 of the Evidence
Act there will be a corresponding burden on the inmates of the house to
give a cogent explanation as to how the crime was committed. The
inmates of the house cannot get away by simply keeping quiet and
offering no explanation on the supposed premise that the burden to
establish its case lies entirely upon the prosecution and there is no duty at
all on an accused to offer any explanation.
El Dorado of absolute proof being unattainable, the law, accepts for it,
probability as a working substitute in this work-a-day world. The law
does not require the prosecution to prove the impossible. All that it
requires is the establishment of such a degree of probability that a prudent
man may, on its basis, believe in the existence of the fact in issue. Thus,
legal proof is not necessarily perfect proof; often it is nothing more than a
prudent man's estimate as to the probabilities of the case.
Since it is exceedingly difficult, if not absolutely impossible for the
prosecution to prove facts which are especially within the knowledge of
the opponent or the accused, it is not obliged to prove them as part of its
primary burden.
136.          In this case, the best evidence which was possible was lead
by the prosecution, of 6 independent as well 6 official eyewitnesses, right
from the point accused started armed from his home, his assault at Palwal
Hospital by eyewitness account and CCTV footage, his vicinity at all the
6 spots of murder by call location charts, apprehension and attempt to
escape with blood-stained weapons and finger-print and serological
reports.Since the remaining 5 murders after Palwal Hospital murder, were
conducted at around 2AM to 5 AM, in dark and foggy night of January,
with very poor visibility as proved, the prosecution cannot be insisted to
bring eyewitness account of each murder along with exact time. The same
is not humanly possible. Needless to say, that prosecution led the best
evidence and there is no contradiction in it and the chain of circumstances
is complete and the same is singularly pointing towards the guilt of the
accused. The entire evidence is clinching and cogent in nature.
Discrepancies pointed out by Defence
137.          There is no merit in the submission that the iron-pipe was not
seized properly. The same was seized and sealed in plastic pipe with the
seal of 'JRS' by PW6 Sub-Inspector Jai Ram as reflected in Ex.PW6/B,
after the finger-prints on the same were lifted by PW HC Gurmukh.
138.          Similarly, the clothes of the accused were received from
Safdarjung Hospital, Delhi and seized by the Investigating Officer vide
seizure memo Ex.PW6/J duly proved by PW Sub-Inspector Jai Ram, PW
ASI Rameshwar, PW Sub-Inspector Mohammad Illiyas. If the Doctors of
the Hospital gave the clothes of accused in a plastic bag and the same was
immediately converted into Pulinda by the Investigating Officer, the same
is not a material irregularity in the investigation. The same is reflected in
139.          It has also been contended by the defence that a blood-
stained bamboo lathi was recovered from the scene of occurrence. It can
be the weapon of weapon and actually murderer may someone else. It is
pertinent to mention that as reflected in scene of crime team report
Ex.PW20/A, when the expert went to the second scene of occurrence near
Geeta Bhawan Trust and 6th scene of occurrence at Rasulpur Mod, he
found blood-stained lathis along with the dead bodies of both the victims
namely Munshi Ram and Khem Chand. These deceased were working as
Chowkidars. The Chowkidars usually keep a bamboo lathi. It was natural
that the lathis which were kept beside the Chowkidars would get smeared
in blood, as in all the murders the skulls of the deceased were crushed and
there was a pool of blood around them, and also on their feet and clothes
etc. Hence, all the clothes of deceased including their other belongings
were all smeared with blood. Hence, 2 blood-stained lathis were found
and there is no presumption that they were used as a weapon. Rather the
weapon of offence was carried by accused and recovered from him. Also,
the nature of injuries caused of multiple fracture of skulls, hands and legs
of the deceased and the death of the injured, show that the same were
committed by an iron rod, rather than a bamboo lathi.In most of the cases
the pieces of bones were found near the body, and brain matter was
scattered too, as reflected in Scene of Crime Report EX PW 20/A and the
postmortem reports ExPW4/B to PW4/D and PW5/B to PW5/D. Hence
there is no meriot in submission that the bamboo lathi may have been
used in offence by some other accused.
140.         There is no merit in the contention of Defence that the
accused was not thoroughly checked up after the incident to ensure his
mental health. As per the documents on record, the accused was medico-
legally examined by the Doctors of Government Hospital, Palwal on
2.1.2018, then he remained admitted in Safdarjung Hospital Delhi till
9.1.2018. On 9.1.2018, again 2 Doctors were appointed for his medical
care namely Dr. Yatender and Dr. Shiv. On 11.1.2018, he was again
medico-legally examined and was opined to be conscious and oriented.
None of the Doctors in these hospitals observed any psychiatric disease or
symptoms of insanity in the accused. No Jail Doctor or the Doctors of BK
Hospital Faridabad has ever detected any trace of insanity in the accused.
141.         The non-matching of blood group on on the clothes of 6
deceased and the weapon of offence and clothes of accused does not give
any strength to defence, since the blood on all these was proved to be of
human origin.
As held in Balwan Singh vs The State Of Chhattisgarh
In the case of John Pandian v. State Represented by
Inspector of Police, Tamil Nadu, (2010) 14 SCC 129, this Court, on facts,
observed that the evidence of recovery of weapons was credible. The
Forensic Science Report (FSL) report had disclosed that the blood was of
human origin. The Court proceeded to conclude that since the evidence of
recovery of weapon was proved to the satisfaction of the Court, it was
sufficient that the prosecution had proved that the bloodstains were of
human origin, even though the blood group could not be ascertained.
12. The cases discussed above highlight the burden that the
prosecution would ordinarily have to discharge, depending on the other
facts and circumstances of the case, for the evidence relating to recovery
to be considered against the accused. At the same time, as mentioned
above, we are conscious of the fact that it may not always be possible to
inextricably link the bloodstains on the items seized in recovery to the
blood of the deceased, due to the possibility of disintegration of
bloodstains on account of the time-lapse in carrying out the recovery. For
this reason, in Prabhu Dayal v. State of Rajasthan, (2018) 8 SCC 127,
where one of us (Mohan M. Shantanagoudar J.) had the occasion to
author the judgment, this Court, relying on Teja Ram (supra), had held
that the failure to determine the blood group of the bloodstains collected
from the scene of offence would not prove fatal to the case of the
prosecution. In Prabhu Dayal case (supra), although the FSL report could
not determine the blood group of the bloodstains on account of
disintegration, the report clearly disclosed that the bloodstains were of
human origin, and the chain of circumstantial evidence was completed by
the testimonies of the other witnesses as well as the reports submitted by
the Ballistic Expert and the Forensic Science Laboratory regarding the
weapon used to commit murder.
13. From the aforementioned discussion, we can summarise
that if the recovery of bloodstained articles is proved beyond reasonable
doubt by the prosecution, and if the investigation was not found to be
tainted, then it may be sufficient if the prosecution shows that the blood
found on the articles is of human origin though, even though the blood
group is not proved because of disintegration of blood. The Court will
have to come to the conclusion based on the facts and circumstances of
each.
142.          The testimony of the above-said Police Officers has not been
impeached in any manner, by the defence, rather the presence of the
accused and his apprehension, has been admitted as it has been contended
in defence that the blood-stains on the pants of the accused could be his
own blood, on account of injury received by him, while he was being
apprehended. Thus, the defence admitted that the accused was present
with the blood-smeared iron-rod at Adarsh Colony, Palwal at 7:00 AM.
143.          Also the defence suggested to PW3 Taslim that the accused
killed certain many street dogs that night. Though the witness denied any
knowledge about that, the same amounts to an admission that the accused
was outside his home that night and killed many street dogs.
144.          Another suggestion was put by Defence to the PW6, Jai
Ram,SI, the Investigating officer that he did not take proper steps for
medical examination regarding mental health of the accused, to ensure
that the offences were committed by him on account of insanity.This
suggestion of defence amounts to admission that the accused committed
the murders, though on account of insanity.
145.          Thus, the prosecution led positive evidence including the
eye-witnesses accounts, scientific evidence of CCTV footage, call
location charts, recovery of weapon of offence and blood-stained clothes
from the accused, to the effect that he committed the 6 murders in the
intervening night of 01.01.2018/02.01.2018 and when he was
apprehended by the police, he assaulted them also and they received
several injuries. He tried to kill PW Taslim, PW Zakir, PW Virender, PW
Kapil and 6 Police Officers. The chain of circumstantial evidence
corroborated by the scientific call location charts and CCTV footages
leads to singular hypothesis, that the accused committed the said murders.
146.         To rebut the case of the prosecution, the defence has raised 2
contradictory pleas, one is that the accused did not commit the murders
and he has been falsely implicated as the murders could not be solved by
the Police Officers. The other defence is that the accused committed the
murders but he was insane at that time. Both the defences are mutually
destructive and self-contradictory. However, since the accused has a right
to take as many defences as possible, both the defences shall be
appreciated as per the evidence and circumstances.
Defence of False Implication in Blind Murders
147.         The defence of false implication on account of blind murder
proves to be baseless in view of the eye-witnesses account of PW Taslim,
PW Zakir, PW Virender, PW Kapil, PW Kamlesh and PW Gopi Chand.
all of whom are public persons and not Police Officers. It is not believable
that the above-said 6 citizens, who admittedly had no enmity with the
accused would make false depositions to implicate the accused as the
blind murders were not solved by the Police. It is not believable that PW3
Taslim would make false complaint against accused at the behest of the
Police and leave out the actual culprit who murdered his sister-in-law. It is
also not possible that the CCTV footage were manipulated by the hospital
persons, technician and the Police Officers. In fact, there was no time to
do so, as around 3:00 AM, after a few minutes of the incident, CCTV
footage was secured and the photographs of the accused were viralled.
Subsequently, he was arrested in the presence of eye-witnesses, including
6 Police Officers and PW Kapil, the neighbour of his wife. All the
witnesses have corroborated that he had a blood-smeared iron-rod in his
hand. There was no motive for these witnesses to falsely implicate the
accused. The Police Officers could not have manipulated the call
locations and the calls made from his mobile phones by the accused
during the intervening night of 01.01.2018/02.01.2018, since all the
above-mentioned calls were made before the accused was apprehended
and no one had access to the mobile phone of the accused, before the
incident. No such allegation had been made by the defence. It would be
absurd to suggest that the Police Officers in connivance with the service
providers manipulated the telephonic call records of the accused, which
were made at the time of the incident. Thus, theory of false implication of
accused in the blind murders proves to be entirely baseless.
Defence of Insanity
148.         The plea of insanity has been taken in a very shady manner
and as a last resort because the accused knows that there is sufficient
evidence to connect him with the offences. He has not stated that he
committed the murders under insanity. He has stated that somebody else
committed the murders and he has been falsely booked as he was an
insane person. However, if the Court finds him guilty he may be given the
defence of insanity and acquitted.
149.            The complicated defence of insanity, has been raised in such
a contradictory manner and without admitting that the accused committed
the offences under insane condition that the defence should be rejected,
still it is the duty of the Court to consider the same. It is well settled law
that whenever a plea of insanity is taken, it is the duty of the Court to
consider all the circumstances and ensure that the accused is not punished,
if he was of unsound mind when the occurrence took place, as per Section
84 of IPC.
150.            Section 84 in The Indian Penal Code says
Section 84. Act of a person of unsound mind.Nothing is
an offence which is done by a person who, at the time of doing it, by
reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of knowing the nature of the
act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or contrary to law.
151.            The above-said provision is to be read with Section 105 of
The Indian Evidence Act, 1872, which says,
Section 105. Burden of proving that case of accused comes
within exceptions.When a person is accused of any offence, the burden
of proving the existence of circumstances bringing the case within any of
the General Exceptions in the Indian Penal Code, (45 of 1860), or within
any special exception or proviso contained in any other part of the same
Code, or in any law defining the offence, is upon him, and the Court shall
presume the absence of such circumstances. Illustrations
(a)A, accused of murder, alleges that, by reason of
unsoundness of mind, he did not know the nature of the act. The burden
of proof is on A.
152.         The defence of insanity is based on M Naughton's case
(1843) 4 St. Tr. (NS) 847. The defence of the insanity has been one of the
favourite defences in cases of multiple murders, as in the present case. It
is also well settled law that the defence of insanity is to be proved by
accused and the degree of evidence required is of preponderance of
probability like in civil cases and not beyond reasonable doubt like in
criminal case. It is also well settled law that accused is to prove that he
was of unsound mind, at the time of incident. As held in Sudhakaran vs
9. The trial court thereafter considered the defence pleaded
by the appellant under Section 84 IPC. Upon examination of the entire
medical evidence, the trial court concluded that there is no material to
indicate that at the time of the commission of the offence or immediately
before the occurrence of the incident, the appellant was suffering from
any mental illness. Although he had taken some treatment in the year
1985 for mental illness but he had fully recovered from that.
Subsequently, long after that he had married the deceased. Even though
they were living a disturbed married life, a child was born out of the
wedlock. The child was 8 months old at the time when the crime was
committed. The trial court also noticed that, although the appellant was
irregular, he used to take on casual jobs for his sustenance. The trial court
concluded that even after taking note of the evidence produced by the
defence, the conclusion was that the appellant was capable of
understanding the nature of the act and the consequences thereof.
17..The medical profession would undoubtedly treat the
appellant herein as a mentally sick person. However, for the purposes of
claiming the benefit of the defence of insanity in law, the appellant would
have to prove that his cognitive faculties were so impaired, at the time
when the crime was committed, as not to know the nature of the act..A
bare perusal of the aforesaid section would show that in order to succeed,
the appellant would have to prove that by reason of unsoundness of mind,
he was incapable of knowing the nature of the act committed by him. In
the alternate case, he would have to prove that he was incapable of
knowing that he was doing what is either wrong or contrary to law...It
is also a settled proposition of law that the crucial point of time for
ascertaining the existence of circumstances bringing the case within the
purview of Section 84 is the time when the offence is committed. We may
notice here the observations made by this Court in the case of Ratan Lal
Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh [1970 (3) SCC 533] In Paragraph 2 of the
aforesaid judgment, it is held as follows:-
"It is now well-settled that the crucial point of time at which
unsoundness of mind should be established is the time when the crime is
actually committed and the burden of proving this lies on the appellant."
20.The High Court on examination of the evidence before it,
came to the conclusion that the appellant had failed to prove that he was
suffering from such mental illness that would enable him to take benefit
of Section 84 IPC.
21. The High Court took into consideration the totality of the
circumstances and came to the conclusion that there was no evidence
indicating that appellant was suffering from mental illness at the crucial
time. The only evidence placed on record shows that the appellant had
been treated in a Psychiatric Hospital for 13 days in the year 1985 even at
that time the doctor had diagnosed the disease as psychotic disorder. The
record did not indicate that the patient was suffering from such mental
disability which incapacitated him to know the nature of the act that he
had committed. The High Court further observed that there was no
evidence to indicate that the appellant suffered from mental illness post
1985. The High Court, in our opinion, rightly concluded that the appellant
was capable of knowing the nature of the act and the consequences
thereof on the date of the alleged incident.
153.          Similarly in Surendra Mishra vs State Of Jharkhand (2011)
11 SCC 495(SC) it was held that,
7. From a plain reading of the aforesaid provision it is
evident that an act will not be an offence, if done by a person who, at the
time of doing the same by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of
knowing the nature of the act, or what he is doing is either wrong or
contrary to law. But what is unsoundness of mind? This Court had the
occasion to consider this question in the case of Bapu alias Gujraj Singh
v. State of Rajasthan, (2007) 8 SCC 66, in which it has been held as
"The standard to be applied is whether according to the
ordinary standard, adopted by reasonable men, the act was right or wrong.
The mere fact that an accused is conceited, odd, irascible and his brain is
not quite all right, or that the physical and mental ailments from which he
suffered had rendered his intellect weak and had affected his emotions
and will, or that he had committed certain unusual acts in the past, or that
he was liable to recurring fits of insanity at short intervals, or that he was
subject to getting epileptic fits but there was nothing abnormal in his
behaviour, or that his behaviour was queer, cannot be sufficient to attract
the application of this section."
8. The scope and ambit of theSection 84 of the Indian Penal
Code also came up for consideration before this Court in the case ofHari
Singh Gond v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (2008) 16 SCC 109 = AIR 2009
SC 31 in which it has been held as follows:
"Section 84 lays down the legal test of responsibility in cases
of alleged unsoundness of mind. There is no definition of `unsoundness of
mind' in IPC. The courts have, however, mainly treated this expression as
equivalent to insanity. But the term `insanity' itself has no precise
definition. It is a term used to describe varying degrees of mental
disorder. So, every person, who is mentally diseased, is not ipso facto
exempted from criminal responsibility. A distinction is to be made
between legal insanity and medical insanity. A court is concerned with
legal insanity, and not with medical insanity."
9. In our opinion, an accused who seeks exoneration from
liability of an act under Section 84 of the Indian Penal Code is to prove
legal insanity and not medical insanity. Expression "unsoundness of
mind" has not been defined in the Indian Penal Code and it has mainly
been treated as equivalent to insanity. But the term insanity carries
different meaning in different contexts and describes varying degrees of
mental disorder. Every person who is suffering from mental disease is not
ipso facto exempted from criminal liability. The mere fact that the
accused is conceited, odd, irascible and his brain is not quite all right, or
that the physical and mental ailments from which he suffered had
rendered his intellect weak and affected his emotions or indulges in
certain unusual acts, or had fits of insanity at short intervals or that he was
subject to epileptic fits and there was abnormal behaviour or the
behaviour is queer are not sufficient to attract the application of Section
84 of the Indian Penal Code.
10. Next question which needs consideration is as to on
whom the onus lies to prove unsoundness of mind. In law, the
presumption is that every person is sane to the extent that he knows the
natural consequences of his act. The burden of proof in the face of Section
105 of the Evidence Act is on the accused. Though the burden is on the
accused but he is not required to prove the same beyond all reasonable
doubt, but merely satisfy the preponderance of probabilities. The onus has
to be discharged by producing evidence as to the conduct of the accused
prior to the offence, his conduct at the time or immediately after the
offence with reference to his medical condition by production of medical
evidence and other relevant factors. Even if the accused establishes
unsoundness of mind,Section 84 of the Indian Penal Code will not come
to its rescue, in case it is found that the accused knew that what he was
doing was wrong or that it was contrary to law. In order to ascertain that,
it is imperative to take into consideration the circumstances and the
behaviour preceding, attending and following the crime. Behaviour of an
accused pertaining to a desire for concealment of the weapon of offence
and conduct to avoid detection of crime go a long way to ascertain as to
whether, he knew the consequences of the act done by him. Reference in
this connection can be made to a decision of this Court in the case ofT.N.
Lakshmaiah v. State of Karnataka, (2002) 1 SCC 219, in which it has
been held as follows:
"9.Under the Evidence Act, the onus of proving any of the
exceptions mentioned in the Chapter lies on the accused though the
requisite standard of proof is not the same as expected from the
prosecution. It is sufficient if an accused is able to bring his case within
the ambit of any of the general exceptions by the standard of
preponderance of probabilities, as a result of which he may succeed not
because that he proves his case to the hilt but because the version given
by him casts a doubt on the prosecution case.
10. In State of M.P. v. Ahmadull,AIR 1961 SC 998, this
Court held that the burden of proof that the mental condition of the
accused was, at the crucial point of time, such as is described by the
section, lies on the accused who claims the benefit of this exemption vide
Section 105 of the Evidence Act [Illustration (a)]. The settled position of
law is that every man is presumed to be sane and to possess a sufficient
degree of reason to be responsible for his acts unless the contrary is
proved. Mere ipse dixit of the accused is not enough for availing of the
benefit of the exceptions under Chapter IV.
11. In a case where the exception under Section 84 of the
Indian Penal Code is claimed, the court has to consider whether, at the
time of commission of the offence, the accused, by reason of unsoundness
of mind, was incapable of knowing the nature of the act or that he is doing
what is either wrong or contrary to law. The entire conduct of the accused,
from the time of the commission of the offence up to the time the sessions
proceedings commenced, is relevant for the purpose of ascertaining as to
whether plea raised was genuine, bona fide or an afterthought."
11. In the background of what we have observed above, we
proceed to consider the facts of the present case. The first evidence in
regard to the unsoundness of mind as brought by the appellant is the
medical prescription dated 18th October, 1987 (Ext. A-1) in which
symptom of the appellant has been noted as psychiatric with paranoid
features and medicine was advised for sleep. Other prescriptions are dated
9th January, 1988 (Ext. A) and 5th of September 1998 in which only
medicines have been prescribed. Other prescriptions (Exts. A-5 to A-7)
also do not spell out the disease the appellant was suffering but give the
names of the medicines, he was advised to take. The occurrence had taken
place on 11th of August 2000. From these prescriptions, the only
inference one can draw is that the appellant had paranoid feeling but that
too was not proximate to the date of occurrence. It has to be borne in
mind that to establish that acts done are not offence and come within
general exception it is required to be proved that at the time of
commission of the act, accused by reason of unsoundness of mind was
incapable of knowing that his acts were wrong or contrary to law. In the
present case the prosecution has proved beyond all reasonable doubt that
immediately after the appellant had shot- dead the deceased, threatened
his driver PW.1, Vidyut Kumar Modi of dire consequences. Not only that,
he ran away from the place of occurrence and threw the country-made
pistol, the weapon of crime, in the well in order to conceal himself from
the crime. However, it was recovered later on. The aforesaid conduct of
the appellant subsequent to the commission of the offence clearly goes to
suggest that he knew that whatever he had done was wrong and illegal.
Further, he was running amedical shop and came to the place of
occurrence and shot dead the deceased. Had the appellant been a person
of unsound mind, it may not have been possible for him to run a medical
shop. We are of the opinion that the appellant though suffered from
certain mental instability even before and after the incident but from that
one cannot infer on a balance of preponderance of probabilities that the
appellant at the time of the commission of the offence did not know the
nature of his act; that it was either wrong or contrary to law. In our
opinion, the plea of the appellant does not come within the exception
contemplated underSection 84 of the Indian Penal Code.
154.         In Jai Lal vs Delhi Administration, 1969 AIR 15(SC), it was
We may briefly notice the evidence bearing on the plea of
insanity. Since 1958 the appellant was an employee in the Stores Branch
of the Northern Railway Headquarters in Baroda House, New Delhi. In
1958 and 1959 he had altercations with other clerks in the office. On May
20, 1959 his superior officer observed that he was prone to, lose temper in
no time. In his moments of excitement he became dangerous and used to
hit his colleagues with anything that he could lay his hands on. But at the
time of his greatest excitement he could distinguish between right and
wrong. After May 1959 he worked at his desk as a normal man. In March
1960 he again quarrelled with another clerk. He was suspended and sent
for medical examination. At this stage he was suffering from mental
illness. On October 12. 1960 he was examined by a psychiatrist who
found that he exhibited symptoms of acute schizophrenia and showed
disorder of thought, emotion and perception of external realities. The
psychiatrist said that he was harbouring certain delusions. The nature of
the delusions is not stated. It is not proved that the appellant suffered from
any particular delusion or hallucination. The appellant was put on a drug
named largactil and was given convulsive electrotherapy treatment. On
January 12, 1961 he was cured of his illness and was advised to join his
duties. On resuming his duties the appellant worked in the office in the
normal manner. There is some evidence that on the morning of November
25. 1961 and the preceding night, the appellant complained that he was
unwell and took medicine. But on the morning of November 25, he went
to his office as usual. He was late in attendance and was marked absent.
He applied in writing for one day's casual leave stating that he had an
urgent piece of work at home. Nobody noticed any symptoms of mental
disorder at that time. He left the office at about 11.30 a.m. and returned
home alone. At 1.45 p.m.he stabbed Leela, Parbati and Raghubir with a
knife.He concealed the knife and a search for it has proved fruitless. At
2.45 p.m. the investigating officer arrived on the spot, arrested the
appellant and interrogated him. He was then found normal and gave
intelligent answers. On the same date he was produced before a
Magistrate. His brother was then present but the Magistrate was not
informed that he was insane. On November 27, he was interrogated by an
Inspector. It does not appear that he was then insane. On November 30,
the appellant's brother filed an application before the committing
magistrate stating that the appellant was insane at the time of the
occurrence. The appellant was later remanded to judicial custody. On
receipt of another application from his brother he was kept under medical
observation from December 16 to December 23. On December 19the
medical officer noted that the appellant was indifferent to his
surroundings and personal cleanliness, preoccupied in his thoughts
muttering to himself, making meaningless gestures, losing track of
conversations, given to delayed and repetitive answers and unable to give
detailed account of incidents leading to his arrest. On Decemher 23, he
was declared to be a lunatic though not violent. The psychiatrist noted that
the appellant had a relapse of schizophrenia and was suffering from
disorder of thought, emotion and loss of contact with realities. From his
attitude and manner of talk he was found to be aggressive. On September
6, 1962 the psychiatrist reported that the appellant was cured and was in a
position to understand proceedings in court. The commitment order was
made on January 4, 1963. The trial started in February 1963. The
appellant was sane at the time of the trial. The group of ailments dubbed
schizophrenia is discussed in James D. Page's Abnormal Psychology, Ch.
XI, pages 236 to 261 and Modi's Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology,
14th ed., pages 349 to 401. Schizophrenia is a general term referring to a
group of severe mental disorders marked by a splitting or disintegration,
of the personality. The most striking clinical features include general
psychological disharmony, emotional impoverishment, dilapidation of
thought processes, absence of social rapport, delusions, hallucinations and
peculiarities of conduct. The question is whether the appellant is
criminally responsible for the acts done on November 25, 1961.Section 84
of the Indian Penal Code says :-
"Nothing is an offence which is done by a person who, at the
time of doing it, by reason of unsoundness of mind, is incapable of
knowing the nature of the act, or that he is doing what is either wrong or
contrary to law."
To establish that the acts done are not offences under sec. 84
it must be proved clearly that at the time of the commission of the act the
appellant by reason of unsoundness of mind was incapable of either
knowing that the acts were either morally wrong or contrary to law. The
question is whether the appellant was suffering from such incapacity at
the time of the commission of the acts. On this question, the state of his
mind before and after the crucial time is relevant. There is evidence of a
medical character that between October 12, 1960 and January 12, 1961 he
was suffering from schizophrenia. He was completely cured of this
disease, on January 12, 1961 when he resumed his normal duties. He had
another attack of this disease in the middle of December 1961. The attack
lasted till September 1962 when he was found to be normal again. But it
is to be observed that the defence witnesses do not say that even during
these two periods the appellant was incapable of discriminating between
right and wrong or of knowing the physical nature of the acts done by
After the appellant was cured of the disease on January 12,
1961 he was found to be normal. He had a highly strung tem- perament
and was easily excitable. But there is positive evidence that even at the
moment of his greatest excitement he could distinguish between right and
wrong. From January 12, upto November 24, 1961 he attended his office
and discharged his duties in a normal manner. On the morning of
November 25, 1961 his mind was normal. He went to and from his office
all alone. He wrote a sensible application asking for casual leave for one
day. At 1.45 p.m.he stabbed and killed a child and soon thereafter he
stabbed two other persons. On his arrest soon after 2.45 p.m. he gave
normal and intelligent answers to the investigating officers. Nothing
abnormal in him was noticed till December 16, 1961.
The thing in favour of the appellant is that though he had a
motive for attacking Baburam, no clear motive for attacking the child
Leela or Parbati is discernible. But there is clear evidence to show that he
knew that his act of stabbing and killing was wrong and contrary to law.
He concealed the weapon of offence. The knife could not be recovered in
spite of searches. He bolted the front door of his house to prevent arrest.
He then tried to run away by the back door. When an attempt was made to
apprehend him he ran back to his house and bolted the door. He then tried
to disperse the crowd by throwing brickbats from the, roof. His conduct
immediately after the occurrence displays consciousness of his guilt. He
knew the physical nature of stabbing. He knew that the stabbing would
kill and maim his victims. On a comprehensive review of the entire
evidence the two courts below concurrently found that the defence of
insanity under sec. 84 was not made out. We are unable to say that the
verdict of the courts below is erroneous.
155.          Also it was held in Siddhapal Kamala Yadav vs State Of
10.Section 84 embodies the fundamental maxim of criminal
law, i.e., actus non reum facit nisi mens sit rea" (an act does not constitute
guilt unless done with a guilty intention). In order to constitute an offence,
the intent and act must concur; but in the case of insane persons, no
culpability is fastened on them as they have no free will (furios is nulla
voluntas est).
11. The section itself provides that the benefit is available
only after it is proved that at the time of committing the act, the accused
was labouring under such a defect of reason, from disease of the mind, as
not to know the nature and quality of the act he was doing, or that even if
he did not know it, it was either wrong or contrary to law then this section
must be applied. The crucial point of time for deciding whether the
benefit of this section should be given or not, is the material time when
the offence takes place. In coming to that conclusion, the relevant
circumstances are to be taken into consideration, it would be dangerous to
admit the defence of insanity upon arguments derived merely from the
character of the crime. It is only unsoundness of mind which naturally
impairs the cognitive faculties of the mind that can form a ground of:
exemption from criminal responsibility. Stephen in `History of the
Criminal Law of England, Vo. II, page 166 has observed that if a person
cuts off the head of a sleeping man because it would be great fun to see
him looking for it when he woke up, would obviously be a case where the
perpetrator of the act would be incapable of knowing the physical effects
of his act. The law recognizes nothing but incapacity to realise the nature
of the act and presumes that where a man's mind or his faculties of
ratiocination are sufficiently dim to apprehend what he is doing, he must
always be presumed to intend the consequence of the action he takes.
Mere absence of motive for a crime, howsoever atrocious it may be,
cannot in the absence of plea and proof of legal insanity, bring the case
within this section This Court in Sherall Walli Mohammed v. State of
Maharashtra: (1972 Cr.LJ 1523 (SC)), held that the mere fact that no
motive has been proved why the accused murdered his wife and child or
the fact that he made no attempt to run away when the door was broken
open would not indicate that he was insane or that he did not have
necessary mens rea for the offence. Mere abnormality of mind or partial
delusion, irresistible impulse or compulsive behaviour of a psychopath
affords no protection under Section 84 as the law contained in that section
is still squarely based on the outdated Naughton rules of 19th Century
England. The provisions ofSection 84 are in substance the same as that
laid down in the answers of the Judges to the questions put to them by the
House of Lords, in M Naughton's case (1843) 4 St. Tr. (NS) 847.
156.          Behaviour, antecedent, attendant and subsequent to the event,
may be relevant in finding the mental condition of the accused at the time
of the event, but not that remote in time. It is difficult to prove the precise
state of the offender's mind at the time of the commission of the offence,
but some indication thereof is often furnished by the conduct of the
offender while committing it or immediately after the commission of the
offence. A lucid interval of an insane person is not merely a cessation of
the violent symptoms of the disorder, but a restoration of the faculties of
the mind sufficiently to enable the person soundly to judge the act; but the
expression does not necessarily mean complete or prefect restoration of
the mental faculties to their original condition. So, if there is such a
restoration, the person concerned can do the act with such reason,
memory and judgment as to make it a legal act ; but merely a cessation of
the violent symptoms of the disorder is not sufficient.
12. The standard to be applied is whether according to the ordinary
standard, adopted by reasonable men, the act was right or wrong. The
mere fact that an accused is conceited, odd irascible and his brain is not
quite all right, or that the physical and mental ailments from which he
suffered had rendered his intellect weak and had affected his emotions
and will, or that he had committed certain unusual acts, in the past or that
he was liable to recurring fits of insanity at short intervals, or that he was
subject to getting epileptic fits but there was nothing abnormal in his
behaviour, or that his behaviour was queer, cannot be sufficient to attract
the application of this section.
157.          In Paramjeet Singh vs State on 4 January, 2013 Crl. Appeal
No. 586/2012(Delhi), it was held that,
17. Every man is presumed to be sane, till contrary is
established. Insanity or unsoundness of mind of the type stipulated in
Section 84 IPC is an exception. Illustration (a) to Section 105 of the
Evidence Act, quoted above, casts burden on the accused to show that the
exception carved out under Section 84 IPC is applicable and burden is on
the accused to prove insanity at the time when the offence was committed.
However, the burden on the accused to prove insanity is not higher than
that upon a party in civil proceeding i.e. the principle of preponderance of
probability applies. It is not for the accused to establish conclusively or
beyond doubt that he was insane to get benefit of Section 84 IPC but he is
entitled to claim insanity, if he is able to raise a doubt regarding his
sanity. To decide on the question of insanity, the Court should examine
the behavior and antecedents of the accused before, during and
subsequent to the event, to the extent they are relevant to record a finding
on the mental condition of the accused. However, while doing so the act
itself or absence of motive is not consequential and determinative..
46. A crime is not excusable under the law whether done under an insane
impulse or not unless it satisfies the grounds on which alone it can be
excused. Those grounds are optimised in Section 84, Penal Code. In
everyday      life  terms    like,   mental   illness/disorder,   behaviour
disorder/abnormality, psychological disorder etc. are used loosely and
applied to behaviour which is highly unusual, specially when an
individual indulges in aggression in speech/conduct or physical violence.
Cause of aggression/violence, as per modern social psychologists, is not
programmed/attributed to a single factor but is triggered by a wide range
of input variables which influence arousal, affective stages and
cognitions. (General Affective Aggression Model proposed by Anderson
in 1996/1997. Also see the Glossary of Mental Disorder and glossary
published        by    World       Health   Organisation       and      other
institution/organization. Section 84 IPC provides immunity in limited
category of cases, i.e., unsound mind which has the stipulated
consequences. The term "unsoundness of mind" in Section 84 IPC is not a
medical term but a legal concept. Crimes are often committed or are a
result of mental disorder/abnormality as in the cases of a serial killers like
David Berkowitiz but the test of "insanity" as a legal term is restrictive
and more precise. The legal test is that the accused because of disease of
mind should be crippled by defect of reason from knowing the nature and
quality of the act he was doing or if he did know it, then he did not know
that it was wrong (morally) or was contrary to law. (Questions of
sympathetic treatment in punishment or grant of probation, when
permissible, are separate aspects).
29. We have scrupulously examined the evidence placed
before the Court to prove that the appellant was not of sound mind (non
compos mentis) when he committed the said offence. From the statement
of various defence witnesses which are to the effect that the appellant
used to remain mentally disturb and do not establish that he was insane as
defined in Section 84 IPC. The witnesses have merely testified that the
appellant was quarrelsome, adamant and used to become angry when
stressed or when he faced difficult times. It becomes apparent that he was
under treatment for the said purpose, when we read DD No.17, Ex.DW
2/A recorded on 17th March, 2004, the complaint of PW-1. Relevant
portion of which reads as under:-
"Smt. Balwinder Kaur has produced me an application
bearing the statement that she had made a telephone call to Police after an
exchange of hot words with her husband on domestic tiffs. My husband is
under mental problem for past long time and he is under treatment in a
hospital and he use to become adamant due to his stubborn attitude. Now
I am taking him to the hospital with the help of his brother Surjeet Singh
and his sister Bhupinder Kaur."
30. A reading of the aforesaid statement elucidates that the
appellant was mentally disturbed and had quarrelsome nature, but it
cannot be said that he was incapable of understanding the nature and
character of his acts and consequences thereof qua to him and others. He
knew the nature and quality of the act which he was committing and that
what he had done was wrong. It cannot be said that the appellant was
incapable of distinguishing right or wrong or not knowing the nature,
consequences and effect of the acts done by him. This becomes clear from
his conduct at the time of the incident. From the statement of PW-1 and
PW-2, it is clear that the appellant tried to prevent the PW-2 from
reaching out for help. In fact, in order to prevent PW-2 from reaching the
door, the appellant inflicted injuries on PW-2's ears. It was only when
PW-1 caught hold of the appellant that PW-2 could run out and get help.
Therefore, he was not ignorant of what he was doing. The fact that he was
mentally disturbed did not mean that he was in the state of confusion or
suffering from mental debility to the extent required and mandated
bySection 84 IPC.
31. It has been clarified in Elavarasan v. State(2011) 7 SCC
110 that the mere fact that the appellant had assaulted his immediate
family members was not ipso facto suggestive of his being an insane
person. It further held that:
"38. So, also the fact that he had not escaped from the place
of occurrence was no reason by itself to declare him to be a person of
unsound mind incapable of understanding the nature of the acts
committed by him. Experience has shown that different individuals react
differently to same or similar situations. Some may escape from the scene
of occurrence, others may not while some may even walk to the police
station to surrender and report about what they have done. Such post-
event conduct may be relevant to determine the culpability of the offender
in the light of other evidence on record, but the conduct of not fleeing
from the spot would not in itself show that the person concerned was
insane at the time of the commission of the offence."
158.          Keeping in view of the above-said precedents, the accused is
not proved to be of insane mind at the time of incident. It is only proved
that prior to the present incident on 01.01.2018/02.01.2018, the accused
suffered from psychosis in the year 2001, as reflected in his discharge
report from Army Ex.PW6/AB. Subsequently, he was medico-legally fit
and he joined government service as SDO in Agriculture Department,
Haryana. His medical fitness certificate, issued by Civil Surgeon,
Faridabad, at the time of his joining the second service in 2006 is
Ex.PW6/AC. He married in the year 2007 and continued working as a
Government Officer till the date of incident. He regularly attended his job
for next 12 years and there is no record of any ailment in the said period.
It is pertinent to mention that 3 times the accused was thoroughly got
diagnosed by this Court to ensure about his physical and mental condition
and that he received the requisite treatment. The entire treatment record
was submitted by the Superintendent District Jail, Faridabad vide Ex.C1.
The accused was lodged in the prison on 15.01.2018. After the same, he
mentioned about the psychiatric problem on 07.02.2018 and was given
Becosules and then he complained of sleep disorder on 15.02.2018.
Subsequently, he complained of epilepsy and the regular psychiatric
treatment was started from 27.04.2018 i.e. between the period from 2001
to 07.02.2018 i.e. 17 years prior to the incident and one month after the
incident, there is no record of any psychiatric illness of the accused. The
Court cannot presume that the accused was insane simple because the
murders was barbaric, brutal and without any motive. As per the reports
submitted by the Superintendent District Jail, Faridabad vide Ex.C1 to
Ex.C3, duly proved by CW1, the general condition of the accused was
normal and he was suffering from psychosis from 07.02.2018 i.e. one
month after the present incident.
159.          The prosecution is not required to prove the motive of the
accused, as held in a similar case where defence of insanity was taken,
and also plea of absence of any proven motive was taken in Sidhdhapal
Kamala Yadavs case (supra),
 Mere absence of motive for a crime, howsoever atrocious it
may be, cannot in the absence of plea and proof of legal insanity, bring
the case within this section This Court in Sherall Walli Mohammed v.
State of Maharashtra: (1972 Cr.LJ 1523 (SC)), held that the mere fact that
no motive has been proved why the accused murdered his wife and child
or the fact that he made no attempt to run away when the door was broken
open would not indicate that he was insane or that he did not have
necessary mens rea for the offence.
160.          Also as held in a similar case where absence of motive was
pleaded in Baswantrao Bajirao Vs. Emperor, 1949 Cri.L.J., 181(Bombay),
In Beg v. Haynes, (1859) 1 P and P 666 : 175 B. Rule 898)
Bramwell B. in summing up to the jury, said:
As to the defence of insanity, it has been urged for the
prisoner that you should acquit him on the ground that, it being
impossible to assign any motive for the perpetration of the offence, he
must have been acting under what is called a powerful and irresistible
influence, or homicidal tendency. But I must remark as to that that the
circumstances of an act being apparently motiveless is not a ground from
which you can safely infer the existence of such an influence. Motives
exist unknown and innumerable which might prompt the act. A morbid
and restless (but resistible) thirst for blood would itself be a motive urging
to such a deed for its own relief. But if an influence be so powerful as to
be termed irresistible, so much the more reason is there why we should
not withdraw any of the safeguards tending to counteract it.
161.          The accused in the present case may be frustrated on account
of matrimonial discord as disclosed by him in his disclosure statements
which was subsequently confirmed in the statement and also deposition of
PW Seema, the wife of the accused. She had also stated before police that
the accused had fight with her father and sister on 31.12.2018, 2 days
prior to the incident and he had to go away, after the fight. Admittedly he
was separated from his wife. Or the accused may be a case of societal
maladjustment, or he had some grudge against some person at Palwal
Hospital and he killed someone else, or may be wanted to take revenge
from his wife and father in law whose house he visited in the end or he
wanted to create an atmosphere of terror and wanted revenge from society
as a whole, for not giving him what he had expected in life. Motive is
relevant but the Court of Law is not preoccupied with motive. It is mens
rea ie guilty mind and actus reus ie consequent illegal act which matters in
law. If a man deliberates and intends to commit a crime and commits it,
the same is sufficient to inculpate him, irrespective of the absence of
proof of any motive or enmity against the victim. He cannot claim that
since he had no motive to kill a person, he may be acquitted on this
162.         It may well be asked as to what is the motive or enmity of a
habitual thief or a rapist and killer just like Nirbhaya Case where after
commission of rape, unspeakable cruelty was inflicted on the victim.
What was the motive of the serial killers in Nithari Case of (in 2005-
2006) where the killers, murdered 19 children and then committed rape on
dead bodies and then ate their body parts, or in the case of Cyanide
Mohan who killed 20 women (in 2005-2009)who were looking for a life
partner , or in the case of Cyanide Mallika (1999-2007) who killed 6
women in temple to loot their jewellery or Thugh Behram (1790-1840)
who was proved to have killed 125 people and suspected to have killed
931 people, by strangulation with a Rumaal (handkerchief) for the
purpose of robbing them or in the case of Psycho Shankar (2008-2011)
who raped and murdered 19 women or in the case of Renuka Shinde and
Seema Gavit (1990-1996) who kidnapped 13 children and killed 5 of
them for the purposes of begging and theft, or in the case of Chandrakant
Jha who killed 18 people (1998 -2007) after befriending them as they
needed jobs, helping them in finding small jobs, letting them stay in his
own house, then fighting over trivial matters with them, then losing his
temper, and killing them. He used to kill his victims and dumped them
outside Tihar, an Indian prison, leaving a note on the corpse, saying he
wanted to challenge the police.
163.         The only motive which one can find in such like criminals is
irresistible criminal impulse and tendency. All these serial killers did not
have any enmity with the victims, still they intended to commit barbaric
crimes and committed the same and were accordingly punished by the
Courts of Law. They had a guilty mind and they committed the crimes
and the same was sufficient to punish them. None of these criminals can
be said to have a healthy mind. Every brutal murder, rapist or one
committing bestiality has an abnormal impulse to commit crimes to
satisfy a hunger for lust, anger, greed and violence. Similarly in the
present case the accused cannot claim to be acquitted, as he did not know
the 6 helpless and innocent victims, who were brutally murdered by him.
He had a criminal intent to commit extreme violence, and he committed
164.          Even if the motive of the accused is not proved nor any
previous enmity is proved, the same would be inconsequential. The two
essential elements of his culpability ie mens rea (guilty mind or intent)
and actus reus (criminal act), both are proved beyond reasonable doubt to
the effect that the accused intended to kill the victims and he killed them.
It is proved that the accused gave multiple blows of iron-pipe on the head
of each victim, repeatedly so as to break open their skulls, and they
immediately died shows that his one and only intention was to kill the
victim, as per Section 3009 firstly) of IPC, which says,
Section 300. Murder.Except in the cases hereinafter
excepted, culpable homicide is murder, if the act by which the death is
caused is done with the intention of causing death, or
165.          The very act of inflicting repeated blows with iron-pipe on
the skulls of the victims proves that the accused intended that the deaths
of the victims are caused and the deaths were immediately caused. Thus
he is guilty of offence punishable under Section 302(1) of IPC.
166.          As held in Jai Lal vs Delhi Administration (supra),
The `intention' and `knowledge' of the accused are
subjective and invisible state of mind and their existence has to be
gathered from the circumstances, such as the, weapon used, the ferocity of
attack, multiplicity of injuries and all other surrounding circumstances.
167.          Thus, the intention of the accused is proved from the manner
in which he inflicted the blows with iron-pipe, that he committed the act
with the intention of killing the victims.
168.          In Sudhakaran's case (supra), Surendra Mishra's case (supra),
Jai Lal's case (supra) and Siddhapal Kamala Yadav's case (supra) The
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India held that even if the accused had suffered
from insanity or psychiatric decease much prior to the incident or after the
incident, the same does not prove that he was insane at the time of
commission of offence. It was also held that where the accused prepared
for the offences, committed it meticulously and then tried to escape, he is
not legally insane. In the present case, the accused came prepared with a 4
foot long and 1 inch thick iron-pipe from his house, meticulously selected
the victims, who were defenseless, helpless and vulnerable which
included 2 persons, who were sleeping, 2 security gaurds and 2 persons
who were going on their jobs. He silently attacked them from behind,
murdered them and then absconded. He tried to abscond to another
District by asking PW Devi Ram at 7:00 AM to leave him at Ballabgarh,
District Faridabad. He tried to wash of his blood-stained hand and feet as
he requested PW Kamlesh for water, for the said purpose. Also as
deposed by 6 Police Officers, he tried to escape and assaulted them in the
process.
169.         The defence has relied upon the precedents laid down in
Devidas Loka Rathod v. State of Maharashtra Criminal Appeal No. 814 of
2017, Date of Decision 02.07.2018 (SC), Ghana Gogoi v. State of Assam
Crl. Appeal No. 104(J) of 2008, Date of Decision 18.06.2013 (Guhati),
Mohan Lal v. State, Through P.P. Criminal Appeal No. 6 of 2020, Date of
Decision 27.01.2022 (Rajasthan) and Kalam Gulab Patel v. The State of
Maharashtra, Criminal Appeal No. 154 of 2014, Date of Decision
170.         The case law relied by the Defence in is not applicable to the
facts of the case as the accused in those cases were proved to be legally
and medically insane, they could not lead normal lives and had to be tied
and some even defecated in their clothes, whereas the present accused has
never been legally or even medically insane. The accused in those cases
were poor and could not maintain the records of medical treatment where
as in the present case the accused is a Government Officer and was well
to do. In those cases the accused did not try to escape where as in the
present case the accused not only attempted escape, but also caused
injuries to 6 policemen in the process and could only be apprehended with
great difficulty.
171.          The accused assaulted all 6 victims in the dead of night and
when no one was around. Such sort of calculated offences and attempt to
escape are not done by the insane persons, as opined in A Textbook of
Medical Jurisprudence And Toxicology by Rai Bahadur Jaising P. Modi,
Chapter XIX (6th Edition,1940). The relevant parts of the Chapter on
insanity are produced as under.
The Absence of Secrecy.The murderer, if he happens to be
insane, does not try to conceal the body of his victim, nor does he attempt
to evade law by destroying evidence of his crime or by running away
from the scene of the murder.
Lastly, handwriting will show the mental confusion, the
misspelling, the omission of letters or phrases and the muscular tremor, if
an educated insane person is asked to write.
There is always some motive for feigning insanity. For
instance, a criminal pretends insanity to escape punishment for his
offence, especially when he is placed on trial. In civil practice an
individual feigns insanity to try and avoid the results of business
transactions or deeds, which he may have executed. Policemen, soldiers
and sailors do so, when they wish to leave the service and are not allowed
to do so, or when they know that they are likely to be punished very
severely for some gross neglect of duty
The following are the distinguishing features between feigned and true
1. Feigned insanity always comes on suddenly, and not
without some motive. True insanity may rarely develop all of a sudden
but, in that case, some predisposing or exciting cause will be evident, if a
2. In feigned insanity there is no peculiarity in the facial
expression, which is generally observed in the fully developed forms of
insanity.
3. In feigned insanity the individual tries to pass off as insane
by putting forward incoherent maniacal symptoms, especially when he
knows that he is under observation. There is a total remission of all the
symp- toms, when he thinks that he is alone and unobserved.
4. In feigned insanity the symptoms are not uniform,
indicating any particular type of insanity. Malingerers usually mix up the
symptoms of one or two distinct types of insanity. Such a condition, may,
however, exist in true insanity.
5. In feigned insanity violent exertion occasioned by
imitating maniacal frenzy (which is generally imitated by impostors) will
bring on exhaustion, perspiration and sleep, but a really insane person can
stand such exertion for many days without sleep and fatigue.
6. A malingerer is not, as a rule, dirty and filthy in his habits.
He may smear his room with faeces and other filth, if he has seen a true
lunatic doing so. He will, however, keep a clear space for sleeping and
will spare his person.
7. The dry, harsh skin and lips, the furred tongue,
constipation, want of appetite and insomnia are, very often, physical
manifestations of true insanity. These are, as a rule, absent in feigned
insanity, as they cannot possibly be imitated by a malingerer.
172.          The accused in the present case has been feigning insanity, if
seen from the parameters laid above by Modis Jurisprudence. It has been
specifically mentioned in the abovesaid classic on medico-legal
jurisprudence that insanity is feigned by the undertrials to escape the
punishment of the offences. As per the reports of the Jail Superintendent,
the accused remained normal in jail and his general condition was normal,
where as he talked loudly in the judicial lock-up. Also he has always
remained neat and tidy unlike the insane persons,which is a case of
feigning of insanity as held in Modi's Medical Jurisprudence and
Toxicology (supra). It is also specifically mentioned by the great Author
Modi that insanity is often feigned by a soldier or policeman, to seek
discharge from service, when he is unable to perform his duties, as in the
present case when accused sought discharge from his duties, which was a
hard training in Ghatak Platoon, where the Officers are to live with
soldiers under tough circumstances. The accused sought such discharge
from Army in 2001-2002 and then joined Government service in 2006
and regularly performed it for next 12 years. It is also pertinent to mention
that the handwriting of the accused while marking his presence in Court
has always been clear and without any smudging or mis-spelling. He
himself wrote the dates below his signatures, as reflected in the case file,
for a large number of times. Thus, he is not proved to be insane as there is
no missing or wrong date, recorded by the accused while signing his
presence in the Court. He has written an application for his release on
psychiatric grounds. The application is dated 17.3.23. It has been placed
on case file. The application is detailed and elaborate, giving every
description of his Army serial number, his village and even the village
where Courts are situated. The entire application is neatly written without
any spelling mistake. The application has been written in his own
handwriting as told by him. The same corroborates the feigned insanity
detailed by Modis Jurisprudence.
173.         Even otherwise, the accused has been regularly doing his job
for last 12 years and there is no document on record that he was insane at
any point of time. Also, as discussed above bi-polar psychosis does not
amount to insanity. The same is a mental condition of phases of
depression excitement.
174.         As per Press Release of GBD India Mental Disorders Paper,
issued by Indian Council of Medical Research, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, Government of India, on 23.12.2019, 197.3 million
Indians are suffering from mental issues on account of frustration,
depression, anxiety, stress, sleeplessness, over-eating, psychosis and
aggression etc. Out of the same 77 lacs people are suffering from
psychosis, as the accused is told to be suffering. Exculpating the accused,
on account of the said psychiatric treatment, 77 lacs people in India would
be given a licence to kill on account of insanity and a much large number
on account of depression etc. disorder. In fact, these are common
disorders and they cannot be termed as insanity.
175.         From the above-said discussion, it is proved that defence
taken by the accused of insanity is proved to be a false defence. He is not
proved to be of unsound mind at the time of the offences committed by
176.         In view of the above discussion, it is proved that the accused
Naresh Dhankar committed the murders of Anjum, Subhash, Sita Ram.
Munshi Ram, Khemchand and Surender, in the intervening night of
01.01.2018/02.01.2018 with an iron-pipe and committed the offence
punishable under Section 302 of IPC. Also, he attempted to kill the Police
Ramdiya, Constable Lukman and SPO Har Parshad and committed the
offence punishable under Section 307 of IPC. It is also proved that he
obstructed their official duties, caused hurt to them with intent to prevent
them from discharging their duties and used criminal force in the process,
and thus he committed offences punishable under Sections 332, 353, 186
of IPC.
177.         Hence, accused Naresh Dhankar is hereby convicted for
commission of offences punishable under Sections 302, 307, 332, 353,
186 of IPC.
178.         Now to come upon 21.03.2023 for hearing the convict
Naresh Dhankar on the quantum of sentence.
Pronounced in open Court:                     (Prashant Rana)
Note: Certified that this judgment contains 150 pages and all the pages of
this judgment have been checked & signed by the undersigned.