This Contempt Petition is filed to punish the respondent for his wilful
disobedience of the order, dated 16.03.2021 passed by this Court in
Crl.R.C.No.112 of 2021.
2.The petitioner is the de-facto complainant. The respondent is the
Investigating Officer. Originally, the petitioner gave a complaint before the
Inspector of Police, District Crime Branch, Namakkal District, against one
Natesan and Rajavelu. On the basis of the complaint given by the petitioner,
the respondent police registered a case in Crime No.32 of 2011 for the
offence under Sections 147, 148, 447, 294(b), 120(b), 420, 467, 468, 471
and 506(ii) IPC. After completing the investigation, the respondent police
closed the case as 'Mistake of Fact' on 10.02.2014 and did not serve RCS
notice to the petitioner. Since the petitioner did not receive the Referred
Charge Sheet Notice from the respondent police, this Court directed the
respondent police to serve RCS notice forthwith to the petitioner and
granted liberty to the petitioner to file a protest petition in the manner
known to law. Subsequently, the petitioner filed protest petition before the
learned Judicial Magistrate, Tiruchengode in C.M.P.No.1045 of 2020. The
learned Magistrate, after hearing the arguments and considering the
materials available on record, has given certain directions based on the
decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Vishnu Kumar Tiwari
-vs- State of Uttar Pradesh, reported in 2019(3) MLJ (Crl.) 406 SC.
Challenging the same, the petitioner filed Criminal Revision Petition before
this Court in Crl.R.C.No.112 of 2021. This Court, after hearing the
arguments, directed the respondent to conduct fresh investigation and also
directed to expedite the investigation and file a charge sheet in accordance
with law, within a period of three months from the date of receipt of a copy
of this order. Subsequently, the present respondent, who is an Investigating
Officer, took up the investigation and completed the same. After
completion of investigation, the respondent police closed the case in Crime
No.32 of 2011 as 'mistake of fact', on 10.02.2014 and served RCS notice on
the same day and also filed final report before the learned Judicial
Magistrate, Tiruchengode. Therefore, the petitioner has filed the present
Contempt Petition that the respondent wilfully disobey the order of this
dated 16.03.2021 in Crl.R.C.No.112 of 2021, when notice was served to the
respondent and he appeared through the Government Advocate and also
filed her counter.
3.The learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioner would
submit that this Court has specifically directed the respondent police to
conduct fresh investigation in accordance with law, despite the respondent
has not conducted the investigation in a fair manner. Therefore, the
respondent police has disobeyed the order of this Court.
4.The learned Government Advocate (Crl.side) appearing for the
respondent would submit that the respondent police has conducted fresh
investigation, as directed by this Court and during the investigation, 15
witnesses were examined. The petitioner/de-facto complainant was
examined as L.W.1 and the sister-in-law of the petitioner was also examined
as L.W.2 and one S.N.Pandian was examined as L.W.10 and also the
statement, under Section 164(5) Cr.P.C before the learned Judicial
Magistrate, was recorded.         After the completion of investigation, the
respondent police finds that the dispute between the parties is civil in nature
and there is no prima facie offence made out and she has conducted the
investigation in a fair manner and therefore, the Investigating Officer closed
the case as mistake of fact and served RCS notice to the petitioner and also
filed final report before the learned Judicial Magistrate and she has also
tendered her unconditional apology for any wrong doing on her part.
Therefore, she has not disobeyed the order of this Court.
5.Heard Mr.R.Singaravelan, learned Senior Advocate appearing for
the petitioner and Mr.S.Sugendran, learned Government Advocate (Crl.side)
appearing for the respondent and perused the materials placed before this
6.Admittedly, the petitioner is the power of attorney and she has filed
a complaint against one Natesan and Rajavelu before the respondent police
and the respondent police had registered the case against the said persons in
Crime No.32 of 2011 for the offence under Sections 147, 148, 447, 294(b),
120(b), 420, 467, 468, 471 and 506(ii) IPC. After completion of
investigation, the respondent police filed referred charge sheet before the
jurisdictional Magistrate Court and subsequently, the petitioner filed a
protest petition before the Judicial Magistrate Court, Tiruchengode. While
deciding the protest petition, the learned Magistrate gave certain directions.
Challenging the said order, the petitioner has filed Criminal Revision Case
before this Court. This Court, after hearing the arguments, directed the
respondent police to conduct fresh investigation. As per the direction of this
Court, once again the present respondent police, who is the Investigating
Officer, has investigated the case and after completion of investigation, the
the said complaint was closed, as 'mistake of fact', that the dispute involved
in the case is civil in nature. Therefore, the petitioner has filed the present
contempt petition that the respondent police wilfully disobey the order of
this Court dated 16.03.2021 passed in Crl.R.C.No.112 of 2021.
7.A reading of the materials, it is seen that the respondent police
conducted fresh investigation, as per the direction of this Court and during
the course of investigation, the petitioner was examined as L.W.1 and
recorded her statement.        One S.N.Pandian/L.W.10        is also one of the
attestors to the disputed document in Document No.379/2000, dated
02.02.2000 and he was produced before the learned Judicial Magistrate,
Kumarapalayam and recorded his statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. The
said S.N.Pandian knows one Kamalam, who is the executor of the said
disputed document, was brought by one of her relatives and she executed
the sale deed, wherein, the said Pandian signed the document as one of the
attestors. Based on the statement of the list of witnesses, the learned
Magistrate has come to the conclusion that the dispute between the parties is
civil in nature and therefore, the respondent police has closed the criminal
case and served RCS notice to the petitioner and also filed referred charge
sheet before the jurisdictional Magistrate.
8.On a careful perusal of the records, this Court does not find that the
respondent police wilfully disobey the order of this Court.               Since the
respondent police, after completion of investigation, has filed charge sheet
before the Jurisdictional Magistrate Court, the petitioner can file protest
petition before the Judicial Magistrate and proceed with the case in
accordance with law. Though this Court finds that the capacity of the
investigating officer is not upto the mark and within her capacity she has
investigated the case, the incapacity of the investigation officer cannot be
treated as wilfully disobey the order of this Court. Unfortunately, as on date,
the police department is running with 90% of the corruptive officers as well
as the officers not having adequate capacity to do the investigation and only
10% of the officers are honest and abled officers. The 10% of officials
alone cannot do all the investigation. Therefore, it is right time to sensitize
the officials and find out to eradicate corruptive officers and give adequate
training to the officers those who are not corruptive but they are incapacity
to do investigation. It is relevant to state that on the date of preferring
original complaint the alleged executor of the sale deed was very much
alive, if the respondent police immediately examined the said Kamalam, the
entire truth would have come out. Whereas till the death            of the said
Kamalam, the respondent police did not examine her.
9.In view of the above, this Court finds that there is no wilful
disobedience by the respondent police. Hence, this Contempt Petition is
closed. However, the petitioner is at liberty to take action against the
respondent police for her incapacity, in the manner known to law and also
work out her remedy before the Judicial Magistrate, by way of filing the
protest petition and proceed with the case further in accordance with law.