Dated this the 4th day of April, 2022
The interesting question in this transfer petition is as
Is the inconvenience of the power of attorney holder
of the husband is a reason to disallow transfer of a petition
pending before the Family Court at the instance of the wife,
highlighting her convenience.
2.    This transfer petition has been filed under
Section 24 of the Code of Civil Procedure by the petitioner,
who is the wife, seeking transfer of O.P.No.1038/2021
pending before the Family Court, Muvattupuzha to Family
Court,    Kozhikode,    where     she    has    been  residing
3.    Heard both sides in detail.
4.    Adv.Shiras Aliyar appeared for the respondent
zealously opposed transfer on the submission that the
respondent is a male nurse working abroad and therefore,
he appointed his father as power of attorney to conduct the
case.    If the  transfer is  allowed,  the  same    will  be
inconvenient for the father who is aged and ailing to reach
Kozhikode to conduct the case. Therefore, the transfer
cannot be allowed, is the submission of the learned counsel
for the respondent.
5.    The sum and substance of the objection raised
by the respondent is that, if transfer sought for is allowed,
the same would be inconvenient for the power of attorney
holder. It is not in dispute that by appointing a power of
attorney, a principal appoints an agent to conduct his case
and such an agent can be anybody capable of travelling
and contesting the case of the respondent for and on behalf
of the respondent. Nobody is permitted to shield the
contention of the wife after appointing an agent who is
incapable to conduct the case, for reasons such as age old
condition, ailment etc. To be precise, the inconvenience of
the power of attorney holder (whether he is male or female)
is not a reason to deny transfer sought for by the wife.
Therefore, this objection is found to be merit less.
6.    Accordingly, taking note of the convenience of
the wife as has been submitted, this transfer petition
stands allowed.
In    the    result,     this    petition   is    allowed.
O.P.No.1038/2021     pending      before   the  Family    Court,
Muvattupuzha shall stand transferred to the Family Court,
Kozhikode. Family Court Muvattupuzha is directed to
forward the case records to the Family Court, Kozhikode,
forthwith. Parties shall appear before the Family Court,
Kozhikode on 18.05.2022.
Registry shall forward a copy of this order to the court
below concerned, within seven days, for information and