Counsel for Petitioner :­ Pradumn Tripathi
Counsel for Respondent :­ C.S.C.
1.     Petitioner ­ a woman, could not participate in the Physical
Efficiency Test (PET) scheduled on 23.3.2021 in pursuance of
recruitment process for the post of Jail Warder's (Male, Female)
when she was in the family way (7 th month of pregnancy). Later
on, she delivered a baby on 2.6.2021. She duly communicated
about her medical condition to the respondents on 23.3.2021 and
subsequently on 26.3.2021 but they remained unheard and in
these circumstances, petitioner has approached this Court with the
prayer that respondents' authorities be directed to conduct
Physical Efficiency Test by providing her an attempt.
2.     Shri Pradumn Tripathi, learned counsel for petitioner has
submitted only submission to grant an opportunity to the
petitioner to appear for Physical Efficiency Test as she was not able
to appear on date fixed due to her pregnancy and delivery of a
3.     The above submissions are opposed by Dr. Amar Nath Singh,
learned Standing Counsel that there is no provision of granting
WRIT ­ A No. ­ 16580 of 2021
any further opportunity to appear for the said Test. He relied upon
a judgment passed by the Supreme Court in State of Uttar
Pradesh and others vs. Pankaj Kumar; (2022) 1 SCC 335 as
well as judgment passed by a co­ordinate in Writ A No.2971 of
2020 (Yogesh Kumar vs. State of U.P. and another), decided
on 1.10.2020, that a recruitment process would be meaningless
without a time line and second chance to appear could not be
4.     Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
5.     To achieve above high status, a woman has to carry a life
within her for about nine months, the period during which, she
not only has to face different physiological changes but has to
cross various psychological situations as well.
6.     The petitioner has travelled journey of the motherhood and
became a proud mother, but forced to pay heavy price for it, being
denied permission by respondents to appear for physical efficiency
test, after she gave birth to a baby.
7.     Petitioner's future prospect and her legitimate right to
complete all steps for recruitment process for post of Jail Warder
are withheld by the respondents. She could not appear in the said
test because it was scheduled during her fourth month of
pregnancy and her representation for giving a chance to appear for
WRIT ­ A No. ­ 16580 of 2021
test after delivery of a child remained unnoticed.
8.     In these circumstances, which were beyond control of the
petitioner after she conceive , the Court has to weigh arguments of
respondents at the anvil of constitutional powers provided under
Article 226 of the Constitution. In support of contention of the
respondents that there is no provision for providing a further
chance to appear for Physical Efficiency Test and that entire
process of recruitment is already over, heavy reliance is placed
upon Pankaj Kumar (supra), that recruitment process would be
meaningless without a time line.
9.     It is relevant to consider time line of present case that date
for Physical Efficiency Test was 23.3.2021, when petitioner was in
her 4th month of pregnancy, therefore she requested for other
date. Thereafter, she gave birth to a baby on 2.6.2021 her request
for fixing a date for aid test, remained unheard. Then she
approached this Court on 9.11.2021, therefore, within 8 months
she is before this Court by way of filing present writ petition. Thus,
facts of Pankaj Kumar (Supra) where respondent therein was
denied a further attempt to appear in the test because he
approached belatedly, however, petitioner herein has promptly
approached before Court, therefore, equity is also in favour of
10.    It is apt to mention here that power conferred on the High
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution is to advance justice
and not to thwart it (State of Uttar Pradesh vs. District Judge
Unnao and others; AIR 1984 SC 1401). The very purpose of such
Constitutional powers being conferred on the High Court is that no
person should be subjected to injustice by violating the law.
WRIT ­ A No. ­ 16580 of 2021
11.   In Gujarat Steel Tubes Ltd. and others vs. Gujarat Steel
Tubes Mazdoor Sabha and others; (1980) 2 SCC 593, the
Supreme Court has held that Article 226 is a sparing surgery but
lancet operates where injustice suppurates. The wide words of
Article 226 are designed for service of the lowly numbers in their
grievances if the subject belongs to the Court's province and the
remedy is appropriate to the judicial process.
12.   In view of above analysis on fact and law, I am of the
considered opinion that facts and circumstances of present case
warrants for interference and to pass appropriate order and
direction to impart justice to the petitioner by exercising powers
granted to Court under Article 226 of the Constitution, therefore,
this writ petition stands disposed of with following directions :­
i) The respondents' authorities are directed to fix a date between
16.5.2022 to 20.5.2022 for conducting Physical Efficiency Test of
petitioner providing prior information to her.
ii) On the basis of outcome of Test referred above, merit of
petitioner shall be declared and in case, she got more than cut off
marks, she shall be appointed on the post of Jail Warder. However,
if process is already completed, petitioner shall put at the bottom
of merit list and her candidature will be considered if a vacancy
arose due to non­joining of a selected candidate or otherwise.