Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Ajai Pratap Singh
Heard learned counsel for petitioner, learned State Counsel
appearing for opposite party No.1, Mr. Pankaj Patel, learned
counsel appearing for opposite party No.2 and Sri Ajai Pratap
Singh Chauhan, learned counsel for opposite party Nos.3 and 4.
Petition has been filed seeking the following reliefs:-
"(i) issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus
commanding the opposite parties 3 and 4 to make payment of
full amount of gratuity to the petitioners along with interest in
view of the amended provisions of Section 4 of Payment of
Gratuity Act, 1972 (amended vide Government of India
Notification dated 24.05.2010) as well as the order dated 28/31
December 2019 passed by the Opposite party No. 4 contained
as Annexure No.1 to the writ petition.
(ii) Issue such other suitable order or directions which this
Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper under the facts and
circumstances of the case.
(iii) Allow the writ petition with cost."
Learned counsel for petitioner submits that the petitioner is
Class III employees of opposite party No.3. Learned counsel for
petitioner submits that thereafter the opposite parties have
admitted to make payment of complete amount of gratuity and
also paid Rs.19,200/- in the month of May, 2021, but since then
remaining amount of Rs.3.06 lacs and statutory interest accrued
thereon is still due. He next submits that the opposite party had
indicated a condition that due to the precarious financial
condition of the corporation, payment to petitioner would be
made in future whenever the funds are available.
Learned counsel for petitioner submits that the gratuity amount
of an employee like the petitioner is not a bounty to be
distributed at the sweet will of the employer and that the
petitioner has a vested right to be paid his gratuity amount
within a reasonable time from the date of superannuation.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the opposite parties has
reiterated the fact that while the corporation admits its liability
towards payment of pensionary benefits of petitioner, the same
can not be paid instantly in view of precarious financial
condition of the corporation whenever the funds are available
with corporation.
Considering the material on record and submissions advanced
by learned counsel for parties, it is apparent the the opposite
parties do not deny their liability for making payments of
pensionary benefits to petitioners.
Precarious financial condition of a corporation can not be a
ground to delay payment of pensionary benefits that are due to
superannuated employee. It is settled law in the case of D.S.
Nakara versus Union of India reported in AIR 1983 Supreme
Court Cases 130. Hon'ble the Supreme Court has already held
that pensionary benefits are not a bounty to be distributed at the
sweet will of the employer. Similarly in the case of Kapila
Hingorani versus State of Bihar reported in (2003) 6 SCC 1
Hon'ble the Supreme Court has already held that the precarious
financial condition of the employer is not a valid ground for
delaying or not making payment of pensionary benefits of a
superannuated employee in which it has been held as under:-
"Financial stringency may not be a ground for not issuing
requisite directions when a question of violation of fundamental
right arises. This Court has been highlighting this aspect in the
matters concerning fundamental rights and maintenance of
ecology. See Rural Litigation and Entitlement Kendra and Ors.
v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors.. AIR (1987) SC 359 =
[1986] Supp. SCC 517, Ratlam Municipality v. Vardi Chand,
[1980] 4 SCC 162 and B.L. Wadhera v. Union of India, AIR
Learned counsel for petitioners, Mr. Pankaj Patel, learned
counsel appearing for respondent-State submits that the
federation has sent requisition to the State Government seeking
grant/loan in order to provide benefits to its employees as
directed by the Court although learned counsel for petitioner
submits that such a requisition is irrelevant in view of the fact
that the same contention has already been rejected earlier by
In view of the aforesaid facts, the opposite parties are directed
to make payment of the outstanding gratuity amount of the
petitioners as indicated in the order dated 31st October, 2020
within a period of four months from the date a copy of this
order is produced. Grant of interest to the petitioners shall also
be considered by the opposite parties within the same time
period and if found eligible, the petitioners shall be paid the
same along with the gratuity.
Consequently, writ petition stands allowed at the admission
stage itself.