Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 2101 of 2020
Counsel for Appellant :- Rajrshi Gupta,Dileep Kumar(Senior
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.,Gyan Prakash(Senior
Heard Sri Dileep Kumar, learned Senior Advocate assisted
by Sri Rajrshi Gupta and Sri Rajiv Lochan Shukla, learned
counsel for the appellant, Sri Gyan Prakash, learned Senior
Advocate assisted by Sri Sanjay Kumar Yadav, learned counsel
for the respondent-CBI.
The incident is of 21.02.1985. Charge sheet came to be
filed before the Special Court at Rajasthan on 17.07.1985. On a
petition by the complainant before the Hon'ble Supreme Court,
the matter came to be transferred to the Mathura Sessions
Court vide order dated 11.10.1989. The charge was framed by
the Sessions Court, Mathura, and the trial concluded by
judgment and order dated 22.07.2020.
A preliminary objection has been raised by learned
counsel appearing for the respondent-CBI that this appeal is not
entertainable before Allahabad High Court as the cause of
action/incident took place in District Bharatpur, Rajasthan,
accordingly,   Rajasthan  High   Court   would  have   territorial
jurisdiction to entertain the criminal appeal. In support of his
submission, reliance has been placed on the decision of the
Full Bench of this Court rendered in Paritosh Kumar Vs. Union
of India & Others1, wherein, it was held that a petition under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. against an order passed by Special Judge,
CBI, at Lucknow, is entertainable in Allahabad High Court.
The court was dealing with the Amalgamation Order and held
that jurisdiction would depend on the cause of action.
The facts and proposition of law of the said case is not
similar to the case in hand. Present case relates to transfer of
trial from one State to another by the Supreme Court in
exercise of power under Section 406 of Code of Criminal
Learned counsel appearing for the appellant submits that
submission        of   learned counsel for the respondent-CBI   is
misconceived. A case came to be registered at Police Station
Deeg, District Bharatpur, State Rajasthan. Investigation of the
case was transferred to the Central Bureau of Investigation
(CBI) vide notification dated 01.03.1985, thereafter, the trial
came to be transferred to Mathura by the Supreme Court. The
appellants, herein, came to be convicted and sentenced by the
Sessions Court at Mathura. In this backdrop, it is urged that
the appeal would lie before this Court and not at Rajasthan. In
support of his submission, reliance has been placed on the
decision rendered by the Division Bench of this Court passed in
the case of Vikas Yadav Vs. State of U.P. 3, wherein, the
incident of crime took place in District Ghaziabad and the trial
was transferred from Ghaziabad to Tees Hazari Court, New
Delhi. The Court was of the opinion that the appeal against the
order of conviction and sentence was cognizable by Delhi High
Court. The relevant portions of the decision rendered in Vikas
Yadav (supra) is extracted:
“The undisputed facts relevant for this decision are that
an offence is alleged to have been committed by the
appellant along with others at Ghaziabad, which falls within
the territory of Uttar Pradesh and, which is within the
territorial jurisdiction of the main seat of the High Court at
Allahabad. The case was committed to the Court of Session
and was pending in the Court of the Sessions Judge,
Ghaziabad. By an order dated 23.8.2002, the Supreme Court
in exercise of powers under section 406 Cr. P.C. transferred
the trial "to the Sessions Court in Delhi". This order was
passed in Transfer Petition (Crl) No. 449/2002 - Nilam
Katara Versus State of U.P. and others. Subsequently,
another order was passed by the Supreme Court on
25.10.2002 saying that because by its earlier order dated
23.8.2002 the case has been transferred from Ghaziabad
(U.P.) to the Sessions Court in Delhi, therefore, all
proceedings in relation to the said criminal application
would be filed only in Delhi High Court. The order further
says that if the accused has filed any application for bail
which is pending before the Allahabad High Court, that also
shall stand transferred to the Delhi High Court. By the
impugned judgment dated 30.5.2008, the Additional Sessions
Judge, New Delhi has convicted the appellant and sentenced
him to imprisonment for life under section 302/34 I.P.C., 10
years R.I. under section 364/34 I.P.C. and 5 years R.I. under
section 201/34 I.P.C. and has also imposed fine of Rs.
1,00,000/-, Rs. 50,000/- and Rs. 10,000/- respectively with
regard to the aforesaid offence.
The statutory provision relevant for the present appeal
is section 374 (2) Cr. P.C., which is reproduced below for
"374. Appeals from convictions.-
(2) Any person convicted on a trial held by a
Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge
or on a trial held by any other Court in which
a sentence of imprisonment for more than
seven years has been passed against him or
against any other person convicted at the same
trial, may appeal to the High Court.
In the definition clause that is section 2 of Cr. P.C.
"High Court" has been defined in clause (e). The relevant
part of the definition says that "High Court" means in
relation to any State, the High Court for that State.
Section 374(2) quoted above does not talk at all about
the commission of offence but merely talks about conviction,
trial, Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge. The
words "High Court" have also therefore to be interpreted in
that context.
Section 406 gives the power to the Supreme Court to
transfer a criminal trial inter alia from a criminal court
subordinate to one High Court to another criminal court
subordinate to another High Court. In exercise of that power
and pursuant to the order of the Supreme Court, the trial
was transferred from the sessions Court at Ghaziabad
(subordinate to Allahabad High Court) to the Sessions Court
in Delhi (subordinate to Delhi High Court). Thus, the trial
took place at Delhi by an Additional Sessions Judge of Delhi
State, the conviction was recorded by the said Delhi Court
at Delhi and, therefore, the "High Court" for the purpose of
section 374 (2) Cr.P.C. would also mean the High Court of
The Additional Sessions Judge of Delhi was not acting
as a Judge of Uttar Pradesh while holding the trial. The
learned Judge while holding the trial was not sub-ordinate
to the Allahabad High Court but continued to be sub-
ordinate to the Delhi High Court. The appeals ordinarily lie
from the decisions of that Court to the Delhi High Court.
There is yet another reason for taking the above view.
If while hearing the appeal, the High Court were to direct
prosecution in respect of an offence covered by section 195
Cr.P.C. of any person connected with the trial, in respect of
the offence committed in relation to the trial, it would have
to be the Delhi High Court to which the Court of Additional
Sessions Judge, Delhi is sub-ordinate. In this connection, the
provisions of section 195(1) and 195(4) are relevant.
Again under section 397 Cr.P.C. the High Court of
Delhi alone can exercise revisional powers and the
Allahabad High Court cannot exercise revisional powers in
respect of the trial by the Delhi Court as exercise of such
power is contingent upon the court below (1) being inferior,
and also (2) being situate within its local (i.e. territorial)
jurisdiction. If the appellant had been acquitted in respect of
some of the charges and the complainant (not being entitled
to file appeal {see section 378 (4)}, the case being not upon
complaint but upon police charge-sheet), could have filed a
revision against acquittal only in Delhi High Court.
Permitting the accused to appeal against the conviction in
one High Court and the complainant to file a revision
against acquittal in another High Court, may lead to the
undesirable result of conflicting orders. Normally in such
situation the appeal and the revision are connected and
heard together, because they are in the same Court.
Moreover, whenever, civil suits or criminal trials before
Magistrates are transferred by the High Court from one
district to another in exercise of powers of section 24 C.P.C.
or section 407 Cr. P.C. and appeals or revisions from such
suits or trials lie before the District Judge, it is always the
District Judge of the district to which the case has been
transferred, who hears the revisions and appeals and not the
District Judge of the place from which the case has been
transferred.
In view of this settled position of law, we have no
hesitation in holding that this appeal is not maintainable in
the Allahabad High Court for want of territorial jurisdiction.
The appeal accordingly is dismissed as not maintainable.”
Before Three Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in
Jayendra Saraswati Swamigal alias Subramaniam v. State of
Tamil Nadu4, the question arose as to which State Government
i.e. Tamil Nadu or           Pondicherry is the appropriate government
to appoint Public Prosecutor or Additional Public Prosecutor or
Special Public Prosecutor. In the given facts, the Sessions case
came to be transferred by the Supreme Court in exercise of
power under Section 406 Cr.P.C. from the Sessions Court of
Chinglepet in Tamil Nadu to the Principal District and Sessions
Judge, Pondicherry. The Court held that once the case is
transferred as per Section 406 Cr.P.C. to another State, the
transferor State no longer has control over the prosecution to
be conducted in a court situated in a different State to which
the case has been transferred. It is the prerogative of the State
Government (transferee State) to appoint a Public Prosecutor to
conduct the case which is pending in the Sessions Division of
The aforenoted authority came to be followed by a
subsequent Three Judge Bench in K. Anbazhagan v. State of
Karnataka        and  others5,    the  Supreme   Court   transferred
prosecution of the case to the State of Karnataka under Section
406 Cr.P.C. from the State of Tamil Nadu. The State of
Karnataka had appointed B as Special Public Prosecutor under
Section 24(8) Cr.P.C. to conduct the trial. However, in the
appeal       before  the    Karnataka   High  Court,   Tamil   Nadu
Government appointed B as Special Public Prosecutor to defend
the said criminal appeal. The main issue before the Supreme
Court was whether B had any authorization to defend the
criminal appeal on behalf of the Tamil Nadu in the High Court
The Court held that the State of Tamil Nadu (transferor
State) could not have appointed B as Special Public Prosecutor
to defend the criminal appeal against conviction in the
transferred case. It could have been done by the State of
Karnataka (transferee State). It therefore follows that once the
case is transferred as per Section 406 CrPC to another State,
the transferor State no longer has control over the prosecution
to be conducted in a court situated in a different State to
which the case has been transferred. It is the prerogative of the
State     Government     (transferee  State) to appoint   a   Public
Prosecutor to conduct the case which is pending in the Sessions
Division of that State. These powers are also to be exercised by
the State Government of the transferee court where the
Sessions case is pending.
In the same corollary, in the facts of the instant case,
having regard to the provisions of the Cr.P.C., the appeal
against the judgment and sentence in the Sessions case would
be maintainable before the High Court of the transferee State
(Uttar Pradesh) and not that of the transferor State (Rajasthan).
Preliminary objection raised by respondent-CBI regarding
jurisdiction of this Court to entertain the appeal is rejected.
Present appeal is maintainable before this Court i.e.
On the joint request of the learned counsel for the
parties, list this case on 9th February, 2022.
Digitally signed by MUKESH KUMAR