This appeal has been preferred by the respondent in
O.P (G&W) No.1139 of 2017, challenging the proceedings of the
Additional District Judge-VI, Ernakulam dated 22.11.2021.
2. O.P (G&W) No.1139 of 2017 was filed by Smt.Sandhya,
mother of minor girl Nivedya, against the respondent, who is the
father of the minor and husband of the petitioner. Due to strained
marital relationship, the petitioner and respondent were living
separately and the minor child was staying with her mother. Plaint
schedule property was owned by the maternal grandmother of the
minor child, and it was settled in her favour as per settlement deed
No.1766/2012 of SRO, Tripunithura. The petitioner-wife filed that
O.P for declaring her as the guardian of the person and property of
the minor Nivedya.
3. The respondent-husband challenged the jurisdiction of the
Family Court in entertaining that petition. He contended that the
District Court is not having jurisdiction, as the entire right of the
District Court, by virtue of the Guardian & Wards Act, has been
taken over by the Family Court as per Section 7 (1) explanation (g)
of the Family Courts Act, 1984.
4.  The District Court, after hearing the rival contentions
raised by the parties, found that, when custody of the property of a
minor is involved, the jurisdiction is with the District Court and so,
that court has jurisdiction to entertain that O.P. In this appeal, the
respondent-husband is challenging that finding.
5.   Heard learned counsel for the appellant and the
6. The question to be considered here is, whether the District
Court is having jurisdiction to entertain a petition for appointment
of guardian for the person and property of a minor.
7.   Learned counsel for the appellant contended that,
matrimonial relationship between the appellant and the respondent
was dissolved on mutual consent on 31.12.2015.           Even prior to
that, his mother executed a settlement deed in favour of his minor
child on 21.05.2012, reserving life interest for the appellant in the
property and the house situated therein. The respondent-wife filed
O.P (G&W) No.1139 of 2017 before the Additional District Court-
VI, Ernakulam, for appointing her as the guardian of the person
and property of the minor child.        According to the appellant,
Section 7(1) explanation (g) of the Family Courts Act, 1984 takes
away the jurisdiction of the District Court, and so, the O.P is not
maintainable     before    that  court.  Moreover      he   has    filed
OP No.931 of 2019 before the Family Court, Muvattupuzha, for
getting custody of the minor child and it is still pending.
8. Section 7 of the Family Courts Act, 1984, lays down that a
family Court shall have, and exercise all jurisdiction exercisable by
any District Court or any subordinate civil Court under any law for
the time being in force, in respect of suits and proceedings of the
nature referred to in the Explanation which, inter alia, includes,
according to clause (g), a suit or proceeding in relation to the
guardianship of the person or the custody of, or access to, any
minor. Section 8 of the Family Courts Act, specifically says that
where a family Court has been established for any area, no District
Court or any subordinate civil Court referred to, shall, in relation to
such area, have or exercise any jurisdiction in respect of such suits
or proceedings referred to, in the Explanation which includes clause
(g). (relied on Abraham G Karimpanal and others vs. Nil – AIR
9. So, there is no doubt with regard to the fact that, in a suit
or proceeding in relation to the guardianship of the person or the
custody of, or access to, any minor, the jurisdiction of the District
Court is taken away by the Family Courts Act as per Section 7(1)
explanation (g) of the Family Courts Act, 1984.      But, when the
question involved relates to appointment of guardian in respect of
the property of minor, the Family Court has no jurisdiction, as that
dispute is not coming under explanation (g) to Section 7(1).
10.  In Devi Lal Bhagat vs. Rekha Bhagat          reported in
2008 (3) KLT SN 14 (C No.16), the Jharkhand High Court held that,
on    a bare reading of Section 7(1) explanation (g) of the Family
Courts Act, 1984 and Section 9 of the Guardian & Wards Act, 1890,
'it is manifestly clear that the suits and proceedings including the
suit or proceeding where any question of guardianship of the
person of any minor or his custody or access to him arises, whether
governed by any personal law or the provisions to the Guardians
and Wards Act, would be cognizable only by the Family Court, if the
mater arises within the area over which the jurisdiction is
exercisable by the Family Court. The Family Court has no
jurisdiction if the question involved relates to appointment of
guardian in respect of the property of a minor whether under
personal law or any other law for the time being in force. However,
in such suits or proceedings where question of appointment of a
guardian for both purposes namely person and property of a minor
is involved, the Family Court would have no jurisdiction, as Clause
(g) of the Act does not include proceeding in relation to property of
a minor'.
11. A Single Bench of this Court had occasion to consider a
similar issue in Anitha Abraham vs. Jacob Oommen reported in
2003 (1) KLT 417, in which this Court found that the Family Court
has no jurisdiction to entertain an application to appoint a person
as guardian of the property of the minor. The judgments in Susila
Naik vs. Judge, Family Court, Rourkela (AIR 1988 Ori. 61) and
in Kamal V.M Allaudin vs. Raja Shaikh (AIR 1990 Bom. 299)
were also relied upon by the learned Single Judge to reach that
12.  In the case in hand, the mother of the minor child
approached the District Court for appointing her as the guardian of
the person and property of the minor Nivedya. Learned counsel for
the appellant submitted that the appellant had filed O.P No.931 of
2019 before the Family Court, Muvattupuzha, for getting custody of
the child under Section 7(1) explanation (g) of the Family Courts
Act and it is pending consideration of that court. But, in O.P (G&W)
No.1139 of 2017, the respondent is praying for declaring her as the
guardian of the person and property of the minor.        Since Family
Court has no jurisdiction to entertain a petition for guardianship of
the property of the minor, no doubt, the jurisdictional District Court
has to entertain that petition.
13. Section 7 of the Guardian & Wards Act, 1980 empowers
the jurisdictional District Court to appoint a guardian of the person
or property or both of a minor or to declare a person to be such a
guardian, if the court is satisfied that, it is for the welfare of the
minor. Section 8 of the Guardian & Wards Act sets out the class of
persons on whose application alone, the court can exercise the
power vested in it by Section 7.       The court is exercising parens
patriae jurisdiction to ensure the welfare and well-being of the
14. Now let us see whether the District Court can entertain a
suit or proceeding in relation to the guardianship of the person or
the custody of, or access to any minor when the jurisdiction of the
District Court is taken away by the Family Court, as per
Section 7(1) explanation (g) of the Family Courts Act. The Family
Courts are set up for the settlement of family disputes, to
exclusively provide within the jurisdiction of the Family Courts, the
matters relating to matrimonial relief including nullity of marriage,
judicial separation, divorce, restitution of conjugal rights or
declaration as to the validity of marriage or as to the matrimonial
status of any person, the property of the spouses or of either of
them, declaration as to the legitimacy of any person, guardianship
of a person or the custody of any minor, maintenance etc. etc. as
seen from the statement of objects and reasons in the bill
presented for the enactment of the Family Courts Act. The nature
of   suits   and    proceedings     coming    within    the   jurisdictional
competence of a Family Court is enumerated in Section 7 of the
Family Courts Act.       When parties to a marriage or an erstwhile
marriage seek guardianship of the person or the custody of, or
access to their minor children, it is exclusively a suit or proceeding
coming under explanation (g) to Section 7(1) of the Family Courts
Act, and then the jurisdiction of a District Court or Subordinate Civil
Court is taken away as per Section 8 of the Family Courts Act which
(a)   no district court or any subordinate Civil
Court referred to in sub-section (1) of section 7 shall, in
relation to such area, have or exercise any jurisdiction in
respect of any suit or proceeding of the nature referred
(b)   no magistrate shall, in relation to such area,
have or exercise any jurisdiction or powers under
Chapter IX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of
referred to in the Explanation to sub-section (1) of
section 7 and every proceeding under Chapter IX of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),-
establishment of such Family Court before any District
Court or subordinate Court referred to in that sub-section
or, as the case may be, before any Magistrate under the
instituted or taken before or by such Family Court if,
before the date on which such suit or proceeding was
instituted or taken, this Act had come into force and such
shall stand transferred to such Family Court on the date    on
which it is established”.
15.    In the case in hand, the mother of the minor child
approached the District Court to appoint her as the guardian of the
person and property of the minor daughter Nivedya. The relief for
appointing her as the guardian of the person of the minor is
exclusively coming under explanation (g) to Section 7(1) of the
Family Courts Act and so, the jurisdiction of the District Court with
respect to that relief is taken away by the jurisdictional Family
Court.    The respondent/father has already filed a petition before
the Family Court for getting custody of the minor daughter. If the
District Court also is proceeding for appointment of guardian of the
person of the minor, it may result in conflicting decisions. So, as
far as the dispute between parties to an erstwhile marriage
regarding guardianship of the person, or the custody of, or access
to their minor child, the jurisdiction of the District Court is taken
away by the Family Court. The fact that a court cannot appoint a
guardian of the person, is no bar for appointing a guardian of the
property. Since the question regarding guardianship of the person
of the minor between the parents of the minor is to be decided by a
Family Court, the District Court cannot decide on that issue,
especially when the proceedings initiated by the appellant for
getting guardianship and custody of the minor child is pending
consideration before a Family Court.          In case of overlapping
jurisdiction, it may result in contradictory orders, which may affect
the welfare and well-being of the child, which is of paramount
consideration. In suits or proceedings of the nature coming under
explanation (g) to Section 7(1), the Family Court alone will get
jurisdiction and the jurisdiction of the District Court is ousted, going
by Section 8 of the Family Courts Act.
16. As far as the impugned proceedings of the District Court
dated 22.11.2021 is concerned, with respect to the jurisdiction to
entertain the petition for appointing guardian for the property of
the minor, there is no illegality or impropriety which warrants our
interference. But, with respect to the appointment of guardian of
the person of the minor, the District Court has no jurisdiction, as it
is a dispute squarely coming under explanation (g) to Section 7(1)
of the Family Courts Act. So, to that extent, the proceedings of the
District Court is liable to be set aside.       The District Court can
proceed with the O.P for appointing guardian for the property of
the minor, and not for the person of the minor.
This appeal is allowed in part to that extent. The District Court
is directed to dispose the case, as expeditiously as possible. The
parties shall suffer their respective costs.