Counsel for Respondent :- Shahnawaz Akhtar,Rama Goel
1.    Heard Sri A.P. Tewari, learned counsel for the petitioner and Ms.
Rama Goel Bansal, learned counsel for the respondents.
2.    This petition has been filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India assailing the order dated 21.12.2021 passed by Prescribed Authority/
Additional District Judge, Court No.7, Badaun allowing the release
application filed by the respondents no.1 to 3 and setting aside the order
dated 23.04.2011 passed by Prescribed Authority/Civil Judge (Senior
Division), Badaun dismissing the release application of the landlord-
3.    Case, in nutshell, is that the landlord-respondents no.1 to 3 filed
Rent Case No.03 of 2009 (Sri Manoj Kumar Agrawal and others Vs. Sri
Collectorate, Badaun) under Section 21(1)(a) of The U.P. Urban Buildings
(Regulation of Letting, Rent and Eviction) Act No. 13 of 1972
(hereinafter called as “Act No.13 of 1972”) for releasing the
accommodation in dispute which is a residential portion purchased by the
landlord-respondents on 06.06.2006 from its previous owner Arun Kumar
4.     The landlord-respondents claimed themselves to be the grand-sons
of one Lala Brij Lal. The entire family of Late Brij Lal consists of 27
members. The landlord-respondents are the sons of one Anand Prakash
Agrawal. Lala Brij Lal had a double storey ancestral house at Mohalla
Khandsari, District Badaun which consists of one gallery, verandah, two
rooms on ground floor and three rooms on the first floor. As the family of
the landlord-respondents was growing up, there stood personal need for
the landlord and their family members, as each one of them required
separate room for living. The accommodation in dispute is in the tenancy
of the tenant-petitioner who is a practising lawyer at Badaun.
5.     The said release application was filed on 03 rd July, 2009 and the
same was contested by the tenant-petitioner by filing his objection/reply,
wherein it was denied that there existed any need of the landlord and they
were having other accommodation, wherein their need could be satisfied.
6.     After exchange of pleadings and affidavits, the trial Court on
23.04.2011 found that the need of the landlord-respondents was not
genuine and bona fide and the comparative hardship tilted in favour of the
tenant. The release application filed under Section 21 (1) (a) of U.P. Act
No.13 of 1972 was rejected.
7.     Aggrieved by the order of the Court of first instance, a Rent Appeal
No.16 of 2011 was filed by the landlord-respondents, wherein, the
appellate Court found that the Court of first instance had wrongly
recorded finding that the landlord had other accommodation in their
possession and the said fact having been conceded, the release application
was wrongly rejected and the need of the landlord was genuine and bona
fide and comparative hardship tilted in favour of the landlord as no effort
was made by the tenant-petitioner to search alternative accommodation
during the pendency of the release application.
8.     Vide order impugned dated 21.12.2021, the appeal was allowed and
the order passed by the Court of first instance was set aside, hence this
writ petition.
9.     Sri A.P. Tewari, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the
appellate Court had wrongly reversed the finding recorded by the
Prescribed Authority and without examining the material on record held
the need of the landlord as genuine and bona fide. He further contended
that the trial Court had recorded categorical finding that the landlord had
concealed material fact that they were having other accommodation and
the trial Court had recorded categorical finding to the effect relying upon
the affidavit filed in favour of the tenant-petitioner. He then contended
that while re-appreciating the evidence the appellate Court was duty
bound to meet the finding returned by the Court of first instance and also
while deferring from the finding and conclusion drawn by Court of first
instance, specific finding should have been recorded, but the appellate
Court failed to do so.
10.    He next contended that the landlord had purchased the western
portion of the accommodation in the year 2013 and was residing in the
same and the trial Court had rightly repelled the argument of the landlord
and rejected his application on the ground that there was genuine and
bona fide need.
11.    Sri Tewari, learned counsel next tried to impress the Court upon the
finding of the trial Court that landlord-respondents were having
alternative accommodation with them, wherein their need could be
satisfied and these facts were deliberately concealed by the landlord while
filing the release application and only averment, to the extent that there
was an ancestral house at Mohalla Khandsari, Badaun, was made in the
release application.
12.    Ms. Rama Goel Bansal, learned counsel appearing for the landlord-
respondents submitted that the appellate Court had recorded a categorical
finding of fact that the other accommodation as disclosed by the trial
Court was not in the exclusive ownership of the respondents-landlord and,
in fact, was owned and in possession of father of the landlord. She further
contended that in the house situated at Mohalla Khandsari, the landlord-
respondents were only having ancestral right and it was a small house
wherein the legal heirs of late Brij Lal were residing and all of them had
share in it.
13.    Ms. Bansal, further contended that a house adjoining the ancestral
house was purchased by the father of the landlord and in the said house
Anand Prakash was carrying on business of manufacturing of edible
products. She further contended that the house which was willed in
favour of the father of the landlord by one Vedwati, a civil litigation is
going on before the Civil Judge (Senior Division), Badaun.
14.    As far as the house situated at Bhurji Vali Gali is in the name of
Anand Prakash from where he is carrying out his business and having a
godown, the landlord- respondents have no concern with the same.
Further, the said house is in a dilapidated condition.
15.    According to Ms. Bansal, the description of the property given by
the tenant to be of the landlord was, in fact, neither owned nor possessed
by the respondents-landlord and in fact, the ownership is with the father
of the landlord who is in possession of the same and is running his
business in the said accommodation. She then contended that the property
as claimed by the tenant to be situated in Purana Bazar being in
possession of the respondents is, in fact, a shop which has been taken on
rent by the landlords, whereas the need of the respondents are for
residential purpose and not for starting business. She has relied upon the
decision of the Apex Court in case of Prativa Devi (Smt.) Vs. T.V.
Behal 2002 (5) SCC 397, Balwant Singh alias Bant Singh and another
Vs. Sudarshan Kumar and another 2021 SCC OnLine SC 114.
16.    I have heard rival submissions of the parties and perused the
material on record.
17.    It is not in dispute that the accommodation in question was let out
to the tenant-petitioner and the same was purchased by the respondents-
landlord on 06.06.2006. The release application filed under Section 21 (1)
(a) of U.P. Act No.13 of 1972, in detail, disclosed the pedigree of the
landlord-respondents and the number of family members which is 27 had
been living in their ancestral double storey house situated at Mohalla
Khandsari, District Badaun. As the family of Lala Brij Lal grew up, the
requirement also arose as the house consisted of one gallery, verandah,
two rooms on the ground floor and three rooms on the first floor.
18.    Looking to the genuine and bona fide need of the growing family,
the respondents-landlord purchased the accommodation in question on
06.06.2006. The release application was contested hotly by the tenant-
petitioner who is a practising advocate at District Badaun. In his
objection/reply, he came up with the case that the landlord-respondents
have not come up before the Court with clean hands and were having
number of alternate accommodation with them in the city of Badaun,
wherein their need could be satisfied.
19.    Affidavits were filed in his support and the Court at first instance
considering the objection/reply rejected the release application of the
landlord on 23.04.2011 on the ground that the application was filed
concealing the fact that landlord-respondents had other accommodation
available with them and their need was not genuine and bona fide, while
the comparative hardship tilted in favour of the tenant.
20.    The appellate Court while re-appreciating the evidence reversed the
finding of the trial Court and held that the findings recorded were totally
in disregard with the evidence on record which conclusively proves the
facts that the alternative accommodation shown to be with the landlords
was not in his exclusive ownership and was in fact, the properties
purchased by the father of the petitioner and in the ancestral property, the
landlord-respondents were having share.
21.     In one of the property, the appellate Court found that the Will which
was executed in favour of the landlords as well as their father, a civil
litigation is going on between the parties in regard to the genuineness of
22.     The appellate Court further recorded a categorical finding that no
effort was made by the tenant during the pendency of the matter in
searching alternative accommodation and only a publication in a
newspaper, which was not in much circulation in the District Badaun, was
made on 27.05.2008. After that no effort was made for getting alternate
accommodation as such, the comparative hardship tilted in favour of the
landlords. The appeal was allowed on 21.12.2021 setting aside the order
dated 23.04.2011 and allowing the release application.
23.     The argument raised by Sri Tewari as to non-recording of finding
by the appellate Court while reversing the finding of the trial Court does
not hold ground, and from the perusal of the judgment of the appellate
Court, it is clear that specific finding has been recorded on each and every
aspect of the case specially in regard to the alternate accommodation as
held by the trial Court being with the landlord.
24.     The appellate Court had recorded specific finding that the landlord-
respondents were only having share in the ancestral house, and the other
three accommodations shown at different places were actually in the
ownership and possession of their father Anand Prakash, and not in the
ownership and possession of the landlords.
25.     The appellate Court had also recorded finding from the evidence
filed before the trial Court that from the accommodation which was in the
exclusive ownership of Anand Prakash, he was carrying on his own
business of edible products and was also using as a godown.
26.    Further, the house alleged to have come in the share of the
landlords through Will executed by one Vedwati, a civil litigation is going
on in respect of genuineness of Will. As far as the shop which has been
taken on rent by the landlord, their need cannot be satisfied as the release
application has been filed for the accommodation for residential purpose.
27.    The Apex Court in Prativa Devi (Smt.) (Supra) has held that
landlord is the best judge of his residential requirement. He has a
complete freedom in the matter. It is no concern of the Courts to dictate to
the landlord how, and in what manner, he should live or to prescribe for
him a residential standard of their own. The Apex Court further held that
there is no law which deprives the landlord of beneficial enjoyment of his
28.    In Shiv Sarup Gupta (Supra), the Apex Court considered the
scope of bona fide and genuine need of a landlord, which is as
“13. Chambers 20th Century Dictionary defines bonafide to
mean 'in good faith : genuine'. The word 'genuine' means
'natural; not spurious; real: pure: sincere'. In Law Dictionary,
Mozley and Whitley define bonafide to mean 'good faith,
without fraud or deceit'. Thus the term bonafide or genuinely
refers to a state of mind. Requirement is not a mere desire. The
degree of intensity contemplated by 'requires' is much more
higher than in mere desire. The phrase 'required bonafide' is
suggestive of legislative intent that a mere desire which is
outcome of whim or fancy is not taken note of by the Rent
Control Legislation. A requirement in the sense of felt need
which is an outcome of a sincere, honest desire, in contra-
distinction with a mere pretence or pretext to evict a tenant, on
the part of the landlord claiming to occupy the premises for
himself or for any member of the family would entitle him to
seek ejectment of the tenant. Looked at from this angle, any
setting of the facts and circumstances protruding the need of
landlord and its bonafides would be capable of successfully
withstanding the test of objective determination by the Court.
The Judge of facts should place himself .in the arm chair of the
landlord and then ask the question to himself-whether in the
given facts substantiated by the landlord the need to occupy the
premises can be said to be natural, real, sincere, honest. If the
answer be in the positive, the need is bonafide. The failure on
the part of the landlord to substantiate the pleaded need, or, in
a given case, positive material brought on record by the tenant
enabling the court drawing an inference that the reality was to
the contrary and the landlord was merely attempting at finding
out a pretence or pretext for getting rid of the tenant, would be
enough to persuade the Court certainly to deny its judicial
assistance to the landlord. Once the court is satisfied of the
bonafides of the need of the landlord for premises or additional
premises by applying objective standards then in the matter of
choosing out of more than one accommodation available to the
landlord his subjective choice shall be respected by the court.
The court would permit the landlord to satisfy the proven need
by choosing the accommodation which the landlord feels would
be most suited .for the purpose; the court would not in such a
case thrust its own wisdom upon the choice of the landlord by
holding that not one. but the other accommodation must be
accepted by the landlord to satisfy his such need. In short, the
concept of bonafide need or genuine requirement needs a
practical approach instructed by realities of life. An approach
either too liberal or two conservative or pedantic must be
guarded against.
14. The availability of an alternate accommodation with the
landlord i.e. an accommodation other than the one in
occupation of the tenant wherefrom he is sought to be evicted
has a dual relevancy. Firstly, the availability of another
accommodation, suitable and convenient in all respects as the
suit accommodation, may have an adverse bearing on the
finding as to bonafides of the landlord if he unreasonably
refuses to occupy the available premises to satisfy his alleged
need. Availability of such circumstance would enable the Court
drawing an inference that the need of the landlord was not a felt
need or the state of mind of the landlord was not honest,
sincere, and natural. Secondly, another principal ingredient of
Clause (e) of Sub-section (1) of Section 14, which speaks of
non-availability of any other reasonably suitable residential
accommodation to the landlord, would not be satisfied.
Wherever another residential accommodation is shown to exist
as available than the court has to ask the landlord why he is not
occupying such other available accommodation to satisfy his
need. The landlord may convince the court that the alternate
residential accommodation though available is still of no
consequence as the same is not reasonably suitable to satisfy
the felt need which the landlord has succeeded in
demonstrating objectively to exist. Needless to say that an
alternate accommodation, to entail denial of the claim of the
landlord, must be reasonably suitable, obviously in comparison
with the suit accommodation wherefrom the landlord is seeking
eviction. Convenience and safety of the landlord and his family
members would be relevant factors. While considering the
totality of the circumstances, the court may keep in view the
profession or vocation of the landlord and his family members,
their style of living, their habits and the background wherefrom
they come.
20. In Sarla Ahuja v. United India Insurance Co. Ltd., this
Court has held that the Rent Controller should not proceed on
the assumption that the landlord's requirement is not bonafide.
When the landlord shows a prima facie case a presumption that
the requirement of the landlord is bonafide is available to be
drawn. It is not for the tenant to dictate terms to the landlord as
to how else he can adjust himself without giving possession of
the tenanted premises. While deciding the question of bonafides
of the requirement of the landlord, it is quite unnecessary to
make an endeavour as to how else the landlord could have
adjusted himself.”
29.    In Raghvendra Kumar (Supra), the Apex Court dealt with a
situation, wherein the landlord had made a statement that the house and
shop were not vacant and the suit premise is suitable for his business, the
Court found that such statement of the landlord cannot be faulted.
“10. The learned Single Judge of the High Court while
formulating first substantial question of law proceeded on the
basis that the plaintiff-landlord admitted that there were
number of plots, shops and houses in his possession. We have
been taken through the judgments of the courts below and we
do not find any such admission. It is true that the plaintiff-
landlord in his evidence stated that there were number of other
shops and houses belonging to him but he made a categorical
statement that his said houses and shops were not vacant and
that suit premises is suitable for his business purpose. It is
settled position of law that the landlord is best judge of his
requirement for residential or business purpose and he has got
complete freedom in the matter. (See: Prativa Devi (Smt.) v. T.V.
Krishnan). In the case in hand the plaintiff-landlord wanted
eviction of the tenant from the suit premises for starting his
business as it was suitable and it cannot be faulted.”
30.    In Joginder Pal (Supra), the Apex Court while dealing with the
social legislations like Rent Control Act held that there should be a
balance maintained between the need of a tenant and the landlord. The
legislation does not bend in favour the tenant, nor is against the landlrod.
Relevant paras 6, 7, 8 and 9 are extracted here as under:-
“6. In Malpe Vishwanath Acharya and Ors. v. State of
Maharashtra and Anr., this Court emphasized the need of social
legislation like the Rent Control Act striking a balance between
rival interests so as to be just to law. "The law ought not to be
unjust to one and give a disproportionate benefit or protection
to another section of the society". While the shortage of
accommodation makes it necessary to protect the tenants to
save them from exploitation but at the same time the need to
protect tenants is coupled with an obligation to ensure that the
tenants are not conferred with a benefit disproportionately
larger than the one needed. Socially progressive legislation
must have a holistic perception and not a shortsighted
parochial approach. Power to legislate socially progressive
legislations is coupled with a responsibility to avoid
arbitrariness and unreasonability. A legislation impregnated
with tendency to give undue preference to one section, at the
cost of constraints by placing shackles on the other section, not
only entails miscarriage of just (SIC) but may also result in
constitutional invalidity.
7. In Arjun Khiamal Makhijani v. Jamnadas C. Tuli (SIC) and
Ors., this Court dealing with Rent Control Legislation observed
that provisions contained in such legislations are capable of
being categorized into two : those beneficial to the tenants and
those beneficial to the landlord. As to a legislative provision
beneficial to landlord, an assertion that even with regard to
such provision an effort should be made to interpret it in favour
of the tenant is a negation of the very principle of interpretation
of a beneficial legislation.
8. The need for reasonable interpretation of Rent Control
Legislation was emphasized by this Court in Mst. Bega Begum
and Ors. v. Abdul Ahad Khan (dead) by Lrs. and Ors.. Speaking
in the context of reasonable requirement of landlord as a
ground for eviction the Court guarded against any artificial
extension entailing stretching or straining of language so as to
make it impossible or extremely difficult for the landlord to get
a decree for eviction. The Court warned that such a course
would defeat the very purpose of the Act which affords the
facility of eviction of the tenant to the landlord on certain
specified grounds. In Kewal Singh v. Lajwanti, this Court has
observed, while the rent control legislation has given a number
of facilities to the tenants it should not be construed so as to
destroy the limited relief which it seeks to give to the landlord
also. For instance one of the grounds for eviction which is
contained in almost all the Rent Control Acts in the country is
the question of landlord's been fide personal necessity. he
concept of bona fide necessity should be meaningfully
construed so as to make the relief granted to the landlord real
and practical. Recently in Shiv Sarup Gupta v. Dr. Mahesh
Chand Gupta, the Court has held that the concept of bona fide
need or genuine requirement needs a practical approach
instructed by realities of life. An approach either too liberal or
too conservative or pedantic must be guarded against.
9. The Rent Control Legislations are heavily loaded in favour of
the tenants treating them as weaker sections of the society
requiring legislative protection against exploitation and
unscrupulous devices of greedy landlords. The Legislative
intent has to be respected by the Courts while interpreting the
laws. But it is being uncharitable to Legislatures if they are
attributed with an intention that they lean only in favour of the
tenants and while being fair to the tenants go to the extent of
being unfair to the landlords. The Legislature is fair to the
tenants and to the landlords - both.”
31.   In Balwant Singh (Supra), the Apex Court reiterated that a tenant
cannot dictate how much space is admitted for the landlord. Relevant
“11. On the above aspect, it is not for the tenant to dictate how
much space is adequate for the proposed business venture or to
suggest that the available space with the landlord will be
adequate. Insofar as the earlier eviction proceeding, the
concerned vacant shops under possession of the landlords were
duly disclosed, but the case of the landlord is that the premises/
space under their possession is insufficient for the proposed
furniture business. On the age aspect, it is seen that the
respondents are also senior citizens but that has not affected
their desire to continue their business in the tenanted premises.
Therefore, age cannot be factored against the landlords in their
proposed business.
13. On consideration of the above aspects, the genuine need of
the appellants to secure vacant possession of the premises for
the proposed business is found to be established. According to
us, the adequacy or otherwise of the space available with the
landlord for the business in mind is not for the tenant to dictate.
The special procedure for NRI landlord was deliberately
designed by the Legislature to speedily secure possession of
tenanted premises for bona fide need of the NRI landlords and
such legislative intent to confer the right of summary eviction,
as a one time measure cannot be frustrated, without strong
reason.”
32.    Thus, this Court finds that as the appellate Court had recorded a
categorical finding to the effect that landlord-respondents were in fact, not
having any alternative accommodation in their exclusive possession and
the alternative accommodation as has been brought on record by the
tenant-petitioner was, in fact, in the exclusive ownership of Anand
Prakash, father of the landlord-respondents and one of the accommodation
was under the dispute.
33.    This Court finds that the finding recorded by the appellate Court
cannot be re-appreciated and the evidences cannot be re-assessed by this
Court exercising extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.
34.    No material irregularity has been pointed out by the petitioner to
demonstrate that there was any failure on the part of the appellate Court
while considering the appeal of the respondents. The argument raised at
the bar was only to the effect that the finding returned by the appellate
Court was not specific while reversing the finding of the trial Court.
35.    From the careful analysis of the judgment of the appellate Court, it
is clear that on each and every aspect, the appellate Court has dealt with
the matter as regards the alternate accommodation alleged to be with the
landlord-respondents by the tenant. The appellate Court had recorded
specific finding on each aspect and found the need of the landlord-
respondents to be genuine and bona fide as the family are growing up and
consisted of 9 members, while in his possession only the western portion
of the accommodation which was purchased in the year 2013 was there
and accommodation was needed for the family members. The finding
recorded by the Court below is the finding of fact which needs no
interference by this Court.
36.    As far as the finding recorded as to the comparative hardship is
concerned, this Court finds that the tenant-petitioner had only got
published an advertisement on 27.05.2008 in a local newspaper in
Badaun, for which, finding has been recorded that it does not have much
circulation in the city, otherwise, no effort has been made for searching an
alternate accommodation. Thus, the comparative hardship tilts in favour
of the landlords.   The finding recorded as to the comparative hardship
also needs no interference by this Court.
37.    Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, this Court
finds that no interference is required in the finding recorded by the Court
below in the order dated 21.12.2021.
38.    The writ petition fails and is, hereby dismissed.
39.    However, considering the facts and circumstances the facts that the
tenant-petitioner is a practising lawyer at Badaun and residing in the
disputed accommodation since long, this Court grants six months’ time to
vacate the premises in question subject to the following conditions:-
(a) The tenants-petitioner shall file an undertaking before court below that
they shall hand over peaceful possession of the premises in question to the
landlord-respondents on or before 28.09.2022;
(b) The said undertaking shall be filed before the court below within two
(c) The tenant-petitioner shall pay entire decretal amount within a period
(d) The tenant-petitioner shall pay damages at the rate of Rs.2000/- per
month by 7th day of every succeeding month and continue to deposit the
same in the Court below till 28.09.2022, or till the date he vacates the
premises, whichever is earlier and the landlord is at liberty to withdraw
(e) In the undertaking, the tenant-petitioner shall also state that he will not
create any interest in favour of the third party in the premises in dispute;
(f) It is made clear that in case of default of any of the conditions
mentioned herein-above, the protection granted by this Court shall stand
vacated automatically.
(g) In case the premises is not vacated as per the undertaking given by the
tenant-petitioner, he shall also be liable for contempt.