WP(C).No.11056 OF 2021(S) & con.case
WP(C).No.11056 OF 2021(S) & con.case
(Impleaded as per order dated 07.05.2021 in
WP(C).No.11056 OF 2021(S) & con.case
Dated this the 7th day of May 2021
One good thing about the Covid – 19 pandemic is that it
has shown how ordinary men and women have risen above
themselves.
2. Difficult times throw up new challenges each day and
the wordwide extent of the disease confronts us with the
tenuously fragile nature of human life.
4. There can be no two ways about it that the judicial
system faced arduous challenges in the last more than a year
and taught us that “the price of liberty is eternal vigilance” -
the famous words of Thomas Jefferson, which has gained a
renewed significance in our life time.
5. The Courts have uninterruptedly functioned – evolving
in the process and adopting technology like never before; and
this was possible to a very large extent owing to the inexorable
commitment shown to the justice delivery system by the
WP(C).No.11056 OF 2021(S) & con.case
Advocates and the Advocate Clerks.           They virtually put their
lives at stake to ensure that those who most need its protection
– the vulnerable and the marginalised          – are not left without
legal recourse. The constant but inevitable “lock downs” and
“quarantines” have caused damaging repercussions on court
activities; but in the midst of it all, the system has moved on, as
it must in the future; and certainly there is not gainsaying that
Advocates and Advocate Clerks are an unexpendible component
of it.
6. The “second wave” of the pandemic now once again
forces citizens to confine themselves to their homes and the
Government has issued orders imposing restrictions and even
“lock downs”. We are told reliably that such restrictions and
“lock downs” may have to continue, if required, in future.
7. In such scenario, the petitioners in these cases – which
have been heard together on account of the common issues
impelled – who are practicing counsel, justifiably apprehends
that members of the Bar and their Clerks may be interdicted by
the    Police   Authorities   from     travelling,  to  reach    their
offices/chambers/courts and other legal forums.
8. We had earlier considered W.P.(C) No.11056/2021 on
05.05.2021 and had passed the following order:
WP(C).No.11056 OF 2021(S) & con.case
“The petitioner voices an apprehension that, on
account of Exhibit P1 Government Order, advocates
and their clerks may be interdicted by the police
force from attending their offices, chambers, courts
and other legal forums.
The learned Senior Government Pleader submitted
that the apprehension of the petitioner is completely
baseless since the police are only maintaining
constant vigil and will not disturb the professional
functioning of any lawyer or their office staff. It is
also submitted that if any advocate or clerk is
stopped by the police, it will be sufficient that they
show their identity cards and explain where they are
going and if they are proceeding to their offices,
chambers, courts and other legal forums, they will
not be stopped in any manner.”
9.   Today,    Sri.Suman    Chakravarthy,     learned    senior
Government Pleader, submitted that the afore undertaking has
been      implicitly    complied    with   by     the    Police   and
Sri.G.Sreekumar (Chelur) and Sri.John Mani, the learned
counsel for the petitioners affirm it.
10. That said, we must record that, pending these
matters, the Government has issued a further order imposing a
complete     “lock    down”   in  the  State   of   Kerala   between
08.05.2021 and 16.05.2021. This certainly therefore presents a
further challenge.
11. Sri.Suman Chakravarthy submits that the undertaking
afore recorded by this Court would certainly continue as long
as the restrictions are in force; but that in the case of a
WP(C).No.11056 OF 2021(S) & con.case
complete “lock down”, more stringent measures will require to
be placed, in the movement of Advocates and their Clerks, as
other citizens.      He added that this has been done by the
Government for common good.
12. Sri.John Mani, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner in W.P.(C) No.11060/2021, placed reliance on several
precedents to contend that advocates and their clerks must be
regarded     as   “essential   services” and   prayed  that  their
movement be directed to be not interdicted by the Government
even during “lock down”. He asserted that without Advocates
and their Clerks, the liberties of ordinary citizens cannot be
protected, particularly when the entire system is closed down
on account of the Covid – 19 restrictions.
13. We find some force in the submissions made on behalf
of the petitioners, but it is also equally important that the
restrictions placed by the Government are honoured and
obeyed. As long as “total lock down” are not ordered, the afore
undertaking made on behalf of the State Police Chief will be
maintained; but in the case of total “lock downs”, the situation
certainly will require a further thought.
14. Sri.Thomas Abraham, the President of the Kerala High
Court    Advocates      Association,  appearing  in  person,  also
WP(C).No.11056 OF 2021(S) & con.case
endorsed the view that Advocates and their Clerks must be
allowed at least minimum access to their offices and courts, so
that they will be in a position to file and move litigations, if it
becomes absolutely necessary.
15. Sri.Rejith, the learned standing counsel for the Bar
Council    of   India,   also argued   on   the  afore  lines; but
supplemented it by saying that though the lives of Advocates
and their Clerks        are important, their professional freedom
cannot make be lost sight of.         He, therefore, wanted that,
except for reasonable restrictions, the access of Advocates to
their offices and Courts be not completely prevented.
16. When we consider the afore submissions, it is without
doubt that the situation which comes out of complete “lock
down” is different from one when there are only restrictions.
17. If there is no total “lock down” but only restrictions,
as has been ordered by the Government through Ext.P1 in W.P.
(C) No.11056/2021, certainly the arrangement that we have
directed in the interim order dated 04.05.2021 in the said writ
petition will have to be maintained. However when it comes to
complete “lock down”, the situation is slightly different.
18. We are, therefore, without doubt that these writ
petitions deserve to be ordered in a limited manner and that
WP(C).No.11056 OF 2021(S) & con.case
the afore recorded undertaking given on behalf of the State
Police Chief would operate in future also, except in the case of
an absolute or total “lock down” or such other similar measure.
It is so ordered.
19. As far are as total “lock downs” and such similar
measures are concerned, the Advocates and the Clerks will be
permitted to travel to Courts if physical sittings are notified,
provided they carry an undertaking in the prescribed format, as
also their identity cards. The State Police Chief is directed to
instruct all the Police Officers to ensure that in such event,
lawyers are given essential access to the Courts because,
otherwise, it will be the common man who will be the sufferer,
particularly in criminal matters.       Of course, in exceptional
circumstances on such days, if an Advocate or Clerk requires
access to office also, it will be up to the Police Officer to verify
credentials and take a decision, if such access be allowed.
20. As regards the request of Sri.John Mani, the learned
counsel for the petitioners in W.P.(C) No.11060/2021, that
Advocates and their Clerks be declared as “essential service”,
we do not deem it appropriate that we speak on it in any
manner, since it is a matter to be decided by the Government at
the appropriate level - it being in the realm of policy decision
WP(C).No.11056 OF 2021(S) & con.case
making. We, therefore, leave it open to the petitioners in the
said writ petition to move the Government, including through
Ext.P8, appositely.
These writ petitions are thus ordered.
WP(C).No.11056 OF 2021(S) & con.case
WP(C).No.11056 OF 2021(S) & con.case