The writ on hand has been filed to direct the respondent to
issue the marriage certificate 32 of 1969 indicating the names of the
petitioner as Mrs.Gnanalossany Valmy and that of her parents as
(Father's Name) Mr.Zeganadin Valmy and (Mother's Name)
2. The petitioner states that at the time of marriage the
respondent had entered the name of her parents as “Jagannathan
Vallmy” and “Anjalatsi Ammal”, instead of Zeganadin Valmya and
Virammalle. The petitioner states that she is not conversant with
English and had not noticed the error. She is a French citizen and
the manner in which the names are spelt differs from the English.
The father of the petitioner is also a French citizen. They have
sought to apply citizenship for her daughter and at that time they had
noticed error and accordingly, sought for rectification.
W.P.No.22307 of 2013
3. The petitioner approached the learned Additional Sub
Judge, Pondicherry by filing E.C.O.P.No.23 of 2005 and sought for
rectification. The petitioner states that the Court had verified the
records and allowed the application which reads as follows:
“The Registrar of Births & Deaths, Oulgaret
Municipality, Pondicherry is directed to rectify the name
of the petitioner's father Zeganadin Valmy instead of
DJEGANADIN VALMY and the name of the petitioner's
mother as VIRAMMALLE VALMY instead of VIRAMANY
DITE       ANDJALATCHYAMMALLE             VALMY         and
consequently to direct the Registrar of Birth's and
Death's, Oulgaret Municipality, Pondicherry territory to
enter the substance of the above order to be passed, in
the margin or at the bottom of the said deed of birth of
the petitioner GNANALOSSANY transcribed in the Etate
Civil of Oulgarmet Municipality vide acte No.82 of 1949
recorded on the 4th March, 1949.”
4. Based on the above order the Oulgaret Municipality had
issued a certificate on 14.05.2013 rectifying its records. On the
strength of the certificate, the petitioner had approached the
respondent. The respondent has not considered the claim of the writ
W.P.No.22307 of 2013
petitioner to correct the errors in the marriage certificate. Thus, the
petitioner is constrained to move the present writ petition.
5. The learned counsel for the petitioner made a submission
that as per the provisions of the French Civil Code, which is
enforced in the Union Territory of Pondicherry, the original records
are made available in the Civil Courts. Based on the original records
available, the Additional Sub Judge, Pondicherry passed an order in
E.C.O.P.No.23 of 2005. Therefore, the respondent ought to have
corrected the name based on the order passed by the Additional Sub
6. In order to verify the procedures followed for the purpose
of passing an order in E.C.O.P.No.23 of 2005, this Court has
directed the Additional Sub Judge, Pondicherry to submit a report.
Initially a report was submitted by the Additional Sub Judge,
Pondicherry, which was not satisfactory and the necessary
verification done were not informed to this Court. Again the
W.P.No.22307 of 2013
Additional Sub Judge, Pondicherry was directed to submit further
report clearly stating, whether a trial has been conducted or original
certificates are verified before passing orders in E.C.O.P.No.23 of
2005. The Additional Sub Judge, Pondicherry submitted further
report on 21.01.2022 which reads as under:
Petition No.22307 of 2013 on the file of the High
Court of Judicature at Madras, praying to issue
a writ of mandamus to direct the respondent to
issue the        marriage certificate 32 of 1969
indicating the names of the petitioner as Mrs.
Gnanalossany Valmy and that of her parents as
(Father Name) Mr.Zeganadin Valmy and
Ref: 1.High Court's Order dated 16.12.2021 in
W.P.No.22307 of 2013
2.Co.Lr.No.492/2021 dated 17.12.2021 of
3.W.P.No.22307/2013, dt.07.01.2022 of the
Hon'ble High Court of Madras.
I humbly submit that the petitioner by name
Gnanalossany Valmy, D/o.Zeganadin Valmy and
Virammalle, has filed E.C.O.P. No. 23 / 2005. I further
submit that the original records pertaining to ECOPs
relating to Birth, death and marriage were maintained at
the Central Record of District Court, Puducherry and at
the Pondicherry and Oulgarate Municipality. Further
submit that on searching of the Central Record office, the
original documents of the ECOP 23/2005 is not available.
Further, in that ECOP the petitioner filed the true extract
following documents obtained from the Oulgarate
1. Extract of birth of the petitioner: Acte No.82 /
1949 of Oulgaret Municipality, dt.04.03.1949.
2. Extract of the deed of renonciation by
Zeganadin Valmy. Acte No. 116, dt.07.10.1952.
3. Certified true copy of the order in ECOP No.
46 / 27 on the file of ASJ, Pondicherry, dt.29.08.1997.
4. Extract of deed of the marriage between
Zeganadin VALMY and VIRAMMALLE, Acte No.81/1947
recorded on 05.06.1947, dt. 05.06.1947,
5. Extract of the birth of petitioner's mother
Virammalle acte No.384 recorded on 26.08.1926,
dt.22.08.1926.
Further I submit that, since the           original
documents not avilable in the ECOP bundle, and      only the
true extracts produced and marked my                learned
Predecessor not verified the originals at the       time of
passing the order.
This report humbly submitted as per the
direction of the Hon'ble High Court in the above cited 3rd
reference order, and humbly prays to accept the same.
7. The above report categorically states that originals were
not verified and more specifically, the Civil Court records with
reference to the French Civil Code, were also not verified before
passing orders in E.C.O.P.No.23 of 2005. Based on the documents
filed by the petitioner, E.C.O.P.No.23 of 2005 was allowed.
8. Such a practice of issuing an order by Courts can never
be appreciated. The Courts are bound to conduct an enquiry in such
circumstances, if any application is filed seeking rectification of
W.P.No.22307 of 2013
names or otherwise.        The petitioner filed an application under
Article 99 of the French Civil Code for rectification of the name of
the petitioner's father and mother in the registration of births and
deaths of Oulgaret Municipality, Pondicherry.
9. Merely based on the copies of the documents filed by the
petitioner, the E.C.O.P.No.23 of 2005 was allowed and based on the
order, the Oulgaret Municipality, Pondicherry also carried on
rectification in the register. If such a procedure is followed, there is
every possibility of abuse of process of law. Any such rectification
of name or otherwise must be done by conducting a proper enquiry
and after verifying the original Civil Court records if it is maintained
with reference to the French Civil Code, which is enforceable in the
Union Territory of Pondicherry. Once a petition is filed under Article
99 of the French Civil Code, the original records available with the
French Civil Code must be verified and thereafter by conducting an
enquiry appropriate orders must be passed.
W.P.No.22307 of 2013
10. Contrarily, merely based on the documents filed by the
petitioner, the Court cannot pass such an order, which will result in
abuse of process of law and sometimes there is a possibility of
further error also. Even for attestation, the Gazetted Officers are
verifying the original documents and attesting the xerox copy.
However, in the present case, without looking into the original
documents and without even conducting any enquiry merely based
on the petition filed by the petitioner the relief sought for to alter the
name of father and mother had been granted, which is directly in
violation of all established procedures of Law to be followed by the
Civil Court. Every Civil Court is expected to follow the established
procedures even in an area where there is no specific procedures are
11. It is not as if a relief can be granted merely based on the
petition filed by any person.           Any such petition filed must be
enquired into properly and necessary verifications are to be done
with reference to the original records and thereafter, appropriate
W.P.No.22307 of 2013
orders have to be passed. This being the established procedures to
be followed by the Civil Court of law even in common parlance the
procedures followed by the Additional Sub Judge, Pondicherry, is
unknown to civil law. Therefore, this Court cannot approve such an
order for the purpose of rectification of name of the petitioner's
father and mother in the register of births and deaths.
12. Mr.R.Neelakandan, the learned Additional Advocate
General appearing on behalf of the respondent made a submission
that even as per Rule 13 - A of the Tamil Nadu Hindu Marriage
(Registration) Rules, 1967, for Correction of entries in the Hindu
Marriage Register certain procedures are contemplated, accordingly,
“No correction or alteration in material particulars like name, age,
date or place shall be made in the Hindu Marriage Register without
obtaining the sanction of the Registrar-General. Every correction
or alteration made after obtaining such sanction shall be made by
the Marriage Registrar by a note in the foot note, without any
W.P.No.22307 of 2013
alteration of the original entry and it shall be signed and dated by
13. Therefore, every such correction or alteration must be
done by scrupulously following procedures as contemplated. Such
procedures are mainly prescribed in order to avoid any abuse or
misuse by any persons for effecting alterations or corrections. Thus,
this Court is of the considered opinion that the order passed by the
learned Additional Sub Judge, Pondicherry in ECOP.No.23 of 2005
cannot be relied upon for the purpose of effecting alterations and
correction in the marriage register or otherwise.
14. Even the procedures followed by the Additional Sub
Judge, Pondicherry is directly in violation of the established Civil
Court procedures and therefore such a procedure shall not be
followed hereinafter and only by conducting appropriate enquiry and
on verification of original records such reliefs are to be considered
W.P.No.22307 of 2013
with reference to the applications filed under the relevant provisions
of the French Code of Civil procedures.
15. However, this Court has not gone into the merits of the
case, as the petitioner is yet to establish her case with reference to
the original documents and by way of an adjudication. In this
context, the petitioner is at liberty to approach the Competent Civil
Court of law or the authority for the purpose of adjudication of issues
on merits and with reference to the original records for the purpose
of redressal of their grievances.
16. However, it is made clear that the Courts at Pondicherry
are restrained from issuing any such orders without conducting any
enquiry and without verifying original Civil Court records with
reference to the French Civil Code or otherwise. Merely based on the
copies filed by the petitioners, the Court cannot pass orders without
conducting any trial or enquiry. Such a procedure is known to law
and cannot be approved by this Court.
W.P.No.22307 of 2013
17. Thus, the Courts at Pondicherry are directed to
entertain such applications, consider the same and pass appropriate
orders only after the verification of the original documents and after
conducting an enquiry in the manner prescribed under law.
18. With these directions, the Writ Petition stands disposed
of. No costs.
Note: The Registry is directed to mark copy of this order to the
The Registrar of Marriages
W.P.No.22307 of 2013