Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 1839/2020 & connected matters                                      Page 1 of 6
Through: Mr. Virender Singh, Advocate for
Saxena, Ms. Rabajena Mishra and
for R-1 & 2.
Through: Mr. Virender Singh, Advocate for
Saxena, Ms. Rabajena Mishra and
for R-1 & 2.
1.      This hearing has been done through hybrid mode.
2.      The present four petitions have been filed by Mr. Virender Singh, Mr.
Pardeep Malik, Mr. Ajay Kumar & Mr. Sumit Dahiya who are all sport
persons of renown. They all have been assessed with 100% disability in
speaking and hearing vide the disability certificates which have been granted
to them. By way of the present petitions, the Petitioners seek equal treatment
of the deaf sports persons with other para-athletes along with other reliefs.
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 1839/2020 & connected matters                                     Page 2 of 6
3.      The petitions highlight that the Committee International of Silent
Sports (CISS) Congress in Rome in the year 2001 had resulted in an
agreement between the International Olympic Committee (IOC) and CISS
where a decision was taken at the international level to accord the same
status to Deaflympic games as to the Olympic games and Para-Olympic
games. In effect, therefore, the case of the Petitioners is that sports persons
who participate in Deaflympics, being deaf, would be deserving of the same
status as those who participate in Olympic games.
4.      The four Petitioners, before the Court, have won various medals in
several international events. Their grievance is that sport persons with
hearing disabilities are not treated equal with other sports persons. It is
highlighted that the cash awards and other schemes which are there for other
sport persons does not apply in the same manner to persons with disabilities
and for Para-Olympic sports. The prayer in these writ petitions is, therefore,
for directions to the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports to frame proper
policies in respect of deaf sports as well.
5.      During the pendency of these writ petitions, vide order dated 23rd
March, 2022, a direction was given to the Union of India to place on record
the applicable ‘award policy’ pertaining to Para-Olympics as well as
Deaflympics. Pursuant to the said order, the award policy had been placed
on record as amended on 11th March, 2020.
6.      The submission of ld. Counsel for the Respondent is that broadly as
per the latest policy, various para sports, blind sports, and deaf sports have
also been considered and proper cash awards and other awards have been
announced by the Government.
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 1839/2020 & connected matters                                Page 3 of 6
7.      On the other hand, ld. Counsel appearing for the Petitioners submits
that there are certain issues which still deserve consideration by the
•    The first being that in the category of deaf sports, ‘Deaf Asian
Games’ is missing. He concedes that this may be due to an oversight.
•    Secondly, he submits that a Target Olympic Podium Scheme (TOPS)
has been launched for the purposes of providing assistance to India’s
top athletes who have the capability to win Olympic medals. He
submits that the TOPS scheme is already applicable to ‘para sport
persons’ but it ought to be extended to deaf sports persons as well.
•    Thirdly, he submits that post retirement benefits for deaf sports
persons should be same as those which are matching to the Olympic
games sport persons and para sport persons.
8.      Mr. Ruchir Mishra, ld. Counsel submits that the three issues which
have been highlighted by ld. Counsel for the Petitioner could be treated as a
representation by the Petitioners on which the Ministry would take a
decision.
9.      Heard. The evolution of these writ petitions, since the time they have
been filed would itself show that considerable changes have been brought in
respect of encouragement being given to sport persons in general and sport
persons with disabilities in particular. The latest scheme which has been
placed on record shows that recognition in the form of cash awards and
other benefits has been extended to para sport persons and even those
persons participating in blind and deaf sports. The issuance of such schemes,
awards, benefits, etc., is in the realm of policy of the Government. While in
general there can be no doubt that persons with disabilities ought not to be
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 1839/2020 & connected matters                                Page 4 of 6
discriminated, announcing of policies and schemes is again to be done by
the Government and a specific benefit cannot be directed by the Court. The
contours of judicial review in policy matters have recently been summed up
by the Supreme Court in Small Scale Industrial Manufactures Association
v. Union of India (2021) 8 SCC 511 in the following words-
“17. The correctness of the reasons which prompted
the government in decision taking one course of action
instead of another is not a matter of concern in judicial
review and the court is not the appropriate forum for
such investigation. The policy decision must be left to
the government as it alone can adopt which policy
should be adopted after considering of the points
from different angles. In assessing the propriety of the
decision of the Government the court cannot interfere
even if a second view is possible from that of the
government.
18. Legality of the policy, and not the wisdom or
soundness of the policy, is the subject of judicial
review. The scope of judicial review of the
governmental policy is now well defined. The courts do
not and cannot act as an appellate authority examining
the correctness, stability and appropriateness of a
policy, nor are the courts advisers to the executives on
matters of policy which the executives are entitled to
formulate.
10.     The Petitioners herein are well qualified sport persons who have
earned accolades for India in various international sporting events. Their
outstanding concerns are the following three issues:
•   ‘Deaf Asian Games’ has not been included in the category of
deaf sports.
• TOPS scheme has not been made applicable to deaf sports
persons.
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 1839/2020 & connected matters                                  Page 5 of 6
•   Post-retirement benefits of the deaf sports persons are not the
same as that of other sports persons.
11.     Overall, the prayer of the Petitioners is that the deaf sport persons
ought to be treated on par with para sports persons. In principle, there can be
no doubt and even the Court confirms that deaf sport persons and para sport
persons would have to be treated equally and neither category can be
discriminated against the other. However, on the specific issues highlighted
by the Petitioners, this Court is of the opinion that the same ought to be
considered by the Respondent, after taking an overall view of the matter.
12.     Accordingly, the present writ petition, along with all pending
applications, is disposed with the direction that on the three issues raised
above, the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports would take a decision in a
manner which is fair to persons suffering from speaking and hearing
disabilities.
13.     The said decision shall be taken within a period of three months from
today. In the meantime, since there are certain tournaments which are stated
to be going on, if any interim support is to be given, the same shall be
considered within four weeks.
14.     With these observations, the present petitions, with all the
applications, are disposed of. All remedies are left open.
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 1839/2020 & connected matters                                Page 6 of 6