has presented this writ petition with a prayer inter alia to
issue a writ of certiorari and to quash the impugned
Government Order2; and to direct the State Government to
implement         Endowment      Commissioner's    Report    dated
2.     As   per  petition   averments,   petitioner  is   a
religious       and   charitable   Trust  registered    under    the
provisions of the Indian Trust Act inter alia with aims and
objectives to protect and develop Shri. Guru Dattatreya
Peetha Devasthana, the Cave Temple at Inam Dattatreya
Peetha village in Chandradrona Parvatha, Chickmagaluru.
3.     The 'Peetha' is a major Muzarai Temple under
Mysore Religious and Charitable Institutions Act, 1927. On
06.04.1973, the Karnataka State Board of Wakf took over
the management of the Peetha.              Two devotees namely
2 No.RD 14 Muzarai 2009 dated 19.03.2018
Sriyuths. B.C. Nagaraja Rao and C. Chandra Shekar filed a
suit before the learned Civil Judge, Chickmagaluru for a
declaration that plaint schedule Institution is a holy place of
worship belonging to Hindus and Mohammedans and upon
transfer to the Court of learned District Judge, it was
registered     as   O.S.  No.25/1978;       and    decreed   on
29.02.1980. The Karnataka State Board of Wakf challenged
the judgment and decree in RFA No.119/1980 before this
Court    and    it stood  dismissed    vide   judgment    dated
07.01.1991. The SLP (Civil) No. 17040/1991 filed thereon,
also stood dismissed on 01.11.1991.
4.     The Tahasildar, Chickmagaluru called upon fifth
respondent's father to submit accounts with regard to the
rents collected during the festivals. Fifth respondent's father
challenged the same in W.P. No.2294/1984 contending
inter   alia   that   he  was    the   Sajjada     Nasheen    of
Shri Guru Dattatreya Bababudan Swamy Darga and the
direction issued by the Tahasildar, infringed his right of
management of the Institution. This Court noticed that the
decree passed in suit was not challenged by the State
Government, but the RFA filed by the Wakf Board was
pending consideration in this Court. It also noted that the
State Government and the Muzarai Officers were required
to act in terms of the decree and as such, the State
Government had directed on more than one occasion that
the Institution be restored to the Sajjada Nasheen to be
administered as per practice prevailing prior to 1975, but
no enquiry was made with regard to practices prevailing
prior to June 1975. On 01.03.1985, this Court has disposed
of the writ petition with following directions:
"The   Commissioner     for  Religious   and   Charitable
Endowments in Karnataka shall have the matter enquired into
through the Muzrai Officer and report made to              him,
regarding the practice that was being followed or prevailing
prior to June, 1975 in respect of management of the affairs of
"Sri Guru Dattathreya Swamy Peeta" otherwise known as
"Sree Gurudattathreya Bababudnaswamy Dargha" including
conducting of Urs or festival, its property and all other
matters pertaining to the institution.      The Petitioner and
devotees of the institution shall be afforded an opportunity in
the course of the enquiry. A Public Notice shall also be issued
in this regard.   The commissioner shall on receipt of the
report, take a decision after affording an opportunity of
hearing to the Petitioner and other persons concerned, if any.
On such decision being taken by the Commissioner, it is open
to the Petitioner to challenge the same in accordance with
law. The enquiry shall be completed and the decision shall be
taken on or before the end of August 1985."
5.      Pursuant       to     the      above     directions,      the
Endowment         Commissioner,         submitted     a   Report      dated
25.02.1989 codifying the religious practice prior to 1975.
6.      Petitioner filed a public interest writ petition
registered as W.P. No.31580/2000 with a payer inter alia
for   a     direction    against       the    Deputy     Commissioner,
Chickmagaluru to handover the management of the Temple
to the petitioners. This Court, while disposing of the said
petition,     has    observed       that     steps   were     taken      by
the       authorities         to        appoint      the        Managing
Committee and the same had been challenged in Writ
Petitions No.52801 & 38148/2000, and it was open for the
petitioner     to  implead       itself   in   the  said   proceedings.
Petitioner got itself impleaded in W.P. No.38148/2000 and
also     filed     a     separate        writ     petition     registered
as       W.P.No.43621/2003                challenging        Endowment
Commissioner's order dated 25.02.1989. It was considered
along with W.P. No.38148/2000 and W.P. No.4262/2002;
and disposed of by common order dated 14.02.2007. The
order    passed  by  the   Endowment     Commissioner     was
quashed. The matter was remitted to the Endowment
Commissioner to pass fresh orders. The State Government
challenged the said order in Writ Appeal No.886/2007 and
the same stood dismissed vide order dated 04.08.2008.
7.    An organization by name 'Citizens for Justice and
Peace' challenged the order passed by the Division Bench in
SLP. No.29429/2008. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India
passed an interim order on 01.12.2008 and directed the
Endowment      Commissioner   to  submit   his  Report    and
directed to maintain status-quo as per earlier report of the
Endowment Commissioner dated 25.02.1989.
8.    The Endowment Commissioner submitted his
Report dated 10.03.2010 before the Apex Court suggesting
inter alia that a Hindu Archak be appointed by the
Management Committee for performing daily pooja. The
Sajjada Nasheen and some contesting respondents raised
objections to the said Report. The State Government took
a stand before the Apex Court that in view of the sensitive
nature of the issues involved in the case, it was required to
be considered by the State Cabinet and a decision would be
taken     thereafter.       The    Civil    Appeal       No.2685/2010
(SLP No.29429/2008) and Civil Appeal No.2686/2010 were
disposed of on 03.09.2015 with the following order:
"2. Objections to the said Report have been raised by the
appellant in C.A No.2686 of 2010 who claim to be Sajjada
Nashin and also by some of the contesting respondents in the
present appeal i.e. C.A No.2685 of 2010.
3.   Shri Basava Prabhu S. Patil, learned senior counsel
appearing on behalf of the State has submitted that in view of
the sensitive nature of the issues involved the Report of the
Commissioner is required to be considered by the State Cabinet
and a decision thereon will be taken after considering the
various pros and cons of the matter.     Having regard to the
issues involved and the stand taken by Shri. Patil on behalf of
the State, we are of the view that, at this stage, the State
should be left free to take its decision on the result of the
Enquiry of the Commissioner as indicated in his Report.    The
State Government will naturally be duty bound to take into
account all objections that may be raised against the said
Report including the objections raised by the parties to the
present appeals, as indicated above.     Thereafter, the State
Government will decide the matter. In case any of the
contesting parties have any grievance against such decision
that the State Government may take, it will be open for them
to seek recourse to the legal remedies as may be available.
4.    In view of the aforesaid directions, we do not consider it
necessary to keep the civil appeals pending any longer. Both
the civil appeals and the contempt petition shall stand disposed
of in terms of the above.
5.    Status quo granted by this Court on 1st December, 2008
will continue until the State Government decides the matter in
accordance with the present directions."
(Emphasis supplied)
9.      The State Government appointed a High level
Committee consisting of a former Judge of this Court and
two   others,      to    consider      among       other     things,    the
recommendation made by the Endowment Commissioner in
his order dated 10.03.2010. The High Level Committee
submitted its Report on 03.12.2017 with a recommendation
to continue the nature and character of religious practices,
which were prevailing as on 15th August 1947. Pursuant
thereto, State Government have issued the impugned
10.   Shri. Ashok Haranahalli, learned Senior Advocate
for the petitioner submitted that:
• Having undertaken before the Apex Court that the
cabinet      would     take       appropriate     action,
the State Government have appointed the High Level
Committee to examine the Report and such delegation
is bad in law   and therefore constitution of the High
Level Committee is illegal;
•   The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has directed that
the State Government was duty bound to take into
account all objections raised by the parties against the
report submitted by the Endowment Commissioner
and    thereafter   take    decision   in   the  matter.
The State Government have not issued notice to the
petitioner before passing the impugned order;
• As per     the  terms of reference, the        High  level
Committee was required to examine the Report and to
consider the objections submitted by the parties;
• The Endowment Commissioner has considered the
statements of as many as 1,015 persons/associations.
He has also considered the book 'Kalandar E Barak
Dattatreya Baba Bundan Swami' written by Shri
S.A.Jabbar and published by Shri Shah Khadri. The
High level Committee has discarded the statements of
individuals as 'oral statements and hear say' and the
book as 'hear say evidence and myth'.
• The High level Committee has, on one hand recorded
a finding that legal and factual aspects relating to the
Institution have attained finality and the findings of
the Courts are binding on all persons; and on the
other hand applying the provisions of 'The Places of
Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991' has held that
the practices prevailing as on 15th August, 1947 must
continue. Therefore, the report is untenable in law;
• One of the members of the High level Committee is a
memorialist, who has filed his affidavit on 17.01.2009
before the Endowment Commissioner in the enquiry
ordered by this Court in W.P.No.43621/2003. Being a
memorialist, he    has   favoured the    interest of a
particular community and hence, the report of the
High level Committee suffers from the vice of bias.
11.   Thus in substance, Shri Haranahalli argued that
appointment of the High Level Committee is contrary to the
stand taken by the State Government before the Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India and the impugned order has been
passed without hearing the petitioner which is also contrary
to the directions of the Apex Court.    Further, the State
Government     have   simply   accepted   the    High  Level
Committee without independently considering Endowment
Commissioner's report.
12.   State Government have filed their statement of
objections contending inter alia that the judgment and
decree in O.S.No.25/1978 and RFA.No.119/1980 could be
true; that after disposal of the matter in the Apex Court,
the   State    Government     have   constituted    a   cabinet
sub-committee comprising of Law Minister, Home Minister,
Minister for WAKF and Minister for Primary and Higher
Education. The said Sub-Committee decided that an expert
body    was     required   to   examine      the   Endowment
Commissioner's report and accordingly the High level
Committee was constituted.      The Cabinet Sub-Committee
has considered the report of the High Level Committee and
thereafter, the Cabinet has met and taken an independent
decision as per the directions of the Apex Court.
13.   Shri  Prabhuling K. Navadagi, learned Advocate
General, argued in support of the impugned order.            He
submitted that there are two distinct aspects in this case
namely,    the   secular   and   the   religious.   The   State
Government have very carefully handled this matter by
appointing a High Level Committee to examine the report
of   the     Endowment      Commissioner.      In    reply   to
Shri. Haranahalli's argument that petitioners were not
heard   by   the   State  Government     before   passing   the
impugned order, it was conceded by him that the original
file does not contain any evidence that notices were issued
to the petitioner.
14.   Smt.Neela Ghokhale, learned advocate for fifth
respondent submitted that, in its order dated 06.04.2018,
the Apex Court has recorded the statement made on behalf
of the State Government that impugned order would be
notified in the Official Gazette and in that view of the
matter, the orders of the Apex Court dated 22.09.2017 and
27.03.2017 had stood complied with.       Therefore, the only
remedy for the petitioner is to seek review of the said
order. She further submitted that petitioners' Trust Deed is
not on record and therefore, it does not have locus standi
to prosecute this Writ Petition.
15.   I have carefully considered rival contentions and
perused the records.
16.   In the conspectus of facts of this case, the point
that arises for consideration is whether the decision making
process adopted by the State Government while passing the
order dated 19.03.2018 suffers from any legal infirmity?
17.    Undisputed         facts    of   the    case    are,     suit in
O.S.No.25/1978         has     been     decreed      on    29.02.1980      in
following terms;
"This   suit   coming     on   for  final  disposal   before
Sri.P.Jayaram, B.A., LL.B., District Judge, Chikmagalur in the
presence of Sri. D. Lakshmikanta Iyengar, Advocate for the
plaintiffs and by Sri. K. Durgoji Rao, Government Pleader for D-
1 and D-3 and by Pleader Sri. M.D. Vasantha Kumar for D-4
and D-2 absent.      It is ordered and decreed that not only in
favour of plaintiffs, but also in favour of the Hindu Devotees or
disciples of "Sri Guru Dathathreya Swamy Peeta" declaring that
the plaint schedule Institution is a religious institution being a
holy place of worship belonging to or of the Hindus and
Mohammadans alike where they worship, it is not a Wakf
property and therefore, the inclusion of the plaint schedule
property in the list of wakfs by the second defendant is
improper and illegal, and such inclusion will not affect the rights
of the plaintiffs or the Hindus, and that the 2nd defendant has
no right to control or manage the suit schedule institution, the
administration, management and control of the said suit
schedule property be retransferred from the control of the
second defendant to the third defendant as it was being
managed prior to June 1975, the 2nd defendant is hereby
restrained by means of a permanent injunction not to interfere
with the plaintiffs' or Hindus' rights in respect of the plaint
schedule institution or property. Since it is a suit on behalf of
the entire community of Hindus and it is against the order of
the Government in transferring the suit schedule property from
its Muzrai Department to the Wakf board and as it is not the
fault of the 2nd defendant in including the suit schedule
property in the list of wakfs, I feel that in the circumstances to
direct the parties to bear their own costs of the suit. Advocate
18.      RFA No.119/1980 filed against the judgment and
decree in O.S. No.25/1978 has been dismissed with
following observation:
"……………………. What is more heartening and commendable is the
attitude of the 4th defendant Sajjada who is said to be a Muslim
not to challenge the averments of his Hindu brotherin the
plaintiffs that this shrine belongs to both Hindus and Muslims.
Equally heartening is the spirit of Hindu plaintiffs in not claiming
the shire as exclusively belonging to the Hindus for the reasons
that there are "Paduka" and Nandadeepa" maintained and
protected since ancient time and it is also known as "Guru
Dathatreya Peeta". It is only the Wakf Board that wants to lay
claim on it taking advantage of its own unilateral acts in 1964
without the very Muslim community people offering prayer since
hundred of years making any claim on it as their exclusive shrine.
The suit institution "the Guru Dathatreya Bababudan Swamy"
stands aloft as a shining example of true secularism in this world
divided so sharply on narrow caste, communal or religious
considerations."
19.      Thus, the Civil Court has decreed Shri Guru
Dattatreya Swami Peetha as a religious institution being a
holy place of worship belonging to or of the Hindus and
Mohammadans and it is not a WAKF property.                     The said
judgment and decree has been affirmed by this Court3 and
the Apex Court4.            The Civil Court has recorded that,
according to the plaintiff, during March 1976, the State
Board of WAKF had seized the Paduke of Shri Guru
Dattatreya Swami and the Nandadeepa kept for worship.
On      a     representation       made       by     the    leaders   of
Chikkamagaluru          town,     the    Deputy      Commissioner     of
Chikkamagaluru got back the Paduke and Nandadeepa.
After this incident, plaintiff learnt that Shri Guru Dattatreya
Swami Peetha and properties attached to it were published
in Gazette dated 16.10.1964 as 'WAKF' property and one
Ghouse Mohiddin was named as 'Mutawalli' of the said
20.      Pursuant to direction in W.P. No.2294/1994, the
Endowment Commissioner submitted his Report dated
In RFA No.119/1980 disposed of on 07.01.1991
In SLP (Civil) No.17040/1991 disposed of on 01.11.1991
25.02.1999 and it has been set-aside by this Court5. The
Writ Appeal filed thereon has been dismissed6.               The Civil
Appeal has also been disposed of by recording the stand
taken by the State Government7.
21.   The   original    file   produced     by    the    State
Government reveals that the Cabinet in its meeting held on
19.04.2017       decided    to   appoint    a  Sub-Committee        to
examine the report. The Sub-Committee recommended for
appointment of a Committee consisting of an Hon'ble Judge
of the High Court or the Supreme Court of India.                  The
Cabinet in its meeting held on 30.05.2017 decided to
appoint a Committee of three members. Pursuant thereto,
the High Level Committee was constituted.
22.   The High Level Committee has recorded that it
has noticed the sanad dated 24.05.1798 of Tippu Sultan,
the Archeological Survey of Mysore, 1916 and the decree in
Common order dated 14.02.2007 in W.Ps.No.38148/2000 c/w. 4262/2002 &
W.A No.886/2007 disposed of on 04.08.2008
O.S.No.25/1978 and other material.                     In its concluding
remarks at para 39, the High Level Committee has held
that the Endowment Commissioner had failed to consider
the historic documents such as sanad and archeological
records.     In para 40, it has held that no amount of oral
evidence shall dislodge the documentary evidence. In para
41, it has held the book 'Kalandar E Barak' by S.A.Jabbar as
an individual opinion based on hear say evidence and myth.
23.     In the impugned order, after recording the facts
leading till the appointment of the High Level Committee
and its conclusions, the decision/recommendations of the
Cabinet Sub-Committee have been noticed and they read
1.      As per the recommendations of the High Level Committee,
the report of Endowment Commissioner dated 10.03.2010 to be
rejected.
2.      Having regard to the above it is decided to recommend
that the same practices shall continue to be followed which would
be in due compliance of the Hon'ble High court single Bench
order     dated:14.02.2007      in    clubbing     writ   petition
nos.38148/2000, 4262/2002 & 43621/2003 as noticed below:-
(1) "There is a Muzwar appointed by the Shah Khadri to
perform daily rites (Pooja) inside the cave and he alone
enters inside the sanctum-sanctorum of the institutions
and distributes Tabaru/Theertha to the devotees of both
(2) He alone puts flowers to the Paduka/Khadave/lits the
(3) The recognized Hindu Gurus of different mutts are
also taken inside the cave gate to offer their respects to
the Paduka/Khadava;
(4) Persons who do not take food prepared in the
Langarakhana are given 'padi' i.e., the provisions like
Rice, Dhal etc., for preparing their food'
(5)the Muzawar takes Lobana (Sambrani) and perform
religious rituals inside the main shrine between 7 pm
(6) The above practices include certain practices which
are found in Hindu temples also, such as;-
i.      offering of flowers to Padukas
v.      taking Hindu Gurus of religious mutts
vi.     giving padi to the pilgrims."
24.   The proceeding of the meeting of the Cabinet
Sub-Committee held on 20.01.2018 is found between pages
No.917 and 919 of the original file and the Report of the
Cabinet Sub-committee between pages No.920 and 937.
The     decision/recommendation              of    the     Cabinet     Sub-
Committee are between pages No. 921 and 922 of the file.
It is relevant to note that the recommendation of the
Cabinet Sub-Committee in the original file reads as follows:
"22. Having regard to the above, it is decided to recommend
that the same practices shall continue to be followed which would
be in due compliance with the direction of the Court which is
noticed below."
25.    Surprisingly, what is extracted in the impugned
order does not match with the original recommendation and
it reads as follows:
"2. Having regard to the above, it is decided to recommend that
the same practices shall continue to be followed which would be
in due compliance of the Hon'ble High Court Single Bench order
dated 14.02.2007 in clubbing writ petition nos.38148/2000,
4262/2002 & 43621/2003 as noticed below."
26.    Therefore, it leads to an irrefutable               inference
that when the matter was discussed by the Cabinet, it was
under the incorrect impression that the recommendation is
in compliance with the order passed by this Court8. It is
Common order dated 14.02.2007 in W.Ps.No.38148/2000 c/w. 4262/2002 &
also relevant to note that the recommendations of Sub-
Committee (at sub-paragraphs No. 1 to 6 of para 2 in the
impugned order), are precisely the same contained in the
first   Report    of   the   Endowment        Commissioner      dated
25.02.1989, which has been quashed by this Court9.                 The
impugned order gives an impression that it is in consonance
with the directions issued by this Court10, which is factually
incorrect. Therefore, the reasons recorded in the impugned
order are without proper application of mind.
27.   It was argued by Shri. Ashok Haranahalli that
one      of   the    members       of   High    Level     Committee,
Shri.     Rahmath      Tarikere,     has    deposed      before    the
Endowment Commissioner. Therefore, the Report is biased.
28.   In his Report11, the Endowment Commissioner
has     considered     statements      of   as   many      as   1,015
persons/institutions.      He has recorded at para 143(f) that
Common order dated 14.02.2007 in WPs No.38148/2000 c/w. 4262/2002 &
Common order dated 14.02.2007 in WPs No.38148/2000, c/w. 4262/2002
dated 10.03.2010
as per the annual report of the Mysuru Archeological
Department, 1932, Shri Guru Dattatreya Swami Peetha is a
small cave in Baba Budangiri, which is sacred to both
Hindus and Mohammadans. He has rightly recorded that
Shri Dattatreya is well known as son of Sage Athri by his
virtuous wife Anasuya and embodiment of Hindu trinity, the
Gods, Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva.
29.   The    Endowment     Commissioner     has   further
recorded    that   1,861  Acres   of   land  was   granted   to
Shri Dattatreya Devaru and 111.25 Acres          to Shri Baba
Budan Dharga separately by the then Maharaja of Mysore.
After   the   enactment    of   Karnataka    Inams    Abolition
(Religious and Charitable) Act, 1955, the inam lands of the
Institution have vested with the Government and upon such
vesting,   the   tastik  amounts    of   Rs.  1,16,207/-   and
Rs.69,360/- have been fixed in favour of Shri. Dattatreya
Devaru and Baba Budan Darga respectively.
30.  The  Endowment     Commissioner   has    further
recorded that in the book 'Kalandar E Barak Hazarath Dada
Swami' written by Shri. S.A. Jabbar and published by Shri.
Shah Khadri contains a reference at page 113 that 'early in
the morning the next day, a Brahmin and a Jangama
entered the cave as per the custom to worship etc. He has
rejected the argument that there is no basis for the said
literature, as untenable, on the ground that the book has
been published by Shah Khadri himself and he has not
denied this aspect in the pleadings. Further, in pages 94
and 95 of that book, it is mentioned that there was a big
stone idol in the cave having three heads and it was being
worshipped as Brahma, Vishnu and Maheshwara.
31.  The   Endowment     Commissioner     has    also
adverted to a literature, 'Karnataka Dattatreya Aradhane'
32.  With regard to the rituals performed in the
Peetha/Darga, the Endowment Commissioner has recorded
that as per Mysore Gazetteer Volume V (pages 1134-1136),
Shri Dattatreya had resided here at the end of his life and
disappeared in this peetha.      Further, as per the Macanzi
Chronicle, this peetha came into the possession of Muslims
for administration after the regime of Hyder Ali.        There
were     padukas     with    silver    covering    and    Shri
Dattatreyaswamy with Deepasthambha.
33.  The Endowment Commissioner has recorded the
versions    contained     in   the    statement    of   1,015
persons/institutions. According to him, the members of the
Communal Harmony Front(deponent No. 143) have stated
that in Baba Budangiri, it is believed that Baba and Datta
are one and the same.
34.  One    Shri.    Ramachandra     Rao   and    others
(deponents No. 434 to 451) have stated in their Affidavits
that there were padukas, trishoola, danda kamandala,
deepastambha with nandadeepa and pooja was performed
as per Hindu customs.
35.  It is further recorded that one Shri. M.N. Bhasha
(deponent No.809) has        stated that he was working as
Mujawar incharge for the period between 1969 and 1975.
There are samadhis of his parents on right side of the
steps.   The devotees were allowed to enter the cave and
proceed upto Peetha.       Shri Gurudattatreya and his four
disciples were said to have performed meditation on this
Peetha.    Dada Hayat Meer Khalander who came from
Mecca-Madeena had mediated here.          Two Nandadeepas
were burning in front of the Peetha along with Hanathes.
(Deepa made out of mud).         The water flowing from the
fountain was treated as theertha. The fountain was widened
with plastering during the time of Peer Mohammed Shah
Khadri and thereby the natural flow of water had stopped
and water was allowed to flow through a pipe connection
from outside.
36.  On the left side of the cave, Anasuya Devi was
said to be preparing Roti out of the mud which were
converted into Roti and the same were given to the
disciples.  The Muslims believed that it is the Peetha of
Mama Jigni, who was the disciple of Dada Hayat.       Hindu
devotees    were   performing   the   pooja   with  Arasina
Kumkuma, blouse piece and bangles.          The burning of
camphor was in practice.    The local people were bringing
the idols from their places in celebration and worshipping
the same on the peetha.       Some of the devotees were
cleaning the idol and padukas out of the water brought
from Manikyadhara, Galikere and Dattapeetha. They were
worshipping as per Hindu customs and 'padi' was given to
them    by  Shah   Khadri  and   the  sweet   prasada   was
distributed to the devotees. The devotees were allowed to
worship the Padukas through Brahmin or Lingayat Archaks
according to their custom with Bhajans and offering of
flower, garland and udusticks and camphor.     Shah Khadri
was taking the Mathadhipatis inside the cave and arranging
to worship peetha with honour and 'Swetha chathri'.
Everyday in the morning and evening Shah Khadri was
sanctifying the cave with Dhupa and lobana and offering
37.  The Audumbara tree outside the cave was also
worshipped by devotees after pradakshina.      The peetha
found at Manikyadhara is said to be the place where
Dattatreya had mediated.    The  devotees were offering in
cash and in kind, such as gold articles, cow, buffalo and
cocks which were sold by Shah Khadri unauthorisedly.
Silver items such as horse, hasta and cradles were also
being offered.
38.  According to the Endowment Commissioner, the
Mujawar has also stated that removal of stone threshold
and replacing it by steel door at the entrance has led to
erosion of cave. After 1975 disputes arose with regard to
rituals (pooja) among Hindus and Muslims and the old
practice must be restored.
39.   In   substance,   according   to  the  Endowment
Commissioner both Hindus and Muslims have been visiting
Baba Budangiri and offering their pooja and prayers and it
was a centre of worship of Hindus prior to arrival of Dada
40.   It is recorded by the Endowment Commissioner
Hampi (deponent No.433), has stated that Baba Budangiri
is a centre of Sufis. The non-vedic Datta pantha had
friendship with the Sufis and muslims and hindus of lower
caste jointly worshipped; and that there is no precedent of
upper caste Hindus having devotion to Baba Budan.
Admittedly, he is a Member of the High Level Committee.
41.   It is settled principle of law that justice should
not only be done but be seen to be done. Nearly, a century
back, Lord Hewart, CJ, has stated that it is not merely of
some importance, but of fundamental importance that
justice should both be done and be manifestly seen to be
42.    Shri. Haranahalli has imputed bias against the
Report of the Committee, which is not a judicial body.
Nonetheless, the recommendation contained in the Report
has influence upon the decision making process by the
State Government. The consequential orders emanating
therefrom impact the citizen with vigor of unmatched
Executive power. Therefore, a decision by the Executive
shall, without any exception, be free from even the risk of
bias. In this context, it may be apt to recall the following
words of Lord Esher noted13.
“The question is not, whether in fact he was or was not biased.
The court cannot inquire into that. . . . In the administration of
justice, whether by a recognised legal court or by persons who,
although not a legal public court, are acting in a similar capacity,
public policy requires that, in order that there should be no doubt
about the purity of the administration, any person who is to take
part in it should not be in such a position that he might be
suspected of being biased.”
R Vs. Sussex Justices (1923) All ER 233 at 234
Ranjit Thakur Vs. Union of India (1987)4 SCC 611 (para 18)
43.     The     recommendations           of    the    High      Level
Committee have been accepted. Though Shri. Rahmath
Tarikere, has stated before the Endowment Commissioner
that Hindus and Muslims were jointly worshipping, the
Committee has recommended for rejection of second
Report of the Endowment Commissioner. The Government
have permitted appointment of only a Mujawar. Therefore,
Shri. Haranahalli's argument that the Report of the High
Level Committee suffers from the vice of bias is well
44.     The High Level Committee has recorded in
paragraph No.35 as follows:
"35. The institution in question, called as Sri Guru
Dattatreya Baba Budan Swamy Dargah is in existence for several
centuries.    This institution Sri. Guru Dattatreya Baba Budan
Swamy Dargah is an ancient place of pilgrimage venerated by
both the Hindus and Muslims. This institution is managed by
Shah Khadri and the prayers inside the cave are offered through
the Muzavar appointed by Sajjada Nasheen.           They Prayers
offered in this institution are a mixture of both the Islamic and
Hindu religious traditions. The Commissioner, in his report,
ignored the constitutional protection guaranteed to these type of
institutions and committed a grave error, while recommending
the   appointment    of   a  Hindu  Archak, to  offer prayers   in
accordance with the Agama and such other things. Therefore,
the report of the Commissioner as recommended to be rejected
as the same is unconstitutional."
(Emphasis supplied)
45.    Thus, the High Level Committee has accepted
that the Institution has been in existence since several
centuries and it is an ancient place of pilgrimage and it has
been venerated by both Hindus and Muslims. In para 37 it
has observed that there is no scope to convert the place of
worship as per the provisions of 1991 Act14 and the
Endowment Commissioner has refused to abide by it. It is
further      stated     in   the     report     that    the   Endowment
Commissioner's suggestion of appointment of Hindu Archak
to offer prayers as per agamas amounts to interfering with
the religious nature of the place of worship and its violation
is punishable under Section 6 of the 1991 Act15. It is
relevant to note that Sub-section (3) of Section 4 makes it
clear that nothing contained in Sub-section (1) & (2) shall
apply to any suit, appeal or other proceedings with respect
The Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991
The Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991
to any matter referred to Sub-section (2) finally decided or
disposed of by a Court. The relevant provision reads as
"(3)  Nothing      contained    in  sub-section (1) and     sub-
section (2) shall apply to,—
(b) any suit, appeal or other proceeding, with respect to any
matter referred to in sub-section (2), finally decided, settled or
disposed of by a court, tribunal or other authority before the
commencement of this Act."
46.    The 1991 Act has come into force on 18th
September 1991. The suit in O.S. No.25/1978 has been
decreed on 29.02.1980. The RFA and the SLP have been
dismissed. Thus, the decree of the Civil Court has attained
finality. Parties are bound by the decree of the Court.
Therefore, Sub-sections (1) & (2) of Section 4 of 1991 Act
have no application.
47.    The        Endowment           Commissioner's             report
indubitably       demonstrates        that      as     many       as    1,015
persons/institutions have been heard by him and the
common factor in their version is, both Hindus and Muslims
offer pooja and prayers.
48.   Out of the persons who have deposed before
Endowment Commissioner, the statement of Shri. M.N.
Bhasha (Deponent No.809) is very relevant. He was the
Mujawar between 1969 and 1975. According to him, Hindus
were allowed to worship the Padukas through Brahmin or
Lingayat Priest as per their custom. He has also given
details of Pooja and Bhajans. He has expressed his opinion
that the old system must be restored. The Report also
shows that endowments and grants were given to the
Institution both in the name of Dattatreya Devaru and Shri.
Baba Budan Darga separately by the Maharaja of Mysore.
Upon abolition of Inams in the year 1995, the tastik
amounts have been separately fixed.
49.   The impugned order permits only a Mujawar to
be appointed by Shah Khadri to enter the sanctum of the
cave and to distribute 'teertha' to both Hindus and Muslims.
He is also required to offer flowers to the paduka and light
the nandadeepa. On the face of it, this portion of the order
runs counter to the practices adopted by the Muslim
community because, the idol worship is not recognized by
50.    Article 25   of  the   Constitution   guarantees
Freedom of Conscience and free profession, practice and
propagation of religion. By the impugned order, firstly, the
State have infringed upon the right of Hindu Community to
have the pooja and archana done in the manner as per
their faith. Secondly, State have imposed upon the Mujawar
to perform 'paduka pooja' and to light 'nanda deepa'
contrary to his faith.   Both these acts amount to flagrant
violation of rights of both communities guaranteed by
Article 25 of the Constitution of India.
51.    Though the versions of large number of devotees
recorded by the Endowment Commissioner including that of
the Mujawar who was working during 1975, demonstrate
that both Hindus and Muslims were worshipping as per their
respective customs, the State Government have chosen to
accept the High Level Committee's recommendation to
reject Endowment Commissioner's Report. As recorded
hereinabove, the High Level Committee Report is not free
from the vice of bias.
52.    The Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court of India, in M.Siddique Vs. Mahanth Suresh Das, the
Ram Janma Bhumi Temple case16 has held that faith is a
matter for the individual believer. Once the Court has
intrinsic material to accept that the faith or belief is
genuine, it must defer to the belief of the worshipper. The
relevant portion in the passage reads thus:
"809. ……. Faith is a matter for the individual believer.
Once the court has intrinsic material to accept that the faith
or the belief is genuine and not a pretence, it must defer to
the belief of the worshipper         This, we must do well to
recognise, applies across the spectrum of religious and their
texts, Hinduism and Islam being among them. The value of a
secular Constitution lies in a tradition of equal deference."
(Emphasis supplied)
53.  Therefore, the impugned order is unsustainable
in law for more than one reason:
• Firstly, because, contrary to the stand taken before the
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India that the Cabinet would
consider the pros and cons          and take a decision, the
State Government have delegated the consideration to
a High Level Committee;
• Secondly because, the recommendation of the Sub-
Committee, has been incorrectly extracted in the
impugned order. The recommendation extracted gives
an impression that the practices recommended are in
consonance with the order of this Court17, which is
factually incorrect because, the six recommendations
recorded in the impugned order are those contained in
the earlier Report of the Endowment Commissioner
dated 25.02.1989 which has been quashed by this
Court. Therefore, the decision arrived at, is on an
incorrect premise and hence vitiated;
Common order dated 14.02.2007 in W.Ps. No.38148/2000, 4262/2002 &
• Thirdly   because,   the  High     Level  Committee    has
mis-directed itself with regard to the 1991 Act, when
the issue in dispute has attained finality as per the
decree in O.S. No.25/1978;
• Fourthly because, it is nobody's case that the place of
worship is being converted. On the other hand, it is the
common case of both communities that it is a place of
worship for both Hindus and Muslims;
• Fifthly, because, the High Level Committee Report is
not free from bias, as Shri. Rehamat Tarikere, one of its
Members      has   deposed     before    the   Endowment
Commissioner and the Committee has recommended
rejection of his Report;
• Sixthly, because, the impugned order infringes the right
of both communities guaranteed under Article 25 of the
Constitution by preventing Hindus from performing
pooja as per their faith and compelling the Mujawar to
offer pooja contrary to his faith.
54.   So far as the contentions urged by Smt. Neela
Gokhale are concerned, the same are noted only to be
rejected because, according to her, the only option for the
petitioner is to seek review of the order of the Apex Court
dated 06.04.2018. That order was passed on the contempt
side and Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, in its order dated
03.09.2015 has granted liberty to any contesting party to
seek recourse to a legal remedy as may be available. Her
next contention with regard to the locus standi is also
untenable because, petitioner was a party respondent in
55.   In the light of the above discussion, the question
formulated by this Court at para 16 is answered in the
affirmative. Resultantly, the impugned order is clearly
unsustainable in law and liable to be quashed. Hence, the
(b)   The order dated 19.03.2018 passed by the first
respondent, State Government is quashed.
(c)   The matter is remitted to the State Government
with  a  direction   to  reconsider  the matter   afresh  in
accordance with law without reference to the Report of the