Sri Krishna Deo Mishra, aged about 41 years, resident of
Sai Krisita Apartment, Room No.102, First Floor, near
Maharastra, Presently residing at Flat No.108,
For the petitioner (s)   : Mr. S. Lodh, Advocate.
For the respondent (s)   : Mr. R. Datta, P.P.
Question arises for consideration in this criminal petition is
whether Section 63 of the NDPS Act mandates the owner of a seized
vehicle to file an application for releasing the vehicle on bail within one
month from the date of its seizure, and such owner cannot file any
application or claim for releasing his seized vehicle after expiry of one
2.            A brief narration of facts may be outlined herein below:-
The police have detained and seized one TATA Ultra 1518
Truck, bearing No.MH-04-JK-8349 and recovered huge quantity of
contraband articles. Driver of the vehicle was arrested. A case was
registered as TLM PS Case No. 2021 TLM 059, under Section
20(b)(ii)(c)/25 and 29 of the NDPS Act. The owner of the vehicle filed an
application on 23rd March 2022 before the learned Special Judge, Khowai
District for releasing the vehicle on bail, but, after expiry of one month.
While disposing of the said bail application, learned Special Judge relied
upon a judgment passed by this court in Crl. Petn. No.8 of 2018 [Kishan
Singh Vrs. The State of Tripura, disposed of on 16.03.2018], wherein it
“… If the owner of the vehicle is not an accused in that
case, a separate and independent proceeding has to be drawn for
confiscation in terms of the express provisions in Section 60(3) of
the NDPS Act to protect an innocent owner before confiscating his
vehicle or conveyance. Thus, there is a right to the owner who
claimed within 30 [thirty] days from the day of seizure, his title
over the vehicle to have interim custody of the said vehicle subject
to the adequate security till completion of the trial…”
3.           Having quoted the aforesaid observation, the learned Special
Judge has recorded a finding in the order dated 01.06.2022, passed in
Special (NDPS) 01 of 2022 as follows:-
“In the instant case the petitioner did not pray for the
vehicle within 30 days from the date of seizure.
Hence, in view of the judgment passed by the Hon’ble
High Court of Tripura in Kishan Singh Vrs. State of Tripura, the
petitioner is not entitled to get interim custody i.e. bail of the said
vehicle at this stage. Hence, the petition praying for releasing the
vehicle is rejected.”
4.           Feeling aggrieved, and dissatisfied with the aforesaid
impugned order, the owner of the vehicle has approached this court and
urged to interfere with the impugned order in exercise of its inherent power
vested under Section 482 of CrPC.
5.           I have heard Mr. S. Lodh, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner and Mr. R. Datta, learned Public Prosecutor along with Mr. S.
Debnath and Mr. S. Ghosh, learned Additional Public Prosecutors
appearing for the State-respondent.
6.           Mr. Lodh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
petitioner has submitted that Section 63 of the NDPS Act does not
contemplate that an owner has to file an application for releasing his
vehicle within a period of 30 days from the date of seizure.
7.            On the other hand, learned P.P. appearing on behalf of the
State of Tripura has defended the impugned order passed by learned
Special Judge and candidly submits that the views taken by learned Special
Judge was based on the principle laid down by this court in the case of
The above submissions of the learned counsels lead this court
to peruse Section 63 of the NDPS Act, which reads as under:-
63. Procedure in making confiscations.--—
(1) In the trial of offences under this Act, whether the
accused is convicted or acquitted or discharged, the court shall
decide whether any article or thing seized under this Act is liable to
confiscation under section 60 or section 61 or section 62 and, if it
decides that the article is so liable, it may order confiscation
accordingly.
(2) Where any article or thing seized under this Act
appears to be liable to confiscation under section 60 or section 61
or section 62, but the person who committed the offence in
connection therewith is not known or cannot be found, the court
may inquire into and decide such liability, and may order
confiscation accordingly:
Provided that no order of confiscation of an article or
thing shall be made until the expiry of one month from the date of
seizure, or without hearing any person who may claim any right
thereto and the evidence, if any, which he produces in respect of his
8.            The proviso of sub-section (2) of Section 63 of the NDPS Act
is relevant to decide the issue raised by learned counsels appearing for the
parties. A bare reading of the said proviso makes it aptly clear that an order
of confiscation of an article or thing shall be made after expiry of one
month from the date of seizure. In other words, an order of confiscation of
any article or thing cannot be made by the court within one month from the
date of seizure i.e. the court may pass an order of confiscation after expiry
of one month. In the opinion of this court, the said proviso of sub-section
(2) of Section 63 of the NDPS Act does not contemplate that the owner of
the said vehicle cannot file an application for releasing his/her vehicle after
expiry of one month. In the instant case, till today no confiscation
proceeding has been initiated after expiry of one month from the date of
seizure. It is not the mandate of law as embodied under the proviso of sub-
section (2) of Section 63 of the NDPS Act that a court must make an order
of confiscation after expiry of one month from the date of seizure. The law
makers have used the word “may” in sub section (2) of Section 63 of the
NDPS Act which means that court is not legally bound to pass an order of
confiscation in all the cases as a matter of routine. In the case of Kishan
Singh (supra), this court after placing reliance upon the judgment of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court of the Union of India Vrs. Mohanlal, reported in
(2016) 3 SCC 379 has observed thus:
“Where no one claims the ownership of the vehicle within
the stipulated time of 30 days, the court may direct the Drug
Disposal Committee for disposal by sale.”
9.             The above proposition of law, in my opinion, does not support
the plea of the State-respondent that the owner of the vehicle has to file an
application for releasing the vehicle on bail within 30 days. What the court
has meant to say, that, in case no owner comes forward to claim the
ownership of the vehicle within 30 days, then, the court may pass an order
directing the Drug Disposal Committee for disposal of the vehicle by sale.
In no way it bars the owner to approach the court and file an application for
releasing the vehicle after expiry of 30 days.
10.           In the light of above analysis on law, particularly, the proviso
of sub-section (2) of Section 63 of the NDPS Act, in my opinion, the
learned Special Judge has misconstrued the judgment of this court in
Kishan Singh (supra) qua Section 63 of the NDPS Act. Accordingly, the
learned Special Judge has committed an error of law in rejecting the
application of the petitioner for releasing the vehicle in question on bail. As
a corollary, the owner of the vehicle may file an application for bail at any
stage of the proceeding or even during the proceeding of confiscation.
11.           Needless to say, to claim the release of vehicle under seizure,
the owner of the vehicle must satisfy the necessary conditions as laid down
in sub Section (3) of Section 60 of the NDPS Act which reads as under:
“60. Liability of illicit drugs, substances, plants,
articles and conveyances to confiscation.--
(3) Any animal or conveyance used in carrying any
narcotic  drug   or   psychotropic    substance    3[or  controlled
substance], or any article liable to confiscation under sub-section
(1) or sub-section (2) shall be liable to confiscation, unless the
owner of the animal or conveyance proves that it was so used
without the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his
agent, if any, and the person-in-charge of the animal or
conveyance and that each of them had taken all reasonable
precautions against such use.”
12.         Having observed thus, I am inclined to release the vehicle No.
TATA Ultra 1518, truck bearing No. MH-04-JK-8349 on bail seized in
connection with Teliamura PS Case No.2021 TLM 059, subject to the
following conditions:
(i)    It is found that the owner of the vehicle is not a resident
of the State of Tripura and he is a resident of Thane,
Maharashtra, however, his vehicle carries national
permit. In view of this, the owner of the vehicle shall
furnish a bail bond of Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees ten lakh)
with two local sureties. If the owner fails to provide two
local sureties in that case, the registered owner of the
vehicle has to deposit Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees ten lakh)
in cash before the competent court;
(ii)   the owner of the vehicle shall keep the vehicle in good
condition and he shall not transfer the vehicle, modify
or change the nature and character of the vehicle in any
manner whatsoever till disposal of the case now pending
before the court of learned Special Judge (NDPS),
(iii)  the owner shall produce the vehicle as and when
directed by the prosecution or by the court;
(iv)   the learned Special Judge may pass any such direction
(v)    it is further made clear that if the sureties fail to produce
the vehicle at any point of time during the course of trial
or before disposal of the case, then, they have to deposit
Rs.10,00,000/- (Rupees ten lakh) in cash to the
competent court, and in that respect they have to give an
undertaking by way of affidavits which have to be
sworn before a Judicial Magistrate, Khowai Judicial
In the result, the order dated 01.06.2022, passed by learned
Special Judge (NDPS), Khowai Judicial District is set aside and quashed.
With the aforesaid observations and directions, the instant
criminal petition stands allowed and disposed.
Case diary is returned.