1.     At the outset, Sri Narendra Gupta, learned Counsel for the
detenues/petitioners have submitted that applications for
amendment, bearing C.M. Application No. 53220 of 2021 in re:
Habeas Corpus No. 412 of 2021, C.M. Application No. 53294
of 2021 in re: Habeas Corpus No. 414 (H/C) of 2021 and C.M.
Application No. 53175 of 2021 in re: Habeas Corpus Petition
No. 416 of 2021, are pending.
2.     On due considerations, we allow aforesaid amendment
applications and permit the learned Counsel for the petitioners
to make necessary amendment in the memo of the writ petition
during the course of the day.
3. Questioning the legality and validity of the orders dated
14.08.2020 passed by the District Magistrate, Sitapur
(respondent no.3), directing detention of Parvez, Irfan and
Rahamtullah in exercise of its power under Section 3 (2) of the
National Security Act, 1980 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Act,
1980'), which was subsequently confirmed by Uttar Pradesh
Advisory Board under Section 11 of the Act, 1980 and on the
basis of same, the orders for confirmation dated 05.10.2020 and
06.11.2020 have been passed by the Under Secretary, Home
(Confidential) Department, Government of Uttar Pradesh
(respondent no.2),     petitioner/detenue Parvez has preferred
Habeas Corpus Petition No. 412 of 2021, petitioner/detenue
Irfan preferred Habeas Corpus Petition No. 414 of 2021 and
petitioner/detenue Rahamtullah preferred Habeas Corpus
Petition No. 416 of 2021, through his brother Imran.
4. In addition to the aforesaid, by means of the amendment, the
detenues/petitioners is also seeking a writ of certiorari to quash
the order dated 10.02.2021 passed by the respondent no.2-
Government of Uttar Pradesh, by which the detention period of
the detenues/petitioners has been extended for a period of nine
months from the date of detention i.e. 14.08.2020.
5. Since the above-captioned Habeas Corpus petitions arise out of
a common factual matrix and law, we are disposing them of by
a common judgment.
6. Shorn off unnecessary details, the facts giving rise to the
controversy involved in the above Habeas Corpus petitions are
While Incharge Inspector Ranvir Singh along with Sub-
Kumar, Constable Shyam Singh, Constable Dipak Shukla were
on duty for maintaining law and order in the area as well as
searching and checking the wanted persons/vehicles within the
area of the police station Talgaon, district Sitapur on 12.07.2020
through Government Vehicle (Tata Sumo), bearing registration
no. U.P. 34 G 0660 and in private vehicle, bearing registration
no. U.P. 34 G 0505, and reached Emalia Chauraha via village
Angrashi, an informer had told them that two butchers of the
Vishwan, after slaughtering a cow elsewhere, have brought beef
in the house of Rahmatullah in village Emalia and in the house,
Rahmatullah and his brother as well as two butchers of the
Vishwan have made small pieces of beef for selling and if
quickness be made, then, they can be caught at home. On
believing the aforesaid information of the informer, the police
party raided the house of Rahmatullah and found that five
persons were cutting the lump of the beef in small pieces by
banka and as soon as the police party entered into the house, all
persons started running away. However, two persons, namely,
Irfan (petitioner of Habeas Corpus No. 414 of 2021) and Parvez
(petitioner of Habeas Corpus No. 412 of 2021) were arrested on
spot, who disclosed the name of Rahamtullah (petitioner of
Habeas Corpus No. 416 of 2021) and two others, namely,
Kurban and Rafi. Thereafter, beef was kept in a white bag and
with the help of the aforesaid two accused persons, one banka, a
piece of wood, one knife and one spear were seized and for
testing the recovered beef, it was sent to Veterinary Doctor,
Parsendi, who, after verifying the same, reported that the
recovered beef was of cow.
7. For the aforesaid incident, a case, bearing First Information
Report No. 0235, under Sections 3/5/8 of the U.P. Prevention of
Cow Slaughter Act, 1955 and Section 7 of the Criminal Law
Amendment Act, 2013, was lodged against accused Parvez and
Irfan, Rahamtullah (detenue/petitioners herein), Rafi and
Kurban at Police Station Talgaon, District Sitapur and
detenue/petitioners Parvez and Irfan were arrested on the same
day     of   the   incident    i.e. on   12.07.2020,    whereas
detenue/petitioner Rahamtullah was arrested on 13.07.2020.
and were sent to jail. Later on, while the detenue/petitioners
were in jail in connection with the aforesaid F.I.R., another
F.I.R., bearing No. 0250 of 2020, under Section 2 (kha)(17)/3 of
the UP Gangsters and Anti-Social Activities (Prevention) Act,
1986 have been lodged against the detenue/petitioners as well
as other co-accused persons, namely, Rafi, Kurban, Mohd.
Safiq and Jamil on the basis of single criminal case.
8. While the detenues/petitioners were in jail in connection with
the aforesaid criminal cases, the Station House Officer, Police
Station Talgaon, District Sitapur had submitted a report dated
01.08.2020 that due to cow slaughtering, a large number of
Hindu Community had gathered due to which the public order
was badly disturbed and further on account of the act of the
detenues/petitioners and co-accused, the sense of insecurity and
terror had spread in the whole area. It was also reported that the
fallout of the incident had culminated in the chaos, disturbing
congenial atmosphere, flaring horrific feeling, affecting the
maintenance of public order and anyhow the peace was
maintained even though the situation was tense for a period of
three days in the village and surrounding villages. Further, the
bail application of the detenue/petitioners were rejected by the
learned Magistrate-I, Sitapur vide orders dated 22.07.2020,
against which they had moved an application before the District
& Sessions Judge, Sitapur on 24.07.2020, wherein the hearing
date was fixed for 14.08.2020. In these backgrounds, it was
reported that under Article 48 of the Constitution of India, it is
the duty of the State Government to protect the cow and if the
petitioners would be enlarged on bail, he would again indulge
in criminal activity of cow slaughtering which is prejudicial to
public order.
9. On receipt of the aforesaid report dated 01.08.2020 of the
(respondent no.5), the Superintendent of Police, Sitapur
(respondent no.4) had referred the matter to the District
Magistrate, Sitapur (respondent no.3) for invoking the
provisions of Act, 1980 while exercising the power under
Section 3 (2) of the Act, 1980.     On receipt of the aforesaid
report of the respondent nos.4 and 5, the District Magistrate,
Sitapur has invoked the provisions of Section 3 (2) of the Act,
1980 and passed the impugned order of detention dated
14.08.2020 against the deteneues/petitioners and also forwarded
the copies of the impugned detention order dated 14.08.2020,
the grounds of detention as well as other connected papers to
the State Government as per the provisions of Section 3 (4) of
the Act, 1980. Thereafter, the State Government has placed the
matter before the U.P. Advisory Board (Detention) under
Section 10 of the Act, 1980 and after confirmation of the
impugned order of detention by the U.P. Advisory Board
(Detention) under Section 11 of the Act, 1980, the State
Government, while exercising the powers under Section 3 (3)
of the Act, 1980, has also confirmed the impugned order of
detention dated 14.08.2020 vide order dated 05.10.2020 for a
period of three months. Thereafter, the State Government, vide
order dated 06.11.2020, extended the detention of the detenues/
petitioners for a period of six months.
10. It has been stated by the petitioners that during pendency of the
aforesaid process, the detenues/petitioners were released on bail
in F.I.R. No. 235 of 2020, under Sections 3/5/8 of the U.P.
Prevention of Cow Slaughter Act, 1955 and Section 7 of the
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 2013 by the IV Additional
District   and     Sessions    Judge/Special    Judge  (Essential
Commodities) Act, Sitapur vide order dated 27.08.2020 in Bail
Application No. 997 of 2020. Subsequently, the detenues/
petitioners were also enlarged on bail in F.I.R. No. 250 of 2020,
under Sections 2 (kha) 17/3 of the U.P. Gangsters and Anti
Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986 by this Court vide
order dated 11.11.2020 in Criminal Misc. Case No. 8724 (B) of
11. It has also been stated by the petitioners that they have
preferred a representation dated 24.08.2020 against the
impugned order of detention dated 14.08.2020 to the District
Magistrate, Sitapur through the Superintendent of Jail, District
Jail, Sitapur but neither the same was rejected nor any order has
been passed.
12. Feeling aggrieved by the aforesaid action of the respondents,
the detenues/petitioners have filed the above-captioned habeas
corpus petitions.
13. Heard    Sri   Narendra    Gupta,    learned  Counsel    for   the
detenues/petitioners,   Sri  S.P.   Singh,   learned Additional
Government Advocate for the State/respondents and perused
the material brought on record.
14. Learned Counsel for the petitioners argued that it is an admitted
fact that co-accused Kurban and Rafi have brought the beef in
the house of Rahamtullah, which shows that the petitioners
have no role in cow slaughtering. He argued that there was
absolutely no material before the detaining authority, which
could justify the belief the detaining authority that the acts
allegedly committed by the detenues/petitioners were in any
way prejudicial to the public order.
15. Elaborating his submission, learned counsel for the petitioner
argued that the impugned order of preventive detention was
passed by the respondent no. 3 against the detenues/petitioners
while they were in prison under judicial custody on account of
they being involved in F.I.R. No. 235 of 2020, under Sections
3/5/8 of the U.P. Prevention of Cow Slaughter Act, 1955 and
Section 7 of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 2013. He
further argued that there was no material placed before the
detaining authority for recording his satisfaction about the
release of the petitioners from the jail in near future. In
paragraph 06 of the grounds of detention, it has been mentioned
that the petitioners, who were confined in District Jail, Sitapur,
was making continuous efforts for obtaining bail and there was
strong possibility of the petitioners being released on bail and
upon being release on bail, there was all likelihood of the
petitioners indulging in activities which would disturb the
public order.     He argued that the bald observation of the
detaining authority that there is likelihood of the petitioner
being released on bail and on his being released on bail, he
would again indulge in similar activities disturbing the public
peace and order and keeping the petitioners in captivity, is
contrary from the facts and circumtances of the case and also in
contravention of fundamental rights enshrined under Article 21
of the Constitution of India.
16. Lastly, learned Counsel for the detenues/petitioners has pointed
out that during pendency of the aforesaid petitions, the
respondent no.2 has passed the order dated 10.02.2021 by
which the detention period has been extended for a period of
nine month from the date of detention i.e. 14.08.2020.
17. To strengthen his submission, learned Counsel for the
petitioners has drawn our attention towards a decision rendered
by a Co-ordinate Bench of this Court at Allahabad in Habeas
Corpus Writ Petition No. 319 of 2019 : Mehboob Ali Vs.
Union of India and 3 others, decided on 31.05.2019, dismissing
the habeas corpus writ petition and has argued that against the
judgment and order dated 31.05.2019, Mahboob Ali (detenue/
writ petitioner) approached the Hon’ble Supreme Court by
filing Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No. 6921 of 2019, wherein
the Hon’ble Supreme Court, vide order dated 30.08.2019, while
issuing notice, stayed the preventive detention order and
extension thereof. Hence, he prays that the impugned order of
detention as well as consequential orders are liable to be
quashed.
18. A short counter has been filed by Superintendent of Jail,
District Jail, Sitapur, wherein it is stated that the grounds of
detention along with all documents have been furnished to the
detenues on the date of passing the impugned order of detention
i.e. 14.08.2020. Thereafter, information for invocation of NSA
against the detenues have also been furnished by the detaining
authority to the Central Government, State Government and
other authorities through Radiogram dated 14.08.2020.        On
20.08.2020, the State Government had approved the impugned
order of detention and the same was also served upon the
detenues on 20.08.2020 and an information to this effect was
also sent to the State Government on 21.08.2020. The
representation submitted by the detenues was forwarded on the
same day vide letter dated 24.08.2020 to the concerned
authority. The approval order dated 20.08.2020, which was
passed by the State Government, had been sent to by the
detaining authority along with letter dated 02.09.2020, was also
served upon the detenues on 02.09.2020 and information to this
effect was also served upon the detaining authority.        The
District Magistrate, vide order dated 03.09.2020, has rejected
the representation of the detenues/petitioners and same was also
communicated to the detenues/petitioners on 03.09.2020.
Thereafter, the State Government, vide order dated 14.09.2020,
rejected the representation of the detenues/petitioenrs, which
was also communicated through radiogram dated 14.09.2020.
The rejection order dated 14.09.2020 was received by the
Superintendent of Jail, District Jail, Sitapur on 15.09.2020 and
the same was served upon the petitioner on 15.09.2020. On
22.09.2020, the detenues/petitioners were produced before the
Advisory Board on 22.09.2020 through Video Conferencing in
compliance of the order dated 18.09.2020 passed by the State
Government.      Thereafter, on receipt of the report of the
Advisory Board, the State Government has passed the
impugned order dated 05.10.2020, whereby the detention under
NSA was confirmed tentatively for three months, which was
also served upon the detenues/petitioners. Vide order dated
26.10.2020, the Central Government had rejected the
representation    dated     24.08.2020      submitted   by    the
petitioners/detenues and the same was also communicated to
the detenues/petitioners on 26.10.2020. Thereafter, vide order
dated 06.11.2020, the State Government has extended the
detention order for further six months tentatively and the same
was also served upon the detenues/petitioners on 06.11.2020.
19. A counter affidavit has also been filed by the respondent
no.2/Under Secretary, Home (Confidential), State of U.P.,
reiterating the contents of the short counter affidavit filed by
Jail Superintendent, District Jail, Sitapur.    In the counter
affidavit filed on behalf of the District Magistrate, Sitapur, it
has been contended that the petitioner and other co-accused had
committed heinous crime and annoyed the Hindu Community
because they were involved in slaughter of cow and from them
recovery of beef was made and due to this reason, it had
disturbed the public order, which was brought under control
because the prompt action taken by the district administration.
It has also been stated that when the accused Irfan and Parvez
was arrested, cow beef was recovered from their possession and
as the news spread, the situation became tense, communal
harmony was disturbed and a large police contingent was
deployed in the area from various Police Stations to control the
situation. In this way, the public order was disturbed.    It has
also been stated that the decision for invocation of National
Security Act against the detenues/petitioners and other co-
accused has been taken on the basis of the police report and
nature of crime committed by them as they had disturbed the
communal harmony, which resulted in serious disturbance of
the law and order situation, which was ultimately controlled
after deploying number of police force. Thus, the act of the
petitioner and other co-accused had adversely affected the
public order.
20. In the rejoinder affidavit, the detenues/petitioners have refuted
the contents made in the counter affidavit and have stated that
the impugned order of detention and its extension have been
passed only on account of pendency of one criminal case
relating to Cow Slaughtering Act. During the pendency of the
aforesaid criminal case, Gangster Act was also slapped upon the
detenues/petitioners. It has also been stated that the extended
period of the detention order dated 10.02.2021 is illegal as the
same has been passed ignoring the fact that other co-accused,
Rafi and Kurban against whom the National Security Act was
slapped and against them number of criminal cases are pending
as has been reflected from the ground of detention itself and
have also brought cow beef in the house of detenues/petitioners,
have been released on 21.01.2020 while the detenues
/petitioners, who neither brought the beef nor was involved in
slaughtering, his detention period has been extended for further
three months. It has also been stated that the detention period
has been extended only on the ground for preventing the
petitioners/detenues from releasing on bail and there is no
evidence that after releasing on bail, the petitioners/detenues
will indulge in activities prejudicial to the public order. It has
also been stated that before extension of period for detention by
the authorities concerned, the same was not sent before the
Advisory Board as has been provided under para-21 of the
General Clauses Act, wherein it has been provided that the
decision can be amended or changed by the same process as it
was got done earlier and the detention period has been extended
without following the due process of law and without approval
of the Advisory Board, hence the extension period of detention
is itself illegal.
21. We have examined the submissions advanced by the learned
Counsel for the parties and gone through the pleadings on
record.
22. It transpires from the record that the impugned order of
detention together with the grounds of detention were served on
the detenues/petitioners on the same day, i.e. on 14.08.2020
when the detenues/petitioners were confined in the District Jail,
Sitapur in connection with a case registered as First Information
Report No. 0235 of 2020, under Sections 3/5/8 of the U.P.
Prevention of Cow Slaughter Act, 1955 and Section 7 of the
Criminal Law Amendment Act, 2013, against accused Parvez
and Irfan, Rahamtullah (detenue/petitioners herein), Rafi and
Kurban at Police Station Talgaon, District Sitapur.
23. It is pertinent to mention here that after lodging the First
Information Report No. 0235 of 2020, under Section 3/5/8 of
the U.P. Prevention of Cow Slaughter Act, 1955 and Section 7
of the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 2013, another F.I.R.,
bearing No. 0250 of 2020, under Section 2 (kha)(17)/3 of the
UP Gangsters and Anti-Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986
have been lodged against the detenues/petitioners as well as
other co-accused persons on the basis of single criminal case
and, thereafter, impugned detention order has been passed by
the detaining authority but from perusal of the grounds of the
detention reflects that the filing of FIR No. 0250 of 2020 under
Sections 2(kha)(17)/3 of the U.P. Gangsters and Anti-Social
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986 has not been mentioned in the
grounds of detention. It appears that the factum of lodging FIR
No. 0250 of 2020 under Sections 2(kha)(17)/3 of the U.P.
Gangsters and Anti-Social Activities (Prevention) Act, 1986
against the detenues/petitioners has not been brought to the
notice of the detaining authority by the sponsoring authority i.e.
and Superintendent of Police, Sitapur and the detaining
authority has passed the impugned order of detention only on
the basis of single case i.e. F.I.R. No. 0235 of 2020.
24. The basic grounds for detaining the detenues/petitioners were
that on receipt of information from the informer that the
detenues/petitioners Parvez, Irfan and Rahmatullah along with
two butchers of village Biswan, namely, Rafi and Kurban were
cutting the beef for the purposes to sell it, the Incharge
Inspector along with other police personnels of police station
Talgaon, district Sitapur visited/raided the house of the
detenues/petitioners at 5.30 A.M. and the petitioners/detenues
Parvez and Irfan were arrested on the spot along with beaf and
weapons for cutting the beaf, however, their associates
Rahmatullah, Karim and Rafi were fled away from the spot.
The recovered beef was examined by the Veterinary Doctor,
Parsendi and after examining, it was verified that the recovered
meat was of beef. Thereafter, the aforesaid F.I.R. i.e. F.I.R.
0235 of 2020, against the petitioners/detenues and co-accused
Karim and Rafi were lodged at Police Station Talgaon, District
Sitapur. On 13.07.2020, petitioner/detenue Rahmatullah and
other two co-accused persons, namely, Karim and Rafi were
arrested and sent to jail. When the aforesaid news spread in the
area, villagers of Hindu community gathered near the house of
the petitioners/detenues and all of them were excited and
communal amity was disturbed. After great efforts, the police
succeeded in assuaging the general public and taking steps for
restoring public order. It is further clarified in the grounds of
detention that as a result of the acts of the petitioners/detenues
and co-accused, the sentiments of the Hindu community were
hurt and Hindu-Muslim harmony was adversely affected and an
atmosphere of fear and terror was generated, public order was
disturbed and the crowd became belligerent. As the relationship
between the two communities was adversely affected and
disturbed due to the petitioners/detenues’ action, hence the
detention order was passed as aforesaid.
25. It also transpires from the ground of detention that as a result of
the act of the detenues/petitioners, the normal course of the
general public was disturbed. On being satisfied by the report of
the Superintendent of Police, Sitapur and Station House Officer,
Police Station Talgaon, District Sitapur and further on being
satisfied that in order to maintain public order and that there
was a likelihood of the petitioners/detenues being released on
bail, the detaining authority passed the impugned order
detaining the petitioners/detenues under Section 3(2) of the Act,
26. The main plank of the argument of the learned counsel for the
detenues is that since the detenues were in custody of the police
authorities for a substantive offence and during that period,
another F.I.R. No. 250 of 2020 was registered under the
Gangsters Act, therefore, there was no need to direct their
preventive detention merely on the basis of a solitary incident
of cutting beef in pieces to sell it, which was carried out in the
secrecy of their home and that when the said beef was brought
by co-accused, Rafi and Karim in the house of the petitioners
/detenues, it could not be inferred that the detenues/petitioners
on being released from jail would repeat the activities that
might be prejudicial to maintenance of public order. Further
since the grounds of detention mentioned that the friends of
petitioners/detenues had a bad reputation as against them
henious crimes have been registered at police station Vishwan
district Sitapur, therefore, because of these extraneous
considerations where only a solitary incident of cutting beef
was only involved, the impugned order of detention was a mala
fide exercise of jurisdiction. It was further contended that the
solitary incident of cutting beef in pieces could not have
disturbed public order as there was no material to show that any
untoward incident had taken place in the village. In fact the
report itself mentioned that the public, which had gathered at
the spot, was disbursed after being pacified by the police.
27. On the other hand, learned Additional Government Advocate
urged that only the subjective satisfaction of the detaining
authority that the action of the detenues/petitioners could have
disturbed even the tempo of life was sufficient for clamping an
order of preventive detention and the same could not be subject
to judicial review as the said order was necessary for the
protection of society and a balance has to be struck between the
needs of the community and the liberty of a citizen. A habeas
corpus petition challenging the preventive action by the District
Magistrate cannot proceed like an appeal against the detention
order and the Court cannot look into the probative value of the
evidence available against the petitioners/detenues, nor was the
Court empowered to substitute its opinion for the subjective
satisfaction of the authority. The cutting of beef to sell it
offends religious faith and feelings of a section of the society,
which certainly disturbs public tranquility, peace and communal
harmony and hence it is a clear cut case of breach of public
order which affected the even tempo of society.
28. We have examined the writ petition, counter affidavits,
rejoinder affidavit and also considered the rival submissions of
the parties as well as perused the impugned orders passed under
Sub-section (2) of Section (3) of the Act, 1980.
29. We note that the grounds of detention clearly indicate that the
incident had taken place in the secrecy of the petitioners/
detenues’ house at 5.30 in the morning. It was a solitary
incident of cutting cow beef in pieces away from the public eye.
There was no resistance when the petitioners/detenues Parvez
and Irfan and the other co-accused were being arrested by the
police at that time. Further, to the specific averment in the writ
petition that the petitioners/detenues had no criminal history
and there was no material to indicate that the petitioners
/detenues on being released from jail, would again indulge in
the activity of cutting cow beef in pieces to sell, there was no
specific denial in the counter affidavit of the District
Magistrate, which simply mentioned that on the basis of the
solitary incident the petitioners/detenues could be preventively
detained. Further in the counter affidavit, it has been mentioned
that the nature of the activity of the petitioners/detenues itself
suggested that the petitioners/detenues may have been involved
in slaughtering of a cow. It was also mentioned that so far as the
allegation     of   discriminatory     treatment     against   the
petitioners/detenues for being singled out for detention under
the National Security Act was concerned, it was refuted by the
petitioners to the fact that the house belonged to the petitioners,
and the other co-accused had brought the beef in the house of
the petitioners but they were released from the charges levelled
against them.
30. In Ramveer Jatav Vs. State of U.P. and others : (1986) 4
SCC 762, the Apex Court has held that it is possible for the
detaining authority to assume that the accused could repeat the
action, but for reaching that conclusion there must be some
material and circumstances on record, to justify such a
conclusion. Ramveer Jatav (Supra) was a case of broad day-
light murder and it was observed by the Apex Court that it was
difficult to infer from a solitary incident that such an act would
disturb public order or that if the petitioner was not detained, he
would be likely to indulge in such an activity in future.
31. In the instant case, the case of the petitioners/detenues, which
are a case of cutting cow beef in pieces in the secrecy of his
own house, can at best be described as a matter affecting law
and order and not public order. Moreover, there was no material
for reaching the conclusion that the petitioners/detenues would
repeat the activity in future.
32. The contention of the learned Additional Government Advocate
that this is a matter for the subjective satisfaction of the
detaining authority and the Court has no jurisdiction to
adjudicate on the probative value, and the propriety or
sufficiency of the ground of the ground of detention of the
detaining authority is immune from judicial review is a
proposition which cannot be accepted when stated so broadly.
33. In the case of S.R. Bommai Vs. Union of India : AIR 1994 SC
1918, the Apex Court has held that even the Presidential
satisfaction under Article 356 of the Constitution to impose
emergency is not completely immune from judicial challenge
although Presidential satisfaction and the satisfaction of the
Constitutional machinery is capable of being objectively
determined only to a very limited extent. Therefore, in certain
cases specially where mala fide exercise of power or action on
extraneous consideration was concerned, a limited power of
judicial review has been conferred even when the President was
exercising his powers under Article 356 of the Constitution. But
as mentioned by Hon'ble K. Ramaswamy, J in paragraph 150 of
S.R. Bommai's case (Supra), the satisfaction of the President
cannot be equated with the discretion conferred upon an
administrative agency which can be tested on objective material
"The satisfaction of the President cannot be equated
with the discretion conferred upon an administrative
agency, of his subjective satisfaction upon objective
material like in detention cases, administrative action
34. Thus, it is crystal clear that in detention cases, the subjective
satisfaction is open to limited judicial scrutiny. Therefore, it
would be wrong to contend that there is complete embargo on
the powers of the Court to look at the sufficiency of the ground
from any perspective, although the probative value of the
material adduced for inferring whether the detenue was engaged
in a particular activity, was a matter primarily for the
satisfaction of the detaining authority, and the Court could not
evaluate it as it would have evaluated material on an appeal.
35. In the present case, we find that learned counsel for the
petitioners has not raised any question of fact and has not
disputed that no such incident has taken place. His basic
contention was that the incident took place in the secrecy of the
home of the petitioners and it was not an act, which was
intended to cause a conflagration or an act of confrontation
where number of cows may have been slaughtered or assault
made on persons, who protested against the slaughtering.
Furthermore, there is no suggestion that any witness has turned
hostile and it has not even been argued by the learned counsel
for the petitioners that either the accused has been discharged,
acquitted or that the case would end in discharge or acquittal or
that there is want of evidence in the case.
36. At this juncture, it would be apt to mention that it cannot be
denied that normally in exercise of powers under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India, this Court has limitations in
considering the sufficiency of the evidence for ascertaining the
factual involvement of a detenue, but this Court can certainly
see whether the activities complained of have resulted in an
infringement of public order or only involve a law and order
issue.
37. The only submission that learned petitioners’ counsel has
advanced is that on the basis of a solitary incident, where there
was no material to infer that repetition was likely, the order of
detention was not justified.
38. At the cost of repetition, it would be relevant to mention here
that the petitioners and co-accused were mutely arrested when
they were found cutting a beef in the wee hours of the morning
in the house of the petitioners. We also do not know whether the
cause was poverty, lack of employment or hunger, which may
have compelled the petitioners and the other co-accused to take
such a step. It is thus, a matter of quality and degree whether
the act has been done in public gaze and in an aggressive
manner with scant regard to the sentiments of the other
community or whether it has been done in a concealed manner,
which can resolve the question whether the case is one
involving public order, or is only a matter affecting law and
order.
39. In the case of T. Devaki Vs. Government of Tamil Nadu and
others, (1990) SCC 456, the Apex Court observed that merely
making averments in the grounds of detention that as a result of
an offence in public and in broad day light alarm, fear and a
sense of insecurity was generated in the minds of the public of
the area and thereby the detenue could be said to have acted in a
manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order which
affected the even tempo of life of the community, was not
sufficient. Repetition of these words in the grounds are not
sufficient to inject the requisite degree of quality and
potentiality in the incident in question, but there must be some
substantive material to indicate that public order has been
jeopardized.
40. In the present case, to the contrary we find that on the arrival of
the police in the wee hour, the public had been pacified and
disbursed and that the beef and weapons of cutting beefs i.e.
banka, wood and knife were recovered and sent to Veterinary
Doctor for test. Thus, an act of slaughtering a cow in the
secrecy of one’s own house in the wee hours probably because
of poverty or lack of employment or hunger, would perhaps
only involve a law and order issue and could not be said to
stand on the same footing as a situation where a number of
cattle have been slaughtered outside in public view and the
public transport of their flesh or an incident where aggressive
attack is made by the slaughterers against the complaining
public, which may involve infractions of public order.
41. In Ramesh Yadav vs District Magistrate, Etah and others :
AIR 1986 SC 315, the Apex Court has observed as under :
“6. On a reading of the grounds, particularly the
paragraph which we have extracted above, it is clear
that the order of detention was passed as the
detaining authority was apprehensive that in case the
detenu was released on bail he would again carry on
his criminal activities in the area. If the apprehension
of the detaining authority was true, the bail application
had to be opposed and in case bail was granted,
challenge against that order in the higher forum had
to be raised. Merely on the ground that an accused
in detention as an under trial prisoner was likely
National Security Act should not ordinarily be
passed. We are inclined to agree with counsel for the
petitioner  that   the    order  of   detention   in  the
circumstances is not sustainable and is contrary to
the well settled principles indicated by this Court in
series of cases relating to preventive detention. The
impugned order, therefore, has to be quashed.”
42. The aforesaid dictum of the Apex Court in Ramesh Yadav vs
District Magistrate, Etah and others (Surpa) has also been
followed by the Apex Court in Sama Aruna v State of
Telangana and another : (2018) 12 SCC 150.
43. Considering the aforesaid, we are of the opinion that there was
no material to indicate that the petitioners/detenues had any
criminal history and it was only a surmise based on no material
or evidence that the petitioners/detenues might have been
earlier involved in such an incident and he may show such a
repetitive tendency, in case they will be released on bail.
44.  In view of the above, all the above-captioned habeas corpus
petitions succeed and are allowed. The detention order dated
14.08.2020 and impugned consequential orders are quashed.
The detenues/petitioners shall be released forthwith unless
wanted in connection with some other criminal case.
45.  No order as to costs.