1.    Mainly two issues arise in this appeal. The first issue is
regarding the omission to frame a proper charge in accordance
with Section 213 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for
short, ‘CrPC’).   The second issue is of the consequence of the
failure of the learned Trial Judge to put material circumstances
brought on record in the prosecution evidence to the accused in
their statements under Section 313 of CrPC.       In short, this
Court will have to examine whether there is a failure to comply
with the requirements of Sections 213 and 313 of CrPC.     If the
answer to the said question is in the affirmative, the next
question will be whether prejudice has been caused to the
accused due to failure to comply with the aforesaid provisions
and whether it has caused a failure of justice.
2.    The present appeal arises out of the judgment and order of
the Fast Track Sessions Court at Bulandshahr. The Fast Track
Court convicted the accused Bangali who is not before this Court
for the offences punishable under Section 148 of the Indian
Penal Code (for short, ‘IPC’), Section 302 of IPC as well as
Section 307 read with Section 149 of IPC. The Fast Track Court
convicted Kalicharan (accused no.1), Yaad Prakash (accused
no.2), Diwan Singh (accused no.3), and Smt. Shakuntala Devi
(accused no.4) for the offences punishable under Section 148 of
IPC, Section 302 read with Section 149 of IPC and Section 307
read with Section 149 of IPC. Yaad Prakash (accused no.2) was
also convicted for the offence punishable under Section 25 of the
Arms Act, 1959. Two separate appeals were preferred before the
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad.          One appeal was
preferred by the accused Bangali and the other one was
preferred by accused nos.1 to 4. By the impugned judgment, the
appeals were dismissed.
3.    Accused Bangali did not challenge the impugned Judgment.
Accused nos.1 to 4 have preferred this appeal.     We must note
here that appellant no.3 Diwan Singh (accused no.3) raised a
plea in the present appeal that on the date of the commission of
the alleged offence, he was a juvenile in conflict with law.
Accordingly, by the order dated 8th February 2021, this Court
directed the learned District and Sessions Judge to hold an
inquiry into the said plea. A finding was rendered by the learned
District and Sessions Judge holding that on the date of
commission of the offence, appellant no.3 Diwan Singh (accused
no.3) was a juvenile in conflict with law. Therefore, by the order
dated 1st July 2021, the conviction of appellant no.3 was set
aside and the present appeal to that extent was allowed.
4.    We may note here that for the same incident, two separate
First Information Reports (FIRs) were registered.    The first FIR
was against all the five accused for all the IPC offences and the
second FIR was against appellant no.2 (accused no.2) for the
offence punishable under Section 25 of the Arms Act.
5.    The prosecution case, in brief, is that on 6th December
2000 at about 1.30 pm, the informant Atar Singh (PW-1) was
carrying soil for levelling a lane by his bullock cart. When he
reached near the house of Shankar, accused no.1 Kalicharan
and his sons, Yaad Prakash (accused no.2), and Diwan Singh
(accused no.3) resisted PW-1 and forced him to turn back his
bullock cart. There was an altercation between accused nos.1 to
3 and PW-1. The said three accused went back to their house
and came back with weapons. The allegation is that the accused
Bangali came with a chura (razor). Accused no.1 was carrying a
lathi. Accused no.2 Yaad Prakash was carrying a country-made
pistol of 315 bores. Accused no.3 Diwan Singh and accused no.4
Shakuntala Devi were carrying axe in their hands. Accused no.4
Shakuntala Devi is the wife of accused no.1 and mother of
accused nos. 2 and 3. The allegation made in the FIR is that
accused no.2 fired four to five shots from his country-made
pistol which hit deceased Harpal Singh who died on the spot. As
a result of this incident, the conflict started and the accused
Bangali who was armed with a razor attacked PW-1’s sister Rani,
who succumbed to the injuries caused by Bangali.         Malkhan
Singh, Ram Autar, Smt. Saroj, Smt. Rajni and Smt. Rani Devi
came to rescue the deceased Rani. However, the said persons
were attacked by accused nos.1,3 and 4 with weapons in their
hands. These persons suffered injuries at the hands of the said
three accused. The accused nos. 2 and 4 also sustained injuries
in the fight. It must be noted here that though in the FIR, a case
was made out that deceased Harpal Singh died to bullet injuries
caused by bullets fired by accused no.2 Yaad Prakash, in the
evidence, the prosecution witnesses and in particular PW-1,
deposed that due to commotion caused by firing of shots by
accused no.2, Harpal Singh fell down and later on he was
attacked by the other accused. The injuries caused by sharp
weapons led to his death. Apart from the evidence of recovery,
the prosecution mainly relied upon the evidence of eye-witnesses
of PW-1 Attar Singh and PW-2 Malkhan Singh who were
allegedly injured at the hands of the accused.
6.    Shri Rakesh Khanna, the learned senior counsel appearing
for the appellants pointed out at the outset that one of the five
accused, Diwan Singh has been acquitted by this Court and
therefore, only four accused were involved in the incident. He,
therefore, submitted that the allegation of unlawful assembly
made by the prosecution cannot be accepted as there was no
assembly of five or more persons. He, therefore, submitted that
Sections 148 and 149 of IPC could not be invoked. He invited
our attention to the fourth charge framed against the accused.
He pointed out that the said charge alleges that accused no.2
Yaad Prakash opened fire with a country-made revolver and the
bullet injury sustained by Harpal Singh caused his death. He
pointed out that there was no charge framed that the accused
killed Harpal Singh after he fell down by using weapons in their
hands. He submitted that as can be seen from the judgments of
the Sessions Court and High Court, it has been held that Harpal
Singh did not receive any firearm injury but he suffered injuries
due to the assault made by the accused nos.1,2 and 4 by
weapons in their hands. He submitted that the accused were
misled due to the failure to frame proper charge. He submitted
that though PW-1 and PW-2 deposed that Harpal Singh is not
the victim of bullet injury caused by the firearm used by accused
no.2, while recording statements of the accused under Section
313, the only circumstance put to the accused is that Harpal
Singh died due to four to five shots fired by accused no.2, Yaad
Prakash. He pointed out that the circumstance that the accused
attacked Harpal Singh with the weapons in their hands which
ultimately cause the death of Harpal Singh has not been put to
the accused persons. He submitted that a serious prejudice has
been caused to the accused due to the failure to frame proper
charge and by failure to put material circumstances to the
accused in their statement under Section 313 of CrPC.          He,
therefore, submitted that the conviction of the appellants nos.1,2
and 4 is vitiated and they deserve to be acquitted. He also
pointed out that the applications for a grant of exemption from
surrendering made by the appellants were rejected by this Court
by order dated 29th July 2019.      The custody certificates show
that appellants nos.1,2 and 4 are in custody since 19 th August
7.    Shri Vinod Diwakar, learned Additional Advocate General
for the State of Uttar Pradesh firstly submitted that the advocate
for the accused had cross-examined the material prosecution
witnesses including the two eye-witnesses on the prosecution
case that Harpal Singh died due to assault made by the
appellant nos.1,2 and 4 by the weapons in their hands.
Therefore, there was no prejudice caused to them on account of
the failure of the Court to frame a proper charge. Moreover, the
appellants were aware of the prosecution case as reflected in the
evidence of PW-1 and PW-2 and therefore, the failure of the
learned Trial Judge to put the circumstance to them in their
statement under Section 313 is not at all fatal. He submitted
that both the Courts have believed the testimony of PW-1 and
PW-2.    He submitted that injuries on the person of deceased
Harpal Singh and injuries found on the injured persons
including PW-1 and PW-2 were consistent with the prosecution
case. He would, therefore, submit that no interference is called
for in this appeal as two persons have been brutally murdered
and several others were injured.
8.    We have given careful consideration to the submission. As
pointed out earlier, the present appellants were convicted for the
offence punishable under Section 148 of IPC. All of them were
convicted for the offences punishable under Sections 302 and
307 with the aid of Section 149. The condition precedent for
attracting offences punishable under Sections 148 and 149 is
that there should be an unlawful assembly as provided in
Section 141 of IPC.       Section 141 of IPC defines “unlawful
assembly” to mean an assembly of five or more persons. In this
case, the four appellants and accused Bangali were named in the
charge sheet.   As noted earlier, appellant no.3 - accused no.3
Diwan Singh was acquitted by this Court by order dated 1 st July
2021 by setting aside the conviction as against him. Therefore,
for considering the question whether there was an unlawful
assembly, appellant no.3 Diwan Singh will have to be kept out of
consideration. Then only four accused remain.        Hence, the
charge under Sections 148 and 149 of IPC cannot be sustained.
9.   Now, we turn to the charge framed by the Trial Court
against the accused.   The only charges framed for the offence
under Section 302 of IPC in relation to deceased Harpal Singh
were the third and fourth charges.         The official English
translation of the said two charges made by the High Court
“Third : That on the above said date, time and
place, you the accused Yaad Prakash opened
45-5 gunshots with the country pistol
holding in your hand at the complainant Atar
Singh and his family members with intention
to kill them that hit to the cousin brother of
complainant namely Harpal Singh.         Thus,
you the accused Yaadram committed the
murder of Harpal Singh. Thus, you have
committed offense punishable under Section
302 IPC which is within the cognizance of this
Fourth : That on the above said date, time and
place, you the accused Yaad Prakash out of
the accused persons, had opened fire with
country pistol at Harpal Singh in furtherance
of your common object and committed
murder of Harpal Singh on the spot which is
punishable offense u/s 302/149/IPC and is
within the cognizance of the Court.”
(emphasis added)
10. Thus, both the charges allege that appellant no.2 Yaad
Prakash (accused no.2) fired 4-5 gunshots with his country-
made pistol which hit Harpal Singh and therefore, Harpal Singh
was killed by accused no.2. That is the third charge framed by
the Trial Court. The fourth charge was again on the basis of the
allegation that it was the injury caused by bullets fired from the
country-made pistol of accused no.2 which caused the death of
Harpal Singh.      The fourth charge indicates that the other
accused were roped in only with the aid of Section 149 of IPC.
11. FIR was lodged on the basis of a written report made by
PW-1 Attar Singh which was reduced in writing by one Murari
Lal, a police constable. The official translation of the material
part of the allegations in the said written report reads thus:
“....Thereafter, the accused persons went to
their home and then Kalicharan armed with
lathi, his sons namely Yad Prakash armed with
country made pistol (315), Bangali armed with
chhura and Diwan Singh armed with knife and
Kalicharan’s wife Smt. Shakuntala Devi armed
with an axe came on the spot with common
object. On the noise, Harpal S/o Shriram, Smt.
Rani Devi daughter of Mahipal, Malkhan Singh,
Ram Autar S/o Mahilal, Smt. Saroj w/o Dhawal
Singh, Smt. Rajni wife of Ved Prakash, Smt.
Rani Devi wife of Atar Singh, Shriram s/o
Mewaram, Ved Prakash s/o Mahipal, Satpal S/o
Chhitar? Singh and Amar Singh s/o Shriram of
our family arrived there.       Thereon, accused
Kalicharan exhorted saying, ‘DEKHTE KYA HO
SALO KO JAAN SE MAAR DAALO (what are you
looking for, kill the bastard).” Thereupon,
accused Yad Prakash fired 4-5 shorts on us
with his country made pistol with intention
to kill, which hit my cousin Harpal Singh.
Due to it, Harpal Singh died on the spot….”
(emphasis added)
12. As noted earlier, only two eye-witnesses, namely, PW-1
Attar Singh, the informant and PW-2 Malkhan Singh were
examined by the prosecution. PW-1 in his deposition before the
Court proved his written statement on the basis of which FIR
was registered. The English translation of the material part of
his examination-in-chief reads thus:
“Kalicharan had lathi in his hand, Yaad Prakash
had country made pistol, Bengali had dagger
(chura). Diwan Singh had knife and Shakuntala
Devi had axe.      As they arrived, Kalicharan
exhorted them to open fire. Thereupon, accused
Yaad Prakash opened 4-5 fires and hearing the
noise of fire, my family members namely
Malkhan Singh, Ramavtar, Saroj, Rajni, my sister
Rani Devi and my wife Rani, Harpal Singh and
others had come. When stampede ensued due to
fire then Harpal Singh fell down and the
aforesaid accused persons assaulted Harpal with
their respective weapons as a result of which
Harpal died on spot.”
13. In the cross-examination, PW-1 stated that as accused no.2
had fired 4-5 gunshots, a stampede ensued.       He stated that
Harpal fell down but he was not aware whether bullets hit him or
not. However, he accepted that in the First Information Report,
he had stated that the gunshots fired by the accused no.2 hit
Harpal Singh who died on the spot.
14. PW-2 Malkhan Singh is the only other eyewitness. He also
came out with the same version in his examination-in-chief. He
stated in the cross-examination that he was not aware whether
Harpal Singh fell down due to a bullet injury.
15. We have quoted the third charge above which is based on
the allegation in the FIR that Harpal Singh suffered injuries due
to bullets fired by accused no.2 and that he died due to the
bullet injuries.  There is no charge framed that the death of
Harpal Singh was caused due to assault made by accused
nos.1,2 and 4 (present appellants). As noted by both the Courts,
PW 3 Dr. R.K. Daware who performed the post-mortem on the
body of deceased Harpal Singh stated that he suffered injuries
caused by sharp-edged weapons like knives and chura. Neither
he deposed that there were bullet injuries nor did post-mortem
notes record such injuries.
16. There are provisions made in CrPC in Chapter XVII
regarding the framing of charge.        The object of the said
provisions is obviously to make the accused aware of the
accusations against him on the basis of which the prosecution is
seeking to convict him. The object of the provisions regarding
the framing of charge is that accused should be in a position to
effectively defend himself.       An accused can properly defend
himself provided he is clearly informed about the nature of the
allegations against him before the actual trial starts.      That is
why there are elaborate provisions in CrPC in that behalf. Sub-
section (1) of Section 212 is material for our consideration which
“212. Particulars as to time, place and
person.—(1) The charge shall contain such
particulars as to the time and place of the
alleged offence, and the person (if any) against
whom, or the thing (if any) in respect of which,
it was committed, as are reasonably sufficient to
give the accused notice of the matter with which
he is charged.
What is more important for this case is Section 213 which reads
“213. When manner of committing offence
must be stated.—When the nature of the case
is such that the particulars mentioned in
sections 211 and 212 do not give the accused
sufficient notice of the matter with which he is
charged, the charge shall also contain such
particulars of the manner in which the alleged
offence was committed as will be sufficient for
that purpose.”
17. The emphasis is on giving details of the manner of
committing offence. Unless the particulars such as specific
Sections of the penal statute as well as the time and place of the
commission of the alleged offence are incorporated in the charge,
the accused will not be in a position to properly defend himself.
Even these particulars may not be enough in many cases to
enable the accused to properly defend himself. That is why there
is a specific requirement incorporated in Section 213 that if the
particulars mentioned in Sections 211 and 212 do not give the
accused sufficient notice of the matter with which he is charged,
the charge shall also contain such particulars of the manner in
which the alleged offence was committed as will be sufficient for
that purpose. Illustration (e) to Section 213 provides that when
the charge contains an allegation that ‘A’ is accused of the
murder of ‘B’ at a given time and place, the charge need not state
the manner in which ‘A’ murdered ‘B’.         Going by the charge
framed in this case, it is alleged therein that it was accused no.2
who murdered deceased Harpal Singh by firing bullets from his
pistol. Though the case of the prosecution as can be seen from
the evidence is that accused nos.1, 3 and 4 committed the
murder of Harpal Singh by using sharp weapons in their hand,
there is no charge framed against accused nos.1, 3 and 4
alleging that they murdered Harpal Singh. As there is no charge
framed against accused nos.1,3 and 4 of committing the murder
of Harpal Singh, Illustration (e) will not apply. Therefore, it was
necessary to frame a charge in terms of Section 213 by stating
the manner of committing the offence of murder by accused nos.
1,3 and 4.
18. There are two provisions in CrPC that deal with errors or
omissions in framing charge. The said provisions are Sections
215 and 464 which reads thus:
“215. Effect of errors.— No error in stating either
the offence or the particulars required to be stated
in the charge, and no omission to state the offence
or those particulars, shall be regarded at any stage
of the case as material, unless the accused was in
fact misled by such error or omission, and it has
occasioned a failure of justice.”
464. Effect of omission to frame, or absence of,
or error in, charge.—(1) No finding, sentence or
order by a Court of competent jurisdiction shall be
deemed invalid merely on the ground that no
charge was framed or on the ground of any error,
omission or irregularity in the charge including any
misjoinder of charges, unless, in the opinion of the
Court of appeal, confirmation or revision, a failure
of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby.
(2) If the Court of appeal, confirmation or revision,
is of opinion that a failure of justice has in fact
been occasioned, it may,—
(a) in the case of an omission to frame a charge,
order that a charge be framed, and that the trial be
recommended from the point immediately after the
framing of the charge;
(b) in the case of an error, omission or irregularity
in the charge, direct a new trial to be had upon a
charge framed in whatever manner it thinks fit:
Provided that if the Court is of opinion that the
facts of the case are such that no valid charge
could be preferred against the accused in respect of
the facts proved, it shall quash the conviction.”
19. Section 215 lays down when errors in the particulars
required to be stated in the charge can be treated as material. It
lays down that the error cannot be said to be material unless the
accused was misled by such error or omission and that such
error or omission has caused a failure of justice. Section 464
deals with the effect of error or omission made while framing
charges on the finding and sentence of the competent Court. The
Section provides that the finding and sentence of the Court
cannot be invalid merely on the ground of error in framing
charge or omission in framing charge. The finding and sentence
will be invalid only if in the opinion of the Court of appeal, the
error or omission has occasioned a failure of justice.
20. When the Court of appeal is called upon to decide whether
any failure of justice has been occasioned due to omission to
frame a charge or error in the charge, the Court is duty bound to
examine the entire record of the trial including all exhibited
documents, depositions and the statements of the accused
recorded under Section 313.
21. At this stage, we must refer to the requirement of the
examination of the accused under Section 313 of CrPC. Section
313 of CrPC reads thus:-
“313. Power to examine the accused.—(1) In
every inquiry or trial, for the purpose of enabling
the accused personally to explain any
circumstances appearing in the evidence
against him, the Court—
(a) may at any stage, without previously
warning the accused put such questions to
him as the Court considers necessary;
(b) shall, after the witnesses for the
prosecution have been examined and before he
is called on for his defence, question him
generally on the case:
Provided that in a summons-case, where the Court
has dispensed with the personal attendance of the
accused, it may also dispense with his examination
under clause (b).
(2) No oath shall be administered to the accused
when he is examined under sub-section (1).
(3) The accused shall not render himself liable to
punishment by refusing to answer such questions,
or by giving false answers to them.
(4) The answers given by the accused may be taken
into consideration in such inquiry or trial, and put
in evidence for or against him in any other inquiry
into, or trial for, any other offence which such
answers may tend to show he has committed.
[(5) The Court may take help of Prosecutor and
Defence Counsel in preparing relevant questions
which are to be put to the accused and the Court
may permit filing of written statement by the
accused as sufficient compliance of this section.]”
The questions in separate statements of the accused nos. 1 to 4
recorded by the Trial Court are almost identical. Question no.5
is the only question put to them about the evidence adduced
against them on the charge of murder of Harpal Singh. Question
no.5 put to accused no.3 reads thus:-
“Ques 5 – That it has come up in prosecution
evidence that on being exhorted by accused
Kalicharan, accused Yaad Prakash fired 4-5
shots at complainant Atar Singh and his
family members with his country made pistol
with intention to kill, that hit complainant’s
cousin Harpal Singh and he died on the spot.
What do you have to say in this regard?”
(emphasis added)
22. Such a case was not at all made out by the prosecution in
the evidence before the Court. The material brought on record by
the prosecution witnesses (PW-1 and PW-2) is to the effect that
Harpal Singh died due to injuries sustained as a result of an
attack made by accused nos.1,3 and 4 on him by sharp
weapons.    These material circumstances brought on record
against the accused on which their conviction is based were
never put to the accused. What was put to the accused was not
the case made out by the prosecution in the evidence.        No
questions are asked in the Section 313 statement about the
post-mortem of the body of Harpal Singh. It is not put to the
witness that the cause of death of Harpal Singh was due to
haemorrhage and shock as a result of injuries caused by sharp
weapons. Questioning an accused under Section 313 CrPC is not
an empty formality. The requirement of Section 313 CrPC is that
the accused must be explained the circumstances appearing in
the evidence against him so that accused can offer an
explanation. After an accused is questioned under Section 313
CrPC, he is entitled to take a call on the question of examining
defence witnesses and leading other evidence. If the accused is
not explained the important circumstances appearing against
him in the evidence on which his conviction is sought to be
based, the accused will not be in a position to explain the said
circumstances brought on record against him.           He will not be
able to properly defend himself. In paragraph 21 of the decision
of this Court in the case of Jai Dev v. State of Punjab1, it was
“21. In support of his contention that the failure to
put the relevant point against the appellant Hari
Singh would affect the final conclusion of the High
Court, Mr Anthony has relied on a decision of this
Court in Hate Singh Bhagat Singh v. State of
468] . In that case, this Court has no doubt
referred to the fact that it was important to put to
the accused each material fact which is intended to
be used against him and to afford him a chance of
explaining it if he can. But these observations must
be read in the light of the other conclusions
reached by this Court in that case. It would, we
think, be incorrect to suggest that these
observations are intended to lay down a general
and inexorable rule that wherever it is found that
one of the points used against the accused person
has not been put to him, either the trial is vitiated
or his conviction is rendered bad. The
examination of the accused person under
Section 342 is undoubtedly intended to give
him     an     opportunity     to    explain     any
circumstances appearing in the evidence
against him. In exercising its powers under
Section 342, the court must take care to put all
relevant circumstances appearing in the
evidence to the accused person. It would not be
enough to put a few general and broad questions
to the accused, for by adopting such a course
the accused may not get opportunity of
explaining all the relevant circumstances. On
the other hand, it would not be fair or right that
the court should put to the accused person
detailed questions which may amount to his cross-
examination. The ultimate test in determining
whether or not the accused has been fairly
examined under Section 342 would be to
enquire whether, having regard to all the
questions put to him, he did get an opportunity
to say what he wanted to say in respect of
prosecution case against him. If it appears that
the examination of the accused person was
defective and thereby a prejudice has been
caused to him, that would no doubt be a serious
infirmity. It is obvious that no general rule can be
laid down in regard to the manner in which the
accused person should be examined under Section
342. Broadly stated, however, the true position
appears to be that passion for brevity which may
be content with asking a few omnibus general
questions is as much inconsistent with the
requirements of Section 342 as anxiety for
thoroughness which may dictate an unduly
detailed and large number of questions which may
amount to the cross-examination of the accused
person. Besides, in the present case, as we have
already shown, failure to put the specific point of
distance is really not very material.”
(emphasis added)
In paragraph 145 of the well known decision of this Court in the
case of Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra 2, it
“145. It is not necessary for us to multiply
authorities on this point as this question now
stands concluded by several decisions of this
Court. In this view of the matter, the
circumstances which were not put to the
appellant in his examination under Section
313 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973
have to be completely excluded from
23. Now coming to the facts of the case, not only that a charge
was not framed on the allegation that the death of Harpal Singh
was caused due to assault physically made by the accused and
in particular accused nos. 1,2 and 4 by use of sharp weapons, a
misleading charge was framed that Harpal Singh died due to
bullet injuries sustained by the bullets fired by the accused no.2
with a pistol in his hand.        There is every possibility of the
accused getting misled due to the framing of such a charge and
omission to frame the correct charge. What is more serious is
that though the prosecution case made out during the trial
clearly indicated that the death of Harpal Singh was not caused
due to any bullet injury, the circumstance put to all the accused
under Section 313 was that the death of Harpal Singh was
caused due to four to five shots fired by accused no.2 by a
country-made pistol. In fact, question no.5 in the statement of
the accused under Section 313 clearly records that the bullets
fired by accused no.2 hit Harpal Singh and he died on the spot.
As can be seen from the oral evidence, the post-mortem reports
and examination of the doctor, Harpal Singh did not receive any
bullet injury. Still, the said allegation was put to all the accused
in the examination under Section 313. Thus, not only that the
charge framed was misleading, but most material circumstance
brought on record against the accused in the evidence that
Harpal Singh died due to injuries caused by the attack made by
accused nos.1,3 and 4 was not put any of the accused. Thus,
not only that the charge was misleading but the accused had no
opportunity to explain the circumstance in which Harpal Singh
was allegedly killed which was brought on record during the
trial. Therefore, in the facts of the case, by reason of omission to
frame a proper charge in terms of Section 213 of CrPC, and by
reason of not putting important circumstances appearing in the
evidence in the statement under Section 313 caused serious
prejudice to the accused. The prejudice, in the facts of the case,
has occasioned a failure of justice.
24. Therefore,     we  considered     whether   the  case   can  be
remanded for framing of a proper charge and for recording
additional statements of the accused under Section 313.         But
the incident is of December 2000. Therefore, it will be unfair to
the accused if they are called upon to answer the circumstances
appearing against them in evidence about the incident which
has taken place more than 22 years back. In fact, such a course
will cause serious prejudice to the accused.
25. In the circumstances, the charge of committing the murder
of Harpal Singh against accused nos. 1,2 and 4 cannot be
substantiated. The accused nos. 1,2 and 4 were convicted for
the offences under Section 307 of IPC with the aid of Section
149. However, Section 149 will not apply in this case. We may
also note that the accused nos. 1,2 and 4 were in jail from 19 th
August 2019. Therefore, all of them had undergone a sentence
for more than three years and four months. Accused no.2 was
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for two years for
the offence punishable under Section 25 of the Arms Act which
he has already undergone.
26. Accused Bangali has not preferred any appeal.       We may
note here that the accused Bangali was convicted under Section
302 of IPC for committing the murder of Rani without the aid of
Section 149 of IPC.
27. Hence, the appeal must succeed. We set aside the
impugned judgments of the Sessions Court as well as the High
Court to the extent to which accused no.1 Kalicharan, accused
no.2 Yaad Prakash and accused no.4, Smt. Shakuntala Devi
were convicted. They shall be forthwith set at liberty unless they
are required to be detained in connection with any other offence.
As noted earlier, accused no.3 Diwan Singh has already been
acquitted under the order dated 1st July 2021.
28. The appeal is, accordingly, allowed.
Date : 14-12-2022 This matter was called on for pronouncement of
Judgment today.
Hon’ble   Mr.   Justice  Abhay  S.  Oka  pronounced  the
reportable judgment of the Bench comprising His Lordship and
The appeal is allowed in terms of signed reportable
judgment.
The operative part of the Judgment reads as under:
“….the appeal must succeed. We set aside
the impugned judgments of the Sessions Court as
well as the High Court to the extent to which
accused   no.1  Kalicharan,  accused  no.2  Yaad
Prakash and accused no.4, Smt. Shakuntala Devi
were convicted. They shall be forthwith set at
liberty unless they are required to be detained
in connection with any other offence.   As noted
earlier, accused no.3 Diwan Singh has already
been acquitted under the order dated 1st July
Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
(Signed reportable judgment is placed on the file)