1.   In State of Gujarat Vs. Shantilal Mangaldas & Ors.,
reported in (1969) 1 SCC 509, the Constitution Bench of the
Supreme Court had an occasion to examine the scheme of the
Bombay Town Planning Act, 1955 in the context of challenge to
the vires of Sections 53 and 67 thereof. It was noticed that the
Bombay Town Planning Act, 1955 was enacted repealing the
(3 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
Bombay Town Planning Act, 1915. The objects for framing the Act
of 1955 and the difference in the repealed Act 1915 and the new
Act were noticed as under:-
“8. The principal objects of the town: planning
legislation are to provide for planned and controlled
development and use of land in urban areas.
Introduction of the factory system into methods of
manufacture, brought about a great exodus of
population from the village into the manufacturing
centers leading to congestion and overcrowding,
and cheap and unsanitary dwellings were hurriedly
erected often in the vicinity of the factories.
Erection of these dwellings was generally subject to
little supervision or control by local authorities, and
the new, dwellings were built in close and
unregulated proximity with little or no regard to the
requirements       of      ventilation           and  sanitation.
Necessity to make a planned development of these
new colonies for housing the influx of population in
sanitary surroundings was soon felt. The Bombay
Legislature enacted Act 1 of 1915 with a view to
remedy the situation.
9. The Bombay Town Planning Act 27 of 1955 is
modelled on the same pattern as Act 1 of 1915, but
with one important variation. By Ch. II of the new
Act it is made obligatory upon every local authority
to carry out a survey of the area within its
jurisdiction and to prepare and publish in the
prescribed manner a development plan and submit
it to the Government for sanction. A development
plan is intended to lay down in advance the manner
in which the development and improvement of the
entire area within the jurisdiction of the local
authority are to be carried out and regulated, with
particular reference to-
(a) proposals for designating the use of the land, for
the purposes such as (1) residential, (2) industries
(3) commercial, and (4) agricultural;
(b) proposals for designation of land for public
purposes such as parks, play-grounds, recreation
grounds, open spaces, schools, markets or medical,
public health of physical culture institutions;
(c) proposals for roads and highways;
(d) proposals for the reservation of land for the
purpose of the Union, any State, any local authority
(4 of 81)                   [CW-15150/2021]
or any other authority established by law in India;
(e) such other proposals for public or other
purposes as may from time to time be approved by
a local authority or directed by the State
Government in that behalf.
By making it obligatory upon a local authority to
prepare a development plan under Bombay Act 27
of 1955 it was clearly intended that the Town
Planning Schemes should form part of a single
cohesive pattern for development of the entire area
over which the local authority had jurisdiction.”
2.     The Supreme Court noticed the scheme framed under the
said Act for formation of final town planning scheme which
included    rearrangement      of     the     titles     in    various  plots   and
reservation of lands for public purposes and financial adjustments
to be made. It was noticed that the owner who is deprived of the
land has to be compensated and the owner who obtains a
reconstituted plot in surroundings which are conducive to better
sanitary living conditions has to contribute towards the expenses
of the scheme. It was observed that this was necessary since on
the making of town planning scheme the value of the plot raises
and a part of the benefit which arises out of unearned rise in
prices is directed to be contributed towards financing the scheme
which enables the residents in that area to more amenities, better
facilities and healthier living conditions.
3.     Town Planning laws similar to the Bombay Town Planning Act,
1955 have been enacted by other State legislations also. In the
State of Rajasthan, Rajasthan Urban Improvement Act, 1959 was
enacted to make provisions for improvement and expansion of
(5 of 81)             [CW-15150/2021]
urban area in the State of Rajasthan. The statement of objects
and reasons for framing of this Act reads as under:-
“Several Urban areas in Rajasthan are in
absolutely abandoned and improper conditions. This
is due to lack of funds and partly due to absence of
proper supervision and chalking out of suitable
improvement scheme on modern lines. It is
considered necessary with a view to achieving the
improvement of such neglected urban areas, to
provide for the establishment of improvement trusts
to empower them to raise funds to frame
improvement schemes, to execute them and to
exercise some municipal powers during such
executions. The Bill is designed to achieve that
purpose. The powers given to the trusts to be
constituted there under are wide enough but as they
have been sufficiently subjected to the Government
Control, they are free from risk of all sorts. The
rights of private persons have also been sufficiently
protected in as much as all disputes arising between
them and the Trusts are to be referred to the District
Judge, from whose decision an appeal will lie to the
4.     These legislations were thus framed for systematic urban
development and to meet with the challenges faced due to rapid
urbanisation. We have begun our judgment with reference to the
decision of the Supreme Court in case of Shantilal Mangaldas
(supra)1 in order to demonstrate that these town planning laws
by whatever name called, contain detailed provisions to facilitate
orderly urban town planning along modern lines. The question that
comes to our mind is, despite such intricate statutory scheme and
well intentioned town planning laws framed by the legislature, has
the process of town planning and development in the country truly
succeeded? The answer sadly and obviously is in the negative. The
combination of factors such as lack of political will, executive
(6 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
apathy     and   human     greed       have       frustrated   the  most    well
intentioned legislations. Increasingly the cities across the country
have    witnessed   haphazard         growth,         unplanned   development,
unauthorised occupations and constructions without permission
from civic authorities with virtually no civic amenities like regular
water supply, sanitation, street lighting and such others.                Such
constructions and unauthorised developments have come up in
privately owned lands, in public lands, on the sides of the streets
and roads and even in low lying areas such as on river banks or
lands which once upon a time formed water bodies such as ponds
and lakes. There are multiple reasons for this virtual breakdown of
the modern town planning. However the prime reason and
perhaps the single most important factor which has contributed to
this phenomena is the process of rapid urbanisation. For variety of
reasons population in large numbers                    from the rural areas is
driven to migration towards urban centers. This unprecedented
gravitation of rural population towards towns, cities and urban
agglomerations outstrips the supply of affordable urban housing
and brings along with it a complex range of problems and
challenges. Essentially the failure of the administration to provide
affordable housing for lower and middle income group families in
urban centers has led to mushrooming of unauthorised, illegal and
unplanned growth. The approach of the society to the people
living in such slums also often times exhibits a clear cleavage
between the haves and have-nots.                    We wish such slums and
juggies disappear because they do not make a pretty sight in our
cities, in the process forgetting that the workforce for menial jobs,
(7 of 81)                  [CW-15150/2021]
the cheap labour force working in our factories and our household
help without whom all our modern amenities and facilities would
become worthless, come from these settlements. We often forget
that it is not out of choice that a person occupies land without
title, a house with leaking roof and the walls which do not protect
his family from cold winds. It is certainly not by choice that these
residents stand in long queues to fill up a bucket full of water, or
their women bathe in semi open conditions trying to protect their
modesty by hiding behind makeshift curtains.
5.     This preamble was necessary because in these cases we are
examining a challenge to the government orders and circulars
under which the State Government wishes to regularise at a large
scale unauthorised occupations and possessions of land; in many
cases with construction. To put it briefly, the case of the
petitioners is that these government orders and circulars and the
government policy are opposed to the various directions issued by
this Court in case of Gulab Kothari (to which a detailed reference
would be made at appropriate stage) and are also otherwise
opposed to several statutory provisions.
Challenge of the petitioners
6.    With this preamble we may refer to challenges raised by the
petitioners in these petitions. Writ Petition No.13782/2021 is filed
by one Roshan Vyas who is a resident of district Jodhpur. He has
challenged clause (3) of an order dated 23.04.2021 issued by the
Director    and   Special      Secretary,           Local      Self   Department,
Government of Rajasthan. Perusal of this order would show that it
(8 of 81)                  [CW-15150/2021]
is in the nature of a communication from the said authority to
various town planning authorities inviting the said authorities to
participate   in  a  meeting        to    be      conducted       through   video
conferencing in which various issues would be discussed. Item
no.3 which is challenged by the petitioner pertains to the question
of regularising kachchi basties. This being a mere communication
for holding a meeting, we do not think it gives rise to any
justiciable issue. The petitioner has also challenged clause (2) of
an order dated 20.09.2021 insofar as it pertains to regulariisation
or illegal encroachments made on public land. In an additional
affidavit   dated    29.11.2021           filed       by      respondent    No.3,
Commissioner, Jodhpur Development Authority, it is clarified that
no kachchi basti situated in public utility land such as park,
playground, pathways/roads, open land, public land etc., reserved
land, forest land, river, drain, pond or restricted area shall be
regularised and an order to this effect is already issued on
12.11.2021. Copy of this order passed by the Director and Special
Secretary is produced along with the said affidavit. In view of this
development, the issues raised by the petitioner would stand
resolved. However the petitioner sought to expand the petition by
seeking amendments through which various other challenges were
sought to be raised. During the pendency of this petition, another
petition   namely   Writ    Petition(PIL)          No.15150/2021       (filed  by
Bhanwar Singh) came to be filed and in which the challenge to the
government policy raised is more comprehensive. Amendment
Application No.2/2021 in D.B. Civil Writ Petition No.13782/2021 in
case of Roshan Vyas was allowed on 10.12.2021 and we have
(9 of 81)                 [CW-15150/2021]
heard the two petitions together for consideration of all issues
arising in these petitions. Before going into the pleadings in the
case of Shri Bhanwar Singh, we may notice that a Division Bench
of this Court in case of Roshan Vyas passed an order dated
06.10.2021 issuing following interim directions:-
“In the meanwhile, no regularization of
unauthorized occupation/construction over the
public land, agriculture land or any other land shall
be permitted pursuant to order dated 20.09.2021
and the orders issued subsequent thereto by the
State Government contrary to the Zonal
Development Plan and Sector Plan of any town or
city of the State of Rajasthan, if already finalized
and notified in conformity with the Master
Development Plan. The towns and the cities where
the Zonal Development Plan/Sector Plan have not
been duly approved in accordance with the law, no
process shall be initiated for regularization of any
individual construction or the colony developed
unauthorizedly        pursuant            to      order    dated
20.09.2021 and orders issued subsequent thereto.
The relaxation of norms under the order dated
20.09.2021 or any order issued by the State
Government subsequent thereto regarding the
width of the road, required facility area/open area
or the set-backs, shall remain stayed. The
directions issued by this Court in Gulab Kothari’s
case (supra) vide orders dated 20.01.2017 and
15.12.2018 shall be strictly followed. The State
authorities shall ensure that no regularization of
unauthorized       occupation            /     construction    is
permitted in defiance of the directions issued by
this Court in Gulab Kothari’s case (supra).It is
made clear that any regularization made in any
town or city of the State in defiance of the
directions issued by this Court in Gulab Kothari’s
case (supra), shall be viewed seriously and dealt
with sternly.”
7.    In case of Bhanwar Singh, the petitioner has challenged
three Government orders/circulars dated 20.09.2021, 27.09.2021
and 28.09.2021 as being opposed to the judgements in case of
Gulab Kothari. He has also challenged a notification dated
(10 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
24.09.2021, by which certain amendments have been made in the
Rajasthan Urban Improvement Act, 1959 (hereinafter to be
referred as ‘the Act of 1959’) authorising Urban Improvement
Trust to dispose of lands vested in the trust.                     He has also
challenged a notification dated 24.02.2021 under which the
2021 have been promulgated, and a notification dated 20.09.2021
by   which   the  Rajasthan       Municipalities           (Surrender   of  Non-
Agricultural Land and Grant of Freehold Lease) (Amendment)
Rules, 2021 have been promulgated.
8.    The case of the petitioner is that these Government decisions
and the corresponding statutory changes are opposed to the
judgments and orders of this Court in case of Gulab Kothari and
even    otherwise   illegal     and       impermissible.         The   petitioner
apprehends that through this mode the Government would
authorise large scale illegal occupations and constructions in
private as well as public lands in total disregard of the decisions in
case of Gulab Kothari, statutory provisions governi]ng the land
laws and urban town planning laws as also in contravention of the
existing town planning schemes.
9.    On the other hand the stand of the State Government is that
these decisions and the statutory changes aim at regularising the
occupations of large number of families in the State of Rajasthan
who are suffering on account of unclear titles, inaccurate land
records and lack of updation of occupation records even though
(11 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
the same would be fully legal. The State Government has
presented a case that no part of the government land or public
land would be divested in the process. In the opinion of the
respondents these policy decisions are in no way opposed to the
directions issued by this Court in case of                Gulab Kothari nor are
opposed to the public policy. The counsel representing the State
authorities have vehemently contended that this Court should not
prevent the State Government from framing and implementing its
policy in the spheres of socioeconomic reforms.
Facts in detail.
10.   To be able to appreciate and deal with the rival contentions
we may examine the facts in greater detail. A Division Bench of
this Court in case of Gulab Kothari considered various issues
concerning haphazard town planning and its adverse impact on
modern town development, ecology and environment. The first of
a series of orders was rendered on 12.01.2017, reported in
Patrika, Jaipur Vs. State of Rajasthan And Ors.) (hereinafter
to be referred as ‘Gulab Kothari-1’). The petition was filed by an
editor of leading newspaper in the State making allegations of
gross violation of master development plan of Jaipur and other
cities by the authorities. It was noticed that the town planning
schemes and master development plan were subjected to frequent
changes. The Court raised as many as 15 questions for its
consideration. These questions included (i) ambit and scope of the
power of the State Government and other authorities as regards
(12 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
preparation    of  the     master         development          plan   and   zonal
development plan and the modification and revision of such plans
during their operative period; (ii) whether peripheral control belt,
green belt, ecological zone etc. specified in the notified master
development plan form its basic character and feature which
cannot be altered and the land forming part thereof cannot be
permitted to be put to other uses such as commercial, residential,
institutional, industrial purposes etc.; (iii) whether the area
reserved for common facilities, parks, open spaces or recreation
etc. in a colony developed by the local authority or by the private
developers as per the approved plan can be diverted to any other
use and if put to such use, should the land be restored in the
original position; (iv) whether the pasture land can be permitted
to be used for other purposes and if yes, to what extent?
11.   The Division Bench considered these questions in light of
Urban Improvement Trust Act and other statutory provisions. It
was observed that under the scheme of the Act the urban areas in
respect of which master plan is once prepared, the sanctity
thereof has to be maintained and all improvement schemes of
various zones and development work to be undertaken by the
local authorities or the private entities must conform to the land
use specified under such master plan. It was observed that though
the Act does not provide for modification of the master plan during
its operative period, such power to modify or revise the plan are
inherent. It was held as under:-
“77. Thus, it can be safely concluded that the
power conferred upon the State Government under
(13 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
sub-section (2) of Section 25 of the Act to grant
approval to the Authority to make modification into
the Plan not covered by the provisions of sub-
section (1) is not absolute and no modification in
the Plan suggested by the Authority is permissible
to be approved by the State Government, which is
not in furtherance of the planned development of
Jaipur Region in most efficient manner. Suffice it to
say that power to modify the Master Development
Plan conferred upon the Authority with the prior
approval of the State Government in no manner
empowers it to effect the modification of the Plan in
deviation of the original legislative intent
underlying the enactment i.e. the planned and
orderly development of Jaipur Region.”
12. It was further held and observed as under:-
“87.Thus, there cannot be any quarrel with the
proposition that the Master Plan, which is a policy
document for guiding the future development of the
city or town in the planned manner and to arrest
undesirable and unplanned growth, is not a static
document, which cannot be modified or revised as
and when considered necessary in the larger public
interest in furtherance of planned development of the
urban area in respect whereof it is made operative.
But then, the Master Development Plan prepared to
master the future development in the city or town
democratically,       after         due         deliberation    and
consideration of suggestions and objections from the
public at large, cannot be permitted to be set at
naught at the whim and fancy of the authority
concerned just to serve the interest of individuals.
Obviously, the object of the planned development
shall be achieved by rigorous and successful
implementation of the Master Development Plan and
not by deviation therefrom with impunity.
88.We are firmly of the opinion that once the Master
Development Plan is brought into being, vigilant
implementation thereof should be the rule and any
deviation therefrom an exception and therefore, the
power vested with the Authority or the State
Government for modification thereof should be
exercised sparingly in furtherance of the planned
development in the larger public interest and not
otherwise.
The status of peripheral control belt /greenbelt/
ecological zone specified in the notified Master
(14 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
Development Plan, permissibility of use of the land
forming part of peripheral control belt/ecological
zone/green belt specified in the Master Development
Plan for the purposes other than those specified
during its operative period and thereafter, at the
time of revision thereof at the end of its tenure and
further the scope of alteration/modification thereof
13.  The conclusions of the Division Bench were culled out in
paragraph 205 as under:-
“205. In the result, having regard to the aforesaid
conclusions arrived at, we issue the following
(i)The Development Authorities and the State
Government shall ensure that Master Development
Plan of a city or town prepared under the relevant
statutes is a comprehensive and self explanatory
document providing for preservation, conservation
and development of eco-sensitive zone/ecological
zone/green area, peripheral control belt, natural
scenery, city forest, wildlife, natural resources and
landscaping as also allocation of land for different
uses such as residential, commercial, industrial,
institutional, cultural complexes, tourist complexes,
open      spaces,       garden,            recreation  centres,
amusement parks, zoological gardens, animal
sanctuaries, dairies and health resorts etc.
(ii)Simultaneously with the preparation of Master
Development Plan or immediately thereafter as
contemplated by Section 4 of the UIT Act and
Section22 of the Act No.25 of 1982 and other
relevant statutes, the authority concerned shall
proceed with the preparation of Zonal Development
Plan for each zone clearly specifying the location and
extent of the land uses proposed in the zone for
such thing as public buildings and other public works
and utilities, roads, housing, recreation, parks,
industry, business, markets, schools, public and
private open spaces etc.
(iii)The sanctity of Master Development Plan or the
Zonal Development Plan finally sanctioned shall be
maintained and all development schemes of the
various zones and the development work to be
undertaken by the local authorities or private
entrepreneurs or anybody else during the operative
period thereof, shall conform to the land uses as
(15 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
specified under the Master Development Plan or
Zonal Development Plan, as the case may be.
(iv)Once the Master Development Plan is brought
into being, vigilant implementation thereof shall be
the rule and any deviation therefrom an exception
and therefore, the power vested with the authority
or the State Government for modification thereof
during its operative period shall be exercised
sparingly in larger public interest, to achieve the
basic object thereof i.e. planned development of the
concerned region, city or town and not to sub-serve
interest of an individual.
(v)The eco-sensitive zone/ecological zone/green
area specified in the Master Development Plan once
established shall not be altered or put to other uses
during the operative period of the Plan and even
while undertaking the revision of the Plan or
preparation of the new Plan.
(vi)Even the area which is shown in the various
Master Development Plans as Green Zone/Green
Area marked as G-2 abutting G-1 developed as
buffer to promote a continuum to G-1 shall not be
permitted to be used for the activities other than
those specified, unless and until, the State
Government after objective consideration arrives at
a categorical conclusion that the public interest
involved in diversion of the land for other use
outweighs the object sought to be achieved in
permitting its restrictive use specified. In any case,
change of the land use of the Green Zone/Green
Area (G2) shall be as an exception to serve the
larger public interest, to achieve the basic object
thereof i.e. planned development of the concerned
region, city or town and not to subserve the interest
of an individual.
(vii)During the operative period of the Master
Development Plan, the land use in the peripheral
control belt for the purposes other than those
specified shall not be generally permitted. But if the
change of the land use in the peripheral control belt
is considered inevitable in the larger public interest
and not to serve the interest of an individual, the
change of the land use for the activities other than
those specified, should only be permitted to sub-
serve the legislative intent of planned development
for promotion and enhancement of the quality of life
of the citizens and not otherwise.
(16 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
(viii) No isolated change in the land use of the land
falling within the peripheral control belt shall be
permitted without inclusion thereof in accordance
with the procedure laid down, in the land use plan of
urbanisable area shown in the Master Development
Plan, the development wherein has to be further
regulated by Zonal Development Plans notified.
(ix) Further, the development activity within the
peripheral control belt for the purposes aforesaid,
shall not be permitted without assessment of
environment impact and ensuring the fulfillment of
requirement of the open spaces/green spaces for the
existing population settled in the different zones of
the city. The authorities shall be under an obligation
to provide for buffer zone to ensure the availability
of minimum requirement of green space/open space
per city dweller.
(x) The State Government while permitting the
change of the land use in the peripheral control belt
or the Green Zone (G-2)/Green Area(G-2) shall
maintain complete transparency, the applications
made for the change of land use as also the orders
passed thereon, shall be uploaded on the website of
Department of Urban Development & Housing so
also on the website of the concerned local authority.
The order permitting the change of land use shall be
an speaking order reflecting the fulfillment of the
parameters laid down as aforesaid.
(xi) The open spaces, green spaces, common
facilities, playgrounds, gardens, parks, recreational
areas specified in the Master Development Plan or
Zonal Development Plan shall be protected during
the operative period of the Plans and even
thereafter, while undertaking revision thereof or
preparing a new Plan and the same shall not be
diverted to the use other than those specified.
(xii)The local authorities and the State Government
are directed to take appropriate steps in accordance
with law, for restoration of the user of the open
spaces,      green        spaces,            common    facilities,
playgrounds, gardens, parks, recreational areas
specified in the Master Development Plan or Zonal
Development Plan or the Layout Plan of the colonies
developed by the local authorities or the private
colonisers in all the six major cities and other towns
of the State, which stand diverted to other
unauthorised use.
(17 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
(xiii) The different land uses as specified in the
Master Development Plan or Zonal Development
Plan, as the case may be, form basic character of
the Plan and the land use as specified shall not be
permitted to be changed without alteration
/modification of the Plan after following the
procedure laid down under the relevant statute. The
change of the land use to be permitted by way of
modification of the Plans must be in furtherance of
the planned development of the city or town in the
larger public interest and not to sub-serve the
interest of an individual.
(xiv) In the residential colonies developed as per the
layout plan approved, where the plan does not
provide for mixed user, no residential land in such
colonies shall be permitted to be used for
commercial or any other uses.
(xv) The Development Authorities and the State
Government shall take appropriate steps for
specifying the locations in the Master Development
Plan and the Zonal Development Plan for
development of multistorey buildings.
(xvi) In the existing residential colonies which are
developed with the infrastructure facilities keeping in
view the number of family units to be settled in the
houses to be constructed in such colonies, no multi
storey buildings shall be permitted to come up
adversely affecting the rights of the residents settled
(xvii) The local authorities and the State shall frame
the township policy ensuring that no small colony
comes up in small area with no infrastructure
facilities precipitating a situation wherein the
residents are condemned to live a miserable life. As
laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Bondu
Ramaswamy's case (supra), instead of permitting
small colonies coming up in small areas, the local
authorities and the State Government shall make
sincere efforts to undertake the exercise for approval
of integrated layout of residential and other schemes
either by acquisition of the land or undertaking the
exercise of land pooling.
(xviii) The local authorities and the State
Government shall ensure that the norms laid down
for providing green belt on both the sides of the
highways in the width of 100 ft. after the right to
way is strictly followed. Further, the appropriate
steps shall be taken for removal of the unauthorised
(18 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
construction raised, if any, in violation of the norms
laid down.
(xix) The local authorities and the State Government
shall take immediate steps to check the
encroachment and unauthorised constructions over
the public ways and footpaths. The encroachment
made on the footpath and public way by way of
putting stairs, ramps, hoardings or fencing etc. In
various cities and towns of the State shall be
removed in accordance with law, expeditiously.
(xx) The local authorities shall enforce the building
by-laws strictly and no construction shall be
permitted in deviation of the approved plan. The
construction of the building shall be regulated by the
concerned officials of the local authorities at all
stages and if any deviation is found, the immediate
measures shall betaken to stop the construction and
undo the deviation.
(xxi) No deviation from the norms laid down under
the building by-laws shall be permitted. The
unauthorised construction raised violating the
building line and the set backs norms laid down
under the Building By-laws or otherwise by the
concerned local authority, shall not be permitted to
be compounded in any circumstances.
(xxii) The suggestions made by the AAG for
strengthening the enforcement of Building By-laws in
the municipal areas and to check the unauthorised
constructions as reproduced in para no.42 of this
order, shall be enforced by all the local authorities of
(xxiii) The norms prescribed for compulsory parking
in the commercial buildings and other than
commercial       buildings         constructed         within   the
municipal area of the various cities shall be enforced
strictly and the buildings shall not be permitted to
commence its functioning unless the completion
certificate is issued by the authority concerned after
being satisfied about compliance of the provisions
incorporated under the relevant statutes for
compulsory parking. In the existing buildings where
the parking spaces have not been provided as per
the sanctioned plan or which have been converted to
other use, shall be restored within the time frame to
be notified by the local authority, failing which such
buildings shall be sealed and appropriate penal
action shall be taken against the defaulters in
accordance with law.
(19 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
(xxiv) Unauthorised development or change of land
use shall not be compounded in exercise of the
power conferred under Section 33A of the Act No.25
of 1982, Section 34 of the Act No.2 of 2009 and
Section34 of the Act No.39 of 2013, as the case may
be, unless and until such unauthorised development
or change of land use sought to be compounded falls
within the parameters of permissible modification of
the plan as contemplated under sub-sections (1)
&(2) of Section 25 of the Act No.25 of 1982 and
other relevant statutes and such modification to the
Plans is actually carried out by following the
procedure laid down.
(xxv) No change of land use in terms of sub-
section(2) of Section 73B of UIT Act or regularisation
of unauthorised change of land use in terms of sub-
section (3) of Section 73B of UIT Act, shall be
permitted without modification of the Master
Development Plan or Zonal Development Plan, as
the case may be, in accordance with the procedure
laid down. Further, no modification of the Plans for
the said purpose shall be permitted by the State
authorities unless such modification is expedient in
the larger public interest to achieve the basic object
of planned development.
(xxvi) The Development Authorities and the State
Authorities shall take appropriate steps to ensure
that the industrial area is located away from the
residential area and shall provide for green areas
between the industrial area and the residential area
to buffer the residential areas.
(xxvii) The State shall constitute a high power
committee consisting of inter alia the experts of the
field, to frame the Relocation Scheme with regard to
shifting of hazardous industries/industrial areas
located in close vicinity of the residential colonies,
after conducting survey in all the major cities of the
State. The report of the committee with the
recommendations to take the appropriate measures
for shifting of industries so as to save the citizens
from ill-effects of industrial activities, shall be placed
before this court.
(xxviii) The State is directed to furnish complete
details regarding availability of the pasture land in
various districts of the State of Rajasthan as on the
date of commencement of the Act of 1955; the
diversion of the user of the pasture land permitted
after commencement of the Act of 1955 and the land
(20 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
set apart as pasture land after commencement of
the Act of 1955. The State shall also furnish the
district wise details of unauthorised occupation over
the pasture land.
(xxix) Pending consideration of the issue with regard
to the diversion of the pasture land for other uses by
this court, the State Government is directed to take
appropriate steps to check and remove unauthorised
occupation over the pasture land by unscrupulous
persons in various villages of the State forthwith.
(xxx) The State Government is directed to produce
the original record of the proceedings taken for
permitting the change of the user of the land
measuring 1222.93 hectares situated between Kho-
Nagoria to Goner Road, covered by the Master
Development Plan of Jaipur, 2011 from ecological
zone to residential and mixed land use, by way of
zonal layout plan of Sector 34 and Sector 35 for
perusal of this court on the next date of hearing. No
permission for raising construction on the aforesaid
land shall be granted by the concerned local
authority and the status quo as it exists today shall
be maintained qua the open land in the aforesaid
area till further orders.
(xxxi) The State Authorities shall take effective steps
for conservation and preservation of natural
resources i.e. hills, forests, rivers, other water
bodies and catchment area. Further, the State
Authorities shall undertake a drive to remove all
encroachments made over the natural resources
noticed hereinabove and the unauthorised activities
operating thereon and shall restore such natural
resources by taking appropriate action including the
cancellation of allotment made in defiance of
provisions of Section16 of the Act of 1955.
(xxxii) The respondents local authorities and the
State Government shall comply with the directions
issued as aforesaid within a period of four months.
(xxxiii) The compliance report shall be filed by the
respective      local      authorities           and   the   State
Government before the next date of hearing.
(xxxiv) The Chief Secretary, Government of
Rajasthan,       the       Principal           Secretary,    Urban
Development & Housing Department, Government of
Rajasthan and the Secretary, Department of Local
Self Government, Government of Rajasthan shall
(21 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
ensure the compliance of the directions issued by
this court as aforesaid.
(xxxv) The interim order dated 9.12.10 passed by
this court shall stand modified in terms of the
directions issued as aforesaid.”
14.   This decision of Gulab Kothari-1 was carried in appeal before
the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court placed the matter back to
the High Court to be considered by a bench of three Judges. A
further detailed order was passed by the Larger Bench of three
Judges on 15.12.2018, reported in 2019 (1) WLC (Raj.) 645
(hereinafter to be referred as ‘Gulab Kothari-2’). Paragraph 54 of
the judgment contains directions which reads as under:-
“54.In view of the discussion above, we
modify/clarify the directions issued by Division
Bench of this court vide order dated 12.1.17 to the
extent indicated below and issue further directions:
(a)The directions issued by this court vide directions
No.(ii) &(iii) directing preparation of Zonal
Development Plan for each zone simultaneously with
the preparation of Master Development Plan or
immediately thereafter, are reiterated and the
modification of the said directions as prayed for, is
declined.
(b) The prayer for modification of directions Nos. (v),
(vi) & (vii)is declined, however, it is clarified that the
Green Zone delineated in the Master Development
Plan-2011 of Jaipur Region has to be protected and
the diversion of the area earmarked as Ecological
Zone/Green Zone to other use as contained in Jaipur
Master Development Plan-2025, which runs contrary
to the directions issued by this court, shall not be
made operative. Further, the diversion of the land
use delineated in the Master Development Plan-2011
for Ecological Zone/Green Area proposed to be
diverted for other use under Master Development
Plan-2025 is directed to be restored as Ecological
Zone/Green Area and no activities other than those
which are permitted in the Ecological Zone/Green
Area shall be open to be permitted therein by the
(22 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
(c) The prayer for permitting the construction of
multi-storey buildings in existing residential colonies,
which are developed with infrastructure facilities
keeping in view the number of family units to be
settled in the houses to be constructed in such
colonies is declined and the directions as contained
in direction no.(xvi) of order dated 12.1.17, are
reiterated.
(d)The prayer for modification of directions no.(xx) &
(xxi) so as to permit compounding of unauthorised
constructions violating the building line and the set
back norms laid down under the Building Byelaws or
otherwise by the concerned local authority, in terms
of Rules of 1966, is declined. It is clarified that only
the deviations from the building plan duly
sanctioned, which in no manner otherwise violate
the norms laid down under the Building Byelaws
regulating the constructions in the local area could
be permitted to be compounded and not the
deviations which affect the rights of other
inhabitants settled in the local area, such as, height
of the building, projections, set backs, absence of
parking area etc.
(e) The respondents are further directed not to
permit conversion of land use/regularisation of
unauthorised colony or individual unauthorised
constructions      until       and         unless      the   Zonal
Development Plan and Sector Plans for the local area
concerned governed by Master Development Plan
are prepared, finalized and notified in accordance
with law. Further, the conversion of the land use or
regularisation of unauthorised development shall not
be permitted unless the unauthorised development
undertaken fulfills the norms laid down for requisite
infrastructure facilities and amenities and conforms
to the Master Development Plan/Zonal Development
Plan/Sector Plans/Schemes duly notified.”
15.   While thus the decisions in case of Gulab Kothari held the
field, the State Government desired to regularise certain land
occupations and land uses. Three successive orders/circulars were
issued by the Government for this purpose. On 20.09.2021 the
State Government issued an order which provided that camps
(23 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
would be organised by the Government for making preparations
for issuing pattas to the residents for which online applications will
be received. This order lays down broad guideline for grant of such
pattas. Some of the provisions of this order came to be deleted
and some were modified later on by amendment order dated
05.10.2021. In the present state this order after the amendment
of 05.10.2021 provides as under:
Under the Prashasan Sheharon Ke Sang Abhiyan-2021,
preparatory camps are to be organised from 15.09.2021,
in which the information about the Approved Plan,
Plan, Lay-out Plan, Application forms, Rates etc. is to be
given by the Local Bodies to the general public. In these
camps preparation regarding issuing of Pattas to be done.
Preparation is to be done in these camps, after receiving
online applications, issuing demand letters and depositing
the amount. The formats of the lease deeds are available
on the website www.shahar2021.rajasthan.gov.in. So that
maximum number of Lease deeds can be issued on the
first day of the main campaign on 2nd October.
1.      In relation to such agricultural land whose
layout plans are already approved in past:-
(i)     According to the census of the year 2011, the lease
deeds of the        unapproved colonies in cities with a
population of more than 1 lakh are to be given only
after the zonal plan is approved. But the                  colonies
whose layout plans are already approved, have to be
accomodated in the zonal plan considering them as
commitments.        Therefore, in pre-approved Layout Plans,
lease deeds can be issued as per the order dated
(ii)    In case where the Plans approved before/after
17.06.1999, developed on agricultural land, in which order
under 90-B has been issued, the prescribed rates of 90B
will be applicable. In the schemes prior to 17.06.1999, in
(24 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
which orders under 90A has been issued, the rates
prescribed by the notification of 31.07.2012 will be
applicable. In the schemes after 17.06.1999, in which
order under 90A has been issued, the rates should be
taken as per       prescribed rates of notification dated
13.02.2020.     During        the       campaign          period    from
15.09.2021, 15% interest will not be payable                    from the
first camp. If demand letter has been issued earlier but
the amount has not been deposited, then demand letter
should be issued again at the present rate (without
(iii)   As many number of times the plots may have been
sold on the basis of unregistered documents in the
approved schemes before 17.06.1999, the lease deed
should be given to the last buyer as per                  order    dated
11.02.2020, after taking an additional amount of 15% of
the premium rate from the final buyer.
(iv) The lease should be given to the purchaser in the
approved schemes after 17.06.1999, in cases where the
plots are sold on the basis of registered documents then
by paying an additional amount of 10% of the premium
rate and in the cases where the sale has                  taken    place
on the basis of unregistered documents may be on many
times then by taking an additional amount of 50% of the
premium      rate as per the order dated 11.02.2020.
(v)     In the approved schemes in which the khasra has
been superimposed, if there is a difference in the Khasra
number of the      plot owned by the applicant and the
Khasra number on the basis of super-imposition then as
order of 90B/90A has been issued for both Khasras, the
lease should be given assuming the superimposition error.
(vi)    In the approved schemes, if the area of the plot is
more than the      ownership document of the applicant
then the amount of excess land should be be taken as
per the Notification dated 30.11.2017.
(vii) In cases where the lease deed has been given after
the permission of 90B /90A as per approved plans then
on the increase in the area of such plots, a new
supplementary lease deed or a new lease deed                           by
surrendering the old lease may be issued by allotting
excess land after taking 50 percent of the reserve price in
the scheme of      private developers and 25 percent of the
reserve price in the      schemes             of       other   colonies/
cooperatives society/schemes.
(viii) If the plots are not created/constructed on site as
per approved schemes then keeping the ratio of the
facility area as per the approved layout plan, revised
(25 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
Layout Plan may be approved and                      lease deed can be
given after approving the revised layout plan.
(x)     According to the plot of the approved layout plan
and the plot submitted by the applicant for lease deed if
there is sub-division/reconstitution, then the lease deed
should be given after depositing the amount at the rate
of Rs.10/- per square meter. Simultaneously, the sub-
division/reconstitution of such layout plan should also be
marked in the approved plan.
2.      Colonies developed on such agricultural lands
whose sector layout plans are approved.
(i)     The lease deed/allotment letter ssued after
17.06.1999 by the cooperative societies is not legally
valid. According to point           25(3)(xi) of the order dated
06.01.2016 in the layout plan                submitted in the Local
body and prepared suo-moto by Local Bodies, it should
be ensured that the scheme is before 17.06.1999 or after
17.06.1999. The lease deed can be issued after approval
of      layout plan by the Local Empowered Committee in
cities having       population more than 1 lakh, according
to the zonal plan and according to the master plan in the
city of population up to 1 lakh                by keeping the ratio of
70:30 in the scheme before 17.06.1999 taking action
under section 90A(8) and taking action under section
90A(5) and 91 for schemes after 17.06.1999 keeping the
ratio of 60:40 in the scheme.
(ii)    In case of construction (one unit and boundary
wall) is done on less than 25 percent of the plots in the
colonies, if the facility area is less than 30/40 percent
then the facility area can be increased after decreasing
the area of plots carved out in the submitted plan and
(iv)    Sector layout plan can be prepared by including
one and more than          one colonies. If the outer limits
match, then there will be no need                    to superimpose the
khasra. It will be necessary to determine all four
boundaries of the area to be sanctioned.
(v)     If Government land is included in the layout plan,
then after demarcation of Government land, the lease
deed of the plots located on Government land may be
given after depositing the amount at the rate of
Government land. But Lease Deed can be issued after
depositing the amount leaving the land reserved for
roads, park and public facilities and land which can be
used independently.
(26 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
(vi)    Proportionately total area of all Khasras of layout
plan as per Khasra Trace or site falling within the four
boundaries is more as mentioned in Jamabandi then
layout may be approved and lease deed may be given
after depositing the excess land amount as per
Government land rate.
3. Granting lease deed on the basis of provisional
lease deed/Form(D)
After approval of 90A, layout plan under Township Policy-
2010 the      Local Body may issue free hold or 99 years
lease deed on the basis of provision Allotment Letter or
Form (D), after registering the Letter or Form (D) or
Nominee or Assignee Letter issued for sale of                    plots as
per approved layout plan by the land holder/developer
taking onetime lease amount of 10 years / 08 years. The
rates of      laxity in registration in such cases are being
issued separately.
4.      Regarding non-submission of records                             of
colonies by some            private developers
Even after allotment of plots by many private developers
over the      years, the records/lists have not been
submitted to the Jaipur              Development                Authority.
Repeated applications have been made by such                          plot
holders to Jaipur Development Authority and State
Government. Therefore, it has been decided in this regard
that if the records of the layout plan and plot holders are
not deposited in the urban body by the private developer
by 30.10.2021 in such cases then after this date, the
concerned plot holders directly or by forming                            a
development committee (Registration will not be
required), submit the details of land alongwith the
available     documents to the Jaipur Development
Authority. Accordingly, the Jaipur Development Authority
will prepare a layout plan after              conducting a survey and
such plot holders will be issued lease deeds during the
Abhiyan period (till 31.03.2022). Such action will also be
taken in the Prithviraj Nagar Yojana of Jaipur.
5.      Lease deed of plot in the schemes of the Local
(i)     In the plots allotted by the Local Bodies by auction
and lottery at a fixed rate, the original amount has not
been deposited in time               as prescribed in demand
letter or allotment letter and deposited                    late but the
amount of interest and penalty has not been deposited. In
such cases of Abhiyan Period (From 15.09.2021 to
31.03.2022)          in which principal amount is deposited
but interest and penalty is not deposited, the possession
(27 of 81)                 [CW-15150/2021]
should be given to them by giving lease deed/lease at the
local level itself, providing 100% rebate in interest and
(ii)    No matter how many times the plots/houses
allotted by the      Local Bodies have been sold through
unregistered documents even                   before the issue of lease
deed by the Local Bodies, the lease deed/ lease should
be given in favour of the final buyer. The rates of
relaxation in registration are being issued separately.
6.      Waiver of interest penalty in the houses of
The houses/plot of EWS/LIG/MIG-A income group have
been allotted by the urban body and Rajasthan Housing
Board. In which, due to non-payment of principal amount
and installments on time, the burden of interest and
penalty has increased a lot. The exemption was granted
by departmental order dated 12.05.2021, now, during the
Abhiyan period (From 15.09.2021 to 31.03.2022),
Allotment/Lease Deed/ Lease should be given at the local
level by      providing 100% rebate in the interest penalty
on depositing the           outstanding             amount      and     the
amount of the outstanding installments in onetime in the
said housing/plot of the housing board                       and        the
residences of the MIG-B and HIG of the Housing Board.
7.      Rebate in resumption charges if construction
is not done within stipulated period
According to the condition of the lease deed/leases issued
by the Local Bodies, it is necessary to construct in the
stipulated period. Land Disposal Rules 1974 and
Permission and Allotment of                   Agricultural      Land     for
Non-Agricultural Purpose Rules 2012, in both                      cases, if
construction is not done during the construction period
mentioned in the lease deed then during the Abhiyan
Period (from         15.09.2021             to        31.03.2022),      the
extension of the construction                 period may be given
after depositing the amount at the rate                     mentioned in
the order dated 01.09.2021, by giving a rebate of 60
percent on the arrears.
8.      Regarding grant of new lease deed from
leasehold to         freehold,           name            transfer,    sub-
division/reconstitution and                   change of land use
(i)     The 99 years lease deed issued by the Local Bodies
should be given a freehold lease by depositing onetime
lease of 10 years           or after depositing onetime lease of
(28 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
8 years, lease free certificate has been obtained in those
cases by depositing the lease amount of 2 years in
onetime, freehold Patta may be issued. After surrendering
the old lease deed to the Local Body, a new freehold lease
should be issued mentioning the registration of the old
lease deed.
(ii)     After lease deed/lease issued by the Local Bodies
on the basis         of registered sale/WILL/Gift etc., a new
lease of freehold should be given by taking the prescribed
amount, as per notification dated 04.01.2021 taking the
lease amount of 10years/2 years in onetime, surrendering
the old lease. Issue releases in newspapers in cases of
registered sales letters and WILLS.
(iii)    The decision of sub-division/reconstitution of plots
is taken after the lease deed / lease issued by the Local
Body in those cases also, after surrendering the old lease
deed/lease, a new freehold lease should be given by
taking the lease amount for 10 years/2 years.
(iv)     After the decision of change of land use, the old
lease should be surrendered and a new freehold lease
should be given after taking the lease amount for 10
years/2 years.
Note: In the cases of point number 8, relaxation in
rates of registration is being issued separately.”
16.   The    amendment        order      dated        05.10.2021     contains   an
important note which reads as under:
“Note:- Area under Roads, park, public facility
and        setback           area            shall        not      be
regularized/allotted in reference of above order
and all orders issued under Prashasan Sheharon
17.   The State Government issued a circular on 27.09.2021 which
contained guidelines and relaxations for accelerated disposal of
the cases for granting of pattas. These guidelines and relaxations
envisage recognition of certain documents as proof of the title for
the lands of different categories as under :
“2. Proof of Right for the above categories of lands
will be determined as follows
(29 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
(d) Lease deed/Registry/donations/Registered book
or any other documents issued during princely time
by Raja/ Jagirdar/ Thikanedar and lease deed other
documents received from State Archive/record of
(x) Documents of privately owned land/building as
recorded in City Survey of Parkota area.
(?k) State Grant’s lease deed/allotment letter/sale
deed/dCtk fu;eu issued by the municipal body in the
(M) Lease deed/allotment letter/ authorization letter
etc. Issued by the Panchayat which has been
included in urban area.
(p) Sale Deed /Family Partition/ Will disposed
between 01.01.1992 to 17.06.1999 on the basis of
which the applicant has the right or possession of the
property. Dated 01.01.1992 to the year 17.06.1999
before the performance.
(N) Order and decree passed in favour of the
ownership of applicant by a Competent court in
relation to the committee.
(t) Construction approval issued by the Municipal
body before 17.06.1999.
(>) In case of non availability of any of the above
mentioned document of point no.( d) to (t) the proof
of right can be determined on the basis of any two of
(30 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
the following documents along with post possession
depending upon the property concerned:-
i.) Electricity / Water Bill before date 01.01.1992 as
proof of possession
ii.) Voter List of the time before date 01.01.1992.
iii) Receipt of house tax for the time before
01.01.1992 or making in the record of the Municipal
iv.) Any other entry recorded in the Municipal records
of the time before the date of 01.01.1992, in which
right of the applicant of the property is known.
v.) Affidavit of two persons above 60 years of age
from the neighbourhood showing the undisputed
right of possession of the applicant’s property before
the date 01.01.1992.
vi.) On the address of the applied house, received
before the date 01.01.1992 by post and notice of any
government department or undertaking or quote or
official document in which the land and ownership in
question has been mentioned.
vii) Pre dated 01.01.1992 proof shuda rent deed
which can be produced by the landlord in his favour.
(.k) Complete      chain        of      applicant’s      ownership
documents from lease deed/registry or donation
letter issued by Raja Maharajas/Jagirdars etc..
(V) Complete       chain        of      applicant’s      ownership
documents conversion order to allotment letter
issued by authorised officer.
(B) If the Gair Mumkin Abadi is registered as a
privately owned non agricultural land, then the
complete chain of applicant’s ownership documents.”
18.   This circular also provides the parameters to be applied for
the properties on the basis of special characters of old abadi areas
which include the lease deed issued under Section 69-A to be
sufficient proof of ownership. It however provides that lease deed
shall not be issued in certain cases such as                    encroachment on
public road, facility area, encroachment or construction on ramps,
(31 of 81)                 [CW-15150/2021]
varandah area or the terrace of the varandah. The circular further
provides in clause (4) that freehold leases of the following lands
shall not be granted:-
“(i.)      Restricted areas mentioned in Rule 3 of
Rajasthan       Municipalities          (Surrender         of    Non-
Agricultural Land and Grant of Freehold Lease)Rules,
(ii.) Land, Land under Acquisition as of the day the
provisions of the existing law relating to land
acquisition.
(iii.)     Land falling within the limits of a railway
boundary, a national highway, a state highway, or a
road maintained by the local authority specified in
any Act or Rules of the Central or State Government.
(iv.)      The land of part of any local body schemes.
(v.)       Land vested in Municipal body under section
(vi.)      Surveyed/notified Kacchi basti land.
(vii.)     The Abadi Developed on the land of any
other government department/any undertaking
department acquired land.
(viii)     Land given on rent and short term lease
license by Municipality/Trust/Development Authority.
(ix.)      Such lands, buildings, properties of former
kings/maharaja/royals family, which are under
covenant or otherwise owned or used by state
government or is rented.
(x.)       If the tenant has occupied on any private
land/property, then the lease will not be issued to
that tenant.
(xi.)      Land falling within limits prescribed for any
archaeological site/monument by any order of the
Court,     Archaeological           survey          of   India    and
(xii)      Land belongs to or vests in the Central
Government or State Government or statutary or non
statutory      bodies,         authorities           or   companies
established by or under control of the Central
(32 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
Government or State Government, as the case may
be, except land vests in the Municipality.
(xiii)     Land belong to deity and waqf.”
19.   Clause 12 of the general notes provides as under:-
“12. The lease under section 69-A will be issued as
per the use shown in the master plan/zonal plan.
But in the old market area where traditionally
commercial activities are in operation (shop on
lower floor and residence on upper floor) in
residential use mixed use lease deed can be
issued.”
20.   On 28.09.2021 the State Government issued an order
regarding works to be performed by the urban local bodies during
‘Prashasan Sheharon Ke Sang Abhiyan, 2021 (hereinafter to be as
referred as ‘Abhiyan’). This order envisages that the Abhiyan
would be executed in three phases. In the first phase preliminary
preparation camps will be organised at the local body level; in the
second phase resolution camps will be organised at the local body
level; and in the third phase follow-up camps will be organised in
which remaining applications will be disposed of. Paragraph 3 of
this order pertains to the guidelines regarding the main tasks to
be executed in the Abhiyan and provides that new lease deed
would be granted by surrendering the ownership rights in the non-
agricultural or abadi land located in the urban areas for which
detailed provisions have been made. Paragraph 4 pertains to
giving lease deed under the State Grant Act. Paragraph 5 pertains
to giving lease deed in the colonies developed on the agricultural
land. Paragraph 6 envisages granting exemption from payment of
stamp duty under certain circumstances. Paragraph 7 pertains to
(33 of 81)                 [CW-15150/2021]
grant of interest waiver. Paragraph 10 envisages grant of lease
deed in public interest on the lands acquired by housing board and
the   local    bodies    where        residential          colonies   and    other
developments have come up. It may be noted that this clause had
come up for detailed discussion during the course of arguments.
When the arguments were still in progress, the respondents filed
an affidavit dated 10.12.2021 and declared as under:-
“3. I state that the State Govt. while reviewing
the progress of the scheme/policy dated
28.09.2021 has decided not to give effect to
the Clauses 10 of the Scheme/Policy for the
present. This said provisions will not be acted
upon at present. The State reserve its rights to
take appropriate lawful decisions in this behalf
on review if so decided.”
21.   Thus paragraph 10 of the order dated 28.09.2021 no longer
survives. We would proceed on such basis. Paragraph 11 makes
provisions for grant of lease deeds where settlements on the lands
acquired under Ceiling Act or the Rajasthan Land Owners’ Property
Acquisition Act and other similar laws have come up. As per this
clause, the leases would be granted by collecting charges at
specific rates. Paragraph 12 pertains to leases on Nazul properties.
22.   Paragraph 18 of the said order deals with lease deeds of
kachchi basties in urban areas and provides as under:-
18. In relation to the Allotment of notified Katchi
Basties in urban areas-
(i) During the previous Abhiyan 2012, the cut-off
date for grant of lease deed to the surveyed/non-
surveyed residents in the Katchi Basties was kept as
15.08.2009, it will be kept as it is.
(34 of 81)              [CW-15150/2021]
(ii) The lease deeds issued earlier for the Katchi
Basties have been kept non-transferable, which can
be transferred after 10 years from the date of issue of
the lease deed.
(iii) The rates of allotment of Katchi Basties have been
kept the same as before.
(iv) The developed Katchi Basties shall be de-notified,
powers of which are delegated to the Empowered
Committee of the Local Body.
(v) The rates for the plots of Katchi Basti have been]
kept as prescribed earlier. 110 square yard residential
in which 15 square yard can be commercial, which is
1 to     50 Rs.20 per SqYd Rs.15 per SqYd Rs.10                    per
51 to 110 Rs.40 per SqYd Rs.30 per SqYd Rs.20                      per
23.   Paragraph 23 pertains to power of allotment of strip of land
and envisages allocation of adjoining land subject to certain
ceiling. Clause (b) of this paragraph reads as under:-
“(b). Allotment of excess area of plots-
In certain cases in the schemes of the Local Body,
the actual area of the plots allotted/sold by auction
is more on the site than the allotted area of the
plot. The main reason for this is the difference
between the survey done while planning and
demarcation. Such excess area is allotted at the
reserve price and allotment is done at auction rate
in the auctioned plots.
Now the area of such excess plots will be allotted
during the Abhiyan period at the following rates:-
(Order dated 01.09.2021):-
(i) 100% of the reserve rate in the schemes of Local
(ii) 50% of the reserve rate in private khatedari
schemes.”
(35 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
24.   Paragraph 38 of this order provides that lease deeds shall
not be given in forest land, low lying area or oran land and other
restricted areas.
25.   On 12.11.2021 the Government issued further clarifications
regarding issuance of pattas of kachchi bastis which reads as
“In view of the order issued by Hon’ble High Court
Jodhpur Chief Bench in D.B. Civil Writ Petition No.
13782/2021 dated 06.10.2021 and D.B. Civil Writ
Petition (PIL) No. 15150/2021 Dated 28.10.2021, the
following facts are clarified regarding issuance of Pattas
of Kutchi Basti in Prasahan Saharon ke Sang abhiyan-
a-    According to the order of the Hon’ble High Court in
No. 1159/05, the State Government issued the Kutchi
Basti Regulation Policy, 2005 dated 30.9.05; According
to which the Hon’ble High Court has given permission to
regularise the kutchi Basti by order dated 24.07.06.
b-    The Hon’ble Supreme Court has also given the
relaxation to decide the regulation by making a policy
for Kutchi Basti in the decision dated 30.8.11 passed in
Corporation, Jaipur vs Lekhraj Soni. According to the
policy framed by the State Government in the year 2005
lease deed are to be issued in Kutchi Basti after
c-    In the above decision of the Hon’ble Supreme and
High Court, it has been allowed to regulate the
occupation of Kutchi Basti. In this sequence, the state
government has issued pattas to about 65000 families
and now the remaining pattas are to be given to the
occupiers of the surveyed/marked Kutchi Basti. The cut
off date of possession for regulation is 15.8.09. The said
regulation gives shelter to poor families, which is a
public welfare work.
In the context of the above facts, the following
guidelines are issued to the urban local bodies:
01. leases should not be given in Such identified
Kutchi Basti which are in reserved facility areas
(such as parks, play grounds, road, open land,
public land etc.), reserved land, forest land, river,
drain, Ponds and other restricted area.
(36 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
02. Lease deed have been issued in the past to the
families residing in notified/surveyed kutchi settlements
till date 15.08.2009. In the current campaign, action
should be taken to issue lease deed to the remaining
families residing above with cut off date of 15.08.2009.
03. Lease deed should be issued only according to the
norms of Kutchi Basti Policy-2005.
04. Cut off date of possession of occupants for issue of
lease deed in Kachchi Basti is 15.08.2009 and the
minimum road width is 15 feet.
05. The following rates are effective for grant of lease
Area (in square yards) Regulation rates (in per square yards)
(In square yards)       Municipal           Municipal Council    Municipal Board
Corporation area                area              area
 This rate will be double for families/individuals other
than BPL.
 The amount of the above regulation rate will be
recovered in one time.
 Pattas issued in Kachchi Basti will be issued on the
basis of 99 year lease.
 The lease deed will be issued on these leases after
recovering the amount of regulation and 1% of the
lease amount in one time.
This order is approved by competent level.”
26.    In order to operationalise these policy decisions of the
Government certain statutory changes have been made. Under a
notification dated 27.03.2020, the Rajasthan Urban Improvement
(Amendment) Act, 2020 came to be promulgated. Through this
amending act certain amendments have been made in the
Rajasthan Urban Improvement Act, 1959. Clause (xi-a) is inserted
in Section 2 which contains the definition of term ”zonal
development plan as to mean a plan prepared and approved in the
(37 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
manner as may be prescribed”. Existing Section 4 of the Act has
been replaced and now reads as under:-
“4. Contents of master plan.- The master plan
shall define the various zones into which the urban
area having the population of more than one lac
may be divided for the purposes of its improvement
and indicate the manner in which the land in each
zone is proposed to be used and shall serve as a
basic pattern of framework within which the
improvement schemes and the zonal development
plans of the various zones may be prepared:
Provided that the preparation of zonal development
plan shall not be mandatory for urban areas having
population of less than one lac.”
27.   As per this provision thus the master plan would define
various zones into which the urban area having population of more
than one lac would be divided. Proviso to Section 4 provides that
preparation of zonal development plan shall not be mandatory for
urban areas having population of less than one lac.
28.   The State Government under a notification dated 24.02.2021
promulgated    the    Rajasthan        Urban        Area      Land  Use   Change
(Amendment) Rules, 2021 to facilitate change of land use in
certain cases which provides inter-alia that change of land use will
not be required if agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes
conforms to the master plan/zonal development plan/technical
29.   Vide   notification      dated         20.09.2021,         the   Rajasthan
Municipalities Act, 2009 was also amended vide the Amendment
Act of 2021. Sections 68-A and 69-A were inserted which read as
(38 of 81)              [CW-15150/2021]
“68-A. Land to vest in the Muncipality and its
disposal.- (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956 (Act No.15 of
1956), the land as defined in Section 103 of that Act,
excluding land referred to in sub-clause (ii) of clause
(a) of the said section and Nazul land placed at the
disposal of a local authority under section 102-A of
that Act in municipal area shall, immediately after
establishment of the Municipality under section 5 of
this Act, be deemed to have been placed at the
disposal of and vested in the Municipality which shall
take over such land for and on behalf of the State
Government and may use the same for the purposes
of this Act, and may dispose of the same subject to
such conditions and restrictions as the State
Government may, from time to time, lay down and in
such manner, as it may, from time to time, prescribe:
Provided that the Municipality may dispose of any such
(a) without undertaking                or       carrying  out   any
development thereon; or
(b) after     undertaking           or       carrying    out   such
development as it        thinks fit, to such person, in such
manner and subject to such covenants and conditions,
as it may consider expedient to impose for securing
development according to plan.
(2) No development of any land shall be undertaken
or carried out except by or under the control and
supervision of the Municipality.
(3) If any land vested in the Municipality is required
at any time by the Development Authority or the
Urban Improvement Trust, as the case may be, for
carrying out its functions, or by State Government for
any other purpose, the State Government may by
notification in the Official Gazette, place such land at
the disposal of the Development Authority or the
Urban Improvement Trust or any department of State
Government, as the case may be, on such terms and
condition as may deemed fit.
(4) All land acquired by the Municipality, or by the
State Government and transferred to the Municipality,
shall be disposed of by the Municipality in the same
manner as may be prescribed for land in sub-section
(39 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
69A. Acceptance of surrender of rights in certain
lands and issue of free hold patta - (1) Any person
who holds non-agricultural land within the jurisdiction
of the Municipality otherwise than under a lease or
licence issued by the Municipality may, in the
prescribed manner, surrender his rights in such land in
favour of the Municipality for the purpose of obtaining
free hold rights from the Municipality, the Municipality
may accept such rights and may issue free hold patta.
(2) Any person who holds any order or patta issued
under any other law may also surrender his rights in
such land in favour of the Municipality for the purpose
of obtaining free hold rights from the Municipality, the
Municipality may accept such rights and may issue free
hold patta. In case such land is on lease hold basis the
free hold patta shall be issued on depositing one time
lease money as may be prescribed.
(3) On acceptance of rights by the Municipality under
sub-sections (1) and (2), all the rights of the holder in
the said land shall vest in the Municipality and the
Municipality shall, subject to the other provisions of
this Act and the rules made thereunder and on
payment by the holder such fee or charges as may be
determined by the State Government, issue free hold
patta to the holder of the said land.
(4) The free hold patta issued under sub-section (3)
shall be subject to all the covenants and
encumbrances which were attached to the land and
existed immediately before acceptance by the
Municipality of the rights under sub-sections (1) and
30.  On the basis of such material on record learned counsel Mr.
Moti Singh for the petitioner laid the charge. He raised following
(i) The Government decisions are in conflict with the
judgments in case of Gulab Kothari and the directions contained
therein. He referred to the relevant provisions of the impugned
(40 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
circulars/orders of the Government and the discussions of this
Court in case of Gulab Kothari’s judgment in order to demonstrate
that the Government scheme and policy cannot be i]mplemented
in view of the restrictions imposed by this Court in the said
(ii) That the Government policy is even otherwise illegal. The
policy envisages regularisation of landholdings by the encroachers
on the private as well as public lands. It also envisages
regularisation of construction which has been carried out without
any permission from the local authority whatsoever. Both these
steps would be taken even if the land use is opposed to the
approved plans. Any such permission by the Government would
lead to haphazard and unplanned growth of the towns and cities in
the State and which even otherwise would be opposed to the
Urban Improvement Act and other land laws.
(iii) That the proposed regularisation scheme of the State
Government would be damaging to the environment and ecology
In addition to extensively referring to the passages of Gulab
Kothari’s judgment, Shri Moti Singh has also relied on following
(i)   A Division Bench judgment dated 13.11.2018 in the case of
Kanti Lal vs. State of Rajasthan and others, D.B. Civil Writ
No.7509/2016, in which it was observed that the traditional
water sources have to be protected and should be left open for the
benefit of public at large.
(41 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
(ii)  The Supreme Court judgment dated 25.11.2019 in the case
of Jitendra Singh vs. Ministry of Environment and others,
Civil Appeal No.5109/2019, in which it was observed that it is
the responsibility of the State to ensure protection and integrity of
the environment, especially one which is a source of livelihood for
rural population. It was also observed that the protection of the
common areas in the village is essential to safeguard the
fundamental rights.      These common areas are lifeline of village
communities. Water bodies are importance source of fisheries and
much needed potable water.
(iii) Reference was made to the Division Bench judgment dated
29.09.2021 in the case of Suo Moto vs. State of Rajasthan and
another, D.B. Civil Writ Petition No.752/2016, in which in
public interest petition, several directions were issued to the State
authorities for protection and reservation of importance lakes
situated in the State.
31.   Learned senior counsel appeared for the State Government
and opposed the petitions contending that the State Government
has framed a policy in the larger interest. The scope of judicial
review of such decisions is available on extremely limited grounds.
This policy is not opposed to any of the directives in case of Gulab
Kothari nor is unreasonable or arbitrary. The Government has the
necessary mandate to make policy changes and also has the
wherewithal to frame such policy with the aid and advise of the
experts in the field. The Court would ordinarily not interfere in
(42 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
such policy matters. In support of this contention he relied on the
following decisions:-
(i) Rustom Cavasjee Cooper Vs. Union of India,
reported in AIR 1970 SC 564.
(ii) Narmada Bachao Andolan Vs. Union of India And
Ors., reported in (2000) 10 SCC 664.
(iii) Madras Bar Association Vs. Union of India and
another, reported in (2021) 7 SCC 409.
32.   He also referred to the decisions of the Supreme Court in
cases of R.K. Garg Vs. Union of India And Ors., reported in
(1981) 4 SCC 675 and Balco Employees’ Union (Regd.) Vs.
Union of India And Ors., reported in (2002) 2 SCC 333 to
canvass that the executive has the authority to frame policies for
governance and which enjoys greater latitude when it comes to
frame policy in the socioeconomic spheres.
33.   Learned senior counsel Mr. Harin P. Raval appeared for the
development authorities and strongly opposed the petitions. He
contended that these petitions have been filed with malicious
intention. In case of Roshan Vyas initial challenge was limited. The
prayers made were against a communication dated 23.04.2021
which was wrongly described as an order. This communication did
not create any rights nor had the Government through this
communication framed any policy which could be called in
question. Referring to challenge to the order dated 20.09.2021,
counsel pointed out that this challenge was limited only to a few
isolated clauses which have been either deleted or modified by the
(43 of 81)                 [CW-15150/2021]
State Government. This petition in its original form thus has
become infructuous. An attempt was therefore made to amend the
writ petition by making large scale changes and expanding the
challenge which was not permissible.
34.   He pointed out that in quick succession another petition was
filed by Bhanwar Singh which according to him was done only to
frustrate   the   Government           policy       which       is sought   to   be
implemented in the interest of the people belonging to the middle
and lower income strata of the State. He took us extensively
through terms contained in the three impugned orders/circulars of
the Government dated 20.09.2021, 27.09.2021 and 28.09.2021
and argued that none of these provisions are opposed to the
directions contained in Gulab Kothari judgments nor are in any
manner illegal. He submitted that contrary to what is sought to be
projected by the counsel for the petitioners, under these policies
the   Government      does     not     wish       to    regularise    unauthorised
occupations and encroachments in any of the public lands nor
these circulars aim at regularising illegal constructions. The thrust
of the policy is to regularise landholdings of various occupants who
on account of variety of reasons do not have clear titles to the
land. On one hand this creates serious problem for occupants of
the land at the time of transfer and on the other hand since no
valid document of transfer is created, the Government also loses
revenue in the form of stamp duty and registration charges. The
policy contains provisions for recognising such rights on the basis
of certain reliable documents and granting leases which would
(44 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
give clear title to the landholders.                        In the process, no
development plans would be breached. Counsel submitted that
decision to regularise kachchi basties is in tune with the
socioeconomic policy of the executive. Similar attempts have been
made in the past.
35.   Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having
perused the documents on record, the entire issue of validity of
the State Government’s policy expressed in the impugned circulars
and orders would have to be examined from three angles, namely
(i) the decisions of the Division Bench and Larger Bench in case of
Gulab Kothari; (ii) whether these policies can be implemented
within the existing statutory framework. In the process we would
also be examining the validity of the statutory amendments under
challenge before us; and (iii) whether argued before us or not, in
this public interest litigation we would also be interested in
satisfying ourselves whether in the process of implementing these
policies the State Government has in any manner breached the
principle of public trust. In case of Centre for Public Interest
Litigation And Ors. Vs. Union of India And Ors., reported in
(2012) 3 SCC 1, the Supreme Court observed that the natural
resources are national assets and the State is the trustee of such
resources on behalf of its people. The State Government thus
holds all public properties in trust or on behalf of the people. Any
divesting of such public property must be governed by reasonable
parameters and cannot be in utter disregard to environmental
(45 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
concerns and degradation of the ecology. We would be examining
the validity of the Government policies on the anvil of trinity of
these parameters.
36.   At this stage we may refer to the relevant statutory
provisions. To consolidate and amend the law relating to land; the
appointment, powers and duties of revenue courts, revenue
officers and village servants; the preparation and maintenance of
maps and land records; the settlement of revenue and rent; the
partition of estate; the collection of revenue and matters
connected thereto, the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956
(hereinafter to be referred as ‘the Act of 1956’) was enacted.
Chapter VI of the Act of 1956 pertains to land. Sub-section (1) of
Section 88 falling within the said Chapter provides that all public
roads, lanes, paths, bridges and ditches, all fences on or beside
the   all rivers,  streams,      lakes       and       tanks, all   canals   and
watercourses, all standing and flowing water and all lands
wherever situated which are not the property of individuals or of
bodies of person legally capable of holding property are except
insofar as any rights of such persons or bodies may be established
in over the same and except may be otherwise provided in any
law for the time being in force are declared to be with all rights in
or over the same or appertaining thereto, the property of the
State and it would be lawful for the collector subject to the order
of the commissioner to dispose of them in such manner as may be
(46 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
37.  Section 90-A of the Act of 1956 pertains to use of
agricultural land for non-agricultural purpose and reads as under:-
“[90-A.] Use of agricultural land for non-
agricultural purpose – (1) No person holding any
land for the purpose of agriculture, and no transferee
of such land or any part thereof, shall use the same or
any part thereof, by the construction of buildings
thereon, shall use the same or any part thereof, by the
construction of buildings thereon, shall use the same
or any part thereof, by the construction of buildings
thereon or otherwise for any other purpose except
with the written permission of the State Government
obtained din the manner hereinafter laid down and
otherwise that in accordance with the terms and
conditions of such permission.
(2) Any such persons desiring to use such land or any
part thereof for any purpose other than that of
agriculture shall apply for the requisite permission in
the prescribed manner and to the prescribed officer or
authority and every such application shall contain the
prescribed particulars.
(3) The State Government shall, after making or
causing to be made due inquiry in the prescribed
manner, either refuse the permission applied for or
grant the same subject to the prescribed terms and
conditions.
(4) When any such land or part thereof is permitted to
be used for any purpose other than that of agriculture,
the person to whom such permission is granted shall
be liable to pay to the State Government in respect
(a) an urban assessment levied at such rate and in
accordance with such manner is may be laid down in
rules to be made in this behalf by the State
(b) such amount by way of premium as may be
prescribed by the State Government, or
(c) both.
(a) without the written permission of the State
Government being first obtained, or
(47 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
(b) otherwise than in accordance with the terms and
conditions of such permission, or
(c) after such permission having been refused under
sub-section (3), or
(d) without making any of the payments referred to
sub-section (4), the person originally, holding the land
as aforesaid for the purpose of agriculture as well as
all subsequent transferees, if any, shall be deemed to
be a trespasser or trespassers, as the case may be,
and shall be liable to ejectment from such land in
accordance with Section 91 as if he or they had
occupied or continued to occupy such land without
lawful authority and to every such proceeding the
provisions of Section 212 of the Rajasthan Tenancy
Act, 1955 (Rajasthan Act 3 of 1955) shall apply as if
such land were in danger or being wasted, damaged or
Provided, that State Government may, in lieu of
having such person and the subsequent transferees so
ejected from the land in question, allow him or them,
as the case may be, to retain such land, use the same
for any purpose other than that of agriculture on
payment to the State Government, in addition to the
urban assessment and premium payable under
subsection (4) of fine by way of penalty as may be
[(5A) Notwithstanding anything contained in any
other provision of this section, the agricultural land
may be used without permission for such non-
agricultural purposes as may be prescribed by the
[(6) Where permission under this section is
sought with respect to a land situated in an urban
area, the permission shall be granted only if the
desired non-agricultural purpose is permissible in
accordance with the law applicable in that area and is
in consonance with the master plan or any other
development plan or scheme, by whatever name
called, in force, if any, in that area.
(7) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
contained in this Act or any other law for the time
being in force, when an order granting permission
under this section is passed with respect to a land
situated in an urban area, on and from the date of
such order.-
(48 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
(a) tenancy rights over such land of the person
to whom permission under this section is granted shall
stand extinguished; and
(b) the land shall be deemed to have been placed
at the disposal of the local authority under section
102-A and shall be available for allotment to the
person to whom permission is granted under this
section, or to the successors, assignees or transferees
of such person, by the local authority for any
permissible non-agricultural purposes in accordance
with the rules, regulations or bye-law made under the
law applicable to the local authority of urban
assessment or premium or both leviable and
recoverable under sub-section (4)
(8) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained
in this Act and the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, 1955 (Act
No.3 of 1955) where before 17th June, 1999 any
person, holding any land for agricultural purposes in
an urban area or within the urbanisable limits or
peripheral belt of an urban area, has used or has
allowed to be used such land or part thereof for non-
agricultural purposes or, has parted with possession of
such land or part thereof for consideration by way of
sale or agreement to sell and/or by executing power of
attorney and/or will or in any other manner for
purported non-agricultural use, the rights and interest
of such person in the said land or holding or part
thereof, as the case may be, shall be liable to be
terminated and the officer authorised by the State
Government in this behalf, shall, after affording an
opportunity of being heard to such person and
recording reasons in writing for doing so, order for
termination of his rights and interest in such land and
thereupon the land shall vest in the State Government
free from all encumbrances and be deemed to have
been placed at the disposal of the local authority under
section 102-A and shall be available for allotment or
regularisation by the local authority for any
permissible non-agricultural purposes in accordance
with the rules, regulations or bye-laws made under the
law applicable to the local authority to the persons
having possession over such land or part thereof, as
the case may be, on the basis of allotment made, or
Patta given, by a Housing Co-operative Society or on
the basis of any document of sale or agreement to sell
or power of attorney or a will or any other document
purporting transfer of land to them either by person
whose rights and interests have been ordered to be
terminated under this sub-section or by any other
person claiming through such person, subject to the
payment to the local authority of urban assessment or
(49 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
premium or both leviable and recoverable under sub-
(i)  nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any
land belonging to deity, Devasthan Department, any
public trust or any religious or charitable institution or
(ii) no proceedings or orders under this sub-
section shall be initiated or made in respect of lands
for which proceedings under the provisions of the
Urban Land (Ceiling and Regulations) Act, 1976
(Central Act No.33 of 1976), the Rajasthan Imposition
of Ceiling on Agricultural Holdings Act, 1973 (Act
No.11 of 1973) and the Rajasthan Land Reforms and
Acquisition of Land Owners Estate Act, 1963 (Act
No.11 of 1964) are pending.
(9).Any person aggrieved by an order of an officer or
authority made under this section may appeal within
thirty days from the date of such order to such officer
not below the rank of Collector as may be authorised
by the State Government in this behalf, who shall, as
far as practicable, disposed of such appeal within a
period of sixty days from the date of its presentation
and if he is unable to dispose of the appeal within the
aforesaid period, he shall record reasons therefore. An
order passed under this sub-section shall be final.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this section.-
(a) “Local Authority” in relation to a local area, means
an authority constituted or designated for, or entrusted
with the function of, planned development of that area
and includes an Urban Improvement Trust constituted
under the Rajasthan Urban Improvement Act, 1959
(Act No.35 of 1959) the Jaipur Development Authority
constituted under the Jaipur Development Authority
Act, 1982 (Act No.25 of 1982), the Jodhpur
Development Authority constituted under the Jodhpur
Development Authority Act, 2009 (Act No.2 of 2009)
or a Municipality constituted under the Rajasthan
Municipalities Act, 2009 (Act No.18 of 2009)
(b) “Urban Area” means an area falling within Jaipur
region as defined in clause (8) of section 2 of the
Jaipur Development Authority Act, 1982 (Act No.25 of
1982), Jodhpur region as defined in clause (8) of
section 2 of the Jodhpur Development Authority Act,
2009 (Act No.2 of 2009) or a municipal area as defined
in clause (xxxix) of section 2 of the Rajasthan
(50 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
Municipalities Act, 2009 (Act No.18 of 2009) or an area
specified as such in a notification issued under section
3 of the Rajasthan Urban Improvement Act, 1959 (Act
No.35 of 1959) or an area for which a local authority is
constituted or designated under any law for the time
(c) “Urbanisable limits” means the urbanisable limits
indicated in the master plan or master development
plan of a city or town prepared under any law for the
time being in force and where there is no master plan
or master development plan, the outer limits of the
(d) “Peripheral belt” means the peripheral belt
indicated in the master plan or master development
plan of a city or town prepared under any law for the
time being in force and where there is no master plan
or master development plan or where peripheral belt is
not indicated in such plan, the area as may be notified
by the State Government from time to time.]”
38.   This section has undergone several amendments. It was
inserted in the Act in the year 1958 by virtue of the Amending Act
of 1958. Existing sub-section (5) was substituted in the year
1980. Sub-sections (6), (7), (8) and (9) were added by virtue of
Rajasthan Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012 and brought into effect
on 02.05.2012. Sub-section (5A) was inserted w.e.f. 07.10.2014
by the Rajasthan Land Laws (Amendment) Act, 2014. Section 90-
B was inserted in the year 1999 but under the Amending Act of
2012 this section was deleted w.e.f. 02.05.2012. Section 90-B
pertained to termination of rights and resumption of land in
certain cases. Before the deletion of Section 90B, the restrictions
on the use of agricultural land for non-agricultural purposes were
dealt with under Section 90-A and the consequences of breach of
these restrictions were dealt with under Section 90-B. After the
(51 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
amendments of 2012, these provisions were merged in Section
90-A and Section 90-B was deleted altogether.
39.   Section 91 of the Act of 1956 pertains to unauthorised
occupation of land. Sub-section (1) of Section 91 provides that
any person who occupies or continues to occupy any land without
lawful authority shall be regarded as a trespasser and may be
summarily evicted by the Tehsildar.
40.   Section 92 of the Act of 1956 provides that subject to the
general orders of the State Government the collector may set
apart land for any special purpose, such as for free pasturage of
cattle, for forest reserve, for development of abadi or for any
other public or municipal purpose and such land shall not be used
otherwise than for such purposes without the previous sanction of
the collector.
41.   Section 101 of the Act of 1956 permits the specified
authority to allot land for agricultural purposes in such manner as
may be prescribed.
42.   Section 102 of the Act of 1956 provides that notwithstanding
anything hereinfore contained the State Government shall have
power to allot land for the purpose of an industry or for any
purpose of public utility on such conditions as it deems fit. Section
102-A of the Act of 1956 provides that any Nazul land or land set
apart under Section 92 may be placed by the State Government at
the disposal of a local authority having jurisdiction and such local
authority may take over with the land so placed at its disposal for
and on behalf of the State Government or may use the same for
(52 of 81)             [CW-15150/2021]
special purpose for which it has been set apart to such extent and
subject   to  such   conditions        and       restrictions as  the   State
Government may from time to time lay down and in such manner
as it may from time to time prescribe.
43.   Section 103 of the Act of 1956 defines the term land and
Abadi for the purposes of Chapter VI. The land is defined in most
comprehensive manner which would include the land as defined in
the Rajasthan Tenancy Act, land acquired under the provisions of
the Rajasthan Land Acquisition Act, land surveyed and recorded in
the Government records, land in possession of the Government or
a local authority obtained by transfer or otherwise, nazul land and
land within the abadi area vesting in a local authority or land
reserved and set apart for special purposes under Section 92 and
would include the benefits to arise out of such land and things
attached to the earth or permanently fastened to anything
attached to the earth. The terms “abadi’ or “abadi area” or “abadi
land” mean the populated area of a village, town or city which
would include the site of such village, town or city, land reserved
and set apart under Section 92 for the development of abadi.
44.   With a view to achieving the improvement of the neglected
urban areas, to provide for the establishment of the improvement
trusts to empower them to raise funds to frame improvement
schemes and to execute them and to exercise municipal powers
during such executions, the Rajasthan Urban Improvement Act,
1959 was framed. Section 2(vii) of the Act defines “master plan”
as to mean the master plan prepared and approved for any urban
(53 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
area in accordance with the provisions of Chapter II. Section 2(x)
defines “urban area” as to mean the urban area notified under
Section 3 or Section 8, as the case may be. Section 2(xi) defines
“zone” as to mean any one of the divisions in which the urban
area may be divided for the purposes of the improvement under
the Act. Section 2(xi-a) defines “zonal development plan” as to
mean a plan prepared and approved in the manner as may be
45.   Chapter II of the Act of 1959 pertains to master plans. Under
Section 3 falling in the said Chapter, the State Government enjoys
power to direct that master plan be prepared in respect of any
urban area and for which purpose the State Government may
constitute an advisory council. Section 4 pertains to contents of
master plan and provides that such plan shall define various zones
into which the urban area having population of more than one lac
may be divided for the purpose of its improvement and indicate
the manner in which the land in each zone is proposed to be used
and shall serve as a basic pattern of framework within which
improvement schemes and zonal development plans of the various
zones may be prepared. Section 5 lays down the procedure to be
followed for preparation of the master plan and envisages
preparation and publication of draft master plan by inviting and
considering the objections and suggestions that may be received
before finalising the master plan.
46.   Chapter III of the Act of 1959 pertains to constitution of
trusts.  Section    8    falling     in     the      said     Chapter  envisages
(54 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
establishment and incorporation of trusts for the purpose of
carrying out improvement of urban areas. Chapter V of the Act of
1959 pertains to framing of schemes. Sub-section (1) of Section
29 envisages framing of schemes for improvement of urban area
by Urban Improvement Trust. As per sub-section (2) of Section
29, such schemes may provide for all or any of the matters, such
as acquisition of any land or other property necessary for
execution of the scheme; re-laying out of any land comprised in
the scheme; construction or reconstructions of buildings; forming
of open spaces for the benefit of the area; making sanitary
arrangements as required; establishment and constructions of
markets and other places of public requirement; reclamation or
reservation   of  land     for    gardens,          forestation,   planting   or
preservation of trees and plantations etc. Such scheme when
prepared by the Urban Improvement Trust would be placed before
the Government for its consideration in terms of Section 37. Under
Section 38 the State Government would sanction a scheme and
notify the same upon which the trust would proceed to execute
the scheme. Under Section 39, the State Government would
specify time within which the scheme would be executed. Section
40 which pertains to alteration of the scheme after sanction
provides that at any time after a scheme has been sanctioned by
the State Government and before it has been carried into
execution, the trust may alter it. However if such alteration is
estimated to increase the net cost of execution of the scheme by
more than Rs.50,000/- or 5% of the cost, whichever is less, the
(55 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
alteration shall not be made without previous sanction of the State
47.   Chapter VI of the Act of 1959 pertains to powers and duties
of the trust where a scheme has been sanctioned. Sub-section (1)
of Section 43 provides that the State Government may by
notification in the official gazette and upon such terms and
conditions as may be agreed upon between it and the trust, place
at the disposal of the trust all or any of the improved and
unimproved lands in the urban area for which the trust has been
constituted and which may be vested in the State to be known as
nazul lands for the purposes of improvement in accordance with
the scheme framed and sanctioned.
48.   Chapter VII of the Act of 1959 pertains to acquisition and
disposal of land. Section 51 falling in the said Chapter authorises
the trust to acquire land by purchase, lease or exchange through
agreement. Under Section 52, upon a representation from the
trust the State Government may acquire any land for the purpose
of improvement or for any other purposes under the Act.
49.   Section 74 of the Act of 1959 under Chapter X authorises the
State Government to frame rules consistent with the Act. In
exercise of such powers the State Government has framed the
Rajasthan Urban Improvement (Disposal of Urban Land) Rules,
1974 and the Rajasthan Urban Improvement (Change of Use of
Residential Land or Premises for Commercial Purposes) Rules,
(56 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
50.   To consolidate and amend the law relating to tenancies of
agricultural lands and to provide for certain measures of land
reforms and matters connected therewith, the Rajasthan Tenancy
Act, 1955 (for short, ‘the Act of 1955’) was enacted. Section 16 of
the Act of 1955 provides that notwithstanding anything in the Act
or in any other law or enactment for the time being in force in any
part of the State, khatedari rights shall not accrue in relation to
several kinds of land including pasture land, land used for causal
or occasional cultivation in the bed of a river, land comprised in
gardens owned and maintained by the State Government, land
acquired or held for a public purpose or a work of public utility,
land situated within the limits of a cantonment, land included
within railway or canal boundaries, land within boundaries of any
Government forest, land which has been set apart or is in the
opinion of the collector necessary for the flow of water therein into
any reservoir or tank of drinking water for a village or for
surrounding villages.
51.   We have reproduced paragraph 205 of the judgment in the
case of Gulab Kothari-1 which contains directions and restrictions
to the State and its authorities in relation to land use. These
directives which are relevant from the standpoint of the present
controversy can be summarised as under:-
(i) the development authority in the State to ensure that
master development plan for the area is comprehensive and
provides for preservation, conservation, development of eco-
sensitive zone, ecological zone, green area etc.
(57 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
(ii) Simultaneously or immediately after preparation of
master development plan the authority should proceed to prepare
zonal development plan.
(iii) Sanctity of such plan shall be maintained and there
should be vigilant implementation thereof and any deviation must
be an exception.
(iv) Eco-sensitive zone or ecological zone or green area
specified in the master plan once established shall not be altered
or put to other uses during operative period or even while
undertaking revision or preparation of new plan.
(v) Area shown in various master plans as green zone, green
area which are to be developed as buffer shall not be permitted to
be used for any activities other than those specified unless the
State Government permits diversion of land.
(vi) The use of the land in peripheral control belt shall not
generally be permitted for the purposes other than those specified
but if any change is necessary in larger public interest, then only
to subserve the legislative intent of planned development for
promotion and enhancement of the quality of life of the citizens it
may be allowed.
(vii)  Open     spaces,       green        space,       common   facilities,
playgrounds, gardens, parks and recreational areas shall be
(58 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
(viii) The land use as specified in the plan shall not be
changed without alteration or modification of the plan carried out
after following the procedure laid down under the law.
(ix) The authorities shall frame township policy ensuring that
no small colony comes up in small areas with no infrastructure
(x) Immediate steps to be taken to check encroachment or
unauthorised constructions over the public way and footpaths. The
encroachments on such areas by putting stairs, ramps, hoardings
or fencing shall be removed.
(xi) The authorities would enforce the building bye-laws
strictly and no construction in deviation of approved plan will be
permitted. The unauthorised constructions raised violating the
building line and the set backs norms shall not be permitted to be
(xii) Unauthorised development or change of land use shall
not be compounded in exercise of power conferred under various
statutes unless such unauthorised development or change of land
use falls within the parameters of permissible modification of the
(xiii) The State should take effective steps for conservation
and preservation of natural resources such as hills, forests, rivers,
other water bodies and catchment area and to undertake a drive
to remove all encroachments made over the natural resources.
(59 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
52.   In Gulab Kothari-2 the Larger Bench refused to entertain the
request of the State Government to modify or clarify the directions
issued in Gulab Kothari-1. In particular prayer for modification of
the  directions   not   to    permit       compounding          of  unauthorised
constructions violating the building norms was rejected. The
further direction issued was not to permit conversion of land use
or regularisation of unauthorised colony or individual unauthorised
constructions until and unless the zonal development plans and
sector plans for the local area concerned governed by the master
development     plan    are    prepared,           finalised    and  notified   in
accordance with law. It was thus provided in para 54(e) of the
judgment as under:-
“(e) The respondents are further directed not to
permit conversion of land use/regularisation of
unauthorised colony or individual unauthorised
constructions      until       and         unless      the   Zonal
Development Plan and Sector Plans for the local area
concerned governed by Master Development Plan
are prepared, finalized and notified in accordance
with law. Further, the conversion of the land use or
regularisation of unauthorised development shall not
be permitted unless the unauthorised development
undertaken fulfills the norms laid down for requisite
infrastructure facilities and amenities and conforms
to the Master Development Plan/Zonal Development
Plan/Sector Plans/Schemes duly notified.”
53.   Perusal of the judgments of Gulab Kothari-1 and Gulab
Kothari-2 would thus demonstrate that that the fundamental issue
considered was of haphazard unplanned development of urban
centers in the State. The Court was perturbed by the non-
existence of the development plans and wherever such plans
existed, lack of proper implementation thereof and unauthorised
(60 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
and   unsupervised    development           which        was   contrary  to  the
development plans. The directions issued by the Court thus were
for the purpose of preserving the sanctity of developing plans and
to ensure that the future development takes place strictly in terms
of the provisions made in the plan and no existing development
which is contrary to the land use permitted under the plan is
regularised. Unauthorised constructions only to the extent it
conforms to the land use and building bye-laws could be
regularised. Any other land use which is contrary to the provisions
of the plan would not be regularised unless the plan itself within
the permissible limits and after following the due procedure has
been altered. Emphasis was placed on preservation of natural
resources   by  providing      effective        steps      for  conservation   or
preservation of natural resources, such as hills, forests, rivers,
other water bodies and catchment area. Any encroachment on
such areas would be removed.
54.   With this background we may now advert to the three
Government orders/circulars which are under challenge. Broad
features of the order dated 20.09.2021 can be summarised as
(i) For agricultural land whose layout plans are already
approved in the past, the Government envisages grant of lease
deed by exercising powers as noted under Section 90-A and 90-B
as applicable of the Act of 1956. This will include correction of
measurement errors. Premium would be charged as per the
Government policy.
(61 of 81)              [CW-15150/2021]
(ii) In cases where lease deeds of unapproved colonies are to
be granted in the city with the population of more than one lac,
the same would be done only after the zonal plan is approved.
However, the colonies where layout plans are already approved,
they would be accommodated in the zonal plan considering them
as commitments. Such regularisation could be done in terms of
Section 90B and 90A as may be applicable and for which charges
at the prescribed rates would be collected.
(iii) Regarding cases where the records of colonies have not
been    submitted    by    the     private        developers   to   the  Jaipur
Development Authority, this order provides that the plot holders
directly or by forming a development committee can submit the
details of the land along with available documents to the Jaipur
Development Authority who shall prepare layout plan after
conducting a survey and such holders will be issued lease deeds.
(iv) For the plots allotted by the local authorities during
auction or lottery, relaxation and concession in interest and
penalty on the late deposit would be granted.
(v) Interest and penalty waiver has been provided for the
houses of economically weaker sections and lower income group
(vi) The provisions have also been made for grant of new
lease deeds on freehold basis under specified situations.
55.   The circular dated 27.09.2021 principally lays down the
guidelines and provides for relaxation for granting property rights
(62 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
as envisaged in the order dated 20.09.2021. The salient features
of this circular are as under:-
(I) The requirements of proof of property rights have been
relaxed so that lease deeds can be given effectively. For example
it is provided that lease deed, registry, donation, registered book
or any other documents issued during princely time would be
recognised. In case of non-availability of necessary documents the
proof of right can be determined on the basis of documents, such
as electricity or water bill of vintage prior to 01.01.1992, or name
in the voter list prior to the said date, affidavit of two persons
above the age of 60 from the neighborhood vouching for the
undisputed right of possession of the applicant over the property
before 01.01.1992 etc.
(II) For old abadi area several provisions have been made.
These terms specifically provide the following:-
“(ii)Lease deed shall not be issued for encroachment
on public road/facility area. The verification of
encroachment can be done on the basis of previous
city survey/other documents.
(iii) Lease deed shall not be issued for the
construction/encroachment                    done       on      the
ramps/verandah area or the terrace of the verandah
of the market’s located in walled city area.
(iv.) Mixed-use lease deed shall be issued for the area
wherein commercial activities (shop on ground floor
and residence on upper floor(s) have been going on
traditionally in the walled city. For the remaining area
of the walled city. Residential/ /Commercial/ Hotels
use lease deed may be issued while issuing of the
lease deed an affidavit regarding adherence of the
provisions of heritage shall be sought.
(v) Reconstitution/sub-division rules and related
charges will not be applicable for the plots located in
the walled city area (UDH order no.F.10(65) UDH/3/4
(63 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
56.   We have reproduced earlier clause (4) of this circular which
lists the cases where lease deeds shall not be granted. This
includes restricted areas as per the Rajasthan Municipality Rules,
land falling within the limits prescribed for any archaeological site,
monument etc. and importantly “land belongs to or vests in the
Central Government of State Government or statutory or non
statutory bodies, authorities or companies established by or under
control of the Central Government or State Government, as the
case may be, except land vests in the Municipality”.
57.   In the order dated 28.09.2021 it is provided that the
Abhiyan will be executed in three phases. This document provides
the guidelines regarding main tasks to be executed in the
Abhiyan. These guideline include the following:-
(i) Giving new lease deed by surrendering ownership rights
in the non-agricultural or abadi land located in the urban areas
and envisages granting of lease deed subject to certain conditions
and correcting measurement errors and anomalies in actual
holding in land records.
(ii)  Giving  lease     deed       in    the      colonies developed    on
agricultural land according to the master plan/zonal development
plant/ approved plan. It provides that in terms of the decision in
case of Gulab Kothari, any area where zonal development plans
have been prepared it would be ensured that land use would be as
shown in the zonal development plan. Further detailed provisions
have been made for such purpose.
(64 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
(iii) This circular also envisages exemption from stamp duty
in certain cases.
(iv) Grant of lease deed of plots on settlements on the land
acquired under the Ceiling Act or Rajasthan Land Owners’ Property
Acquisition Act. It was noted that developments have come up on
lands acquired under the Ceiling Act and other similar provisions
and in some cases the land has already been sold prior to
commencement of the Act, developments have come up on such
properties and litigation is pending in various courts with respect
to such lands since long. Such landholdings are therefore decided
to be regularised by granting lease deed after charging premium
at the specified rates.
(v) For nazul properties it would be done at the specified
rates fixed by the cabinet sub-committee.
(vi) Freehold leases to be given in respect of short term
lease and rental business properties.
58.   As noted earlier, the thrust of the Gulab Kothari judgments is
the requirement of planned development of urban areas and
preservation of sanctity of development plans. On the other hand
the thrust (though not the sole purpose) of the Government
scheme under scrutiny is recognising and granting leasehold or
freehold rights to the occupants of the land by relaxing the
standards of proof of the subsisting rights and waiver of interest
penalty and premium charges. In the process the Government
scheme      also   in  part     envisages           regularisation   of  existing
constructions which may not be strictly in tune with the
(65 of 81)                 [CW-15150/2021]
development      scheme      and      in    some         cases   in   absence    of
development scheme.
59.   In Gulab Kothari judgments the High Court has put strict
restrictions on the Government and its authorities in the spheres
of town planning. Not just the Government and its authorities, we
also, by virtue of law of precedent are bound by the judgments of
coordinate and Larger Bench. We would therefore not permit the
State Government to implement any of its measures/provisions
contained in the impugned circulars which are in deviation of the
mandamus contained in Gulab Kothari judgments.
60.   Having said that, as observed in the preliminary remarks of
this judgment, the urban town planning is extremely complex
socioeconomic and legal challenge. Due to variety of reasons there
is a wide gap between what a dream urban modern center should
look like and what the realities are. We must realise that the
executive wing of the state is headed by Council of Ministers who
is  chosen    by   the   legislative       assembly          formed    by  elected
representatives of the people. The policies framed by the
legislature are implemented by the executive. The members of the
assembly have the mandate of their electorates to take policy
decisions. Their performance is judged periodically on the basis of
the decisions that they take. They therefore have to seek a fresh
mandate from the electorates at the end of the five year term. It
is therefore that as part of the broad division of powers under the
Constitution, it is recognised that the Government has the
authority to frame policies which also come with the elbow room
(66 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
to experiment and make errors. This play in the joint is essential
in any democratic set up. The Government agencies also have the
wherewithal and assistants of the experts in the field which
enables them to frame policies and to take informed decisions.
The Courts neither have expertise in the highly technical field such
as town planning nor have the democratic mandate to take policy
decisions nor have the requirement to have such policy measures
tested by facing the electorates. At the same time precisely
because the Courts do not have to have their decisions tested on
the principle of popularity, they can insulate the governmental
actions and decisions from being merely populist and at times
majoritarian. While thus preserving the power of judicial review
even of policy natters, the Courts hold the Government policies in
high regard and make interference in policy matters on rare and
exceptional occasions.
61.   We would therefore have due regard to the Government
policy flowing from the three impugned orders and circulars. We
would not interfere unless the policy fails any of the three tests
which we have outlined earlier, namely:-
(i) It is contrary to any of the directions issued by this Court
in Gulab Kothari judgments.
(ii) It is not permissible as per the statutory frame work.
(iii) Or it otherwise fails to pass the public trust test.
62.   Insofar as the desire of the Government to regularise the
rights of the persons who have landed properties by granting
leases we do not find the same is in any manner opposed to the
(67 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
Gulab Kothari directives. As noted more than once earlier, Gulab
Kothari judgments principally concern the question of urban town
planning and unauthorised development in urban centers. These
decisions do not touch the question of recognising or granting
leasehold rights to the occupants of the lands in any manner. We
have also perused these provisions which as noted make
relaxation in the requirement of proof of existing rights, give
relaxation on interest and penalty on late payments. It also
envisages regularising non-agricultural use of agricultural lands
within the parameters of erstwhile Section 90-B and present
Section 90-A of the Act of 1956. Erstwhile Section 90-B contained
provisions for termination of rights and resumption of land when
agricultural land is put to non-agricultural use after following the
procedure laid down therein. Sub-section (6) of Section 90-B
provided that the land so resumed shall vest in the State free from
all encumbrances and would be placed at the disposal of
concerned authority. However proviso to sub-section (6) provided
that lands surrendered under sub-section (3) shall be made
available to the person who surrenders the land for its planned
development in accordance with the rules, regulation and bye-
laws applicable for housing, commercial purposes etc. This
provision thus envisaged regularisation of land use for non-
agricultural purposes under certain circumstances.                   Likewise
Section 90-A of the Act of 1956 in the present form also envisages
resumption of the agriculture land which has been put to non-
agriculture use after following the procedure. Proviso to sub-
section (5) of Section 90-A provides that the State Government
(68 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
may in lieu of having such person and the subsequent transferees
so ejected from the land, allow him to retain it and use the same
for any purpose other than that of agriculture on payment of
urban assessment and premium and fine by way of penalty as
may be prescribed. Sub-section (8) of Section 90-A covers the
cases where such land use for non-agricultural purpose has been
made before 17.06.1999. In such a case the Government could
allow a person to continue to hold the land on payment of
assessment of premium. Thus in the existing framework the
Government has the right to regularise non-agricultural use of
agricultural land made without permission.
63.  Having said that, no divesting of the public property in the
guise of recognising or granting leasehold rights to the occupants
can be permitted unless a proper legal framework has been put in
place. In the present Government scheme we do not find that the
Government proposes to divest any of the public properties. This
would be demonstrated from various provisions of these circulars
and orders. For example paragraph 4 of the circular dated
27.09.2021 provides that freehold leases for various kinds of land
would not be granted, one of them being land belonging to or
vests in the Central Government or State Government or statutory
or non-statutory bodies, authorities or companies established by
or under control of the Central Government or the State
Government. In paragraph 38 of the order dated 28.09.2021, it is
provided that lease deed will not be given in forest land, low lying
area or oran land and other restricted area.
(69 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
64.   In the order dated 28.09.2021, there are two clauses which
require special mention. Clause 10 as it stood at the relevant time
made detailed provisions regarding grant of lease deed of the
lands acquired for housing board and local bodies and the colonies
developed on the lands of local bodies. For such purpose this
clause envisaged that the lands of the housing board would be
transferred to the development authority or Urban Improvement
Trust, who in turn would grant lease deed to the occupants of the
colonies which have come up on such lands. It would be done
after charging normal rates applicable to agriculture land. We have
serious doubt about the manner and method for divesting such
public property in favour of private individuals who could regarded
as no better than encroachers.
65.   While the hearing of these petitions was still going on, the
State Government filed its affidavit on 10.12.2021 and declared
that the Government has decided not to give effect to clause-10 of
the said circular dated 28.09.2021 for the present and these
provisions will not be acted upon. The Government would review
the situation later. This spares us the requirement of testing the
legality of this clause.
66.   In comparison to this clause which as noted involves grant of
lease deed in favour of occupants of Government land, clause-11
pertains to issuance of lease deed of plots on settlement on the
lands acquired under the Ceiling Act or any other similar Acts. It
appears that with respect to lands falling under the Urban Ceiling
Act or other similar Acts, there are multiple disputes, some of
(70 of 81)              [CW-15150/2021]
them are pending before various courts since long. Even if there
are no legal disputes pending, as it often happens the State fails
to protect such properties from occupations and constructions put
up by such occupants, majority of whom are innocent purchasers
of constructed properties. In some cases such developments have
taken place even before the ceiling laws were introduced. In this
context the Government has taken a decision to regularise such
occupations by charging premium at prescribed rates. This
decision of the Government cannot be seen as divesting public
property and we would therefore not interfere with the same.
67.      The question of regularising kachchi basties needs to be
dealt with separately. The provisions are made for this purpose in
Government order dated 28.09.2021.                   We reproduced paragraph
18 of the said order as per which the cut-off date as 15.08.2009
which was adopted in the previous Abhiyan of 2012 for grant of
lease deeds to surveyed and non-surveyed of kachchi bastis has
been maintained. One modification made is that the lease deeds
earlier issued which were non-transferable have now been made
transferable after 10 years from the date of issue of lease deeds.
The rates of lease deeds of kachchi bastis have been kept same as
before.   Further clarifications were issued by the Government in
separate    order  dated     12.11.2021            regarding   kachchi   bastis.
Further guidelines have also been issued. It is clarified that leases
should not be given in such kachchi bastis which are developed in
reserved facility areas such as park, playground, roads, open land,
public land etc.; reserved land, forest land, river, drain, ponds and
(71 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
other restricted areas. It is pointed out that the lease deeds have
already been issued in past in favour of the families residing in
notified/surveyed kachchi settlements till 15.08.2009.                     In the
present, the Government again issued lease deeds to the
remaining families residing in such bastis with the cut-off date of
15.08.2009. Such lease deeds would be issued according to the
norms of Kachchi Bastis Policy-2005.
68.   It can thus be seen that the policy of regularising kachchi
bastis is an on-going process continued from time to time. In the
present scenario, the original cut-off date of 15.08.2009 is
maintained. It is pointed out that earlier steps have been taken to
regularise such kachchi bastis. Emphasis is on regularising rest of
the eligible bastis for grant of leases to the occupants. This policy
is thus not a new one and can be seen as a social welfare measure
by the Government to regularise the occupations of the persons
belonging to lower income groups and those who belong to below
poverty line. One major departure from the earlier policy is that
such occupations are now made transferable after 10 years of
grant of lease. We do not find this scheme opposed to the
directions contained in Gulab Kothari’s judgment. The order dated
12.11.2021 records that pursuant to permission granted by the
Supreme     Court    allowing       the     Government          to  regulate  the
occupation of Kachchi basti, the State Government had already
granted pattas to about 65000 families and the task of granting
pattas to the remaining occupants would be completed. The cut-
off date of the possession of occupants for regularisation is fixed
as 15.08.2009.      This is done in order to give shelter to poor
(72 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
families. As noted, the order excludes those Kachchi bastis which
are situated in facility areas such as parks, playgrounds, roads,
open land, public land, reserved land, forest land, river, drain,
ponds, other restricted areas from the purview of the Government
scheme for grant of pattas. This policy does not suffer from any
illegality or is in any manner opposed to Gulab Kothari’s judgment
(supra) of this Court as long as the Government sticks to its
promise of not granting leases to the residents of such kachchi
bastis which have developed on reserved facility areas such as
park, playground, roads, open land, public land etc.; reserved
land, forest land, river, drain, ponds and other restricted areas.
69.   When it comes to the desire of the Government to regularise
existing constructions, the restrictions imposed by the Court in
Gulab     Kothari    judgments         immediately            kick in.  No    such
regularisation can be done which is not permissible as per the said
decisions. Broadly, restrictions imposed in the judgments of Gulab
Kothari are that development schemes shall be framed promptly
and those which are framed will be implemented. No land use will
be permissible dehors the provisions made in the development
plan and modification of the development plan would be after
following the procedure and only subject to permissible limits. It is
also provided that till the zonal development plans are prepared
and sanctioned, no development dehors the master plan will be
permitted. To overcome this obstacle the Government has
amended the Rajasthan Urban Improvement Act by amending
Section 4. Before amendment Section 4 provided as under:-
(73 of 81)                 [CW-15150/2021]
“4. Contents of Master plan.-                     The master plan
(a) define the various zones into which the urban
area for which the plan has been prepared may be
divided for the purposes of its improvement and
indicate the manner in which the land in each zone is
proposed to be used, and
(b) serve as basic pattern of frame work within
which the improvement schemes of the various
zones may be prepared.”
70.   The amended Section 4 now provides that the master plan
shall define the various zones into which the urban area having
population of more than one lac may be divided for the purposes
of its improvement and indicate the manner in which the land in
each zone is proposed to be used and shall serve as a basic
pattern of framework within which the improvement schemes and
zonal development plans of the various zones may be prepared.
Proviso to Section 4 which is important provides that the
preparation of zonal development plan shall not be mandatory for
urban areas having population of less than one lac. In other
words, as per the changed statutory scheme, the development of
urban area having population of less than one lac would be
governed by master plan without further preparation of the zonal
development plan. The legislative reaction to one of the directives
contained in Gulab Kothari judgments, in our opinion, is legitimate
one. It is within the powers of the legislature to amend the
existing statutory framework and as long as the amendment is not
unconstitutional,   it  would       serve       the      legitimate   purpose    of
neutralising the judgments or the directions of the Court. While
the legislation in the present form does not envisage preparation
(74 of 81)                 [CW-15150/2021]
of zonal development plan for urban areas having population of
less than one lac, the petitioners cannot bind the Government to
the   directions issued     in    Gulab        Kothari       judgments    of  not
recognising development in such areas without preparation of
development plan. The legislative intent appears to be that the
master plan itself would contain the manner in which the land
would be put to uses in different zones and provides a basic
framework within which the areas would be developed. In urban
areas with population less than one lac, the legislature in its
wisdom as per the proviso to Section 4 of the Rajasthan Urban
Improvement Act now provides that the preparation of zonal
development plan shall not be mandatory.                         In such areas,
provisions made in the master plan would suffice for the
development of the area without further macro planning through
zonal development plans. Such legislative wisdom is not open to
question before the Court.           Merely because a different mode
appears more suitable to the Court, cannot be the ground to
declare such legislation unconstitutional.                 In other words, the
Court would not substitute its wisdom for that of the legislature.
71.    We may recall, the State legislature has made certain
legislative  amendments       under       the      Rajasthan      Laws   (Second
Amendment) Act, 2021. Section 43 of the Rajasthan Urban
Improvement Act, 1959 has been substituted. Sub-section (1) of
substituted Section 43 provides that notwithstanding anything
contained in the Rajasthan Land Revenue Act, 1956, the land as
defined in Section 103 of that Act.                 Under Sub-section (1) of
(75 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
substituted Section 43 the lands within the jurisdiction of urban
area are deemed to have been placed at the disposal of the Urban
Improvement Trust upon establishment of such trusts under
Section 8 of the Act and the trust would take over such land for
and on behalf of the State Government and could utilize the same
for the purposes of the Act and may dispose of the same by way
of allotment, regularization or auction subject to such conditions
and restrictions by the State Government from time to time lay
down and in which manner, as it may, from time to time prescribe.
Proviso to Sub-section (1) of substituted Section 43 provides that
the trust may dispose of any such land even without undertaking
or carrying out any improvement thereon or after undertaking or
carrying out such improvement as it thinks fit.
72.   Section 60-C has also been inserted in the said Act. As per
Sub-section (1) of Section 60-C, any person who holds non-
agricultural land within the jurisdiction of the trust otherwise than
under a lease or licence issued by the trust may, in the prescribed
manner, surrender his rights in such land in favour of the trust for
the purpose of obtaining free hold rights from the trust, the trust
may accept such rights and may issue free hold patta.                    Sub-
section (2) of Section 60-C provides that any person holding any
order or patta issued under any other law may also surrender his
rights in favour of the trust for obtaining free hold rights from the
trust and the trust may accept such rights and issue free hold
pattas, which shall be issued on depositing one time lease money
as may be prescribed. Sub-section (3) of Section 60-C provides
(76 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
that on acceptance of rights by the trust under Sub-sections (1)
and (2) all rights of the holder in the said land shall vest in the
trust and the trust shall, subject to other provisions of the Act and
the Rules made thereunder and on payment by the holder such
fee and charges, as may be determined by the State Government,
issue free hold patta to the holder of the said land. Sub-section
(4) of Section 60-C provides that the free hold patta issued under
Sub-section    (3)    shall    be      subject        to     all covenants    and
encumbrances which were attached to the land and existed
immediately before acceptance by the trust of the rights under
sub-section (1) and (2).
73.   Similar provisions have been made by inserting Section 54-E
in the Jaipur Development Authority Act, 1982, Section 50-B in
the Jodhpur Development Authority Act, 2009, Sections 68-A and
69-A in the Rajasthan Municipalities Act, 2009 and Section 50-B in
74.   In essence, under substituted Section 43 of the Rajasthan
Urban Improvement Act, 1959, the land falling within the urban
area is vested in the Urban Improvement Trust from inception by
deeming provision and placed at the disposal of the trust which in
turn can dispose of the same by way of allotment, regularization
or auction subject to such conditions and restrictions by the State
Government from time to time lay down and in which manner, as
it may, from time to time prescribe. As per Section 60-C of the
said Act, a person holding non-agricultural land or holding pattas
can surrender the land in favour of the trust.                    The trust after
(77 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
accepting such surrender can issue free hold patta upon payment
of such charges as may be determined.                    The holder of the land
thereupon be issued free hold pattas which shall be subject to all
covenants and encumbrances attached to the land which existed
immediately before acceptance by the trust of the rights under
sub-sections (1) and (2).
75.   Necessary corresponding amendments have been made in
the respective rules.    For example, the Rajasthan Municipalities
(Surrender of Non-Agricultural Land and Grant of Freehold Lease)
Rules, 2015 have been amended by virtue of the Rajasthan
Municipalities (Surrender of Non-Agricultural Land and Grant of
Freehold Lease)(Amendment) Rules, 2001 through amendment
circular dated 20.09.2021.             The existing Rule 8 has been
substituted by new Rule 8. Sub-rule (1) of substituted Rule 8 is
now applicable, which provides that the applicant shall pay such
charges as may be determined by the State Government from
time to time and submit a proof of deposit of amount of charges
along with his application. Sub-Rule (2) of Rule 8 provides that in
case of any shortfall in the amount deposited by the applicant on
the basis of self assessment, he shall deposit the balance amount
of charges within 30 days of the demand raised by the
Municipality.  Substituted Rule 9 provides that the after grant of
permission under Rule 6 and deposition of charges under Rule 8,
free hold lease deed shall be executed by the Chief Municipal
Officer and Chairperson or any other officer authorised by the
State Government in favour of person to whom permission is
(78 of 81)                [CW-15150/2021]
granted under Rule 6 or in favour of his successors, assignees or
transferees, as the case may be.
76.   The vires of these provisions have been challenged by the
petitioners.  However      we     do      not      find     that the  same    are
unconstitutional in any manner. As is well known as per the
decision of the Supreme Court in the case of The State of
Jammu and Kashmir Vs. Triloki Nath Khosa, reported in AIR
1974 SC 1, if there is a presumption of constitutionality of a
statute the onus is on the one who urges that the same is
unconstitutional, to produce necessary material in support of such
a contention. As held by the Supreme Court in the case of State
of Andhra Pradesh and others Vs. Mcdowell & Company and
others, reported in (1996) 3 SCC 709, the statute framed by
the Parliament or State legislature can be challenged only on the
ground that the same is not within the legislative competence of
the concerned legislature or is opposed to any other fundamental
right or any of the provisions of the Constitution. This principle has
been expanded by a Constitution Bench judgment in the case of
Shayara Bano Vs. Union of India and others, reported in
(2017) 9 SCC 1, where it has been held that a legislation can
also be challenged on the ground of manifest arbitrariness. In the
present case the petitioners have not established existence of any
of the available grounds for challenge. The provision is neither
outside the legislative competence of the State legislature nor it is
shown to be opposed to any of the fundamental rights or
constitutional provisions nor it is demonstrated to be manifestly
(79 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
arbitrary. In its legislative wisdom the State legislature has done
away with the requirement of framing a development plan for an
urban area having population of less than one lac. Our preference
or understanding of what should be a better policy certainly has
no place when we are judging the constitutionality of a statute
framed by the State legislature.
77.   There still one area of grave concern. We would be
concerned     if while    implementing            the      Government   scheme,
occupations and encroachments in eco-sensitive zones, catchment
areas, water bodies, riverbanks and such alike are to be
regularised. The same would not only be wholly impermissible on
the anvil of principles and directives of Gulab Kothari judgments
but   independently      thereof       also.      Irreversible    environmental
damage and ecological degradation cannot be permitted in the
name of Government policy choices.
78.   We would summarise our conclusions as under:-
(i) Insofar as the impugned Government circulars/orders
pertaining to recognising the rights over properties and granting
lease deeds subject to terms and conditions indicated, the same
are not opposed to the Gulab Kothari judgments nor are
impermissible in any other manner.
(ii) Insofar as the Government’s desire to regularise the
existing land uses, the same falls into broad categories, (a) where
agricultural land is put to non-agricultural use without permission
and (b) where such lands as aforesaid or other lands of non-
agricultural character which have been put to uses other than land
(80 of 81)            [CW-15150/2021]
use specified in the development plans. So far as clause (a)
category of uses are concerned, per se we find no illegality in the
approach of the Government. The Government has the authority
in terms of Section 90B of the Act of 1956 as it stood at the
relevant time and Section 90-A as it stands today to regularise
such unauthorised land conversions. However so far as clause (b)
is concerned, any such regularisation of the land use, must strictly
conform to the Gulab Kothari judgments. In other words, if the
current land use is different from the land use permissible under
the sanctioned development plan, the same would not be
regularised unless and until to the extent permissible and after
following the procedure as envisaged, the development plan is
modified. While doing so, all rigours, restrictions and directions
contained in Gulab Kothari judgments would apply. Nothing stated
in this judgment would be taken as having diluted any of these
(iii) Vires challenge to the statutory provisions fails.
(iv) No construction in the guise of operating any of the
provisions of the scheme which cannot be regularised as per the
existing bye-laws, would be regularised. This flows clearly from
the Gulab Kothari judgments. Unless and until the Government
brings a valid legislation, these directions must apply.
(v)   The decision to regularise the kachchi bastis, per se, is
not opposed to any of the Gulab Kothari’s principle as long as the
Government sticks to its stand of not granting leases to the
residents of such kachchi bastis which have developed on reserved
(81 of 81)               [CW-15150/2021]
facility areas such as park, playground, roads, open land, public
land etc.; reserved land, forest land, river, drain, ponds and other
restricted areas.
79.    Before closing we may note that after considerable judicial
time was spent in hearing these petitions, it was pointed out to us
that Gulab Kothari related issues are still pending before the
Larger Bench and one possible approach is to place these petitions
for hearing before the same Bench where a holistic view can be
taken. We had given anxious consideration to this development.
We however chose to continue and complete the hearing. Firstly,
because by then considerable judicial time was already consumed
which we would go totally waste if no finality was given to these
petitions. Secondly, Gulab Kothari case is to be heard by the
Larger Bench and formation of which would mean disturbing
several benches and current roster. Assembling the Larger Bench
would therefore not be that simple nor that frequent. As opposed
to this, these petitions were placed before the regular Bench to
whom public interest petitions are assigned. On both sides issues
were of considerable urgency. We had therefore heard the
arguments and reserved the judgment which we are pronouncing
80.     Both the petitions are disposed of. Pending applications also
stand disposed of.