bus coming from Vadodara to go for pilgrimage, at that time,
original accused Nos. 3, 9 and 10, resident of Barel Faliya,
Village : Rodadha, came and attacked on the complainant, by
keeping grudge about the voting in the election. Accused
No.10 – Kangaliyabhai was armed with an iron pipe. Accused
No.9 – Nevsingbhai caught the complainant and accused No.10
has given pipe blow on the back and Thigh of the complainant,
where as accused No.3 has given fist blows to the complainant.
Due to such scuffle and shouting, all the three accused ran
away from the place of offence. While leaving the place of
offence, they have threatened the complainant that they will
kill him. The persons who were standing with the complainant
were already left the place due to the said scuffle. Thereafter,
when the accused had run away from the place of offence, the
other persons who were standing with the complainant, came
back and called the ambulance and the complainant was
shifted to Keshar Hospital, Chhota Udepur, where he was
treated. The complainant has given complaint before ASI from
the hospital on 13.12.2015 at about 11:15 hours with regard to
the incident. The same was registered before Panvad Police
Station as II–C.R. No.18 of 2015 for the offences under Sections
143, 147, 148, 149, 307, 323, 325, 504 and 506(2) of the
3.      In pursuance of the complaint lodged by the complainant,
investigating agency recorded statements of the witnesses,
collected relevant evidence in form of medical evidence and
drawn various Panchnamas and other relevant evidence for
the purpose of proving the offence.          After having found
material against the respondent accused, charge-sheet came
to be filed in the Court of learned JMFC, Kawant. As said Court
lacks jurisdiction to try the offence, it committed the case to
the Sessions Court, Chhota Udepur as provided under section
209 of the Code.
4.     Upon committal of the case to the Sessions Court, Chhota
Udepur, learned Sessions Judge framed charge at Exh.13
against the respondents accused for the aforesaid offence. The
respondents accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be
5.     In order to bring home charge, the prosecution has
examined          19  witnesses     and      also  produced           various
documentary evidence before the learned trial Court, more
particularly described in paragraphs : 6 and 7 of the impugned
judgment and order.
6.     On conclusion of evidence on the part of the prosecution,
the    trial   Court   put  various      incriminating    circumstances
appearing in the evidence to the respondent accused so as to
obtain his explanation/answer as provided u/s 313 of the Code.
In the further statement, the respondent accused denied all
incriminating circumstances appearing against him as false
and further stated that he is innocent and false case has been
filed against him.       After hearing both the sides and after
analysis of evidence adduced by the prosecution, the learned
trial Judge acquitted the respondent accused of the offences,
for which he was tried, as the prosecution failed to prove the
case beyond reasonable doubt.
7.     We have heard learned APP Ms. Shah appearing for the
applicant State and have minutely examined the documentary
evidence provided to us by learned APP during the course of
8.1    From the deposition of the complainant himself, it
transpires that, one uncle of the complainant viz., Raghanbhai
has gone to the Chhota Udepur Police Station for lodging the
complaint immediately after the incident, however, for the
reasons best known to him, the complaint was lodged on the
next day i.e. on 13.12.2015 at about 11:15 hours i.e. after
about 19 hours of the incident. The complainant has not
explained as to why the complaint is given late i.e. after about
19 hours from the incident, which creates suspicion on the part
of the complainant regarding the incident. Further, he has
deposed       in    his examination-in-chief that   he     has       taken
treatment as indoor patient at Keshar Hospital, Chhota Udepur
for nine days, whereas in his cross-examination, he has stated
that he was admitted in the hospital as indoor patient for 11
days. He has stated in his cross-examination that 42 persons
were there along with him.
8.2    Further, PW-8 – Rumliben, wife of Bhuniyabhai has clearly
deposed in her cross-examination at Exh.49 that, when her
husband was shifting to the hospital, few persons were going
to the police station for lodging the complaint. Factually, the
incident was happened on 12.12.2015 and the complaint is
lodged after about 19 hours i.e. on 13.12.2015 at about 11:15
hours. Therefore, the story mentioned in the cross-examination
does not support the case of the prosecution.
8.3    Further, PW-9 – Harsingbhai Chandubhai Rathwa at
Exh.50 has deposed in his deposition that, the complainant
himself has stated to the said witness that one Zanzadiya
Nevsing has given stick blow to the complainant. From
compliant, we could not find any stick blow by any of the
accused. The complainant did not speak about stick blow in his
first version – complaint. It is important to note here that, the
said witness has, in his cross-examination, stated that, said
Zanzadiya Nevsing was handicap and bend from middle part of
the body and cannot be able to walk without the help of the
stick. This is hearsay evidence. However, there is factual
contradiction in the version regarding the blows. Therefore, it
does not support the case of the prosecution.
8.4     Further, looking to the deposition of PW-14 – Dr.Jagdish
Chelappan at Exh.74, the said witness has deposed that the
uncle of the complainant viz., Raghanbhai Malubhai has stated
that there were iron rod, stick blows and stones to the
complainant. It is relevant to note that this witness in his
deposition has deposed that the complainant was admitted in
the hospital for six days as an indoor patient.
8.5     From various depositions of the witnesses, there are
contradiction regarding hospitalisation of the complainant. The
complainant has stated in his deposition that he was admitted
in the hospital as an indoor patient for 9 days and at the same
time, in his cross-examination, he has stated that he was
admitted in the hospital for 11 days, whereas PW-14 – Dr.
Jagdish has stated that the injured was admitted in the hospital
for 6 days as an indoor patient. These are the factual but
material contradiction qua the hospitalisation on record. From
these contradiction, it reveals that the injuries sustained by the
complainant was not serious and therefore, he was discharged
from the hospital within few days. Therefore, the trial Court
has rightly evaluated the depositions of the witnesses.
8.5     It is relevant to observe that said uncle – Raghanbhai
Malubhai was not examined by the prosecution. Though the
said uncle has gone to the police station for lodging the
complaint, but the complaint was not given and though the
said uncle was with the complainant in the hospital during the
first treatment, even though he was not examined by the
8.6     With regard to the presence of accused, PW-17 – Dr. Raju
Adinarayan at Exh.92 has stated in his deposition that at the
time of admitting the injured, the injured has stated that
Kangaliyabhai          Nevsingbhai      Rathwa and      Nevsingbhai
Chhaganbhai Rathwa have given blows. The complainant –
injured has not given the name of any other accused. From this
it reveals that, the complainant – injured has changed his
version time and again. The said witness during the cross-
examination has stated that some of the injuries are fracture
injuries and not grievous injuries and it can be easily curable.
8.7     Thus, from medical evidence also, it reveals that there
are contradiction in the weapons used in the scuffle as well as
attempt of over-implication of the persons by the complainant,
so also timing of FIR and the period of hospitalisation.
Therefore, the trial Court has rightly considered all these
aspects and acquitted the accused.
8.8     It is relevant to note here that the trial Court has
observed that the investigation is not properly carried out by
the authorities. The Trial Court has also observed about the
conduct of the investigation officer(s) as well as the sequence
of the investigation.
8.9    The trial Court has rightly observed in its judgment that
there are material and factual contradiction between timings of
the injury. The medical evidence speaks that the injuries are of
six hours old, whereas the complainant has stated that the
incident has happened at around 4 p.m. Therefore, the trial
Court has observed that the complainant was not speaking
truth before the police as well as before the Court. Further, the
trail Court has observed that the prosecution has failed to
produce the other relevant material on record like x-ray plates,
etc. Therefore, in absence of material evidence also, the trial
Court     has      rightly acquitted      the accused.    Further,        the
complainant and the accused persons were known to each
other since long, even though the version of the complainant
regarding the accused changed at different stages of the
investigation and the trial.
8.10           Under the circumstances, the learned trial Judge
has rightly acquitted the respondent accused for the elaborate
reasons stated in the impugned judgment and we also endorse
the view/finding of the learned trial Judge leading to the
9.     It is pertinent to note that the prosecution is required to
prove the intention or knowledge of the accused persons,
however, it is necessary that the prosecution is required to
prove the intention or knowledge of the accused persons and it
is not necessary that injury capable of causing death should
have been inflicted by the accused persons. What is material
to attract offense under section 307 of the IPC is the intention
or knowledge with which all the acts are done irrespective of
its results. In order to attract the offence under section 307 of
IPC, we have minutely examined oral evidence and all the
prosecution witnesses, we found that nothing is disclosed with
regard to intention or knowledge so as to constitute that there
is anything on the part of the respondents – accused persons
to commit act or attempt to commit murder. In the present
case the prosecution has failed to discharge its duty to prove
its case beyond reasonable doubt and the Trial Court has
rightly acquitted the accused persons by giving benefit of
doubt as the case is not proved beyond reasonable doubt.
10.     In view of above and on our own analysis and re-
appreciation of the evidence, we do not find any infirmity or
compelling reasons to interfere with the order of acquittal
recorded by the trial Court. We have also perused the
judgment and findings given by the trial Court and find that the
same are in accordance with law.
11.     It is a cardinal principle of criminal jurisprudence that in
an acquittal appeal if other view is possible, then also, the
appellate Court cannot substitute its own view by reversing the
acquittal into conviction, unless the findings of the trial Court
are perverse, contrary to the material on record, palpably
wrong, manifestly erroneous or demonstrably unsustainable.
(Ramesh Babulal Doshi V. State of Gujarat (1996) 9 SCC 225).
In the instant case, the learned APP has not been able to point
out to us as to how the findings recorded by the learned trial
Court are perverse, contrary to material on record, palpably
wrong, manifestly erroneous or demonstrably unsustainable.
12.     In the case of Ram Kumar v. State of Haryana, reported
in AIR 1995 SC 280, Supreme Court has held as under:
“The powers of the High Court in an appeal from order of acquittal to
reassess the evidence and reach its own conclusions under Sections
378 and 379, Cr.P.C. are as extensive as in any appeal against the
order of conviction. But as a rule of prudence, it is desirable that the
High Court should give proper weight and consideration to the view of
the Trial Court with regard to the credibility of the witness, the
presumption of innocence in favour of the accused, the right of the
accused to the benefit of any doubt and the slowness of appellate
Court in justifying a finding of fact arrived at by a Judge who had the
advantage of seeing the witness. It is settled law that if the main
grounds on which the lower Court has based its order acquitting the
accused are reasonable and plausible, and the same cannot entirely
and effectively be dislodged or demolished, the High Court should not
disturb the order of acquittal."
13.    As observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Rajesh Singh & Others vs. State of Uttar Pradesh reported in
(2011) 11 SCC 444 and in the case of Bhaiyamiyan Alias Jardar
Khan and Another vs. State of Madhya Pradesh reported in
(2011) 6 SCC 394, while dealing with the judgment of acquittal,
unless reasoning by the learned trial Court is found to be
perverse, the acquittal cannot be upset. It is further observed
that High Court's interference in such appeal in somewhat
circumscribed and if the view taken by the learned trial Court
is possible on the evidence, the High Court should stay its
hands and not interfere in the matter in the belief that if it had
been the trial Court, it might have taken a different view.
14.    In the very recent judgment reported in 2021 (15) SCALE
184 in the case of Mohan @ Srinivas @ Seena @ Tailor Seena
V/s. State of Karnataka, the hon’ble Apex Court has observed
the scope of section 378 of the Code in Para : 20 to 22 as under :-
“20.     Section 378 CrPC enables the State to prefer an appeal against
an order of acquittal. Section 384 CrPC speaks of the powers that can
be exercised by the Appellate Court. When the trial Court renders its
decision by acquitting the accused, presumption of innocence gathers
strength before the Appellate Court. As a consequence, the onus on
the prosecution becomes more burdensome as there is a double
presumption of innocence. Certainly, the court of first instance has its
own advantages in delivering its verdict, which is to see the witnesses
in person while they depose. The Appellate Court is expected to involve
itself in a deeper, studied scrutiny of not only the evidence before it, but
is duty bound to satisfy itself whether the decision of the trial Court is
both possible and plausible view. When two views are possible, the one
taken by the trial court in a case of acquittal is to be followed on the
touchstone of liberty along with the advantage of having seen the
witnesses. Article 21 of the Constitution of India also aids the accused
after acquittal in a certain way, though not absolute. Suffice it is to state
that the Appellate Court shall remind itself of the role required to play,
while dealing with a case of an acquittal.
21.      Every case has its own journey towards the truth and it is the
Court’s role undertake. Truth has to be found on the basis of evidence
available before it. There is no room for subjectivity nor the nature of
offence affects its performance. We have a hierarchy of courts in
dealing with cases. An Appellate Court shall not expect the trial Court to
act in a particular way depending upon the sensitivity of the case.
Rather it should be appreciated if a trial Court decides a case on its
own merits despite its sensitivity.
22.      At times, courts do have their constraints. We find, different
decisions being made by different courts, namely, trial court on the one
hand and the Appellate Courts on the other. If such decisions are made
due to institutional constraints, they do not augur well. The district
judiciary is expected to be the foundational court, and therefore, should
have the freedom of mind to decide a case on its own merit or else it
might become a stereotyped one rendering conviction on a moral
platform. Indictment and condemnation over a decision rendered, on
considering all the materials placed before it, should be avoided. The
Appellate Court is expected to maintain a degree of caution before
making any remark.”
15.      Considering the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the
case and law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court while
considering the scope of appeal under Section 378 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, no case is made out to interfere with the
impugned judgment and order of acquittal.
16.      In view of the above and for the reasons stated above,
present Criminal Misc. Application No.4612 of 2022 for leave to
appeal fails and same deserves to be dismissed and is
accordingly dismissed. In view of dismissal of the application
for leave to appeal, captioned Criminal Appeal No.495 of 2022
also deserves to be dismissed and is accordingly dismissed.