Date of decision: 11th November, 2022
1.      This hearing has been done through hybrid mode.
2.      The present suit has been filed by Plaintiff No.1 - Hamdard National
Foundation (India) and Plaintiff No.2 - Hamdard Dawakhana also trading as
Hamdard Laboratories India against Defendant No.1 - Amazon Seller
Services Pvt. Limited and Defendant No.2 - M/s. Golden Leaf, C/o Amazon
Seller Services Pvt. Limited. The suit relates to the product and mark of the
3.      The case of the Plaintiffs is that Plaintiff Nos.1 & 2 are engaged in the
business of manufacturing and selling various Unani and Ayurvedic
medicines, oils, syrups and non-alcoholic beverages. The Hamdard Group of
the Plaintiffs has a history which dates back to over 100 years when well-
known Unani practitioner ‘Hakeem Hafiz Abdul Majeed’ set up a Unani
clinic under the name ‘Hamdard Dawakhana’. Over the years, the activities
Digitally Signed           CS (COMM) 607/2022                                                          Page 1 of 9
of the Plaintiffs have expanded and they have been involved in research and
development.
4.      The Plaintiffs own rights in the marks ‘HAMDARD’ and ‘ROOH
AFZA’ details of which are mentioned in paragraph no. 11 of the plaint. The
mark ‘ROOH AFZA’ was adopted by the Plaintiffs in 1907 and the said
product is a market leader in its segment. The mark ‘ROOH AFZA’ has
been used by the Plaintiffs for a range of products including non-alcoholic
sharbets and beverages, for which Plaintiff No.2 has obtained the
assignment on 11th August, 1975 from Plaintiff No.1. The mark ROOH
AFZA is registered in India and one of the registrations of the Plaintiffs
dates back to 3rd August, 1942. Other trademarks have also been registered
by the Plaintiffs for variants of ‘ROOH AFZA’, including the labels and
flavour variants etc., The annual sales of the products under the mark
‘ROOH AFZA’ brand are over Rs.200 crores and a substantial amount has
also been incurred by the Plaintiffs in the advertisement and promotion of
the brand.
5.      The grievance of the Plaintiffs in the present case is that Defendant
No.1, runs the e-commerce website www.amazon.in. Defendant No.2, which
claims to have the contact details - C/o Amazon Sellers Service Pvt. Ltd.,
Bengaluru- 560055 (Karnataka), is a seller on the www.amazon.in platform
selling and offering for sale the product ‘ROOH AFZA’ (hereinafter,
‘impugned products’). The said sellers were ‘M/s Royal Sales’ and ‘M/s.
Good Health Enterprises’. Upon these notices having been issued on 4th
September, 2021 and 9th December, 2021, the said listings were removed
from www.amazon.in platform. However, recently another listing by one
Digitally Signed           CS (COMM) 607/2022                                                    Page 2 of 9
‘M/s. Golden Leaf’ was found by the Plaintiffs on the website of Defendant
No.1 and upon clicking on ‘Golden Leaf’, the contact details were shown as
‘C/o Amazon Sellers Services Pvt. Ltd’. The Plaintiffs effected purchases of
the said product on 6th December, 2021 and found to their utter shock and
surprise that the said product was not manufactured by the Plaintiffs. Ld.
counsel for the Plaintiffs submits that the said product is manufactured in
Pakistan and also does not comply with the legal requirements of the Legal
Metrology Act, 2009 (hereinafter referred as “LMA”), the Legal Metrology
(Packaged Commodities) Rules, 2011, and the Food Safety and Standards
Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred as ‘FSSAI’) which governs such products.
6.      On 5th September, 2022, when the suit was listed before this Court,
Mr. Siddharth Chopra, ld. Counsel appearing for Defendant No.1 had
submitted that if the URLs of the infringing listings are furnished to him, the
same shall be taken down. On the said date, complete papers were directed
to be supplied to ld. Counsel for Defendant No.1. The Plaintiffs had also
pointed out that three purchases were effected by them from three sellers
through the Amazon platform and on all three occasions, the product was
claimed to be manufactured by Hamdard Laboratories (Waqf), Pakistan
from Karachi, Pakistan. Copies of the invoices of the said purchases were
also directed to be supplied to Mr. Siddharth Chopra, ld. Counsel for
Defendant No.1. The original bottle purchased from the Amazon was shown
to the Court and accordingly the following directions were issued vide order
dated 5th September 2022 :
“20.       Ld. Counsel for the Plaintiffs has produced
the ‘Hamdard ROOH AFZA’ product bottle which is
stated to be purchased by them through
www.amazon.in platform. A perusal of the physical
Digitally Signed           CS (COMM) 607/2022                                                     Page 3 of 9
products shows that the same is shown to be
manufactured by ‘Hamdard Laboratory (Waqf),
Karachi, Pakistan’. There are no other details of the
manufacturer mentioned on the product apart from just
the name of the manufacturer. No address, email
address or telephone number of the manufacturer is
available at the label of the product. The label on the
bottle produced by the Plaintiffs is as under:
21.        The manufacturing date on the product is
shown as March, 2020 and the expiry date is March,
2022. The Plaintiffs’ case is that this product also
does not comply with the LMA and FSSAI regulations.
It is also not clear as to how these products are being
imported from Pakistan when clearly the Plaintiffs
have statutory rights in the marks in India.
22.        The Court has, during the course of hearing,
also accessed the website www.amazon.in which
reveals that there are various ‘ROOH AFZA’ products
being offered for sale. However, on a cursory browsing
the names of the sellers, their addresses/contact details
are not clear.
23.        Clearly, ‘ROOH AFZA’ is a product which
has been consumed by the Indian public for over a
century now. The same being a drink for human
consumption, the quality standards have to comply
with the applicable regulations prescribed by the
FSSAI and LMA. It is surprising that an imported
product is being sold on www.amazon.in platform
without the complete details of the manufacturer being
Digitally Signed        CS (COMM) 607/2022                                                    Page 4 of 9
disclosed. Moreover, when one clicks on the link ‘Visit
the Hamdard Store’, which is provided next to the
product listing of Defendant No.2, the consumer is
taken to the webpage of ‘Hamdard Laboratories India’
on www.amazon.com, which is of the Plaintiffs. Thus,
any consumer or user on the www.amazon.in platform
is likely to confuse the ‘ROOH AFZA’ product
originating from Hamdard Laboratories (Waqf),
Pakistan as being connected or originating from the
Plaintiffs. Until and unless the consumer actually
receives the product, the consumer has no way of
knowing as to whether the product being sold is that of
the Plaintiffs or not. This can have an adverse impact
on the consumers, inasmuch as the details of the sellers
are not known. Since www.amazon.in claims to be an
intermediary it has an obligation to disclose names of
sellers, their contact details etc., on the product
listings.
24.        Under these circumstances, the Court is
convinced that the Plaintiffs have made out a prima
facie case for grant of an ad-interim injunction. The
balance of convenience lies in the favour of the
Plaintiffs and if an injunction is not granted at this
stage, irreparable injury would be caused to the
Plaintiffs. Mr. Siddharth Chopra, ld. counsel, wishes to
seek instructions. However, considering the nature of
the dispute, urgent interim injunction orders are
required to be passed not only in order to recognize the
Plaintiffs’ rights but also to ensure that the products
not meant for consumption in India are not sold on the
www.amazon.in platform. Accordingly, the following
directions are issued:
(1) The listings of infringing ‘ROOH AFZA’
products on the website www.amazon.in not
originating from the Plaintiffs shall be
removed within 48 hours. If the Plaintiffs
have details of the said URLs, the same shall
be submitted to Mr. Chopra ld. Counsel for
Digitally Signed        CS (COMM) 607/2022                                                    Page 5 of 9
(2) The said company shall also check up as
to who are the sellers who are selling
‘ROOH AFZA’ products on its platform and
if any of the said products are found not to be
originating from the Plaintiffs, their listings
shall be removed immediately.
(3) If any of the product listings show the
products are manufactured or originating
from the Plaintiffs, in such a situation,
www.amazon.in shall give notice to the said
seller to confirm that the same originate from
the Plaintiffs and if so, such listings shall be
retained.
(4) Since Amazon Sellers claims to be an
intermediary      under     the     Information
Technology Act, 2000, it shall file an affidavit
clarifying as to whether the details of the
sellers, including the place of manufacturing
of the products, the complete address of the
sellers, and the contact details, including the
telephone number, email address etc. are
mentioned on the ROOH AFZA product
listings, invoices, product labels etc. If the
same are not available on the product
listings, Amazon Sellers shall clarify as to in
what manner consumers expected to obtain
such details from www.amazon.in platform.
The said affidavit shall be filed within four
weeks.
(5) The ld. Counsel for Amazon Sellers shall
provide the details of the sellers of all the
‘ROOH AFZA’ product listings on its website
to the Plaintiffs, within one week, who may
then take steps in accordance with law for
impleadment etc., if so advised.
(6) The Plaintiffs are permitted to inform
Amazon Sellers of any listings which they may
Digitally Signed        CS (COMM) 607/2022                                                       Page 6 of 9
come across even in the future, in respect of
‘ROOH AFZA’ branded products which are not
manufactured and sold by the Plaintiffs so that
the same can be immediately removed from the
website within 48 hours of the intimation. ”
7.      Pursuant to the aforementioned directions, today it is submitted by the
ld. Counsel for the Plaintiffs that the details of the sellers on the Defendant
No.1’s platform who were selling the impugned products has been disclosed
in the affidavits filed by Amazon. The details of the said sellers as disclosed
in the said affidavits are as under:
S.No. ASIN(s)               Seller details as available with Defendant No.1
Email: internatiolcougar@gmail.com
Address:Shop No. 441 to 446, 2nd Lane, Crawford
Email: chefssneed@gmail.com
Digitally Signed           CS (COMM) 607/2022                                                      Page 7 of 9
Email: abhishek_anand007@yahoo.co.in
Listing / URL           Particulars                    Details as available with
B07QPV5GTF              Name of the person who         Renu Mittal / Golden Leaf
created the listing
Address & contact details of   H. No. 217, Huda, Sector 6,
such person                    Hansi, Haryana -125033
renumittalhns@gmail.com
8.      At this stage, Ld. counsel for the Plaintiffs submits that since all the
details of the sellers have been received and all the infringing listings have
been taken down, the reliefs sought in the present plaint stand satisfied.
9.      Considering the submissions made and the facts recorded above, the
suit shall stand decreed in terms of paragraph 38(a) of the Plaint against
Defendant No.2 as also the sellers mentioned above. The relevant paragraph
of the Plaint is as follows:
“38. In light of the aforesaid, it is humbly prayed
that this Hon’ble court may be pleased to grant the
following reliefs against Defendants:
Digitally Signed           CS (COMM) 607/2022                                                      Page 8 of 9
an order for permanent injunction restraining
the Defendants, their proprietors or partners
or directors as the case may be, their principal
officers, servants, agents and all others acting
for and on behalf of the Defendants from
using, selling and offering for sale the
products under the mark ROOH AFZA which
is identical to the registered trade mark ROOH
AFZA of the Plaintiffs, in any manner and for
any goods and services particularly for
Syrups/Sherbets products, so as to cause
confusion or deception leading to infringement
10.    Insofar as Defendant No.1 is concerned, in case any other listings
infringing the Plaintiffs’ mark ‘ROOHAFZA’ are found by the Plaintiffs, the
same shall be brought to the notice of the Defendant No.1 and the same shall
be taken down in accordance with the Information Technology
(Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules, 2021 as
amended in 2022. Ld. Counsel for Defendant No.1 shall also be notified of
the same in order to ensure compliance.
11.    No further reliefs are pressed in the suit.
12.    Decree sheet be drawn in the above terms.
13.    All pending applications are disposed of.
Digitally Signed          CS (COMM) 607/2022                                                     Page 9 of 9