2.           The present petition challenges the final report/charge-
sheet No.278 of 2017, for the offence under Section 304 read with
Section 34 of IPC, filed by the Police Inspector, Police Station Gadge
Nagar, Amravati, in which the present petitioner has been made an
accused. The F.I.R. leading to the charge-sheet was lodged on the
report of the Civil Surgeon, General Hospital, Amravati, on the
allegation that between the night of 28/5/2017 and early morning
of 29/5/2017, between 10:30 p.m. to 3:50 a.m. (3:50 a.m. of
29/5/2017 as per the post mortem report), there occurred
unfortunate demise of four babies, who were admitted in the
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (hereinafter referred to as “the
NICU”), Department of Paediatrics at Dr. Punjabrao Deshmukh
Medical College, Amravati, due to wrong administration of an
injection by the nursing staff on duty, namely, sister Vidya Thorat,
who administered the drug “Potassium Chloride” instead of injection
“Calcium Gluconate”, as prescribed. The complaint also named the
present petitioner, who was occupying the post of Junior Resident
Doctor at the relevant time and was stated to be absent and was
arrayed as an accused on the ground that he had not taken proper
care, due to which the unfortunate incident happened.
3.            Mr. Anil Mardikar, learned Senior Counsel, for the
petitioner, submits, that filing of the F.I.R. as well as the charge-
sheet against the petitioner under Section 304 read with Section 34
of I.P.C. is clearly not justified on the face of it. He submits that it
was an admitted position that the petitioner though on duty, was not
present at the time of administration of the injection, and was
somewhere else at the relevant time. That what was prescribed was
the injection “Calcium Gluconate” to be administered to the babies,
instead of which, what was administered was the injection
“Potassium Chloride” (Kesol). He submits that the injection
“Potassium Chloride” (Kesol) was never prescribed by the petitioner,
as would be indicated from the clinical notes on record at page 211
and onwards. He invites our attention to the admission given by the
staff nurse, who was on duty at that time, namely, Vidya Bhanudas
Thorat, who had admitted her mistake in administering the injection
“Potassium Chloride” (Kesol) instead of “Calcium Gluconate”, which
is on record at page 57. He further invites our attention to the
report of the fact finding Committee constituted for this purpose,
dated 31/5/2017, which also found that death of the four newborns
was possible by injection Kesol (Potassium Chloride) 2 CC IV, which
is corroborated by the post mortem finding. He further invites our
attention to the CCTV footage visualization panchanama dated
30/5/2017, to submit that the admission as given by the on-duty
staff nurse is borne out therefrom. He, therefore, submits a perusal
of the entire charge-sheet and the material along with it as placed
on record, would indicate, that no case is made out against the
petitioner under Section 304 of I.P.C. The learned Counsel invites
our attention to the definition of “culpable homicide: as contained in
Section 299 and the Exceptions – 1 to 3 of Section 300 of the IPC
and submits, that the ingredients necessary for invoking the said
section are not made out against the petitioner. He submits that
there was no intention, or knowledge on part of the petitioner as is
necessary to attract Section 299 of I.P.C. and, therefore, no offence,
even if the entire charge-sheet is taken to be proved, can be made
out against the petitioner. He submits that, at the most, a
departmental action can be taken for his absence in the NICU at the
particular time on the given day; but in any case, the petitioner
cannot be charged with the offence under Section 304 of I.P.C.
Ghodeswar for the respondent no.1 supports the prosecution and
opposes the prayer. As we were not satisfied with the reply of the
State in this matter, therefore, by an order dated 1/12/2020, we had
directed the filing of a proper reply, which was reiterated in the
order dated 8/1/2021, in pursuance to which, additional reply has
been filed on record on 20/1/2021.
5.            Mr. S.M. Ghodeswar, learned A.P.P. submits that there is
no dispute that the petitioner was duty officer in the NICU, in which
capacity, it was the duty of the petitioner, to ensure that proper
drugs were administered, in which he submits the petitioner failed.
Learned A.P.P. further invites our attention to the report of the
Committee, dated 31/5/2017, which recommended the action
against the petitioner. He submits that the entire record of the
charge-sheet indicates a criminal negligence on part of the petitioner
and, therefore, he is being correctly prosecuted for the offence
punishable under Section 304 of I.P.C. He, thus, submits that the
petition is clearly misconceived and is liable to be dismissed.
6.             With the help of learned Senior Counsel Mr. Anil
Mardikar and Mr. S.M. Ghodeswar, learned A.P.P, we have gone
through the charge-sheet as placed on record.
7.             It is not disputed that, on the fateful day, the petitioner
though on duty as a Junior Resident Doctor, was not present in the
NICU at around 10:30 p.m. It is also not disputed that it is the staff
nurse Vidya Bhanudas Thorat, who had administered the injection
Kesol (Potassium Chloride) (IV), which resulted in the fatality of the
four newborns. A perusal of the OPD case papers and the continuing
sheets dated 28/5/2017 (page 214) points out that what was
prescribed to be administered was an injection of “Calcium
Gluconate”, as is indicated from the entry dated 28/5/2017. The
reply of the respondent no.1 does not dispute this position. The
reply at page 299 categorically states that Dr. Kaustubh Deshmukh
and Dr. Rushikesh Ghatol had prescribed the “Calcium Gluconate”
injection. It is, thus, clear that the petitioner was not the person who
had prescribed the injection “Calcium Gluconate”, which is to be
administered muscularly. It is further apparent from the reply that
the injection “Potassium Chloride” is not administered muscularly,
i.e., through an injection, but through IV saline after diluting it not
less than 50 times its volume with Sodium Chloride Intravenous
Infusion (0.9% w/v). It is further an admitted position that
“Potassium Chloride” is an emergency drug injection and is kept in
the emergency kit, whose custody is with the in-charge sister of the
NICU. The procedure, as stated in the reply for receiving drugs, was
that the drug was prescribed by the on-duty doctor, after which, the
on-duty nurses used to give the medicines as per the prescription
after taking entry in the general order book, which injections were
to be given under the observation of on-duty doctor of the NICU. In
the instant matter, on a query being made as to how did the
injection “Potassium Chloride” came to be taken out, the position is
clarified by letter dated 16/7/2017 (Annexure – R-5) by the Head of
Paediatric Department, Dr. Punjabrao Deshmukh Hospital and
Research Centre, Amravati, which states that, in the NICU, the
injections “Potassium Chloride” were kept for patients admitted on
an earlier point of time and the one used by the nurse Vidya Thorat,
was a leftover injection. It is further stated therein that the leftover
injections are to be used in the event of emergency. The above
position would, therefore, indicate that the petitioner had no role to
play in the entire matter, either of prescribing the drug, storing the
same or of administering the same.
8.           A    perusal   of   the   CCTV     footage    visualization
panchanama dated 30/5/2017 (record page 133) indicates that, on
28/5/2017, between 8:00 p.m. to 9:30 p.m., in the night, a lady
doctor had checked the newborn babies. At 9:38 p.m., the doctor
and nurse were looking over the newborn babies and nurse Vidya
Thorat was seen filling up the syringe from the medicine bottle and
thereafter, administering the injection to the newborns. From 9:42
to 9:46 p.m., the CCTV footage shows the nurses taking care of the
newborns. The CCTV footage further shows, the petitioner, coming
to the NICU at 11:47 p.m. of 29/5/2017, and having checked the
newborns. There was some commotion noticed between the doctors
and nurses at that time.
9.           It is the statement of the present petitioner that ,on
28/5/2017, when he was present in the ward during night time,
around 10:30 p.m., the duty nurse came to him in the ward and
informed    about    deteriorating   conditions   of   the   newborns,
whereupon he reached immediately in the NICU and started
resuscitation, however, the condition deteriorated. His co-junior
resident also came and started resuscitation of the other newborn.
The seniors were informed. At around 12:00 noon, he got a call
from the Gynaecology ward for an LSCS, due to which he was
required to go there.
10.          What is further material to note is that the injection
“Calcium Gluconate” is required to be administered muscularly by
an injection, as against which, the injection “Potassium Chloride”is
to be administered Intravenously, after diluting it in the proportion
as stated above. The nurse on duty, namely Vidya Bhushan Thorat,
however, appears to have directly administered the injection
“Potassium Chloride” muscularly, which was the cause of the
untimely and unfortunate demise of the newborns.
11.          An enquiry initiated by constitution of an enquiry
Committee headed by the Professor and Head of Department of
FMI, G.M.C, Akola, upon the orders of the Directorate of Medical
Education and Research (DMER), comprising of four doctors, all
from G.M.C, Akola, gave its report on 31/5/2017. The conclusion is
rendered by the Committee in its report dated 31/5/2017. It is
worthwhile to note that the Committee observed that, although
Doctors should be available for 24 hours in the NICU, still the
petitioner, who was an on-duty doctor, was absent at the time of the
incident. The Committee further found that the four newborn babies
that succumbed in the incidents had been prescribed injection
“Calcium Gluconate” and three other newborns who were not
affected were not on injection “Calcium Gluconate” (Kesol). In view
of the fact that the petitioner, being an on-duty Junior Resident
Doctor, was not present in the NICU at the fateful time, the
Committee recommended action against the petitioner also, as a
result of which, the F.I.R, was lodged, which included the name of
the petitioner.
12.          Now if we consider the offence registered against the
petitioner and others vide Crime No.346 of 2017 at Police Station,
Gadge Nagar, Amravati, we would find that even though the
petitioner was not present in the NICU at the relevant time, an
offence punishable under Section 304 r/w. 34 of I.P.C. has been
registered against him. In fact, the crime so registered in the matter
does not reveal incorporation of any other offence, except for the
one under Section 304 of the I.P.C., as provided in the Indian Penal
Code. The offence punishable under Section 304 of the I.P.C. is an
offence of culpable homicide not amounting to murder and so, if we
are to examine the correctness or otherwise of registering this
offence against the petitioner, we have to make a beginning with
what is considered as culpable homicide in the Indian Penal Code.
It is defined in Section 299 of the Indian Penal Code and it reads
Section 299 of the I.P.C. defines culpable homicide as under :-
“299. Culpable homicide. - Whoever causes death by
doing an act with the intention of causing death, or with
the intention of causing such bodily injury as is likely to
cause death, or with the knowledge that he is likely by
such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable
homicide.
Explanation 1. - A person who causes bodily injury to
another who is labouring under a disorder, disease or
bodily infirmity, and thereby accelerates the death of
that other, shall be deemed to have caused his death.
Explanation 2. - Where death is caused by bodily injury,
the person who causes such bodily injury shall be
deemed to have caused the death, although by resorting
to proper remedies and skilful treatment the death
might have been prevented.
Explanation 3. - The causing of the death of child in the
mother's womb is not homicide. But it may amount to
culpable homicide to cause the death of a living child, if
any part of that child has been brought forth, though the
child may not have breathed or been completely born.”
13.          A bare perusal of the above referred definition would
indicate that heart of an offence of causing death lies in doing an act
intentionally or with knowledge. If the act done is coupled with
intention, the intention must be of either causing death or causing
such bodily injury as is likely to cause death. But, if the facts and
circumstances of a given case show that the act has been done with
the knowledge then the knowledge must be of the character and
degree that the person doing the act knows that by such an act, he is
likely to cause death. Thus, the culpable homicide would require
doing of an act either with the intention or the knowledge as
elaborated just now.      Since possession of the knowledge of the
nature explained in Section 299 of the I.P.C. can also lead to
constituting the act of culpable homicide, in a given case, even an
omission to do an act, which if done would prevent the death,
would amount to culpable homicide, if the omission of such nature
leads to death. The concept could be explained further, but, in the
context of the factual setting here, it is not required and therefore,
we would avoid it to restrict the length of the Judgment. But, at the
cost of repetition, we would say that the proposition that we are
putting forward here is that, for something to be regarded as
culpable homicide as contemplated under Section 299 of the Indian
Penal Code, there must be an act or omission coupled with the
intention or knowledge as contemplated in Section 299 of the I.P.C.
on the part of the person and if there is no such act or omission,
there would be no offence of culpable homicide.          If there is no
offence of culpable homicide, further questions as to whether it
amounts to murder as defined under Section 300 or it does not
amount to murder as envisaged in Section 304 of the I.P.C. would
not arise.
14.          In the present case, as could be seen from the facts
discussed earlier that, at the relevant time, the petitioner was not at
all present in the NICU and so, there is no question of the petitioner
doing any act with the requisite intention or knowledge.          There
would also not be any question of the petitioner omitting to do any
act with such intention or knowledge as is required under Section
299 of the I.P.C., unless, ofcourse, the facts and circumstances had
shown that the petitioner had deliberately avoided his presence in
the NICU with the intention that death of the infants had thereby
been facilitated or with the knowledge that such death had likely to
be facilitated. In this case, there is neither any allegation made
against the petitioner on these lines nor is there present any
material collected during the course of investigation, from which
such an inference in a prima facie manner could be drawn.
15.          All that is alleged in the present case is that though the
petitioner was on duty, he was not physically present in the NICU at
the fateful moment. No material has been placed before us that
whenever an injection has to be administered, it must be done
under the supervision of the doctor on duty at the NICU. There is
no allegation made against the petitioner that the nurse who
administered the fatal doses of injection to the infants, had informed
the petitioner that she was going to administer the injections and
had requested the petitioner to remain personally present near the
beds of the infants so that administration of those doses could be
monitored by the petitioner, but the petitioner refused to pay heed
to such request. In fact, we must put it on record here that in spite
of our repeated requests to the Investigating Officer to place before
us the rules or regulations or Standard Operating Procedure or
protocol, if any,    regarding the procedure to be adopted for
administration of injections to the infants admitted in the ICU with a
view to know about the nature of duty of the doctor in the NICU as
regards administration of injections by the staff nurses, nothing was
placed before us. This must have been owing to the fact that no
such protocol or S.O.P. exists and that personal supervision and
monitoring by a doctor may not have been envisaged in any rule or
S.O.P. where trained nurses are employed, they              having the
competence and authority to administer injections without the
supervision of any doctor. It then follows that this is a case wherein
apart from absence of any blameworthy act, there being no act
whatsoever done by the petitioner, there is also missing the element
of culpable omission on the part of the petitioner, there being no
duty in him to personally monitor the administration of injection by
a trained nurse which absence of duty led to no breach of duty by
the petitioner.  This would enable us to hold that on the three
parameters of Jacob Mathews vs. State of Punjab and another, 2005
ALL MR (Cri) 2567 (SC) namely : (i) duty to take care, (ii) breach
of duty and (iii) consequential damage, this case fails to attract any
criminal offence, much less offence of culpable homicide not
amounting to murder. We make it clear here that in recording such a
finding, we have only considered the criminal dimension of the case
insofar as it relates to the petitioner and we have not dealt with civil
dimension of the case involving such issues as of damages, civil
liability, departmental action and so on, in any manner.
16.           It is, thus, apparent that there is absolutely no material
available on record showing, prima facie, that offence of culpable
homicide not amounting to murder punishable under Section 304 of
I.P.C. is constituted against the present petitioner. Continuation of
these proceedings against the present petitioner, in the present
circumstances, would clearly be an abuse of process of law, which
cannot be permitted.
17.           We are mindful of the guidelines laid down in State of
Haryana and others Vs. Bhajan Lal and others, 1992 Supp (1) SCC
335, in para 102 thereof relating to quashing of F.I.R. In the instant
case, considering the allegations as leveled against the petitioner, of
his absence in the NICU at the relevant time, would, even if
everything as mentioned in the charge-sheet was presumed to be
true, at the most, may lay a blame of dereliction of duty at his
doorstep, for which Departmental action can always be taken by the
authorities, as has been reported to have been done in the case of
Dr. Nistane, Professor and Head of Department of Paediatrics, who
was absent without sanctioned leave on the fateful day. The material
in the charge-sheet is certainly not indicative of the petitioner
having prima facie committed an offence under Section 304 of I.P.C.
We are, thus, of the view that continuation of the proceedings
against the petitioner would clearly be an abuse of the process of
law, which would always be unsustainable in law.
18.           The petition is, therefore, liable to be allowed. In the
circumstances, the charge-sheet No.278/2017 for the offence under
Section 304 read with Section 34 of IPC as against the present
petitioner is quashed and set aside. The writ petition is allowed and
disposed of accordingly.
Rule is made absolute in the aforesaid terms.