The present petitioner, as a complainant had filed a
complaint     under Section 200 of the code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter for brevity referred to as “the
Cr.P.C.”)   in   C.C.No.25334/2010,        against   the   present
respondents, arraigning them as accused No.1 and accused
No.2 respectively in the Court of the XIII Additional Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate, Bangalore (hereinafter for brevity
referred to as “the Trial Court”) for the offence punishable
under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881
(hereinafter for brevity referred to as “the N.I. Act”).
2. After holding a trial and recording the evidence led
by both side, the learned Magistrate of the Trial Court, by
her judgment of conviction and order on sentence dated
01-02-2013 convicted the accused No.1 and accused No.2
before her for the offence punishable under Section 138 of
the N.I. Act and sentenced the accused No.2 to pay a fine of
`66,49,881/- and in default of the payment of the said fine
amount, to undergo simple imprisonment for a period of
one year.
Aggrieved by the same, the accused No.1 and accused
No.2   in   the   Trial  Court   preferred   Criminal     Appeal
No.103/2013, in the Court of the LII Additional City Civil
for brevity referred to as “the Sessions Judge’s Court”)
which Court, by its judgment      dated 02-09-2013, allowed
the appeal, setting aside the impugned judgment passed by
the Trial Court and remanded the matter to the Trial Court
ordering for a de-novo trial.
Aggrieved by the same, the complainant in the Trial
Court has preferred this criminal revision petition.
3.   The respondents No.1 and 2 herein, who are
accused No.1 and accused No.2 in the Trial Court are
represented by their learned counsel.
4.  The Trial Court and the Sessions Judge's Court’s
records were called for and the same are placed before this
5.    Learned   counsel   for  the  revision    petitioner
(complainant) and the learned counsel for the respondents
No.1 and 2 (accused Nos.1 and 2) are physically appearing
in the Court.
6.   Heard the learned counsels from both side.
Perused the materials placed before this Court including the
memorandum of revision petition, impugned judgments, the
Trial Court records and also the Sessions Judge's Court’s
7. For the sake of convenience, the parties would be
henceforth referred to as per their rankings before the Trial
8. After hearing the learned counsels for the parties,
the only point that arise for my consideration in this revision
Whether the impugned judgment passed by the
Court of the LII Additional City Civil and Sessions
Judge,      Bangalore      City     (CCH-53)       dated
02-09-2013 in Criminal Appeal No.103/2013, warrants
any interference at the hands of this Court?
9.    Learned counsel for the complainant (revision
petitioner) in his argument submitted that, though Section
143 of the N.I. Act prescribes the proceedings for the
alleged offences to be tried as a summary trial, however,
the matter in the Trial Court was tried as a regular trial. For
the same, the Magistrate of the Trial Court has also
assigned reasons in her impugned judgment.          That being
the case, the Sessions Judge’s Court was not justified in
remanding     the   matter   to   the  Trial   Court   ordering
for a de-novo trial.
In his support, he relied upon a judgment of the
Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of J.V. BAHARUNI & ANR.
Vs. STATE OF GUJARAT & ANR. reported in (2014) 10
With this, the learned counsel submitted that the
impugned judgment passed by the Sessions Judge’s Court
be set aside and the matter be remanded to the Sessions
Judge's Court for its disposal on the merits of the case.
10.    Learned counsel for the accused No.1 and
accused No.2 (respondents No.1 and 2 in the Trial Court)
also in her brief argument submitted that, since the
Sessions Judge's Court has not decided the matter on its
merit, the same deserves to be remanded.
11. As per Section 143 of the N.I. Act, the nature of
the proceedings for the trial for the offence punishable
under Section 138 of the N.I. Act is summary in nature.
However, the very same Section also enables the Magistrate
when it appears to him that the nature of the case is such
that, a sentence of imprisonment for a term exceeding one
year may have to be passed or that it is, for any other
reason, undesirable to try the case summarily, after hearing
the parties,  to record an order to that effect and thereafter
recall any witness who may have been examined and
proceed to hear or re-hear the case in the manner provided
by the Criminal Procedure Code.         Thus, it enables the
Magistrate to try the case as a summons case.
12.    The Sessions Judge’s Court, accepting the
contention of the appellants before it (accused No.1 and
accused No.2) that the Magistrate of the Trial Court ought
not to have relied upon the evidence recorded by her
predecessor and should have held a de-novo trial, referring
to a judgment of the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of
Nitinbhai Saevatilal Shah and Anr. Vs. Manubhai Manjibhai
Panchal and Anr., reported in AIR 2011 SUPREME COURT
3076 and relying upon an order of a co-ordinate bench of
this Court in the case of Shashidar Vs. Bhimarao in
Criminal Revision Petition 2628/2010 disposed of on the
date 18-02-2013 and further observing that there is no
specific order as contemplated under Section 143 of the N.I.
Act to try a summary case as a summons case, proceeded
to set aside the impugned judgment of conviction passed by
the Trial Court and remanded to the Trial Court for a de-
novo trial in the matter.
13.    The Hon’ble Apex Court in Nitinbhai's case
(supra), wherein matter involved was an offence punishable
under     Section    138    of   the    N.I.     Act,    while
analysing the nature of the trial and the scope of Section
326(3) of the Cr.P.C., was pleased to observe that, the
mandatory language in which Section 326(3) of the Code is
couched, leaves no manner of     doubt that when a case is
tried as a summary case, a Magistrate,    who succeeds the
Magistrate who had recorded the part or whole of the
evidence, cannot act on the evidence so recorded by his/her
predecessor. In summary proceedings, the successor Judge
or a Magistrate has no authority to proceed with the trial
from a stage at which his/her predecessor has left it. The
reason why the provisions of sub-sections (1) and (2) of
Section 326 of the Code have not been made applicable to
summary trials is that, in summary           trials, only the
substance of evidence has to be recorded and the Court
does not record the entire     statement of the witnesses.
Therefore, the Judge or the Magistrate, who has recorded
such substance of evidence is in a position to appreciate the
evidence led before him and the successor Judge or
Magistrate cannot appreciate the evidence only on the basis
of evidence recorded by his predecessor.
14.  The Hon’ble Apex Court in BAHARUNI's case
(supra) observed that, in Nitinbhai Saevatilal Shah's case
(supra), the matter was tried purely as a summary trial, as
such, the Court proceeded to observe that a successor
Magistrate cannot rely upon the summary of the evidence
recorded by his predecessor.       Further, the Hon’ble Apex
Court made a distinction      between a summary trial and a
regular trial and observed that, wherein a case that may be
tried   summarily,   if  the   Court   records    the   evidence
elaborately and in verbatim and gives the opponent full
scope to cross-examine, then the procedure adopted is
indicative that it is not summary procedure. It further
observed that, before arriving at any conclusion with regard
to the nature of the trial, there should be proper application
of judicial mind and evidence on record must be thoroughly
perused. Thus, when the case in substance is not tried in
the summary, where though triable summarily and is tried
as a regular summons case, the successor Magistrate need
not hear the case de novo and can act on evidence recorded
by his predecessor to decide the case.
15.     The Hon’ble Apex Court, to ensure speedy
disposal of the cheque dishonor cases, issued several
directions   in  BAHARUNI's     case   (supra),    wherein   the
direction Nos.2, 5 and 6 read as bellow:
"2. The learned Magistrate has the discretion
under Section 143 of the N.I. Act either to follow a
summary trial or summons trial.                 In case the
Magistrate wants to conduct a summons trial, he
should record the reasons after hearing the parties
and proceed with the trial in the manner provided
under the second proviso to Section 143 of the N.I.
Act. Such reasons should necessarily be recorded by
the Trial Court so that further litigation arraigning the
mode of trial can be avoided.
5.    Remitting the matter for de novo trial
should be exercised as a last resort and should be
used sparingly when there is grave miscarriage of
justice   in   the   light    of   illegality,    irregularity,
incompetence or any other defect which cannot be
cured at an appellate stage.           The appellate Court
should be very cautious and exercise the discretion
judiciously while remanding the matter for de novo
6.     While examining the nature           of the trial
conducted by the Trial Court for the purpose of
determining     whether    it    was    summary       trial  or
summons trial, the primary and predominant test to
be adopted by the appellate Court should be whether
it was only the substance of the evidence that was
recorded or whether the complete record of the
deposition of the witness in their chief examination,
cross-examination and re-examination in verbatim
was faithfully placed on record. The appellate Court
has to go through each and every minute detail of
the Trial Court record and then examine the same
independently and thoroughly to reach at a just and
reasonable conclusion."
16. In the instant case, the accused in the Trial Court
itself, had taken a contention that         a de novo trial is
required to be conducted by the Magistrate.           A memo to
that effect was also filed by them.       The complainant had
filed his detailed objection to the said memo.               After
recording the filing of such a memo and objection to the
memo, the Magistrate of the Trial Court in her impugned
judgment has made a detailed discussion on the contention
taken up by         the accused and      has made a       specific
observation that the predecessor Magistrate had recorded
the entire memorandum of evidence of witnesses and not
the substance of evidence as required under the summary
The predecessor Magistrate had not recorded only the
substance of evidence.     The predecessor Magistrate might
have decided to try the case as a warrant case. Therefore,
the Magistrate of the Trial Court adopted the procedure
which has to be adopted in a warrant trial while recording
his evidence. She recorded the memorandum of evidence
given by the witness in full and given sufficient opportunity
to the opponent party to cross-examine the witness fully
and thoroughly and has recorded the evidence in its entirety
as given by the parties.
With the above observation, the Magistrate of the Trial
Court proceeded to decide the case on its merit.
However, the Sessions Judge's Court only on the point
that the Magistrate, before proceeding to record the
evidence as in summons case or a warrant case, had not
recorded her reason in writing, had set aside the impugned
judgment passed by the Trial Court and remanded the
matter to the Trial Court for a de novo trial.
In that regard, the Sessions Judge’s Court, though
claims to have kept in     mind the judgment of the Hon’ble
Apex Court in Nitinbhai Saevatilal Shah's case (supra), but
referred to an order passed by a co-ordinate bench of this
Court in Shashidar's case (supra), however, it failed to
notice that, as on the date of passing of the order in
Shashidar's case (supra), the judgment of the Hon’ble
Apex    Court   in   BAHARUNI's     case   (supra)     was    not
pronounced.        As  such,   the  principle    laid  down    in
BAHARUNI's case (supra) was not available before the
Court, while passing its order in Shashidar's case (supra).
Further it appears that, Nitinbhai Saevatilal Shah's case
(supra), the reference about which was made in the order
by a co-ordinate Bench of this Court, had clearly observed
that, the procedure followed by the Magistrate in recording
the evidence was purely as in a summary trial.
However, the learned Sessions Judge's Court failed to
notice that, in the instant case, the evidence recorded was
as in a regular trial but not as in a summary trial.      In that
regard, a detailed observation has also been made by the
Magistrate of the Trial Court in the impugned judgment
17. A careful perusal of the evidence recorded by the
Trial Court would also go to show that, the evidence
recorded was in full and in verbatim as stated by the
witness but not only the summary of the evidence given by
the parties.   As observed by the Hon’ble Apex Court in
BAHARUNI's case (supra), remitting the matter for a de-
novo trial should be exercised as a last resort and should be
used sparingly when there is grave miscarriage of justice in
the light of    illegality, irregularity, incompetence or any
other defect which cannot be cured at an appellate stage.
The Appellate Court (Sessions Judge's Court in the instant
case) should be very cautious and exercise the discretion
judiciously while remanding the matter for a de-novo trial.
18.   However, in the instant case, though the
Magistrate of the Trial Court has demonstrated through her
judgment that, the evidence recorded was not in a
summary manner but as though it was a warrant case, the
evidence of the parties in its entirety and as given by them
were recorded but not its summary and that the other side
was given sufficient opportunity to cross-examine the
witness, cannot be ignored. In such a circumstance, when
the evidence of the parties, in the chief examination, cross-
examination and re-examination (if any) were recorded in
verbatim and was faithfully placed on record then for
merely not recording the order observing that the matter
would be tried as a summons case or as a regular trial
would not itself vitiate the trial conducted by the Magistrate
of the Trial Court, when it has not resulted in miscarriage of
justice.  Therefore, the judgment passed by the Sessions
Judge’s Court only on technicalities and setting aside the
impugned judgment passed by the Trial Court and ordering
for a de-novo trial would not sustain. The Sessions Judge's
Court ought to have decided the appeal before it on its
merit, as such, the revision under consideration deserves to
be allowed and the matter requires to be remanded to the
Sessions Judge’s Court for its fresh disposal, in accordance
with law.
Accordingly, I proceed to pass the following:
[i]    The   Criminal    Revision    Petition   is
[ii]   The    impugned      judgment        dated
02-09-2013 passed by the Court of               the LII
Additional    City   Civil   and   Sessions      Judge,
Bangalore City (CCH-53), in Criminal Appeal
No.103/2013, is set aside;
[iii] The matter stands remanded          to the
Court of the LII Additional City Civil and Sessions
Judge, Bangalore City (CCH-53),              for fresh
disposal of the Criminal Appeal No.103/2013 on
its merits and in accordance with law;
[iv]   Considering the age of the petition,
which has arisen from a criminal case of the year
2010 and in order to avoid any further delay in
the matter, both parties are directed to appear
before the Court of  the LII Additional City Civil
and Sessions Judge, Bangalore City (CCH-53),
where the Criminal Appeal No.103/2013 earlier
came to be allowed, without anticipating any
fresh notice or summons from it, on 09-01-2023
at 11:00 a.m., and participate in the further
proceedings of the matter;
[v]  The early disposal of the matter by
the Court of the LII Additional City Civil and
Sessions Judge at Bangalore City (CCH-53), is
highly appreciated.
Registry to transmit a copy of this order to both the
Trial Court as well the Sessions Judge's Court along with
their respective records immediately.