… For the petitioner in WPA 9184 of 2020
… For the petitioner in WPA 9209 of 2020
These two matters, filed in public interest, pertain
to the upcoming celebrations. In the second of the matters,
prayers have been made pertaining to Kali Puja right upto
There is an application by an unregistered body
that can be loosely called the local firecrackers’ association.
It is a body of persons engaged in the manufacture of or
trading in firecrackers.
The State has issued verbal advisories pertaining to
firecrackers during the Kali Puja and Diwali celebrations.
Certain guidelines have been framed regarding Kali Puja
pandals. An appeal appears to have been made on behalf of
the State for all kinds of firecrackers not to be used this
year in view of the pandemic and the virus that attacks the
respiratory system. It is evident that there has been an
endeavour on the part of the State to protect the air quality
so that the respiratory problems that arise as a result of
the infection are not aggravated because of the noxious
fumes brought about by the use of firecrackers.
For a start, the State Government and the State
police need to be commended for the admirable conduct of
the Durga Puja, despite the late directions issued by the
Court. By and large – there were some ugly exceptions –
the Durga Puja celebrations all over the State, including in
the city, were in accordance with the directions issued by
the Court and both the police and the administration made
serious attempts to ensure that the Covid protocol was
maintained and hygiene was not compromised. Indeed, the
usual crowding at puja pandals during the Durga Puja
was, more or less, absent.
Whether as a result of the measures taken or
otherwise, there does not appear to have been a spike in
Covid cases, till at least a week after Durga Puja. It is,
thus, hoped that if similar directions are issued for the
conduct of Kali Puja next week, it may enure to the benefit
of the citizens of the State.
The State submits that the matter pertaining to
firecrackers is pending before the National Green Tribunal
and orders have been reserved. The State suggests that in
the light of such specialised body having taken up the
matter pertaining to firecrackers all over the country, such
aspect may be left to the Tribunal and not gone into in the
present proceedings. As far as puja pandals are concerned,
the State says that it has required all four sides of pandals
to be left open by the Kali Puja organisers and, in such a
scenario, the strict directions as issued in respect of the
Durga Puja may not be necessary.
Since    the   present  matters    cover   even   the
Jagadhatri Puja and Kartick Puja and the Chhat Puja
celebrations, the State says that the directions to be issued
now may be confined to Kali Puja and the matters
pertaining to Kali Puja pandals since there is sufficient
time available before Jagadhatri Puja and even Chhat Puja.
As far as Chhat Puja is concerned, the State says that an
order of the NGT pertaining to Rabindra Sarobar has been
challenged in Supreme Court. As to how processions
should be allowed for Chhat Puja celebrations, the State
seeks time to indicate its stand.
Matters pertaining to Chhat Puja are, thus, kept for
consideration on November 10, 2020.
In addition to the Kali Puja, Jagadhatri Puja and
Kartick    Puja   pandals,   the  petitioners refer to  the
congregations on the day of Kali Puja at temples all over
the State. The petitioners seek appropriate directions for
the maintenance of Covid protocol in temples and for
crowding not to be allowed within close spaces.
It appears from the notifications issued from time
to time by the Central Government that relaxations have
been made for open air congregations, though the wearing
of face-masks or the use of face-shields has been made
mandatory. Stricter protocols are required for gatherings
As far as Kali Puja, Jagadhatri Puja and Kartick
Puja pandals are concerned, the same directions as issued
for Durga Puja would apply. However, since public Kali
pujas are many more than Durga pujas and some of the
pandals are much smaller, the guidelines issued for Durga
Puja pandals are somewhat modified:-
(i)     All pandals will continue to be No-Entry
Zones, including an area of five-metre beyond the
pandals on all the open sides. Only dhakis will be
permitted to occupy the space beyond the pandals
and within the five-metre zone thereafter. Except for
dhakis,   the   five-metre  zone  has   to  be  kept
completely free at all times.
(ii)   For the smaller pandals, where the covered
area excluding the dais is upto 150 square metre,
only 10 persons may be in such covered area at any
given point of time. For pandals with a covered area
between 150 square metre and 300 square metre
excluding the dais, the number of persons at any
point of time may be 15. For bigger pandals, in
excess of 300 square metre in area excluding the
dais, a maximum of 45 persons can be within the
pandals at any given point of time.
(iii)  Sanitisers must be available at the puja
pandals and wearing of masks will be mandatory
within and around the pandal area. The distancing
norm has to be maintained at all times both within
the pandals and in an around the pandals.
(iv)   Immersions should be low-key affairs and
processions for such purpose will not be permitted.
The use of bands and lights at the time of
immersion will also remain prohibited. It will be
open to the local police to provide for staggered
timings so that the immersion ghats are not
overcrowded.
As    far  as    the   firecrackers    are  concerned,
notwithstanding the pendency of the matter before the
NGT, in view of the appeal issued by the State and the
unique problem brought about by the pandemic, the State
should ensure that there is no use or display or bursting of
firecrackers at all during the Kali Puja and Diwali
celebrations. For this purpose, only wax or oil-based diyas
would have to suffice, for the greater good of the citizens
and in the larger public interest. This direction as to
firecrackers will be effective all over the State and will cover
not only the Kali Puja and Diwali celebrations, but also the
Chhat Puja, Jagadhatri Puja and Guru Nanak’s birthday
celebrations thereafter.
The police should maintain a strict vigil to ensure
that there is no sale or purchase of firecrackers of any form
in the State between now and the end of the month. The
police should make every effort to confiscate firecrackers
and any kind of like material which have the potential to
pollute the air. Immediate appropriate measures must be
taken by the police against those seeking to act in
contravention of these directions. The State will ensure
that no firecrackers of any kind are brought into the State,
except for immediate transit to another State.
The compendious word “firecrackers” is used in
this order to include all types of sparklers and the like,
whether or not the use or burning thereof involves any
sound or light being generated.
The local administration in Hooghly, particularly at
Chandannagar, should ensure that these directions are
made known to the Jagadhatri Puja organisers well in
advance so that appropriate steps can be taken. Similarly,
in those pockets where Kartick Puja is held in a big way,
the local administration should take appropriate steps well
in advance. In Uttarpara, Barasat and other areas where
Kali Puja is held in a big way, the local police and
administration     should  make     the    citizens   and  the
organisers of public pujas aware of these directions
As far as the application by the firecrackers’
association is concerned, it will be for the State to consider
whether appropriate compensation or other measures can
be taken. For the greater good, a small number of persons
involved in the firecracker business may have to suffer
losses.  The    overwhelming   public    interest   cannot  be
As far as the temples in the State are concerned,
the local police should ensure that Covid protocol is
maintained, including the distancing norms. The local
administration and police will ensure that there is no
overcrowding within the temple precincts or outside. This
will apply particularly to the Dakshineshwar Kali temple,
the Kalighat temple, the Tarapith temple, the Kalyaneswari
temple in Rupnarayanpur and other Kali and Shakti and
other temples all over the State, till the lockdown is
completely lifted.
For the other aspects, particularly, the Chhat Puja
and the kind of processions that may be allowed for Chhat
Puja celebrations, the matter will appear on November 10,
2020.   Since   Christmas   is  some   distance   away,  no
directions in such regard are issued at the moment.
Urgent photostat certified copy of this order, if
applied for, be given to the parties, upon compliance of
necessary formalities.