Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 53834 of 2022
Counsel for Applicant :- Zaheer Asghar,Syed Ahmed Faizan,Sr.
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
1. Supplementary affidavit filed today on behalf of the applicant is
taken on record.
2. Heard Sri S.F.A. Naqvi, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Sri
Zaheer Asghar, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Manish Goyal,
learned AAG assisted by Sri A.K. Sand and Sri Rajesh Mishra, learned
AGAs for the State.
3. This instant bail application has been filed seeking release of the
applicant on bail in Case Crime No. 0175 of 2022 under Sections 143,
C.L.A. Act, 83 Juvenile Justice Act and ¾ Public Property Damages
Act as well as 3 Explosive Substance Act Police Station Kareli,
District- Prayagraj, during pendency of the trial in the court below.
4. According to the FIR, the accused persons pelted stones on the
vehicles of police party and set the vehicles on fire and also damaged
the public property after Friday prayer. In the FIR 14 persons were
named and more than 200 persons were unnamed. Applicant was
named along with 14 others. It is further alleged, in the incident some
police personnels also sustained injuries and due to the act of accused
persons law and order was severely disturbed.
5. Learned counsel for the applicant submits that entire allegations
made against the applicant is totally false and baseless and applicant
made accused in the present matter along with 14 named accused
persons on the basis of general and omnibus allegation.
6. He further submits, applicant neither participated in the incident nor
he was instrumental for such incident. He further submits, even as per
the FIR more than 200 persons were participating in the incident but
out of them only 14 persons were named including applicant and this
fact clearly suggest that who were well known persons of the locality
they have been implicated by the police and police nominated them in
the FIR including applicant. He further submits, applicant is a social
worker and he used to raise voice against atrocity and only due to this
reason he was falsely implicated by the police in the present matter.
7. Learned counsel for the applicant further submits, there is no
allegation against the applicant that either he was instigating people at
spot or he was leading the mob and as admittedly the incident was a
result of mob violence, therefore, applicant cannot be held liable for the
act of mob.
8. He further submits, although, there is allegation that mob was
hurling bomb too and number of police vehicles were also damaged but
there is no allegation that applicant was either hurling the bomb or he
set the vehicles on fire or on his exhortation or instigation bombs were
hurled and vehicles were burnt.
9. He further submits, there is also no allegation either in the FIR or in
the statements of prosecution witnesses recorded under Section 161
Cr.P.C. that on the instigation of applicant, property was damaged or
vehicles were set on fire. He next submits, although in the FIR it is
alleged that number of police personnels were also sustained injuries in
the incident but none sustained any serious injury.
10. He next submits that number of similarly placed co-accused
persons have already been released on bail in the present matter by co-
ordinate benches of this Court including the persons who were also
named in the FIR along with the applicant and case of applicant is at-
par with those accused who were also named in the FIR. He produced
the bunch of the bail orders during the course of argument which is
taken on record.
11. Learned counsel for the applicant further submits, Umar Khalid
who were named in the FIR at serial no. 14 has been granted
anticipatory bail by this Court vide anticipatory bail order dated
28.11.2022 passed in Criminal Misc. Anticipatory Bail Application U/S
438 Cr.P.C. no. 7627 of 2022 and similarly another accused Shah Alam
was aslo granted anticipatory bail on 28.11.2022 by co-ordinate bench
of this Court passed in Criminal Misc. Anticipatory Bail Application
U/S 438 Cr.P.C. no. 7782 of 2022. Similarly, named accused Fazal
Khan was also released on anticipatory bail by this Court on
21.10.2022 passed in Criminal Misc. Anticipatory Bail Application U/S
438 Cr.P.C. no. 10019 of 2022.
12. He next submits, the named accused Mohd. Shahid was enlarged on
bail by this Court on 2.11.2022 passed in Criminal Misc. Bail
Application No. 47086 of 2022 and Sahab Urf Mohd. Ahmad was
granted bail on 17.10.2022 passed in Criminal Misc. Bail Application
No. 39511 of 2022. He further submits apart from the above persons
who were named in the FIR there are several other persons who were
made accused during investigation and they were also released on bail.
He next submits as per allegation made in the FIR and in the statements
of witnesses of the present case the case of the applicant is at par with
other accused persons who were named in the FIR and have enlarged
on bail.
13. Learned counsel for the applicant further submits, applicant was
neither arrested at the spot nor any incriminating material was
recovered from his possession. He further submits, although, earlier
also applicant has falsely implicated in as many as 11 cases but in all
the cases he was falsely implicated by the police and in all the cases
applicant has been released on bail and criminal antecedents of the
applicant has been properly explained in paragraph no. 40 of the
affidavit filed in support of the present bail application. He further
submits, out of 11 cases one case is of Electricity Act and two cases
relate to violation of Covid-19 guidelines and one case is the present
one. He further submits, applicant in all the cases including the present
one was implicated only due to reason that he is a whistle blower for
his community and always raises voice against atrocities.
14. He further submits number of offences in which applicant is
detained are bailable and except Section 307 IPC and 4/5 Explosive
Substance Act, in all the offences maximum punishment is upto either
three years or seven years and from the perusal of FIR and other
material collected by investigating officer during investigation
including the statement of prosecution witnesses recorded under
Section 161 Cr.P.C. prima facie no offence under Section 307 IPC and
offence under Section 4/5 Explosive Substance Act is made out against
the applicant and       therefore, considering the law laid down by the
Apex Court in the case of Satender Kumar Antil Vs. CBI & others
reported in [MANU/SC/0851/2022], applicant who is in jail since
10.6.2022 is entitled to be released on bail.
15. Per contra, learned Additional Advocate General vehemently
opposed the prayer for bail and submits that in the incident number of
police vehicles were damaged and applicant along with other accused
persons promoted enmity between different groups on the grounds of
religion and race.
16. He further submits, the act of the applicant was prejudicial to
national integration and from the FIR itself it appears that applicant
along with other accused persons tried to create terror among the
common people and law and order was badly disturbed. He further
submits in the incident as many as three police personnels were
sustained injuries and as they are police personnels, therefore, merely
on the ground that they sustained minor injuries, the act of accused
persons including applicant cannot be diluted.
17. Learned AAG further urged although, in the incident as many as
more than 200 person participated but as applicant and 13 others were
actively participated, therefore, they were identified by the police
personnels and applicant was the person who was instrumental for such
incident and this fact is evident from the statement of accused persons
including the statement of applicant recorded during investigation.
18. He further pointed out that from the statements of co-accused
persons recorded during investigation it is evident that applicant was
the principal accused and he was instrumental for the alleged incident
and on his instigation people gathered and law and order was badly
disturbed and public property was damaged and they created havoc in
the city and security of entire city came at risk.
19. He further submits, even in the statement recorded under Section
161 Cr.P.C. applicant stated that he is having grudge with the present
government and he instructed the people to gather at Atala Crossing on
10.6.2022, the date of incident and this fact clearly suggest that
applicant was instrumental for the mob violence occurred on 10.6.2022.
20. Learned AAG produced compilation of case laws which is taken on
record and submitted that in the case of Salim Khan Vs. Sanjay Singh
and another (2000) 9 SCC 670 the Apex Court observed that at the
time of deciding bail application, all the statements recorded under
Section 161 Cr.P.C. should be taken into account and it clearly shows
that even the statement of accused person should be considered at the
stage of bail.
21. He further submits, in case of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar Vs. Rajesh
Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav and another 2004 (7) SCC 528, the Apex
Court held that admissibility of statement recorded under Section 161
Cr.P.C. cannot be adjudicated at the stage of bail and it can only be
determined during trial and in case of Kalyan Chandra Sarkar (supra)
the Supreme Court merely on the basis of the statement of the accused
set aside the bail granting order passed by the High Court.
22. He further submits, the law is settled that while granting bail the
Court     should   consider    the  nature   of   accusation,  reasonable
apprehension tempering with the witness and impact upon the society
of such incident and considering the fact that applicant was having
criminal antecedent of as many as 10 cases and the incident was of
such nature which greatly impacted the society and applicant was the
principal accused who was instrumental of such mob violence, he
should not be released on bail.
23. I have heard both the parties and perused the record of the case.
24. The present matter is a case of mob violence in which more than
200 persons participated and the mob damaged the public property and
also hurled bombs and number of vehicles were also damaged and they
the vehicles were set on fire and in the incident three police personnels
also sustained injuries.
25. Applicant was named in the FIR along with 13 others accused
persons. From perusal of the FIR and the statements of prosecution
witnesses recorded during investigation it appears that general
allegation were made against all the accused persons including
26. It is neither alleged in the FIR nor in the statements of prosecution
witnesses recorded during investigation that applicant was either
instigating the people or was leading the mob or he was having any
weapon in his hand or was hurling bomb or set the vehicles on fire.
From the perusal of FIR and statements of witnesses recorded under
Section 161 Cr.P.C. it appears that general role has been attributed to all
the accused persons including applicant. During investigation when the
statement of accused persons were recorded under Section 161Cr.P.C.,
then they stated that applicant was instrumental and on his instigation
they joined the mob and when the statement of applicant was recorded
then he also stated that he instructed the people to gather after Friday
prayer on 10.6.2022 and we will have to show our unity and we must
prepare for administrative action.
27. In his statement applicant further stated that he did not instruct the
peoples to hurl bombs and pelting stones but when mob gathered then it
became uncontrolled and thereafter he himself any how managed to
escape from the spot.
28. Although, the statements of the accused persons recorded before
police are not admissible but as stated by the Apex Court in case of
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar (supra) it can be considered at the time of
deciding bail application. From the statements of the accused persons
although, it appears that on the instigation of applicant they joined the
mob and from the statement of applicant it reflects that he told the
people to gather after Friday prayer to show their unity and also told
them be prepared for action of administration but from these statements
it could not be reflected that applicant either instigated or instructed
them to commit violence. Further, neither in the FIR nor in the
statement of any prosecution witnesses including the statement of
police personnels, it has been alleged that applicant was either leading
or he was instigating the people at the spot.
29. Further, if the statement of applicant is taken as whole then it
appears that he in his statement stated that he did not tell the people to
commit violence and he never told them to either hurl bombs or
damage the public properties.
30. Therefore, if we consider the entire evidence available on record
including the statements of prosecution witnesses and statements of
applicant and other accused persons recorded during investigation then
it appears that it is a case of mob violence and at this stage it can not be
said that applicant was instrumental for such violence. It can only be
said that he was instrumental for such large gathering of people.
31. Further, applicant has been challaned under Section 143, 144, 145,
505(2), 506, 120-B IPC, 4/5 Explosive Substance Act but offences
under Sections 143, 144, 145, 147, 148, 336, 435, 427, 504 are bailable
and except offences under Section 307 IPC and 5 Explosive Substances
Act for all the offences maximum punishment is either of three years or
of seven years and as there is no allegation that applicant is either
having any bomb or he hurled any bomb or he caused any injury to
police personnels, therefore, merely on the basis of existence of Section
307 IPC and 4/5 Explosive Substances Act in the charge-sheet he can
not be denied bail.
32. Further, in the FIR total 14 persons were nominated including
applicant and number of such accused persons have already been
released on bail by co-ordinate bench of this Court and as per allegation
made in the FIR and in the statements of prosecution witnesses
recorded during investigation the case of applicant is also at par with
these accused persons.
33. Although, applicant is having criminal history of 10 other cases but
his criminal history has been explained in paragraph no. 40 of the
affidavit filed in support of the instant bail application and it appears
that one case is of Electricity Act and two cases were of violation of
Covid-19 guidelines and in all the other cases applicant is on bail.
34. Bail is a rule and jail is an exception and bail can not be rejected for
punitive purposes. Although, it appears that due to the aggression and
activeness of the applicant people of his community gathered in large
number and thereafter mob committed the violence but considering the
fact that applicant does not appear to be instrumental for such violence
and he is in jail, in the present matter, since 10.6.2022 and number of
similarly placed accused persons have already been enlarged on bail,
and also considering the law laid down by the Apex Court in case of
Satyendra Kumar Antil (supra) case, in my view applicant is entitled to
be released on bail.
35. In the light of discussions made above, without expressing any
opinion on the merits of the case, the instant bail application is
allowed.
36. Let the applicant- Javed Mohammad @ Pump be released on bail
in the aforesaid case on furnishing a personal bond and two sureties
each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned with
the following conditions:-
(i) The applicant shall appear before the trial court on the dates fixed,
unless his personal presence is exempted.
(ii) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly, make inducement,
threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so
as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court or any police
officer or tamper with the evidence.
(iii) The applicant shall not indulge in any criminal and anti-social
activity.
37. In case of breach of any of the above condition, the prosecution will
be at liberty to move an application before this Court for cancellation of
the bail of the applicant.