Medical Board opined that the victim has history of delayed milestone, poor
understanding, poor self-care, inabilities to speak, drooling of saliva since
childhood. The Medical Board further opined that on examination, it was found that
patient is unable to take care of self, her hygiene is very poor and her intellectual
abilities are poor. In view of these factors, patient was opined to suffer from
Medical Board was further of the view that mental age of the victim is that of a
minor, being only 6 years. According to them, she is unable to take care of herself
and, therefore, she would not be able to take care of the fetus. In our considered
view, in a situation like this, it would be hazardous to allow her to continue with the
pregnancy till full duration. It may even be more dangerous to the unborn child too.
In facts like these, this Court cannot lose sight of the psychological trauma the
victim would have to undergo all this time. She being not in a position to take a
decision due to her intellectual deficiency, decision of her guardian to consent for
termination of unwanted pregnancy has to be accepted as a move in her best
interest. Not permitting the rape victim in the present case to go in for medical
termination of unwanted pregnancy would amount to compelling her to continue to
bear such pregnancy for full duration and deliver the child, which would be
violative of her bodily integrity, which would not only aggravate her mental trauma
but would also have devastating effect on her overall health including on
psychological and mental aspects. This is violative of her personal liberty, to
borrow the words of the Supreme Court in Suchita Srivastava (supra), (para 22)
because “a woman’s right to make reproductive choices is also a dimension of
“personal liberty” as understood under Article 21 of the Constitution of India”. In
the peculiar facts of the case, her personal integrity has to be respected.
Explanation 2 to Section 3(2) of the MTP Act has expanded the scope of
“grave injury to mental health” by raising a presumption that “the anguish caused
by such pregnancy may be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental
health of the pregnant woman”. “Such pregnancy” here refers to pregnancy
“alleged to have been caused by rape”. Thus, the legislature has by providing for
raising such presumption rather expanded the meaning of the expression “grave
injury to mental health” of the rape victim for deciding whether it would constitute
a grave risk to the mental health of the pregnant woman in the meaning of Section
3(2)(i) of the MTP Act. The Court would also be entitled to reasonably visualise
the environment in which the victim will have to live in immediate foreseeable
future to decide the question of her mental health.
Explanation 2 to Section 3(2) of the MPT Act expands the concept of
“grave injury to mental health” by raising a presumption that anguish caused by
any pregnancy as a result of rape shall be presumed to constitute a grave injury to
the mental health of a pregnant woman. Therefore, for the purposes of Section 3(2)
of the MTP Act, the expression “grave injury to mental health”, is used in a liberal
sense by the legislature itself and further Section 3(3) of the MTP Act, in terms
provides that in determining whether continuance of pregnancy would involve such
risk of injury to the health as is mentioned in Section 3(2), account may be taken of
the pregnant woman’s actual or reasonable foreseeable environment. Section 3(3)
of the MTP Act, makes reference not merely to physical injury but also to mental
injury. In fact, the aspect of a pregnant woman’s actual or reasonable foreseeable
environment has greater nexus to aspect of mental health as compared to physical
health, particularly in the present context. This legislative liberality when it comes
to expanding the concept of the grave injury to mental health cannot evaporate no
sooner the ceiling of 24 weeks prescribed in Section 3(2)(b) of the MTP Act is
crossed. If the expression “life” in Section 5(1) of the MTP Act is not to be
confined to mere physical existence or survival, then, permission will have to be
granted under section 5(1) of the MTP Act for medical termination of pregnancy
which may have exceeded 24 weeks, if the continuance of such pregnancy would
involve grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.
Medical termination of pregnancy of the Victim-A, daughter of the
petitioner, permitted.
Since writ petition- allowed on applying provisions of Section 3(2)(i) read
with its Explanation-2 to the facts of the case, the question of constitutional validity
of Section 3(2)(ii) was left untouched.
Murugan Nayakkar Vs. Union of India & others (2017) SCC Online SC 1902
Meera Santosh Pal & others Vs. Union of India & others (2017) 3 SCC 462
Tapasya Umesh Pisal Vs. Union of India & others (2008) 12 SCC 57
XYZ Vs. Union of India & others, 2019 SCC OnLine Bom 560=(2019) 3 Bom CR 400
Kalpana Singh Vs. Government of NCT of Delhi & others, WP(C) No.115/2021
Sundarlal Vs. The State of M.P. & others, W.P.No.20961/2017-decided on 6.12.2017
Victim (A) Vs. State of Rajasthan & others, S.B.Criminal W.P.No.148/2020, decided on
ABC Vs. State of Chhattisgarh & others, W.P. (C) No.2294/2021 decided on 25.06.2021
Hearing convened through Video Conferencing:
1.      This writ petition has been filed by Smt. Prembai praying for a
direction to the respondents to allow her daughter (hereinafter referred
to as “Victim-A”) to undergo medical termination of pregnancy at the
State expense. The petitioner has also challenged the constitutional
validity of Section 3(2)(b) of the Medical Termination of Pregnancy
Act, 1971 (for short “the MTP Act”) to the extent it stipulates a ceiling
of 24 weeks for medical termination of pregnancy with the prayer the
same be declared as ultra virus Article 14 and 21 of the Constitution of
India. The petitioner has also challenged the order dated 6.7.2021
passed by the Third Additional Sessions Judge, Hoshangabad in MJC-R
No.207/2021 rejecting application of the petitioner for permission to
terminate pregnancy of Victim-A.
2.      The petitioner is resident of Village Baagratwa, Tehsil Babai,
District Hoshangabad of State of Madhya Pradesh. She belongs to
Scheduled Tribe community. She is wholly illiterate, living below
poverty line. She does not have any moveable or immoveable property.
According to the petitioner, she and her husband work as a labourer.
Her daughter Victim-A is aged about 23 years and she is mentally
retarded. The petitioner and her husband left their village for Ujjain for
earning livelihood by doing labour work. When they returned back
after some time, the petitioner found that her daughter Victim-A was
behaving in a peculiar manner. Their daughter Victim-A informed them
in sign language about certain stomach pain. On making further
enquiry, she learnt that one of her neighbours had committed rape upon
her. She immediately took her to the doctor, who found that she was
pregnant. The petitioner lodged a First Information Report with the
Police Station Babai. District Hoshangabad, which has been registered
for offence under Section 376(2)(1) of the IPC as Crime No.301/2021.
The accused was arrested on 20.6.2021. The police got Victim-A
medically examined and also obtained the medical report about her
mental health. Victim-A was thereafter sent for further medical
examination on 22.6.2021, upon which it was confirmed that she was
carrying pregnancy of 22 weeks. The petitioner immediately filed an
application under Section 3 of the MTP Act on 30.6.2021 before the
Judicial Magistrate First Class, Hoshangabad, seeking permission for
termination of her pregnancy, who rejected the same on 2.7.2021. Since
3rd and 4th July, 2021, being Saturday and Sunday, were holidays, the
petitioner filed application under Section 3 of the MTP Act with the
same prayer before the Third Additional Sessions Judge, Hoshangabad
on 5.7.2021, which was registered as MJC-R No.207/2021. The same
was however rejected on the very next working day i.e. 6.7.2021 under
the ignorance about the latest law whereby maximum length of
pregnancy under Section 3(2)(b) of the Act, which was earlier 20
weeks, was raised to 24 weeks by amendment to that effect by the Act 8
of 2021 published in the Gazette of Government of India on 25.3.2021.
3.     When the matter was listed before this Court on 12.7.2021, the
Court directed the Medical Superintendent, Hamidia Hospital, Bhopal
to constitute a Multi Disciplinary Medical Board consisting of
registered medical practitioner each from the Department of
Gynaecology, Psychiatry, Paediatrics and Radiology or any other
specialist, in his discretion, as per the MTP Act for having the
radiological examination of the fetus to determine the status of its
health and also give the bona fide opinion as to whether the medical
termination of the pregnancy would be necessary to save the life of the
victim. A report of the Medical Board has been produced today, which
“The findings of the Medical Board are as follows:-
1. Survivor age 24 y/f (as per AADHAR card). As per the
history narrated by mother, she has history of delayed milestone,
poor understanding, poor self care, inability to speak, drooling of
saliva since childhood. She has been certified as Mental
Retardation by District Hospital Hoshangabad. On examination,
it was found that patient is unable to take care of self, her hygiene
is poor, her intellectual abilities are poor. In view of these, patient
2. Obstetric Ultrasound was performed on 13.07.2021 and it
reveals a single live intrauterine fetus of Gestational Age by USG
is 25 week 5 days +/- 2 weeks. During this scan No gross
congenital anomaly was detected.
3. There is alleged history of sexual assault, which has resulted
in pregnancy. During her Antenatal checkup done on 13.07.2021,
it was found that she is vitally stable. Today, she is having single
live intrauterine fetus of Gestational Age is 25 week 5 days
without evidence of gross congenital anomaly (as per USG report
dated 13/07/2021). As per the MTP Act, 1971, Medical
termination of pregnancy is permissible up to 20 weeks and as
per the amendment made in MTP Act, 2021, termination of
pregnancy is permitted up to 24 weeks gestation age.
4. There is no immediate risk to the life of pregnant woman in
continuation of Pregnancy.
5. Survivor is a case of SEVERE MENTAL RETARDATION
WITH BEHAVIORAL PROBLEMS. Mental age of the survivor
is that of a Minor (Mental age approximately 6 years). She is
unable to take care of self and she will not be in a position to take
care of the baby, if she delivers it.
OPINION: Based on above findings, Medical Board is of the
opinion that Survivor is a case of SEVERE MENTAL
antenatal with 25 weeks 5 days live pregnancy. She is unable to
take care of self and she will not be in a position to take care of
the baby, if she delivers it. There is no immediate risk to the life
of pregnant woman in continuation of Pregnancy.”
Apart from the report of the Medical Board, the Radiologist in
the Department of Radiodiagnosis GMC and SZH Hospital, Bhopal in
his report has given the following conclusion:-
“Total cervical length- 3.5 cm.
Impression- Single live intrauterine fetus of MGA 25 WKS 5
days (+/- 2 weeks) without evidence of any gross congenital
anomaly detected in the present scan.”
4.     Shri Harpreet Singh Ruprah, learned counsel for the petitioner
submitted that Medical Board in their collective opinion as well as
Radiologist, have concluded that the Victim-A is bearing pregnancy of
25 weeks and 5 days, with the variation of +/- 2 weeks. That means that
even according to the experts, the duration of pregnancy could even be
23 weeks. The petitioner upon being advised immediately filed an
application before the Court of Judicial Magistrate First Class on
30.6.2021 which was rejected on 2.7.2021. Thereafter the petitioner
again filed an application before 3rd Additional Sessions Judge,
Hoshangabad on 5.7.2021, which too was dismissed on 6.7.2021 under
ignorance of the amended provision of law which came into effect from
25.3.2021 whereby outer limit of the duration of pregnancy, for
permitting termination, was increased from 20 weeks to 24 weeks. In
the first place, the delay if all has taken place, is not attributable to the
petitioner or atleast the Victim-A, secondly, even the experts are not
certain about the age of the fetus by indicating in their opinion that the
Victim A is antenatal with 25 weeks 5 days live pregnancy, which is
adjustable, plus or minus, by two weeks and thirdly there is no risk to
the life of the Victim-A even if her pregnancy is terminated now.
Learned counsel further argued that even otherwise, as per report of the
Medical Board, Victim-A is a case of severe mental retardation with
behavioural problems and her mental age is of a minor aged
approximately 6 years. She is unable to take care of herself and she is
not in a position to take care of the baby, if she delivers it. Moreover,
this Court may consider the case of the petitioner for permitting
termination of pregnancy in view of Section 3(2)(b)(i) read with
Explanation (2) thereto, according to which if a pregnancy is alleged to
have been caused by rape, the anguish caused by the pregnancy shall be
presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the
pregnant woman.
5.     Learned counsel in support of his arguments relied upon the
judgments of the Supreme Court in RBI Vs. Peerless General Finance
Vs. Union of India in W.P.(C) No.928/2007 decided on 9.10.2007;
Tapasya Umesh Pisal Vs. Union of India & others (2008) 12 SCC
57; X Vs. Union of India (2017) 3 SCC 458; Meera Santosh Pal Vs.
Union of India (2017) 3 SCC 462; Murugan Nayakkar Vs. Union of
India & others (2017) SCC Online SC 1902; Z Vs. State of Bihar
(2018) 11 SCC 572; Sarmishtha Chakrabortty Vs. Union of India
(2018) 13 SCC 339 and A Vs. Union of India & others (2018) 14
SCC 75. Learned counsel also relied upon the Division Bench
judgment of Bombay High Court in Sheikh Ayesha Khatoon Vs.
Union of India & others (2018) SCC Online Bom 11.
6.     Per contra, Shri Swapnil Ganguly, learned Deputy Advocate
General submitted that though the Medical Board in their collective
opinion as well as Radiologist in his individual opinion have opined
that the gestational age of fetus appears to be 25 weeks 5 days with the
variation of +/- 2 weeks. In any case, now when the outer limit is 24
weeks, primary consideration for grant of permission for medical
termination of pregnancy would be the possible risk to the life of the
woman concerned or the fetus. In most of the cases relied by the
learned counsel for the petitioner, report of the medical expert was in
favour of either of the situations whereas in the present case, the
Medical Board had opined that there is no immediate risk to the life of
the woman or the fetus.
7.     We have given our anxious consideration to rival submissions,
perused the material on record and studied the cited precedents.
8.     A perusal of the afore-quoted opinion of the Medical Board in
condition no.1 indicates that the survivor is a case of severe mental
retardation with behavioral problems. Mental age of the survivor is
approximately 6 years. She is unable to take care of herself and
therefore, obviously she will not be in a position to take care of the
baby, if she delivers the one. In conclusion no.2 of the aforesaid
opinion of the Medical Board, the victim-A is opined to be a single live
intrauterine fetus of gestational age by USG is 25 week 5 days +/- 2
weeks with the possibility of age being either less or more by 2 weeks,
which is indicated by “+/- of 2 weeks”. This is also the opinion given
by the Radiologist. We have to therefore now examine whether in the
facts like these, this Court would be justified in refusing to grant
permission for medical termination of the pregnancy on the law
available on the subject.
9.     Section 3 of the MTP Act is relevant for the purpose of deciding
“Section 3. When pregnancies may be terminated by registered
(1)     Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code
(45 of 1860), a registered medical practitioner shall not be guilty of
any offence under that Code or under any other law for the time being
in force, if any pregnancy is terminated by him in accordance with the
provisions of this Act.
(2)     Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), a pregnancy may
be terminated by a registered medical practitioner,-
(a) where the length of the pregnancy does not exceed twenty
(b) where the length of the pregnancy exceeds twenty weeks
but does not exceed twenty-four weeks, in case of such
category of woman as may be prescribed by rules made under
this Act, if not less than two registered medical practitioners
(i)     the continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk to the
life of the pregnant woman or of grave injury to her physical or
(ii)    there is a substantial risk that if the child were born, it would
suffer from any serious physical or mental abnormality.
Explanation 1.-For the purposes of Clause (a), where any pregnancy
occurs as a result of failure of any device or method used by any
woman or her partner for the purpose of limiting the number of
children or preventing pregnancy, the anguish caused by such
pregnancy may be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental
health of the pregnant woman.
Explanation 2.-For the purposes of Clause (a) and (b), where any
pregnancy is alleged by the pregnant woman to have been caused by
rape, the anguish caused by the pregnancy shall be presumed to
constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.
(2-A) The norms for the registered medical practitioner whose
opinion is required for termination of pregnancy at different
gestational age shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made
under this Act.
(2-B) The provisions of sub-section (2) relating to the length of the
pregnancy shall not apply to the termination of pregnancy by the
medical practitioner where such termination is necessitated by the
diagnosis of any of the substantial foetal abnormalities diagnosed by a
(2-C) Every State Government or Union territory, as the case may
be, shall by notification in the official Gazette, constitute a Board to
be called a Medical Board for the purposes of this Act to exercise
such powers and functions as may be prescribed by rules made under
this Act.
(2-D) The Medical Board shall consist of the following, namely-
(d) Such other number of members as may be notified in
the Official Gazette by the State Government or Union
Territory, as the case may be.
(3) In determining whether the continuance of pregnancy would
involve such risk of injury to the health as is mentioned in sub-section
(2), account may be taken of the pregnant woman's actual or
reasonably foreseeable environment.
(4) (a) No pregnancy of a woman, who has not attained the age of
eighteen years, or, who, having attained the age of eighteen years, is a
mentally ill person, shall be terminated except with the consent in
writing of her guardian.
(b) Save as otherwise provided in clause (a), no pregnancy shall be
terminated except with the consent of the pregnant woman.”
10.    It is indeed surprising that the Third Additional Sessions Judge,
Hoshangabad relied on unamended Section 3 of the MTP Act rather
than considering the amended provision, which has now increased the
permissible outer limit for termination of pregnancy from 20 weeks to
24 weeks. This means that if the law was correctly read and applied by
him, the permission of medical termination of the pregnancy could
have been granted as the period of 24 weeks had yet not passed on the
date the said Court was approached. Be that as may be, Section 3(2)(b),
which is relevant for deciding the medical termination of pregnancy,
inter alia provides that subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), a
pregnancy may be terminated by a registered medical practitioner
where the length of the pregnancy exceeds twenty weeks but does not
exceed twenty-four weeks in case of such category of woman as may
be prescribed by rules made under this Act, if not less than two
registered medical practitioners are of the opinion, formed in good faith
that; (i) the continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk to the
life of the pregnant woman or of grave injury to her physical or mental
health; or (ii) there is a substantial risk that if the child were born, it
would suffer from any serious physical or mental abnormality. The first
Explanation thereto relates to Clause (a), which provides that where
any pregnancy occurs as a result of failure of any device or method
used by any woman or her partner for the purpose of limiting the
number of children or preventing pregnancy, the anguish caused by
such pregnancy may be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the
mental health of the pregnant woman. This Explanation may not be
relevant for deciding the present case, but the second Explanation of
Section 3(2) would in the facts of the present case have bearing on the
interpretation of Section 3(2)(i) of the MTP Act, which stipulates that
where any pregnancy is alleged by the pregnant woman to have been
caused by rape, the anguish caused by the pregnancy shall be presumed
to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.
11.    Admittedly, in the present case, the Victim-A, daughter of the
petitioner, was subjected to rape and according to experts, her mental
age is only 6 years and therefore, regardless of her biological age, the
consent for sexual intercourse in her case would be irrelevant. The First
Information Report was lodged by her mother for the offence of
Section 376(2)(1) of the IPC against the accused with          the Police
Station Babai, District Hoshangabad in Crime No.301/2021. This
therefore would bring the case of her daughter within the purview of
Explanation (2) which provides that the anguish caused by the
pregnancy shall be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental
health of the pregnant woman, who in this case is Victim-A. Moreover,
what is peculiar about this case is that the Medical Board itself has
opined that duration of pregnancy is variable by two weeks. The victim
is unable to take care of self, her hygiene is poor, her intellectual
abilities are poor, her mental age is only 6 years and therefore,
obviously she will not be in a position to take care of the baby, even if
she delivers it.
12.     This Court is cognizant of the fact that the Victim-A is mentally
retarded, and her mental age having been adjudged by the experts to be
only 6 years, therefore, all the steps on her behalf could be and were in
fact taken by her mother, who is her natural guardian. She immediately
filed an application before the Court of JMFC, Hoshangabad on
30.6.2021 which was rejected on 2.7.2021 and thereafter, immediately
on the very first next working day i.e. on 5.7.2021, she filed the
application before the Third Additional Sessions Judge, who being
ignorant of the amended provision, which came into effect from
25.3.2021, rejected the same under the misconception that the outer
limit for grant of permission of medical termination of pregnancy was
20 weeks and not 24 weeks. Sub-section (4) of Section 3 requires
consent of the guardian of a minor, or a major who is mentally ill
person. The exceptions to this rule of consent have been given in
Section 3(4)(a) of the MTP Act, which provides that when the pregnant
woman is below eighteen years of age or is a “mentally ill” person,
then consent of her guardian would have to be obtained. Since in the
present case the mental age of the Victim-A was determined
approximately 6 years, her pregnancy can be medically terminated with
the consent of the guardian who is actually natural mother of Victim-A.
The permission/consent has to be therefore necessarily assumed.
13.    In Murugan Nayakkar (supra), the petitioner, who was 13 years
of age, was a victim of alleged rape and sexual abuse. She preferred a
writ petition for termination of her pregnancy. The Medical Board
opined that termination of pregnancy at this stage or delivery at term
will both have equal risk to the mother. The Supreme Court held that
considering the age of the petitioner, trauma which she prima facie
suffered due to sexual abuse and the agony she is going through at the
present, it would be appropriate to allow termination of pregnancy. In
Tapasya Umesh Pisal Vs. Union of India and others (supra), the
victim, who was 24 years old, was seeking permission to undergo
medical termination of the pregnancy, which had progressed to 24
weeks. The Supreme Court held that it is difficult to refuse the
permission to the petitioner to undergo medical termination of
pregnancy as it is certain that if the foetus is allowed to be born it
would have a limited life span with serious handicaps which cannot be
avoided. In Kalpana Singh vs. Government of NCT of Delhi &
others (supra), the victim had pregnancy of 25 weeks and 5 days,
which was permitted to be terminated medically.
14.    The Supreme Court in Suchita Srivastava and Another Vs.
Chandigarh Administration reported in (2009) 9 SCC 1, held that
there is no doubt that a woman’s right to make reproductive choices is
also a dimension of “personal liberty” as understood under Article 21
of the Constitution of India. Reproductive rights include a woman’s
entitlement to carry pregnancy to its full term, to give birth and to
subsequently raise children. However, in the case of pregnant women,
there is also a “compelling State interest” in protecting the life of the
prospective child. Therefore, the termination of a pregnancy is only
permitted when the conditions specified in the applicable statute have
been fulfilled. Hence the provisions of the MTP Act, 1971 can also be
viewed as reasonable restrictions that have been placed on the exercise
of reproductive choices. The Lordship further held that ordinarily a
pregnancy can be terminated only when a medical practitioner is
satisfied that a “continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk to
the life of the pregnant woman or of grave injury to her physical or
mental health”. The Explanations to Section 3 however also
contemplate termination of pregnancy when the same is the result of a
rape or a failure of birth control methods since both of these
eventualities have been equated with a “grave injury to the mental
health” of a woman.
15.    This Court in Writ Petition No.20961/2017-Sundarlal Vs. The
State of M.P. & others, decided on 6.12.2017, was dealing with the
case of minor daughter of the petitioner, who was kidnapped and a First
Information Report at his instance was registered under Sections 363,
366, 376 of the IPC read with Section 4 and 6 of the Protection of
Children From Sexual Offences Act, 2012 against the accused. The
police secured the custody of the minor daughter of the petitioner, who
was handed over to the petitioner. On medical examination, she was
found to be carrying pregnancy of about 16 weeks. The petitioner being
guardian gave consent for termination of the pregnancy of his minor
daughter. This Court while directing constitution of a committee of
three medical practitioners to form bonafide opinion as to termination
of pregnancy and retention of DNA sample of fetus and providing all
medical assistance and care to the victim observed as under:-
“12. In Explanation I, the law makers made it clear that where
pregnancy is alleged by victim because of rape, a presumption can
be drawn that such pregnancy constitute a grave injury to the
mental health of pregnant woman. In the present case, this is not in
dispute that victim is a minor and petitioner is praying for
termination of pregnancy because her daughter is a rape victim.
This court in Hallo Bi (supra) (Hallo Bi @ Halima Vs. State of
M.P. & others 2013 (1) MPHT 451) opined that we cannot force a
victim of violent rape/forced sex to give birth to a child of a rapist.
The anguish and the humiliation which the victim is suffering
daily, will certainly cause a grave injury to her mental health. Not
only this, the child will also suffer mental anguish in case the lady
gives birth to a child.”
16.   The Rajasthan High Court in Victim (A) Vs. State of Rajasthan
& others, S.B.Criminal Writ Petition No.148/2020, decided on
26.2.2020, was dealing with the case where the Medical Board had
opined the age of the fetus to be 23 +/- 2 weeks. Relying on the
decision of the Supreme Court in Meera Santosh Pal & others Vs.
Union of India & others (2017) 3 SCC 462, where permission was
granted for termination of pregnancy of a term of 24 weeks and another
judgment of the same High Court in Nisha Vaishnav Vs. State of
Rajasthan S.B. Civil Writ Petition No.1271/2019, decided on
29.1.2019, the High Court allowed termination of pregnancy, in view of
aforesaid Explanation (2) to Section 3(2) of the MTP Act as it was a
case where a minor victim was subjected to rape and held that anguish
caused by such pregnancy shall be presumed to constitute a grave
injury to the mental health of the petitioner.
17.    In ABC Vs. State of Chhattisgarh & others, Writ Petition (C)
No.2294/2021, vide judgment dated 25.06.2021, the High Court of
Chhattisgarh dealing in a case of rape victim bearing pregnancy of 14
weeks and 3 days, relying on the judgment of Supreme Court in Meera
Santosh Pal (supra) permitted the termination of pregnancy, holding
“8. The explanation clause of Section 3 of MTP Act takes within its
ambit not only the physical injury but also to mental injury and
anguish. It is obvious that if the victim is subjected to rape and if she
is forced to give birth to a child in the social scenario she has to face
a life time anguish apart from the fact the child who is born will also
have to face disdain of the society. Under the circumstances, it is
directed that the petitioner shall be entitled to Medical termination of
pregnancy. In order to carry out the pregnancy State shall form a
panel of expert doctors at the District Hospital Durg as early as
possible. The hospital shall take due care of the petitioner's health
and provide her all medical support. It is further directed that the
DNA of the child shall also be preserved considering the fact that the
victim has already lodged a report under Section 373 which will
eventually be required at a future date. The petitioner is directed to
appear at District Hospital Durg on Wednesday i.e. 23.06.2021.”
18.    The Bombay High Court in X Vs. Union of India & others
2018 (2) Mh.L.J. 46, was dealing with a case of victim who was
mentally retarded, deaf and dumb and her pregnancy was of 18-19
weeks. The case of the guardian before the Court, like in the present
case, was that the victim was unable to take care of herself and
therefore, she would not be able to take care of the fetus. The Court
relying on the judgment of the Supreme Court in Suchita Srivastava
“13. The crucial question here is whether permission can be
granted to terminate the pregnancy of 22 weeks in this case. The
victim in this case is deaf, dumb and mentally retarded; therefore,
she is unable to make a choice on her own whether to terminate the
pregnancy or to continue with it. She has no such intellectual
capacity, therefore, her guardian should be given that right to make
choice. This case is also required to be considered from the physical
point of view of the victim. Victim is deaf, dumb and mentally
retarded. She is unable to take any decision. In fact, she is not even
aware that she has been raped and she is pregnant. It has been stated
by her guardian and brother that she is not even able to take care of
herself. Question therefore arises under such circumstance as to how
she would take care of child to be borne? It has been stated in the
medical certificate that "On Paediatrics examination, survivor has
gross development delay with Down Syndrome". If we consider
"Down Syndrome", it means "is a genetic disorder caused by the
presence of all or part of a third copy of chromorome". It is typically
associated with physical growth delays, characteristic facial features
and mild to moderate intellectual disability. The medical literature
would show that there is no cure to the "down syndrome". No doubt,
a person with down syndrome may lead a normal life, but in the
present case, when the victim is unable to take care of herself, there
is every possibility that she will not be able to take care of the foetus.
Though the certificate states that the risk of termination of pregnancy
is within normal acceptable limits; it would be hazardous to ask her
to bear the pregnancy. It is not only dangerous to her, but dangerous
to the unborn child also. Apart from danger to the life of the
petitioner, this Court has to take note of the psychological trauma the
petitioner is undergoing as a result of carrying unwanted pregnancy.
The pregnancy of the petitioner is definitely unwanted for her and it
is violative of her personal liberty. Since she is unable to take
decision due to intellectual disability, her guardian is taking the said
decision, which is in the best interest of the victim and her survival.
In the circumstances, we do not notice any impediment in permitting
petitioner to terminate unwanted pregnancy.”        (emphasis supplied)
19.   In Z Vs. State of Bihar and others (2018) 11 SCC 572, the
Supreme Court was dealing with a case of mentally retarded rape
victim, who was found to be pregnant and was also HIV positive. The
issue before the High Court was whether medical termination of
pregnancy should be permitted. The High Court having relied on
doctrine of “parens patriae” and “compelling State interest” declined
medical termination of pregnancy, which had advanced in 23-24 weeks.
The Supreme Court on detailed analysis reversed the verdict of the
High Court. Explanation 2 to Section 3(2)(b), which has been relied by
the learned counsel for the petitioner, was at that time Explanation 1,
which provided that where any pregnancy is alleged by the pregnant
woman to have been caused by rape, the anguish caused by the same
has to be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of
the pregnant woman. The Supreme Court held that once such a
statutory presumption is provided, the same comes within the
compartment of grave injury to mental health of the victim. Following
observations made by the Supreme Court in paras 23 are worth
“23. We have already anlaysed in detail the factual score and the
approach of the High Court. We do not have the slightest
hesitation in saying that the approach of the High Court is
completely erroneous. The report submitted by the IGIMS stated
that termination of pregnancy may need major surgical procedure
along with subsequent consequences such as bleeding, sepsis and
anesthesia hazards, but there was no opinion that the termination
could not be carried out and it was risky to the life of the
appellant. There should have been a query in this regard by the
High Court which it did not do. That apart, the report shows that
the appellant, who was a writ petitioner before the High Court,
was suffering from mild mental retardation and she was on
medications and her condition was stable and she would require
long term psychiatry treatment. The Medical Board has not
stated that she was suffering from any kind of mental illness. The
appellant was thirty-five years old at that time. She was a major.
She was able to allege that she had been raped and that she
wanted to terminate her pregnancy. PMCH, as we find, is
definitely a place where pregnancy can be terminated.”
20.    The Division Bench of Bombay High Court in a case on its own
motion in XYZ Vs. Union of India and others, 2019 SCC OnLine
Bom 560=(2019) 3 Bom CR 400 held that a woman’s decision to
terminate a pregnancy is not a frivolous one. Abortion is often the only
way out of a very difficult situation for a woman. An abortion is a
carefully considered decision taken by a woman who fears that the
welfare of the child she already has, and of other members of the
household that she is obliged to care for with limited financial and
other resources, may be compromised by the birth of another child.
These are decisions taken by responsible women who have few other
options. They are women who would ideally have preferred to prevent
an unwanted pregnancy, but were unable to do so. If a woman does not
want to continue with the pregnancy, then forcing her to do so
represents a violation of the woman’s bodily integrity and aggravates
her mental trauma which would be deleterious to her mental health.
The Division Bench referred to certain international treaties concerning
human rights. In that context, the Division Bench observed that the
pregnancy takes place within the body of a woman and has profound
effects on her health, mental well being and life. Thus, how she wants
to deal with this pregnancy must be a decision she and she alone can
make. The right to control her own body and fertility and motherhood
choices should be left to the women alone. The basic right of a woman
is the right to autonomy, which includes the right to decide whether or
not to get pregnant and stay pregnant.
21.    While dealing with Explanation 1 of Section 3(2) of the MTP
Act, which after amendment is now Explanation 2, the Bombay High
Court in the above case observed that this Explanation expands the
concept of “grave injury to mental health” by raising a presumption
that anguish caused by any pregnancy as a result of rape shall be
presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of a pregnant
woman. In fact, the Explanation states that where pregnancy is alleged
by a pregnant woman to have been caused by rape, anguish caused by
such pregnancy shall be presumed to constitute a grave injury to the
mental health of a pregnant woman. Therefore, for the purposes of
Section 3(2) of the MTP Act, the expression “grave injury to mental
health”, is used in a liberal sense by the legislature itself and further
Section 3(3) of the MTP Act, in terms provides that in determining
whether continuance of pregnancy would involve such risk of injury to
the health as is mentioned in Section 3(2), account may be taken of the
pregnant woman’s actual or reasonable foreseeable environment.
Section 3(3) of the MTP Act, makes reference not merely to physical
injury but also to mental injury. In fact, the aspect of a pregnant
woman’s actual or reasonable foreseeable environment has greater
nexus to aspect of mental health as compared to physical health,
particularly in the present context. This legislative liberality when it
comes to expanding the concept of the grave injury to mental health
cannot evaporate no sooner the ceiling of 24 weeks prescribed in
Section 3(2)(b) of the MTP Act is crossed. If the expression “life” in
Section 5(1) of the MTP Act is not to be confined to mere physical
existence or survival, then, permission will have to be granted under
section 5(1) of the MTP Act for medical termination of pregnancy
which may have exceeded 24 weeks, if the continuance of such
pregnancy would involve grave injury to the mental health of the
pregnant woman.
22.    Curial question that we posed to ourselves at the beginning of
this judgment still is whether this Court in the facts of the present case,
would be justified in refusing to permit medical termination of
pregnancy? According to Medical Board, the victim has history of
delayed milestone, poor understanding, poor self-care, inabilities to
speak, drooling of saliva since childhood. The Medical Board further
opined that on examination, it was found that patient is unable to take
care of self, her hygiene is very poor and her intellectual abilities are
poor. In view of these factors, patient was opined to suffer from
PROBLEMS. The Medical Board was further of the view that mental
age of the victim is that of a minor, being only 6 years. According to
them, she is unable to take care of herself and, therefore, she would not
be able to take care of the fetus. In our considered view, in a situation
like this, it would be hazardous to allow her to continue with the
pregnancy till full duration. It may even be more dangerous to the
unborn child too. In facts like these, this Court cannot lose sight of the
psychological trauma the victim would have to undergo all this time.
She being not in a position to take a decision due to her intellectual
deficiency, decision of her guardian to consent for termination of
unwanted pregnancy has to be accepted as a move in her best interest.
Not permitting the rape victim in the present case to go in for medical
termination of unwanted pregnancy would amount to compelling her to
continue to bear such pregnancy for full duration and deliver the child,
which would be violative of her bodily integrity, which would not only
aggravate her mental trauma but would also have devastating effect on
her overall health including on psychological and mental aspects. This
is violative of her personal liberty, to borrow the words of the Supreme
Court in Suchita Srivastava (supra), (para 22) because “a woman’s
right to make reproductive choices is also a dimension of “personal
liberty” as understood under Article 21 of the Constitution of India”. In
the peculiar facts of the case, her personal integrity has to be respected.
23.    Explanation 2 to Section 3(2) of the MTP Act has expanded the
scope of “grave injury to mental health” by raising a presumption that
“the anguish caused by such pregnancy may be presumed to constitute
a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman”. “Such
pregnancy” here refers to pregnancy “alleged to have been caused by
rape”. Thus, the legislature has by providing for raising such
presumption rather expanded the meaning of the expression “grave
injury to mental health” of the rape victim for deciding whether it
would constitute a grave risk to the mental health of the pregnant
woman in the meaning of Section 3(2)(i) of the MTP Act. The Court
would also be entitled to reasonably visualise the environment in which
the victim will have to live in immediate foreseeable future to decide
the question of her mental health.
24.    In view of the above discussion, the present writ petition seeking
permission for medical termination of pregnancy of the Victim-A,
daughter of the petitioner, is allowed. She shall be produced before the
Medical Superintendent, Hamidia Hospital, Bhopal by tomorrow, who
is directed to ensure the medical termination of the pregnancy of
Victim-A under the supervision of the experts at the earliest by taking
all the precautions. The Superintendent of Police, Hoshangabad shall
arrange for transportation of the Victim-A along with her parents to
Hamidia Hospital, Bhopal. It is further directed that DNA sample of the
fetus shall be saved for the purposes of evidence to be led by the
prosecution before the Court in the criminal case of rape registered in
the matter. All expenses shall be borne by the State.
25.       Since this Court was persuaded to allow the writ petition on
applying provisions of Section 3(2)(i) read with its Explanation-2 to the
facts of the case, the question of constitutional validity of Section
3(2)(ii) was left untouched.
26.       The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.