Union of India                          …Respondent
The Hon’ble Chief Justice and
His companion Justices of the
Supreme Court of India
The humble Petition of
the Petitioner abovenamed
1. That the above writ petition is filed before this Hon’ble
Court urging it to direct the central government to allow
migrant workers to return to their home towns and villages
after testing for COVID-19 and the authorities to provide
for their safe travel back home
2. Above Petition is pending and likely to be listed soon
before the appropriate bench of this Hon’ble Court.
3. That Petitioner full name: Kamlakar Ratnakar Shenoy,
shenoykr2001@yahoo.co.in                                 Id:
Annual Income: Rs. Approx 2 lakh p.a
4. The Intervener is making this application seeking
indulgence of this Hon’ble Court for permitting them to
intervene in the above matter so as to demonstrate that the
taking any such measure before the lock down is over will
be serious threat in containing the COVID-19 spread
5. That in order to control the spread of coronavirus, proper
Lockdown is very necessary and in order to keep the
Lockdown partial and equal for each citizen and in such
situation nobody should be allowed to violate the
lockdown norms including migrant workers so that virus
is not spread and people’s lives can be saved . That under
the present health care system which we have in place it
cannot be said that all the test are accurate , even in
advanced health care system all test cannot be termed as
accurate. There are various report available which suggest
that common test for COVID -19 may produce false
negative up to 30%. Petitioner states that online health
magazine health line .com had published an article just few
days ago which has raised concerns that no COVID-19
test is faultless and the high rate of false negatives is likely
due to collection rather than testing in a laboratory.“Tests
have different sensitivity and specificity. Needless to state
that high rate of incorrect negative results are also due to
collection procedure adopted by           different person at
different locations and for want of well trained health care
workers .It’s important to recognize that none of COVID-
19 conducted are perfect and faultless as there are still
research being conducted to understand the disease by
leading developed countries . The 30 percent rate is based
on collection, not the analytic performance of the test,              “
The petitioner’s contention is that those who have tested
COVID-19         should      be   allowed     is    laughable      and
preposterous , and there are all likely hood that respective
authorities just to run away from their responsibility of
providing reliefs and shelter may just declare large number
of poor migrants COVID negative and it will be used as
tool to show decrease in COVID positive cases putting
citizens at large at risk which means that even after
COVID negative test patient is still at risk             .The above
mentioned article is available on the below link.
“       https://www.healthline.com/health-news/false-negatives-covid19-
tests-symptoms-assume-you-have-illness#How-false-negatives-happen
6. As per media report of 20.04.2020, union home ministry
has decided not to allow interstate travel of migrant worker
after central government implements its decision to open
some economic activities in some non hot spot areas from
tomorrow ,instead the workers stranded in the lockdown
must register with local authorities to find out                 their
suitability for various kind of job , the news report is
available at the below link
https://www.ndtv.com/india-news/coronavirus-lockdown-no-inter-state-
movement-allowed-for-stranded-labourers-workers-to-register-with-
7. In view of the above it is not desirable to allow the above
petition filed by the petitioner as any relief in favour of
the petitioner will only lead to spreading of COVID-19
across country .
8. This Hon’ble Court may allow the applicant here in to
make his submissions for proper adjudication of the above
writ petition.
9. This application is made bona fide and in the interest of
justice.
a.    Permit the present Applicant herein to intervene in
the aforesaid Writ Petition bearing W.P. (C) No.
b.    Permit    the   Applicant     to    place     its   Written
Submissions before this Hon’ble Court;
c.   Pass any other order/orders as may be deemed fit in
the facts and circumstances of this case.
Advocate for the Applicant
Drawn on: 19.04 .2020
Filed on : 19.04.2020
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) diary NO. 10947 OF 2020
Union of India                               …Respondent
I, Kamlakar Ratnakar Shenoy, S/o Ratnakar Shenoy, aged about
62 years, Resident of B-903, 9thFloor, Vaishali Apartment,
Mumbai, Maharashtra- 400010, do hereby solemnly affirm and
1. That I am the Applicant in the present Application and being
well conversant with the facts and circumstances of the present
case am competent to swear this affidavit .
2. That I have read over the accompanying Application from
Paras 1 to 8 (pages 1 to 9 ), and I have understood the contents
therein which are true to my knowledge and belief and nothing
material has been concealed therefrom
VERIFICATION Verified this on this 20th day of April 2020,
at Mumbai / Delhi that the contents of the above Affidavit from
para 1 to 2 are true and correct to the best of my knowledge, no
part of it is false and nothing material has been concealed there
Union of India                                …Respondent
I, Kamlakar R Shenoy the applicant in the above application
and I do hereby appoint and retain OMPRAKASH
AJITSINGH PARIHAR , Advocate, Supreme Court to act and
appear for me/us in the above Interlocutory Application, Petition,
Appeal and on my/our behalf, to conduct and prosecute/defend
the same and all proceedings that may be taken in respect of any
application connected with the same or any Decree or order
passed therein, including proceedings in taxation and application
for Review, and to file and obtain return of documents, and
deposit and receive any money on my/our behalf in the said I.A.,
Petition, Appeal and in application for Review, and to represent
me/us, and to take all necessary steps on my/our behalf in the
above matter. I/We agree to pay his fees and out of pocket
expenses, agree to ratify all acts done by the aforesaid advocate
in pursuance of this authority.
Dated this the 19.04. 2020
ADVOCATE SUPREME COURT                               k.r.shenoy
Kindly enter my appearance in the above-mentioned
Petition/Appeal/ Reference/Review made on behalf of the
New Delhi                        Advocate for the Applicant
Date: 19.04.2020                  J-2/42B 1st floor DDA flats,