1.   Writ Petition(Civil)No.634 of 2018 has been filed
by the State of Bihar for quashing and setting aside the
order dated 31st May, 2018 passed by respondent No.2-Union
of India thereby rejecting the permission to the three
Government Medical Colleges established by the State of
Bihar    for  the  Academic  Session  2018-19.    It  is also
prayed for in the petition to issue writ of mandamus
directing the respondents to grant Letter of Permission
to    the   said  three   Government   Medical  Colleges  and
admitting the students for the Academic Session 2018-19.
The other two Writ Petitions have been filed by the State
of Jharkhand and the State of Uttar Pradesh with similar
Reason:             grievances and for similar prayers.
2.    A perusal of the order passed by this Court on 18 th
June, 2018 would reveal that this Court had taken on
record the affidavits filed by the States which pointed
out the various steps taken to remove or rectify the
deficiencies pointed out by the Medical Council of India
3.    On   the   basis    of   the    statements    made   in  the
affidavits,    this   Court     had    granted    permission   for
Academic Session 2018-19 onwards.         As per the said order,
the  Medical   Council    of  India    was   also   to  carry  out
inspection   as   to  whether     the   States   have   cured  the
deficiencies or not.
4.    Mr.   Gaurav   Sharma,    learned    counsel   appearing  on
behalf of the MCI (now NMC) states that the periodical
inspections   are   being   carried    out  with   regard   to the
aforesaid Government Medical Colleges established by the
5.    In that view of the matter, we do not find that any
purpose   would   be   served    by   keeping    these   petitions
6.    The petitioner-States are bound to adhere to the
standards as specified by the regulatory authority i.e.
NMC.   If there are any deficiencies, the NMC as well as
the Central Government have ample powers to take such
steps as are permissible in law.         The Writ Petitions are,
therefore, disposed of with the aforesaid observations.
7.    Needless   to  state  that   since   the  permission  for
starting the course to the respective Medical Colleges
was  granted    by  this   Court,    the   students   who  have
undertaken the degree courses are required to be treated
at par with the regular students and would be entitled to
the same benefits and privileges as of having passed from
the  Medical   College   which   was   granted   permission  in
accordance with law.
8.   All pending applications stand disposed of.
Date : 14-02-2023 These matters were called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
1.    The Writ Petitions and all the pending applications
including  applications  for  intervention/impleadment  are
disposed of in terms of the signed order.
(Signed order is placed on the file.)