1.     This is an application under Section 439, Cr.PC filed by the petitioner
seeking interim bail for a period of 45 days in FIR No. 280/2019 under
Sections 302/34 IPC registered at P.S. Bhalswa Dairy on the ground that his
case is covered by the High Powered Committee (HPC) guidelines.
2.     Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner is a
young man of 27 years of age having clean antecedents and has never been
involved previously in any case. He submits that the petitioner has already
spent more than two years as an under-trial prisoner, having been in custody
since 24.05.2019. He further submits that the charge sheet against the
petitioner already stands filed and therefore, prays that he maybe granted
interim suspension of sentence for a period of 45 days in accordance with
the guidelines issued by the High Powered Committee of this Court.
3.     Upon notice being issued, the Nominal Roll has been received from
the Jail Authorities, from which it is evident that the petitioner has already
spent 2 years and almost 15 days as an under-trial prisoner. It also emerges
that the petitioner’s conduct in jail has been good, and he has no previous
involvement in any cases.
4.     Learned APP appearing on behalf of the respondent opposes the
application by urging that the petitioner is charged with a heinous offence
i.e. under Section 302, IPC and if released on bail, there is every likelihood
that he will tamper with the ongoing investigation against the other four co-
accused, who are stated to be still absconding.
5.     By placing reliance on the minutes of the HPC meeting dated
18.05.2020, he contends that merely because the case of the petitioner falls
in the additional criteria “xii” of the guidelines issued by the HPC on
11.05.2021, he does not have an indivisible right to be released on interim
bail. He, therefore, prays that the present application be dismissed.
6.     Having given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions of the
parties and perused the minutes of the HPC meetings dated 18.05.2020,
04.05.2021, and 11.05.2021; I find merit in Mr. Chadha’s contention that
even the case of an under-trial or a convict falls within the categories set out
by the HPC, and he does not have any indivisible right to claim that he
ought to be granted interim suspension/bail, as the case may be. Each case is
required to be considered on its own merits by taking into consideration the
guidelines laid down by the HPC.
7.     Now coming to the facts of the present case, I find that the petitioner
is a young man of 27 years of age, whose conduct in jail has been certified
to be good and he is not alleged to be previously involved in any case.
8.     In these circumstances, merely because that the other co-accused are
absconding, cannot be a ground to deny the petitioner the benefit available
under the recommendations made by the HPC. I also do not find any reason
to believe the bald statement of the respondent that in case the petitioner is
released on interim bail, he will tamper with the investigation.
9.     The petition is, accordingly, allowed by granting interim bail to the
petitioner for a period of 45 days, subject to his furnishing a personal bond
in the sum of Rs. 25,000/- with a surety of the like amount to the satisfaction
of the Jail Superintendent.
10.    Upon being released on interim bail, the petitioner shall neither leave
the NCR of Delhi nor contact any of the prosecution witnesses. The
petitioner will provide his mobile number, and that of the surety to the
concerned IO, which numbers will be kept operational at all times.
11.    List before the Roster Bench on 02.08.2021.