1.    The detention order bearing No. 05/DMA/PSA/DET/2021 dated 25.02.2021,
issued by respondent No. 2, has been impugned by the petitioner-detenue,
a.        That the detenue has not been furnished the material relied
upon by the detaining authority like the grounds of detention and other
connected documents and the detenue has been deprived of his right to
represent against the order of detention.
b.        That the allegations levelled against the detenue are purely
criminal in nature and the detaining authority has failed to show as to
why the law of the land is not sufficient to restrain the detenue from
indulging in the activities which are criminal in nature.
c.         That the petitioner was apprehended from his home on
06.09.2020 and then implicated in F.I.R. No. 99/2019 of Police Station,
Pattan. The Charge Sheet against the detenue was filed on 05.12.2020
and the charges were framed against him on 06.02.2021 and he was
bailed out by the Court on 13.02.2021. However, the detenue was not
released from custody but implicated in F.I.R No. 159/2019. All the
aforesaid facts, particularly with regard to the grant of bail to the
detenue, find no mention in the grounds of detention.
2. Counter affidavit has been filed by the respondents wherein it has been
stated that the safeguards guaranteed to the petitioner-detenue under Article
22(5) of the Constitution of India and section 13 of the J&K Public Safety
Act, 1978 (hereinafter to be referred as the Act), have been fully complied
with and the detenue was furnished with sufficient particulars so as to enable
him to make an effective representation. The case of the detenue was
examined by the Advisory Board constituted under section 15 of the Act and
it was only after the opinion of the said Board that the order of detention was
confirmed by the Government. It is further stated that the detenue was
detained in pursuance of the detention order(supra) as he had remained in
touch with two militants, namely Haider R/O Dialgam and Basharat @
Mawiya R/O Dehruna. The detenue was working as an overground worker
and was keeping vigil on Security Forces besides passing information to the
aforesaid militants. The detenue was apprehended on a naka at Akura,
Mattan on 06.09.2020 and in this regard FIR No. 99/2020 under section 7/25
Arms Act and 3/4 Explosive Substance Act at Police Station, Mattan, stands
registered against him. It has been stated that FIR No. 159/2019 under
sections 307 and 427 RPC, 3/4 Explosive Substance Act has been registered
against the detenue in Police Station, Anantnag. Accordingly, the Police
prepared a dossier and while finding that the activities of the detenue are
prejudicial to the security of the State, the detention order was passed and
the same was executed on 28.02.2021 through Sub Inspector, Mohammad
Ashraf of Police Station, Anantnag, who handed over the detenue to the
Assistant Superintendent, District Jail, Kathua, against proper receipt.
Further the detenue was informed about his detention and the grounds of
detention vide communication dated 25.02.2021. He was also informed
about his right to make representation against the said order both before the
Government as well as before the detaining authority. The Government has
approved the order of detention vide communication dated 23.03.2021.
3. Mr. Shafaqat Nazir, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, reiterated
the submissions made in the petition and vehemently argued that the detenue
was already in custody at the time of passing of impugned order of detention
but the order is absolutely silent with regard to that aspect of the matter and
as such, the impugned order is bad in law.
4. Ms. Insha, learned Government Advocate, vehemently argued that the
detenue has been supplied with all the requisite documents and all the
constitutional and statutory safeguards have been fully complied with while
passing the order impugned and executing the same.
5. Heard and perused the record.
6. Before appreciating the rival contentions of the parties, it would be
appropriate to note that the procedural requirements are the only safeguards
available to the detenue since the Court cannot go behind the subjective
satisfaction of the detaining authority. In Abdul Latif Abdul Wahab
Sheikh v. B. K. Jha reported in (1987) 2 SCC 22, it has been held by the
Apex Court that the procedural requirements are the only safeguards
available to a detenue since the Court is not expected to go behind the
subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority. The procedural
requirements are, therefore, to be strictly complied with, if any, value is to
be attached to the liberty of the subject and the constitutional rights
guaranteed to him in that regard.
7. One of the contention raised by the petitioner is that he was not supplied
with the record relied upon by the Respondent No. 2 while issuing the order
impugned. Perusal of the execution report dated 28.02.2021 reveals that at
the time of execution of the order of detention, a copy of the detention letter
addressed to the detenue and a copy of grounds of detention comprising of
02 leaves, were handed over to the detenue for making an effective
representation against his detention. Perusal of the detention order further
reveals that the respondent No. 2 has relied upon two FIRs, dossier and
connecting documents but perusal of the execution report reveals that FIRs
and so called connecting documents have not been furnished to the detenue
which deprived him from making an effective representation before the
authorities concerned. It is only after the petitioner is supplied all the
material that he can make an effective representation to the Detaining
Authority and also to the Government and if the same is not done, he is
deprived of his valuable constitutional right. Failure on the part of the
respondent No. 2 to supply material relied upon by him while passing the
detention order renders it illegal. Reliance is placed upon the decision of
Apex Court in Thahira Haris v. Govt. of Karnataka, reported in (2009) 11
SCC 438 and the relevant para is reproduced as under:
“30. Our Constitution provides adequate safeguards
under clauses (5) and (6) of Article 22 to the detenue who
has been detained in pursuance of the order made under
any law providing for preventive detention. He has the
statements and other materials relied upon in the grounds
of detention without any delay. The predominant object of
communicating the grounds of detention is to enable the
detenu at the earliest opportunity to make effective and
meaningful representation against his detention.”
8. The other grounds urged by the petitioner are that there is no mention in the
order of detention that the detenue was admitted to bail by the Court. Perusal
of the grounds of detention reveals that it has been mentioned that the
detenue was apprehended on 06.09.2020 but there is no whisper that the
detenue was granted bail on 13.02.2021 in FIR No. 99/2020. The detention
order was passed on 25.02.2021 pursuant to the letter dated 23.02.2021 of
Senior Superintendent of Police, Anantnag accompanied with dossier and
other connected documents. Neither in the dossier nor in the order of
detention, it has been mentioned that the petitioner has been granted bail on
13.02.2021 before the issuance of detention order. Thus, it is evident that the
whole of the material was not placed before the detaining authority so as to
enable it to record its subjective satisfaction that the passing of detention
order is necessary so as to prevent the petitioner from indulging in activities
those are prejudicial to the security of the State. This too vitiates the order of
detention.
9.      For the reasons aforementioned, the present petition is allowed. The
impugned order of detention bearing No. 05/DMA/PSA/DET/2021 dated
25.02.2021, issued by respondent No. 2, is quashed with further direction to
the respondents to release the detenue-Adil Farooq Mir S/O Farooq Ahmad
Mir R/O Pthbugh Dialgam, District Anantnag, forthwith, unless required in
any other case.