1.     Heard Shri Ajit Ray, Learned A.G.A. for the State-appellant and
Shri Kameshwar Singh, learned counsel for the respondent.
2.     The instant appeal has been filed by the State against the
impugned judgment and order dated 30.07.1985 passed by Sessions
Judge, Banda by which accused-respondents Lakshmi, Ram Swaroop
and Deoraj have been acquitted from the charge of offence punishable
under Sections 302/34 I.P.C. in Sessions Trial No. 291 of 1985 (State vs.
Lakshmi and others), arising out of Case Crime No. 58 of 1985, under
3.     Brief facts of the case are that first information report was lodged
by the PW1 Chandra Bhushan, father of the deceased, on 28.02.1985 at
20:30 P.M. at Police Station Bisanda, District- Banda on the basis of
written complaint (Ext.Ka.1) alleging therein that about 8-10 days’
before his son Kuldeep Chandra had gone to see his field Chak no. 86
where he found that wife of accused Laxmi was uprooting gram crop in
his field, thereupon, his son scolded her. Thereafter, the wife of accused
Laxmi told at her house that Kuldeep Chandra insulted her. Then the
accused Laxmi and others came to the informant and told him that his
son has insulted his wife. On 28.02.1985 the informant was returning
from Banda after getting her wife Asha Devi (PW4) treated and was
going from village Murwal to his village Milathu by bullock cart which
was being driven by his son Kuldeep Chandra and his wife was lying in
the bullock cart. Informant Chandra Bhushan, Sukhdev son of Ram
Sewak (not examined) and Arimardan (PW3) son of Sadhu were
following the bullock cart. When his bullock cart covered a distance of 1
km from village Palhri and reached near Lalwa Devra towards Milathu
at about 4:30 PM, then the assailants namely Laxmi, armed with single
barrel gun, Ram Swaroop armed with double barrel gun and Deoraj
armed with 12 bore gun ambushed in the field stopped the bullock cart
and all the accused persons opened fire upon his son who sustained
injury and fell down on the ground from the bullock cart and pellets
injury was also sustained by the bullocks. On being challenged the
accused persons fled from the place of occurrence towards the North
after committing murder of his son Kuldeep Chandra. The villagers of
village Palhri and Milathu also reached at the place of occurrence.
4.     PW5 the then Constable Moharrir Ram Singh ascribed the
Chik report (Ext.Ka.3) on 28.02.1985 at 20:30 P.M. and by making
necessary entry in GD vide report no. 17 at 20:30 PM on 28.02.1985
(Ext.Ka.4) has registered Case Crime No. 58 of 1985, under Section 302
I.P.C.   against   accused    Laxmi,    Ram     Swaroop     and   Deoraj.
The investigation of the case was undertaken by the then SO Bisanda
S.I. Shyam Pal Singh (PW6). The first information report was lodged at
police station in his presence. He recorded the statement of informant
Chandra Bhushan (PW1) and proceeded to the place of occurrence at
9:30 PM. Due to insufficiency of arrangement of light inquest of dead
body of deceased was conducted and completed on next day i.e.
01.03.1985 at 08:45 AM. Ram Kishan, Devraj, Rameshwar, Sunder Lal
and Harish Chandra were appointed as panch of inquest. Panch have
opined that deceased has died due to injuries sustained by the deceased.
SI Shyam Pal Singh (PW6) prepared the panchayatnama (Ext.Ka.7),
Challan Nash (Ext.Ka.8), Photo Nash (Ext.Ka.9), Letter to Medical
Officer Civil Hospital, Banda (Ext.Ka.10), Letter to CMO, Banda
(Ext.Ka.11). He sealed the dead body and handed over it to Home Guard
Devi Deen (PW8) and village Chowkidar Sundar Lal for carrying the
dead body for postmortem.
5.     The autopsy of the dead body of deceased was conducted by Dr.
MC Mittal (PW2) and he prepared postmortem report (Ext.Ka.2) in his
own handwriting. He found following ante-mortem injuries on the
person of the deceased:-
(i) Gulter shaped gunshot wound 14 cm x 6 cm x oval cavity deep
on the left side of lower face starting just below the left ear to the
mid of mandible middle, left side mandible badly fractured. Slight
blackening was seen on the wound. 1/3 part margins are inverted
and abraded.
(ii) gunshot wound of entry 4 cm x 2 cm x clavical cavity deep
back side of skull 2.5 cm behind the right ear. Blackening and
tattooing were present. Margin inverted abraded collar, on
opening right side of parietal and occipital bones were fractured
and 25 metallic small size pellets were recovered.
(iii) gunshot wound of entry 5 cm x 4 cm x cavity deep on the left
side of chest 9 cm below the armpit on the back line. Blackening,
tattooing and charring were not present. Margins of the wound
were found inverted abraded collar and on dissection 6 th and 7th
rips were found fractured. Lower part of the lung was badly
lacerated and blood was coming out of the wound. Diaphragm
was also found lacerated. Left part of the liver was found
lacerated. Stomach perforated and lacerated. Twenty metallic
pellets were found inside the lungs and liver along with these
injury abrasion 2 cm x 1.5 cm was found on the outer part of the
back.
(iv) gunshot wound of entry 4 cm x 3 cm on the back of right side
chest 3 cm away from the mid line and 4 cm below from top of the
chest. Blackening, charring and tattooing were found around the
wound, margin of wound was inverted, abraded collar. On
dissection 2nd and 3rd rips of posterior aspect were found
fractured. In WAD one piece and 40 metallic pellets were
recovered from the diaphragm and right part of liver was
perforated and lacerated.
(v) gunshot wound 1.5 cm x 1.5 cm x bone deep on the tip of right
thumb lacerated and fractured. Margins of wound were inverted,
abraded collar.
On internal examination stomach was found empty and
perforated. Digested food and gases were found in small
intestine. Fecal matter and gases were found in the large
intestine. The gallbladder was found full and urine bladder was
also found full.
The doctor has opined that deceased has died one day before as a
result of hemorrhage/shock due to ante-mortem gunshot injury.
6.    SI Shyam Pal Singh (PW6) inspected the place of occurrence
along with informant on 01.03.1985 and prepared site-plan (Ext.Ka.14).
He has taken bloodstained and plain earth from the place of occurrence
and sealed in separate container and prepared Ext.Ka.15. He also saw the
bullock and bullock cart at the place of occurrence and found four
injuries on the right buttock of one bullock. He also sent the bullock to
LDO, Bisanda for medical examination. The bullock was medically
examined by Dr. H.S. Saraswat, LDO, Bisanda on 01.03.1985. He
prepared injury report of bullock (Ext.Ka.17) in his own handwriting.
The following injuries were found:
All these injuries were on the right side of hip just below tail of
bullock with direction from downward to upward. All injuries
were caused by hard object. Doctor opined that all the injuries
could be cured by treatment.
7.     PW6 also recorded the statement of PW4 Asha Devi, Sukhdev,
Arimardan (PW3), Sundar Lal and other witnesses and after
investigation submitted charge-sheet (Ext.Ka.16) against accused Laxmi,
Ram Swaroop and Deoraj. Cognizance on the charge-sheet was taken by
the Magistrate and after complying the procedure of Section 207 Cr.P.C
the case was committed by the then Chief Judicial Magistrate, Banda on
29.05.1985 for trial by the court of sessions. The charges were framed
under Section 302 read with Section 34 I.P.C by the then Sessions Judge,
Banda on 12.06.1985. Accused-respondents had not pleaded guilty and
claimed to be tried.
8.     In order to prove its case, prosecution has examined PW1
informant Chandra Bhushan, father of the deceased, as eye-witness who
proved the tehrir report (Ext.Ka.1). Witness Arimardan Singh was
examined as PW3 and step mother of the deceased Smt. Asha Devi was
examined as PW4 as eye-witness. Learned Public Prosecutor has also
examined Dr. M.C. Mittal as PW2 to prove the postmortem report
(Ext.Ka.2), one WAD piece (Material-Ext.1) and 65 metallic pellets
(Material-Ext-2) which were found in the body of the deceased at the
time of postmortem. Prosecution has also examined Head Constable
Ram Singh (PW5) as formal witness to prove chik report (Ext.Ka.3) and
GD registering the case (Ext.Ka.4). Investigating Officer SI Shyam Pal
Singh was examined as PW6 to prove inquest report (Ext.Ka.7), Challan
Nash (Ext.Ka.8), Photo Nash (Ext.Ka.9), Chitthi to Medical Officer
Civil Hospital (Ext.Ka.10) and Chitthi to CMO, Banda (Ext.Ka.11). He
also recovered bloodstained scarf from the dead body and prepared
memo (Ext.Ka.12) in presence of witnesses and also found two empty
cartridges and three ticklies from the place of occurrence and prepared
memo (Ext.Ka.13) in presence of witnesses. He visited the place of
occurrence along with informant and inspected the place of occurrence
and prepared site-plan (Ext.Ka.14). He took bloodstained and plain earth
from the place of occurrence and prepared memo Ext.Ka.15 in this
regard. He also sent the bullock for medical examination and proved the
charge-sheet (Ext.Ka.16). Prosecution has also examined Dr. H.S.
Saraswat as PW7 to prove injury report of bullock (Ext.Ka.17). Devi
Deen was also examined to prove that he along with village Chowkidar
Sundar Lal had taken the dead body in sealed cover along with relevant
papers for postmortem. Thereafter, the prosecution has closed his
9.     Statements of accused persons under Section 313 Cr.P.C. were
recorded by the lower court wherein the accused admitted that they are
real brothers and are sons of Ram Kumar. They stated that PW4 Asha
Devi was not ill. They denied the prosecution case and stated that
prosecution   witnesses    are   falsely deposing     against    them    and
Investigating Officer without conducting fair and proper investigation
submitted the charge-sheet against them. They further stated that a
banyan tree was allotted in their Chak during consolidation ownership of
which was claimed by the informant. They also stated that they
supported one Jageshwar in the election of Village Pradhan against the
informant, therefore, due to aforesaid facts there was enmity between
them and they were falsely implicated in this case. It is further stated that
uprooting of gram crop by the wife of Laxmi is incorrect and false,
whereas, the wife of Laxmi had given birth to a child 10-12 days before
the occurrence. In defence, the accused-respondents have examined
witness DW1 Harpal Singh, Head Master of Para Bihari Primary School
to prove alibi of accused Ram Swaroop who filed copy of attendance
register of month February, 1985 (Ext.Kha.1) regarding presence of
accused Ram Swaroop in primary school and also examined Bhagwan
Das, A.J.A./Clerk Collectorate, Banda as DW2 to prove that special
report of police regarding Crime No. 58 of 1985 was not received in his
office. They also filed documentary evidence like sijra map of village
Jot Chakbandi Akar Patra 23 part 9 pertaining to village Milathu
(Ext.Kha.5&6), certificate issued by DW2 Harpal Singh, Principal,
Primary School Para Bihari dated 11.03.1985 regarding presence of
accused Ram Swaroop in the school from 09:30 A.M. to 04:30 P.M. on
28.02.1985 (Ext.Kha.7), copy of Pariwar Register (Ext.Kha.8), copy of
Khatauni for the Fasli year 1382 to Fasli 1387 (Ext.Kha.9) pertaining to
witness Arimardan, order of Consolidation Officer dated 27.04.1984
(Ext.Kha.10), copy of chik F.I.R./Crime No. 57 of 1955, under Section
302 I.P.C., Police Station Bisanda (Ext.Kha.11), copy of charge-sheet of
Crime No. 57 of 1955, under Sections 148, 323, 302 I.P.C. (Ext.Kha.12)
and closed the evidence.
10.    Learned court below heard the argument of learned Additional
Public Prosecutor and learned counsel for the accused-respondents and
held that motive of the crime was not proved. It was also held that
presence of witness PW1 Chandra Bhushan, PW3 Arimardan and PW4
Smt. Asha Devi was not proved beyond reasonable doubt. Lower court
has further held that PW4 Asha Devi was not ill, therefore, there was no
occasion for her to be taken to Banda for treatment, therefore, the story
of the prosecution that while she was returning in the bullock cart the
occurrence has taken place is not liable to be believed. It is further held
that no bloodstained was found on the yokes and the entire story put
forward by the prosecution is unbelievable. It is further held that witness
PW3 Arimardan is relative witness and witnesses PW1 and PW4 are
father and step mother of the deceased and they are interested witness.
Learned lower court on the ground and reasons as stated above
disbelieved the prosecution case and acquitted the accused-respondents
vide impugned judgment and order dated 30.07.1985 from the charge of
offence punishable under Sections 302/34 I.P.C.
11.    Feeling aggrieved by the impugned judgment and order, State has
preferred this appeal along with application for leave to appeal which
was granted by this Court vide order dated 12.05.1985.
12.    During pendency of the appeal, accused-respondent no.1 Laxmi
has died and vide order dated 11.09.2014 the case against him was
13.    It is submitted by learned A.G.A. that occurrence has taken place
on 28.02.1985 at 04:30 P.M. and the first information report was lodged
at 08:30 P.M. on the same day. From the testimony of PW1, it is proved
beyond reasonable doubt that first information report was lodged
promptly, therefore, it rules out any sort of concoctions and
deliberations. Lower court has wrongly held that motive of the case was
not proved. Bullocks and bullock cart were found near the place of
occurrence when PW6 Investigating Officer inspected the place of
occurrence. PW6 has proved the panchayatnama and other related papers
and after sealing the dead body prepared sample seal and handed it over
to Home Guard Devi Deen (PW8) and village Chowkidar Sundar Lal to
carry it for postmortem. It is further submitted that lower court has given
too much emphasis on the evidence of PW7 Dr. H.S. Saraswat who has
proved four injuries on the right buttock of bullock just below the tail
and has opined that these injuries were caused by blunt object and all
injuries can be cured by treatment. But in cross-examination he has
clarified that he used the word 'hard object' assuming that these injuries
were caused by pellets. It is further stated that prosecution has proved
beyond reasonable doubt the presence of witness PW1 Chandra
Bhushan, father of the deceased, PW3 Arimardan, PW4 Asha Devi at the
place of occurrence in the manner as stated in the first information report
and their statements are fully supported by medical evidence. Medical
evidence also supports the manner in which deceased and one bullock
have sustained injuries. He has further submitted that the presence of
bullock and bullock cart at the place of occurrence is proved by the
Investigating Officer SI Shyam Pal Singh (PW6). The presence of
bullock cart and bullock near the place of occurrence has not been
challenged by the accused-respondents in cross-examination, therefore,
it cannot be said that the prosecution story is as a result of concoctions
and deliberations. Presence of bullock and bullock cart near the place of
occurrence is also proved by the witnesses PW1 Chandra Bhushan, PW3
Arimardan and PW4 Asha Devi. It is further submitted that on a bullock
cart the driver of the bullock cart sits on the wood i.e. on the projection
of body of the bullock cart. Only on the ground of absence of blood on
the driving seat of bullock cart, the prosecution case cannot be doubted.
PW1 Chandra Bhushan during examination-in-chief has explained that
he took his wife to Dr. Arvind Mathur who attended her and also
prepared prescription and he has also filed the prescription at the time of
his examination-in-chief. In cross-examination he has stated that
Investigating Officer has not asked regarding prescription of his wife so
he could not tell him regarding it. He has purchased medicine of about
Rs. 250-300 on the basis of said prescription and kept it in his bag. He
has further clarified that he reached to Dr. Arvind Mathur at about 11-
11:15 A.M. and remained there for about two and a half hours and the
doctor had also given an injection to his wife. This witness has denied
the suggestion that he has got the prescription prepared later. Learned
A.G.A. has submitted that medicine and injection find supports from the
prescription filed by PW1 at the time of his examination-in-chief and
there is nothing immaterial in his cross-examination which will cast any
doubt regarding the illness and treatment of his wife and also the fact
that bullock cart was being driven by his son. It is also proved by the
testimony of witnesses that deceased took his step mother on bullock
cart up to Murwal where he stopped and from Murwal father of the
deceased PW1 Chandra Bhushan and step mother of the deceased PW4
Asha Devi proceeded to Banda by bus. The deceased was driving the
bullock cart and PW4 Asha Devi was lying in the bullock cart and his
father PW1 Chandra Bhushan was behind the bullock cart on foot. The
testimony of the witnesses is consistent. The prosecution case is proved
beyond reasonable doubt against the accused-respondents. Lower court
ignoring the principles of appreciation of evidence has wrongly
disbelieved the prosecution witnesses in perverse manner and the finding
given by the lower court is perverse which resulted in miscarriage of
justice to the prosecution, therefore, the impugned judgment of lower
court acquitting the accused-respondents is liable to be set-aside and the
surviving accused Deoraj and Ram Swaroop are liable to be convicted.
14.    Learned counsel for the accused-respondents has submitted that
informant had inimical terms with the family of accused-respondents. In
fact, informant was contesting election of village Pradhan against
Jageshwar in which the accused-respondents had supported Jageshwar.
On account of this fact, the accused-respondents have been falsely
implicated in this case. It is further stated that ten days before the
occurrence the wife of accused Laxmi had given birth to a child namely
Ram Naresh on 17.02.1985 which is proved by the Pariwar Register
(Ext.Kha.8) and she was confined to the house due to maternity
condition and there was no occasion for her to go and uproot gram crop,
and therefore, the motive alleged by the prosecution is not proved by the
prosecution and the lower court has rightly held that motive of the case
is not proved. In above circumstances, non-proof of motive, presence of
witnesses at the place of occurrence was concocted by the prosecution
and lower court has rightly held that presence of PW1 Chandra Bhusan,
PW3 Arimardan and PW4 Asha Devi is not proved and has disbelieved
the prosecution witnesses of the fact. It is further submitted that Dr. H.S.
Saraswat (PW7) has found four injuries on the hip of bullock just below
the tail and has opined that those injuries were caused by hard object
which also belied the prosecution case that bullock also sustained injury
on its right hip at the time of occurrence. The presence of eye-witnesses
at the place of occurrence is not established and the order of acquittal of
the accused-respondents is not liable to be interfered and reliance has
been placed on the law laid down by this Court in State of UP vs. Kalim
Ullah and others [reported in 2021 (115) ACC 613] in paras 45 & 47.
15.    It is submitted that from the perusal of above law as pronounced
by the Hon’ble Apex Court, it is clear that in an appeal against acquittal
in absence of perversity in the judgment and order interference is not
warranted. From the evidence on record, it transpires that there is no
perversity in the judgment, therefore, judgment of the lower court cannot
be interfered in this appeal and is liable to be sustained and reliance has
been placed on para 24 of the judgment of Hon’ble Apex Court in State
of Rajasthan vs. Darshan Singh @ Darshan Lal [reported in 2012 (78)
16.    It is submitted by learned counsel for the accused-respondents that
the judgment of lower court is not perverse and lower court by appraisal
of evidence has held that the case against accused-respondents is not
made out, therefore, the order of acquittal cannot be interfered and the
appeal is liable to be set-aside. It is further stated that lower court has
rightly disbelieved the testimony of the witnesses of the fact on the
ground that their presence at the place of occurrence is not proved. It is
also submitted that receipt of Special Report is not proved in the
Collector office as stated by DW2 Bhagwan Das, AJA/Clerk
Collectorate, Banda, therefore, such circumstances cast doubt on the
prosecution story and the prosecution story cannot be relied on. Reliance
has also been placed on the law laid down by Hon’ble Apex Court in
Gopal Singh and others vs. State of M.P. (Criminal Appeal No. 1297 of
2008 decided on 12.05.2010).
17.    We have carefully considered the arguments advanced by learned
A.G.A. as well as learned counsel for the accused-respondents and have
gone through the record including the lower court record.
18.    While dealing with an appeal against acquittal by invoking
Section 378 Cr.P.C. the appellate court has to consider whether the trial
court’s view be deemed as possible one, particularly when evidence on
record has been analyzed. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Jafruddin and
others vs. State of Kerala 2022 SCC Online SC 495 in para 25 has held
that “while dealing with an appeal against acquittal by invoking Section 378 of the
Cr.P.C, the Appellate Court has to consider whether the Trial Court's view can be
termed as a possible one, particularly when evidence on record has been analyzed.
The reason is that an order of acquittal adds up to the presumption of innocence in
favour of the accused. Thus, the Appellate Court has to be relatively slow in
reversing the order of the Trial Court rendering acquittal. Therefore, the
presumption in favour of the accused does not get weakened but only strengthened.
Such a double presumption that enures in favour of the accused has to be disturbed
only by thorough scrutiny on the accepted legal parameters.”
19.    Hon’ble Supreme Court in Mohan @ Srinivas @ Seena @ Tailor
Seena vs. State of Karnataka, [2021 SCC OnLine SC 1233] has
observed as herein-under:-
"20. Section 378 Cr.P.C. enables the State to prefer an appeal
against an order of acquittal. Section 384 Cr.P.C. speaks of the
powers that can be exercised by the Appellate Court. When the
trial court renders its decision by acquitting the accused,
presumption of innocence gathers strength before the Appellate
Court. As a consequence, the onus on the prosecution becomes
more burdensome as there is a double presumption of
innocence. Certainly, the Court of first instance has its own
advantages in delivering its verdict, which is to see the
witnesses in person while they depose. The Appellate Court is
expected to involve itself in a deeper, studied scrutiny of not
only the evidence before it, but is duty bound to satisfy itself
whether the decision of the trial court is both possible and
plausible view. When two views are possible, the one taken by
the trial court in a case of acquittal is to be followed on the
touchstone of liberty along with the advantage of having seen
the witnesses. Article 21 of the Constitution of India also aids
the accused after acquittal in a certain way, though not
absolute. Suffice it is to state that the Appellate Court shall
remind itself of the role required to play, while dealing with a
case of an acquittal.
21. Every case has its own journey towards the truth and it is
the Court's role undertake. Truth has to be found on the basis of
evidence available before it. There is no room for subjectivity
nor the nature of offence affects its performance. We have a
hierarchy of courts in dealing with cases. An Appellate Court
shall not expect the trial court to act in a particular way
depending upon the sensitivity of the case. Rather it should be
appreciated if a trial court decides a case on its own merit
despite its sensitivity.
22. At times, courts do have their constraints. We find, different
decisions being made by different courts, namely, trial court on
the one hand and the Appellate Courts on the other. If such
decisions are made due to institutional constraints, they do not
augur well. The district judiciary is expected to be the
foundational court, and therefore, should have the freedom of
mind to decide a case on its own merit or else it might become a
stereotyped one rendering conviction on a moral platform.
Indictment and condemnation over a decision rendered, on
considering all the materials placed before it, should be
avoided. The Appellate Court is expected to maintain a degree
of caution before making any remark.
23. This court, time and again has laid down the law on the
scope of inquiry by an Appellate court while dealing with an
appeal against acquittal under Section 378 Cr.P.C. We do not
wish to multiply the aforesaid principle except placing reliance
on a recent decision of this court in Anwar Ali vs. State of
14.2. When can the findings of fact recorded by a court be held
to be perverse has been dealt with and considered in paragraph
20 of the aforesaid decision, which reads as under : (Babu case
[Babu v. State of Kerala, (2010) 9 SCC 189 : (2010) 3 SCC
(Cri) 1179]) "20. The findings of fact recorded by a court can be
held to be perverse if the findings have been arrived at by
ignoring or excluding relevant material or by taking into
consideration irrelevant/inadmissible material. The finding may
also be said to be perverse if it is "against the weight of
evidence", or if the finding so outrageously defies logic as to
suffer from the vice of irrationality. (Vide Rajinder Kumar
Kindra v. Delhi Admn. [Rajinder Kumar Kindra v. Delhi Admn.,
Officer-cum-Assessing Authority v. Gopi Nath & Sons [Excise &
Taxation Officer-cum-Assessing Authority v. Gopi Nath & Sons,
1992 Supp (2) SCC 312], Triveni Rubber & Plastics v. CCE
[Triveni Rubber & Plastics v. CCE, 1994 Supp (3) SCC 665],
Gaya Din v. Hanuman Prasad [Gaya Din v. Hanuman Prasad,
(2001) 1 SCC 501], Aruvelu [Arulvelu v. State, (2009) 10 SCC
206 : (2010) 1 SCC (Cri) 288] and Gamini Bala Koteswara Rao
v. State of A.P. [Gamini Bala Koteswara Rao v. State of A.P.,
It has been further observed, after following the decision
of this Court in Kuldeep Singh v. Commr. of Police [Kuldeep
Singh v. Commr. of Police, (1999) 2 SCC 10 : 1999 SCC
(L&S) 429], that if a decision is arrived at on the basis of no
evidence or thoroughly unreliable evidence and no reasonable
person would act upon it, the order would be perverse. But if
there is some evidence on record which is acceptable and which
could be relied upon, the conclusions would not be treated as
perverse and the findings would not be interfered with.”
20.   Reference may be made to para 41 of the judgment of this Court
passed in Government Appeal No. 2239 of 2009 decided on
27.05.2022 which is quoted below:-
“41. In Manu Sharma v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2010) 6 SCC 1,
the Hon'ble Supreme Court formulated the following principles to
be kept in mind by the appellate Court while dealing with appeals
"27. The following principles have to be kept in mind by the
appellate court while dealing with appeals, particularly
against an order of acquittal:
(i) There is no limitation on the part of the appellate court to
review the evidence upon which the order of acquittal is
founded.
(ii) The appellate court in an appeal against acquittal can
review the entire evidence and come to its own conclusions.
(iii) The appellate court can also review the trial court's
conclusion with respect to both facts and law.
(iv) While dealing with the appeal preferred by the State, it is
the duty of the appellate court to marshal the entire evidence
on record and by giving cogent and adequate reasons set
aside the judgment of acquittal.
(v) An order of acquittal is to be interfered with only when
there are "compelling and substantial reasons" for doing so. If
the order is "clearly unreasonable", it is a compelling reason
for interference.
(vi) While sitting in judgment over an acquittal the appellate
court is first required to seek an answer to the question
whether findings of the trial court are palpably wrong,
manifestly erroneous or demonstrably unsustainable. If the
appellate court answers the above question in the negative the
order of acquittal is not to be disturbed. Conversely, if the
appellate court holds, for reasons to be recorded, that the
order of acquittal cannot at all be sustained in view of any of
the above infirmities, it can reappraise the evidence to arrive
at its own conclusion.
(vii) When the trial court has ignored the evidence or misread
the material evidence or has ignored material documents like
dying declaration/report of ballistic experts, etc. the appellate
court is competent to reverse the decision of the trial court
depending on the materials placed."
2. In Khekh Ram v. State of H.P., (2018) 1 SCC 202 the Hon'ble
Supreme Court held that: -
"25. The elaboration of the facts in the decisions cited at the
Bar has been to underline the factual setting in which reversal
of the orders of acquittal had been interfered with by this
Court. Though it is no longer res integra that an order of
acquittal, if appealed against, ought not to be lightly
interfered with, it is trite as well that the appellate court is
fully empowered to review, reappreciate and reconsider the
evidence on record and to reach its own conclusions both on
questions of fact and on law. As a corollary, the appellate
court would be within its jurisdiction and authority to
dislodge an acquittal on sound, cogent and persuasive reasons
based on the recorded facts and the law applicable. If only
when the view taken by the trial court in ordering acquittal is
an equally plausible and reasonable one that the appellate
court would not readily substitute the same by another view
available to it, on its independent appraisal of the materials
on record. This legally acknowledged restraint on the power
of the appellate court would get attracted only if the two views
are equally plausible and reasonable and not otherwise. If the
view taken by the trial court is a possible but not a
reasonable one when tested on the evidence on record and
the legal principles applied, unquestionably it can and ought
to be displaced by a plausible and reasonable view by the
appellate court in furtherance of the ultimate cause of
justice. Though no innocent ought to be punished, it is
equally imperative that a guilty ought not to be let off
casually lest justice is a casualty."
3. State of M.P. v. Chhaakki Lal, (2019) 12 SCC 326, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court held that: -
"36. We are conscious that in an appeal against acquittal, the
appellate court would not ordinarily interfere with the order
of acquittal. But where the approach of the High Court suffers
from serious infirmity, this Court can reappreciate the
evidence and reasonings upon which the order of acquittal is
based. A miscarriage of justice which may arise from the
acquittal of the guilty is no less than from the conviction of the
innocent. Upon reappreciation of the evidence and the
reasonings of the trial court and the High Court, in our
considered view, the judgment of the High Court suffers from
serious infirmity. The High Court erred in doubting the
version of PW 1, the sole eyewitness whose evidence is
corroborated by the medical evidence and the evidence of the
ballistic expert. The High Court did not appreciate the
evidence of PW 1 in proper perspective and erred in
disbelieving her version on the contradictions which are not
material. The High Court erred in rejecting the credible
evidence of Kesar Bai (PW 1), which in our considered view
resulted in serious miscarriage of justice, where four persons
were murdered."
4. In Achhar Singh v. State of H.P., (2021) 5 SCC 543, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court explained the scope of powers of the High
Court in appeals against acquittal in the following manner: -
"16. It is thus a well-crystalized principle that if two views are
possible, the High Court ought not to interfere with the trial
court's judgment. However, such a precautionary principle
cannot be overstretched to portray that the "contours of
appeal" against acquittal under Section 378 Cr.P.C. are
limited to seeing whether or not the trial court's view was
impossible. It is equally well settled that there is no bar on the
High Court's power to re-appreciate evidence in an appeal
against acquittal. This Court has held in a catena of decisions
(including Chandrappa v. State of Karnataka, State of A.P. v.
M. Madhusudhan Rao and Raveen Kumar v. State of H.P.)
that the Cr.P.C. does not differentiate in the power, scope,
jurisdiction or limitation between appeals against judgments
of conviction or acquittal and that the appellate court is free
to consider on both fact and law, despite the self-restraint that
has been ingrained into practice while dealing with orders of
acquittal where there is a double presumption of innocence of
the accused."
5. The Hon'ble Supreme Court further held that "homicidal deaths
cannot be left to judicium dei. The court in its quest to reach the
truth ought to make earnest efforts to extract gold out of the heap
of black sand. The solemn duty is to dig out the authenticity. It is
only when the court, despite its best efforts, fails to reach a firm
conclusion that the benefit of doubt is extended."
6. The principles which emerge from the aforesaid decisions are
that the scope of appeal against acquittal under Section 378 Cr.P.C
is not limited to scrutinize whether or not the trial court's view is a
possible view. The High Court has to appreciate the evidence in an
appeal against acquittal in the same manner as it would do in an
appeal against conviction. However, while adjudicating an appeal
against acquittal, the High Court has to keep into consideration
that the accused having been acquitted in trial, there is a double
presumption of innocence of the accused.
7. Before proceeding to examine the evidence in the case in order
to ascertain as to whether the judgment and order of the learned
Court below needs any interference, it would be appropriate to
refer to the law on the subject as propounded by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court by certain judgments on the issue. While deciding
an appeal against an order of acquittal passed by the High Court,
the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held in State of U.P. v. M.K.
Anthony, (1985) 1 SCC 505, that: -
"10. While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the
approach must be whether the evidence of the witness read
as a whole appears to have a ring of truth. Once that
impression is formed, it is undoubtedly necessary for the court
to scrutinise the evidence more particularly keeping in view
the deficiencies, drawbacks and infirmities pointed out in the
evidence as a whole and evaluate them to find out whether it
is against the general tenor of the evidence given by the
witness and whether the earlier evaluation of the evidence is
shaken as to render it unworthy of belief. Minor discrepancies
on trivial matters not touching the core of the case, hyper-
technical approach by taking sentences torn out of context
here or there from the evidence, attaching importance to some
technical error committed by the investigating officer not
going to the root of the matter would not ordinarily permit
rejection of the evidence as a whole. If the court before whom
the witness gives evidence had the opportunity to form the
opinion about the general tenor of evidence given by the
witness, the appellate court which had not this benefit will
have to attach due weight to the appreciation of evidence by
the trial court and unless there are reasons weighty and
formidable it would not be proper to reject the evidence on
the ground of minor variations or infirmities in the matter of
trivial details. Even honest and truthful witnesses may differ
in some details unrelated to the main incident because power
of observation, retention and reproduction differ with
individuals. Cross-examination is an unequal duel between
a rustic and refined lawyer..…"
8. In State of U.P. v. Krishna Master, (2010) 12 SCC 324, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court explained the manner in which the Court
should examine the statement of witnesses, in the following words:-
"15. Before appreciating evidence of the witnesses examined
in the case, it would be instructive to refer to the criteria for
appreciation of oral evidence. While appreciating the
evidence of a witness, the approach must be whether the
evidence of the witness read as a whole appears to have a ring
of truth. Once that impression is found, it is undoubtedly
necessary for the court to scrutinise the evidence more
particularly keeping in view the deficiencies, drawbacks and
infirmities pointed out in the evidence as a whole and evaluate
them to find out whether it is against the general tenor of the
evidence and whether the earlier evaluation of the evidence is
shaken as to render it unworthy of belief. Minor discrepancies
on trivial matters not touching the core of the case, hyper
technical approach by taking sentences torn out of context
here or there from the evidence, attaching importance to some
technical error committed by the investigating officer not
going to the root of the matter would not ordinarily permit
rejection of the evidence as a whole.
16. If the court before whom the witness gives evidence had
the opportunity to form the opinion about the general tenor of
the evidence given by the witness, the appellate court which
had not this benefit will have to attach due weight to the
appreciation of evidence by the trial court and unless the
reasons are weighty and formidable, it would not be proper
for the appellate court to reject the evidence on the ground of
variations or infirmities in the matter of trivial details. Minor
omissions in the Police statements are never considered to be
fatal. The statements given by the witnesses before the Police
are meant to be brief statements and could not take place of
evidence in the court. Small/Trivial omissions would not
justify a finding by court that the witnesses concerned are
liars. The prosecution evidence may suffer from
inconsistencies here and discrepancies there, but that is a
shortcoming from which no criminal case is free. The main
thing to be seen is whether those inconsistencies go to the
root of the matter or pertain to insignificant aspects thereof.
In the former case, the defence may be justified in seeking
advantage of incongruities obtaining in the evidence. In the
latter, however, no such benefit may be available to it.
17. In the deposition of witnesses, there are always normal
discrepancies, howsoever honest and truthful they may be.
These discrepancies are due to normal errors of observation,
normal errors of memory due to lapse of time, due to mental
disposition, shock and horror at the time of occurrence and
threat to the life. It is not unoften that improvements in earlier
version are made at the trial in order to give a boost to the
prosecution case, albeit foolishly. Therefore, it is the duty of
the court to separate falsehood from the truth. In sifting the
evidence, the court has to attempt to separate the chaff from
the grains in every case and this attempt cannot be abandoned
on the ground that the case is baffling unless the evidence is
really so confusing or conflicting that the process cannot
reasonably be carried out. In the light of these principles, this
Court will have to determine whether the evidence of
eyewitnesses examined in this case proves the prosecution
case."
9. In Bhagwan Jagannath Markad v. State of Maharashtra,
(2016) 10 SCC 537, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that: -
"18. It is accepted principle of criminal jurisprudence that the
burden of proof is always on the prosecution and the accused
is presumed to be innocent unless proved guilty. The
prosecution has to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt
and the accused is entitled to the benefit of the reasonable
doubt. The reasonable doubt is one which occurs to a
prudent and reasonable man. Section 3 of the Evidence Act
refers to two conditions--(i) when a person feels absolutely
certain of a fact--"believes it to exist", and (ii) when he is not
absolutely certain and thinks it so extremely probable that a
prudent man would, under the circumstances, act on the
assumption of its existence. The doubt which the law
contemplates is not of a confused mind but of prudent man
who is assumed to possess the capacity to "separate the chaff
from the grain". The degree of proof need not reach
certainty but must carry a high degree of probability (Vijayee
Singh versus State of U.P., (1990) 3 SCC 190).
19. While appreciating the evidence of a witness, the court has
to assess whether read as a whole, it is truthful. In doing so,
the court has to keep in mind the deficiencies, drawbacks and
infirmities to find out whether such discrepancies shake the
truthfulness. Some discrepancies not touching the core of the
case are not enough to reject the evidence as a whole. No true
witness can escape from giving some discrepant details. Only
when discrepancies are so incompatible as to affect the
credibility of the version of a witness, the court may reject the
evidence. Section 155 of the Evidence Act enables the doubt to
impeach the credibility of the witness by proof of former
inconsistent statement. Section 145 of the Evidence Act lays
down the procedure for contradicting a witness by drawing
his attention to the part of the previous statement which is to
be used for contradiction. The former statement should have
the effect of discrediting the present statement but merely
because the latter statement is at variance to the former to
some extent, it is not enough to be treated as a contradiction.
It is not every discrepancy which affects the creditworthiness
and the trustworthiness of a witness. There may at times be
exaggeration or embellishment not affecting the credibility.
The court has to sift the chaff from the grain and find out
the truth. A statement may be partly rejected or partly
accepted [Leela Ram versus State of Haryana, (1999) 9 SCC
525]. Want of independent witnesses or unusual behaviour of
witnesses of a crime is not enough to reject evidence. A
witness being a close relative is not enough to reject his
testimony if it is otherwise credible. A relation may not
conceal the actual culprit. The evidence may be closely
scrutinised to assess whether an innocent person is falsely
implicated. Mechanical rejection of evidence even of a
"partisan" or "interested" witness may lead to failure of
justice. It is well known that principle "falsus in uno, falsus in
omnibus" has no general acceptability [Gangadhar Behera
versus State of Orissa (2002) 8 SCC 381 On the same
evidence, some accused persons may be acquitted while
others may be convicted, depending upon the nature of the
offence. The court can differentiate the accused who is
acquitted from those who are convicted. A witness may be
untruthful in some aspects but the other part of the evidence
may be worthy of acceptance. Discrepancies may arise due to
error of observations, loss of memory due to lapse of time,
mental disposition such as shock at the time of occurrence and
as such the normal discrepancy does not affect the credibility
of a witness.
20. Exaggerated to the rule of benefit of doubt can result in
miscarriage of justice. Letting the guilty escape is not doing
justice. A Judge presides over the trial not only to ensure
that no innocent is punished but also to see that guilty does
not escape [Gangadhar Behera (2002) 8 SCC 381]."
10. The principles which emerge from the aforesaid decisions are
that there are always some discrepancies in the statements of
witnesses, but while examining the evidence, the Court should
consider that whether the evidence, taken as a whole, appears to
have a ring of truth. The Court must examine whether those
discrepancies go to the root of the matter or not. In the former
case, the Appellate Court may have to uphold the order of
acquittal passed by the trial Court. In the latter case, the appellate
court is competent to reverse the decision of the trial court
depending on the materials placed the Court. The prosecution has
to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt and the accused is
entitled to the benefit of the reasonable doubt, but a reasonable
doubt is one which occurs to a prudent and reasonable man. The
doubt which the law contemplates is not of a confused mind but of
prudent man who is assumed to possess the capacity to "separate
the chaff from the grain". The degree of proof need not reach
certainty but must carry a high degree of probability. Exaggerated
stress upon the rule of benefit of doubt can result in miscarriage of
justice. Letting the guilty escape is not doing justice. A Judge
presides over the trial not only to ensure that no innocent is
punished but also to see that guilty does not escape. Though no
innocent ought to be punished, it is equally imperative that a guilty
ought not to be let off casually lest justice is a casualty. A
miscarriage of justice which may arise from the acquittal of the
guilty is no less than from the conviction of the innocent. If the
view taken by the trial court is a possible but not a reasonable one
when tested on the evidence on record and the legal principles
applied, unquestionably it can and ought to be displaced by a
plausible and reasonable view by the appellate court in
furtherance of the ultimate cause of justice.
11. In the light of these principles, this Court will have to
determine whether the evidence of the witnesses examined in this
case proves the prosecution case.”
21.    In this case the occurrence has taken place on 28.02.1985 at about
16:30 P.M. and first information report was lodged by PW1 Chandra
Bhushan, father of the deceased at 20:30 P.M. PW1 Chandra Bhushan,
PW3 Arimardan Singh and PW4 Smt. Asha Devi, step mother of the
deceased, are said to be eye-witnesses of the incident. PW1 Chandra
Bhushan in his examination-in-chief has stated that he is the resident of
village Milathu. Before 8-10 days of the incident, his son Kuldeep
Chandra had gone to his Chak No.86 and he found there wife of
accused-appellant Laxmi uprooting the standing gram crop from his
field. Thereupon, he scolded her and she informed at her house that
Kuldeep Chandra insulted her. Then accused-appellant Laxmi and others
approached to him and told that his son insulted his wife which is not a
good thing. Thereupon, he asked the accused-appellants that they may
insult him in return. He has further deposed that on 28.02.1985 he was
returning from village Murwal to his village Milathu after getting
treatment of his wife PW4 Smt. Asha Devi at Banda by bullock cart
which was being driven by his son Kuldeep and his wife was lying in the
bullock cart. He along with Arimardan and Sukhdev were following the
bullock cart. When they reached near Lalwa Dera Ghar after covering a
distance of 1 km from Palhari at about 16.30 P.M., the assailants namely
Laxmi armed with SBBL gun, Ram Sewak armed with DBBL gun and
Deoraj armed with SBBL gun, who were hiding in the South side of
Khanti suddenly came out and stopped the bullock cart and all the three
accused persons opened fire upon his son who sustained injuries and fell
down on the ground from bullock cart and one bullock also sustained
pellets injury. On being challenged, the assailants ran away towards
North after committing murder of his son. Thereafter, the residents of
village Palhari and Milathu reached on the spot. He entrusted the dead
body to them and went to police station Bisanda along with village
Chawkidar for lodging the first information report. He proved the written
complaint (Ext.Ka.1) and stated that it was written in his handwriting
and under his signature. He further stated that after lodging the first
information report he obtained the copy of F.I.R., thereafter,
Investigating Officer met him and recorded his statement. Thereafter, he
returned to the place of occurrence along with Daroga Ji. He in his
examination-in-chief clarified that he had gone to Banda for treatment of
his wife by Dr. Arvind Mathur who after seeing the patient prepared
prescription which was filed by him in the court during examination-in-
chief. In cross-examination, he admitted that accused Ram Swaroop was
a Teacher since before the occurrence. On the day of occurrence, he was
employed as Teacher in Primary School village Para Bihari which is
about 4 km away from his village Milathu. If anyone go to Para Bihari
by cycle, he will have to go via village Palhari and if anyone go to Para
Bihari on foot, he will have to go via village Kawai. He further clarified
that Kawai is less than 1 km away from his village Milathu and is 3-3 ¼
km away from village Palhari. The village Palhari is about 4-4 ¼ km
from his village Milathu and is 3 km away from village Para Bihari. He
further admitted that accused-respondent Ram Swaroop used to go to
Para Bihari to teach children and used to come to his village from Para
Bihari daily. He denied the suggestion that all the accused-respondents
were living and doing farming separately at the time of occurrence. He
further admitted that the elder son of accused Ram Swaroop is aged
about 7-8 years, who is alive. The son of accused Laxmi is aged about 5-
6 years and his elder daughter has died. He further admitted that there
was no dispute between him and accused-respondents before the incident
of uprooting of gram crop by the wife of accused Laxmi. He further
admitted that the wife of Laxmi had not uprooted the gram crop in his
presence. At first accused told him about the aforesaid incident, then
after half hour his son told him about the uprooting of gram crop. He had
not gone to the field to see the uprooted crop. He had also not shown the
field to Daroga Ji where the gram crop was uprooted because he had not
asked him to show. He further admitted that he cannot tell as to how
many neighbours and who were present at the time of reprimanding by
accused Laxmi but 2-4 persons were present. Accused Laxmi and Deoraj
had come to his house to reprimand him. He further deposed that it is
wrong to say that the son of accused Laxmi had born 8-10 days before
the incident. The youngest child of accused Laxmi is about 7-8 months
old. He denied the suggestion that the incident of uprooting of gram crop
is untrue. He also denied that the crop was being harvested 10-15 days
before the incident. In Chak No. 86, he had sown gram and wheat crops
which were not harvested before the day of incident.
22.    Learned court below has found that story of uprooting of gram
crop by the wife of accused Laxmi 8-10 days before the incident is not
proved and also found that wife of Laxmi had not gone to uproot the
gram crop from Chak No. 86. Learned lower court has also held that the
motive of the crime is not proved. Before us it is vehemently argued by
learned counsel for the respondents that at the time of incident the wife
of accused Laxmi was in Sowari (postpartum) in this respect he has
relied on Ext.Kha.8, the extract of Pariwar Register issued by Gram
Panchayat Officer, Badagaon on 17.07.1985. The date of birth of son of
Laxmi is recorded as 17.02.1985. In this case the occurrence has taken
place on 28.02.1985 while the copy of Pariwar register was obtained on
17.07.1985. The date of birth recorded in the Pariwar register is not
conclusive proof of date of birth. The accused has not produced the
extract of Birth and Death Register which is maintained under the
statute. From the evidence on record, it is abundantly clear that the copy
of birth of son of Laxmi was issued on 17.07.1985. It is suggested by
learned counsel for the accused to witness PW1 Chandra Bhushan that 8-
10 days before the incident a child born from the wife of Laxmi which
was denied by this witness. For the sake of argument, if it is presumed
that the date of birth of the son of accused Laxmi entered in the Pariwar
register is correct, then it also falsifies because he was born eleven days
before the occurrence. Moreover, in cross-examination PW1 Chandra
Bhushan has deposed that on the day of his cross-examination the age of
the youngest child of Laxmi was 7-8 months which was not challenged
by the accused in his cross-examination. His cross-examination on this
point was conducted on 15.07.1985. If the lowest figure seven months is
deducted from the date of cross-examination of PW1, the son of Laxmi
would have been born in the month of December, 1984. The incident of
uprooting of gram crop took place in the mid of February, 1985,
meaning thereby she was not confined in home due to delivery of her
child. Normally, ladies are confined at home for upto 40 days after
giving birth to a child. This statement was not challenged by learned
counsel for the respondents, therefore, it will be presumed that this fact
is admitted to the accused-respondents that the son of Laxmi born in the
Month of December, 1984. It also indicates that the date of birth of the
son of Laxmi is entered as 17.02.1985 in the Pariwar register to create
defence by the accused-respondents. It is also deposed by PW1 Chandra
Bhushan that after the incident of uprooting of gram crop accused Laxmi
and Deoraj had complained to him that deceased has insulted the wife of
Laxmi. Thereafter, he asked them to insult him and after complaint by
the accused persons his son had also told him about the incident of
uprooting the gram crop. The aforesaid version of this witness was also
not challenged in the cross-examination, therefore, it will be presumed
that the deposition on above point is trustworthy and admitted to the
accused-respondents. Therefore, unchallenged testimony of PW1 that
after half an hour of complaint made by accused his son told him about
the incident of uprooting of gram crop by the wife of Laxmi also comes
within the purview of circumstances in which his death was caused and
the same will be treated as dying declaration of the deceased.
23.    Section 32 (1) of Evidence Act reads as follows:-
“32. Cases in which statement of relevant fact by
Statements, written or verbal, of relevant facts made
by a person who is dead, or who cannot be found, or
unreasonable, are themselves relevant facts in the
“32 (1). when it relates to cause of death.— When
transaction which resulted in his death, in cases in
which the cause of that person's death comes into
question. Such statements are relevant whether the
person who made them was or was not, at the time
and whatever may be the nature of the proceeding in
which the cause of his death comes into question.”
24.    The circumstances must have some proximate relation to the
actual occurrence. Hon’ble Bombay High Court in Ajjan Munshi vs.
State, AIR 1960 Bombay 290 has held that when the statement is made
by a person as to the cause of his death, or as to any of the circumstances
of the transaction which resulted in his death, in cases in which the cause
of that person’s death comes into question is relevant under Section
32(1) of Evidence Act and also held to be relevant under Section 8 of
Evidence Act as showing the motive of the crime. In above
circumstances, learned lower court has not appreciated the evidence of
PW1 Chandra Bhushan regarding motive in right perspective and has
appreciated in perverse way, therefore, the finding of lower court that the
motive of the crime is not proved is perverse and is against the evidence
on record. The second count on which learned lower court held that the
witnesses PW1 Chandra Bhushan, PW3 Arimardan Singh and PW4 Smt.
Asha Devi were not present at the place of occurrence is also perverse
because learned lower court has held that PW4 Smt. Asha Devi was not
taken to Banda for treatment and was not carrying on the day of
occurrence by bullock cart which was being driven by the deceased.
25.    In this regard, deposition of PW1 Chandra Bhushan is very
convincing who deposed that her wife was ill and on the day of
occurrence he had taken his wife to Banda for treatment by Dr. Arvind
Mathur who saw her and draw prescription. He has also filed the
prescription, although, it is not proved by the doctor but it might have
been prepared by doctor in his presence. The prescription dated
28.02.1985 of Dr. Arvind Mathur is available on the file as paper no.
14Ka wherein it is mentioned that Smt. Asha Devi, wife of Chandra
Bhushan, is diagnosed as "बे होश होना दौरा होना दौरा दौरा दौरा" and was given intervenous
injection of 5% dextose and three other intervenous injections and also
prescribed her Disprin, capsule and other medicines. From the perusal of
prescription, it appears that PW4 Asha Devi was suffering from disease
like epilepsy. In cross-examination, he has deposed that he filed the
prescription of his wife in the court at the time of his examination-in-
chief. It has further been deposed that Daroga Ji had not asked from him
about prescription so he did tell him about the prescription. He has
further deposed that he had taken medicine for Rs.250-300 from the
hospital of Dr. Arvind Mathur. It is further deposed that medicines were
given for one week. He had not shown the medicine to Daroga Ji. He has
further stated that thereafter he has not visited to Dr. Arvind Mathur
along with his wife again. From the prescription 14Ka, it appears that
medicine was prescribed for eight days which also gets corroboration
from the statement of PW1 Chandra Bhushan. He has given vivid
description of the conveyance used by him under Section 161 Cr.P.C. by
which he had visited the doctor. He has stated that he has visited the
doctor for treatment of his wife on the day of occurrence at about 11-
11:15 A.M. and remained there for about two and a half hours. He has
also told the name of Mohalla where the clinic of Dr. Arvind Mathur is
situated. He has further stated that Dr. Arvind Mathur was known to him.
The doctor has given four intervenous injections to his wife, therefore,
his statement appears very natural and convincing that he remained in
the dispensary of Dr. Arvind Mathur for about two and a half hours.
Therefore the evidence of this witness that on the day of occurrence he
had gone to Dr. Arvind Mathur for treatment of his wife inspires
confidence and there is no discrepancy in his statement which make his
statement unreliable in this regard. Therefore, his statement regarding
visiting to Dr. Arvind Mathur for treatment of his wife for ailment like
epilepsy is proved beyond doubt and learned lower court has not
appreciated the evidence in right perspective and has ignored the
evidence and has given perverse finding in this regard. PW1 in his
deposition has deposed that he had gone to meet doctor by bullock cart
from his village Milathu to village Murwal and the bullock cart was
being driven by his son Kuldeep. He had left the bullock cart at Murwal
and from there he had gone to Banda by bus and meanwhile his son
Kuldeep remained sitting at the bus stand. Learned counsel for the
accused-respondents has not challenged the above testimony of witness
PW1 Chandra Bhushan that he had gone by bullock cart from village
Milathu to village Murwal and his son remained sitting at the bus stand
and from there he had gone to Banda to meet Dr. Arvind Mathur for
treatment of his wife and the occurrence has taken place when he was
returning from Murwal to his village by bullock cart which was being
driven by the deceased Kuldeep. In cross-examination he has stated that
at the time of occurrence his bullock cart was going from West to East.
He has further stated that accused were hiding in the West of field of
Ghutku Ahir in Khanti and as soon as the bullock cart reached there, the
accused-respondents suddenly came out from Khanti and stood in front
of bullock cart. They were not firing while standing in front of bullock
cart and after that the accused Laxmi had gone towards North side of
bullock cart and Ram Swaroop and Dev Raj gone to the South side of
bullock cart. All the three accused-respondents opened fire. It is further
deposed by this witness that he could not see as to which accused first
opened fire. The accused fired 5-6 shots. After the incident, 10-20 men
came to the place of occurrence in which Rameshwar, Brij Bhushan,
Saurabh, Kureel and others were of his village.
26.    He had further stated that he, Sukhdev and Arimardan were 25-30
steps behind the bullock cart from where they witnessed the incident.
After incident the bullock cart was dragged and parked by the side of
road. The bullock cart was lying there till arrival of Daroga Ji. All the
shot of fires were made upon his son when he was sitting on the driving
part of bullock cart. He had been on the place of occurrence for about
half an hour, till then Arimardan and Sukhdev were also present there.
He left the aforesaid witnesses on the spot and went to the police station
and when he returned the aforesaid two witnesses were not present at the
place of occurrence. He had left the police station for place of
occurrence at about 08:45 P.M. and would have reached at the place of
occurrence at about 09:30 P.M. Daroga Ji had come to the place of
occurrence in the night but he did nothing. He further deposed that when
the accused opened fire his wife got up and sat in the bullock cart. Prior
to this incident his son was shot due to which he remained hospitalized.
He wrote the written complaint at about 05:30 P.M. at his house and no
one was present at that time. The village Chawkidar had come to his
house himself and he had gone to police station on foot. He had not
given the statement to Daroga Ji that “Laxmi had stopped the bullock
cart and rest accused opened fire from South side of bullock cart”
because Daroga Ji had not asked about it. He had also not told Daroga Ji
that “a bullock cart was parked in the West side of the field of Chhotku
Ahir.” He had denied the suggestion of learned counsel for the accused
that he was neither present on the place of occurrence nor he witnesses
the incident. He had also denied the suggestion that the occurrence has
not taken place in the manner as he had stated.
27.    It is submitted by learned counsel for the accused-respondents that
the deceased Kuldeep has several enemies and prior to the incident he
was shot by the firearm due to which he remain hospitalized. The
accused-respondents have been falsely implicated in this case due to
enmity and village party-bandi. It is also submitted that there was a
banyan tree in his Chak which was allotted to him in chakbandi due to
which informant was having enmity with the accused. The argument
does not inspire confidence. In this case the son of informant was killed
before his eyes, therefore, it cannot be believed that informant will spare
the real accused and falsely implicate the accused-respondents.
28.    PW3 Arimardan Singh has supported the version of first
information report and stated that Kuldeep was know to him and he was
murdered about 4-5 months ago. He further deposed that he along with
Sukhdev and Chandra Bhushan were coming from Murwal to his village
in the evening following the bullock cart which was being driven by the
deceased Kuldeep in which Smt. Asha Devi was lying. As soon as they
reached near Lalwa Debra Har, the accused Laxmi, Ram Swaroop and
Devraj who were hiding themselves in Khanti came out. At that time
Ram Swaroop armed with DBBL gun, Devraj and Laxmi armed with
SBBL gun came in front of bullock cart and stopped it and opened 5-6
shot of fire upon the deceased Kuldeep who fell down from the bullock
cart. Thereafter, he, Chandran Bhushan and Sukhdev raised alarm then
the accused fled from the place of occurrence. They came near Kuldeep
and saw that he had died and blood was coming out from the injuries and
the clothes of the deceased become bloodstained and blood also fallen on
the ground. He remained on the spot and after half an hour PW1
Chandra Bhushan had gone to the police station for lodging the first
information report. In the cross-examination, he admitted that he,
Sukhdev and the deceased had purchased a land of 77 bigha jointly. He
also admitted that he is distant cousin of PW1 Chandra Bhushan. He
further deposed that the depth of Khanti was up to the height of waist of
a man. He also gave the vivid description of the place of occurrence.
There is no discrepancy in his statement which make his presence
doubtful. His testimony inspires confidence and is corroborated by the
testimony of PW1 Chandra Bhushan. Therefore, his evidence is liable to
be relied on.
29.    PW4 Smt. Asha Devi has deposed that accused Laxmi, Ram
Swaroop and Deoraj are known to her. They are residents of her village
Milathu. She further stated that the deceased Kuldeep is her step son and
he was murdered about four and a half months ago when she was
coming to Milathu from Murwal by bullock cart which was being driven
by the deceased Kuldeep and her husband was coming from behind
following the bullock cart. They had gone from Milathu to Murwal by
bullock cart and from Murwal to Banda by bus for treatment leaving the
bullock cart and his son at the bus stand Murwal. She has deposed that as
soon as the bullock cart reached near Lalwa Debra Har at link road at
about 04:30 P.M., accused Laxmi, Ram Swaroop and Devraj armed with
gun suddenly came out from Khanti and stopped the bullock cart and
opened fire on her son from the side of bullock cart which hit him who
fell down on the ground. Thereupon, her husband, witness Arimardan
Singh and Sukhdev raised alarm and the accused fled from the place of
occurrence. Her husband Chandra Bhushan, Arimardan Singh and
Sukhdev saw that her son was dead. Thereafter, her husband had gone to
lodge the first information report. In her cross-examination, she has
stated that the bullock cart stood where her son had fallen and it was
moved a little in the side of road. Thereafter, it was taken to nearby field
in the South side of the road. Rameshwar etc. of her village had come
there. She remained at the place of occurrence for about three hours,
thereafter, she had gone to her village from the bullock cart of Bholwa
Chamar. She has further stated that she was suffering from fever since 4-
5 days ago and she used to become unconscious due to fits but when she
was returning after getting treatment she was not unconscious and her
health was cured. Her husband had taken her from Murwal to Banda for
treatment by bus.
30.    Learned lower court has given imaginary importance regarding
non-presence of blood on the bullock cart and on the carpet of bullock
cart on which witness PW4 Smt. Asha Devi was lying and on this count
lower court has disbelieved the testimony of witnesses PW1 Chandra
Bhushan, PW3 Arimardan Singh and PW4 Smt. Asha Devi. Lower court
has also held that it is not proved that Smt. Asha Devi was ill and she
was returning after treatment by the bullock cart which was being driven
by the deceased Kuldeep. From the deposition of PW1 Chandra
Bhushan, PW3 Arimardan and PW4 Smt. Asha Devi, it is proved that the
bullock cart was parked near the place of occurrence after incident.
Investigating Officer SI Shyam Pal Singh (PW6) has deposed that when
he reached at the place of occurrence he saw the bullocks and the
bullock cart and had also seen four marks of injury on the right buttock
of one bullock, therefore, he sent the bullock along with Ram Krishna to
LDO, Bishanda for medical examination. From the evidence of PW6 SI
Shyam Pal Singh, it is proved that he found the bullock cart parked near
the place of occurrence and found that one bullock had also sustained
four injuries on its right buttock which corroborates the statements of
PW1 Chandra Bhushan, PW3 Arimardan and PW4 Smt. Asha Devi that
the occurrence has taken place while PW4 Smt. Asha Devi was returning
after getting treatment from Murwal to Milathu by bullock cart which
was being driven by her step son Kuldeep. The structure of the bullock
cart is as such that the driving seat of the bullock cart remains open from
three sides and is very small. In above circumstances, it cannot be
assumed that Dari (carpet) which was laid on the bullock cart will also
reach to the driving seat, therefore, lower court has given undue
emphasis in finding that carpet of bullock cart and the paddy straw of
bullock cart was not found bloodstained which belied the prosecution
case is perverse and against the record. There is no major contradiction
in the statement of witnesses PW1, PW3 and PW4 which make their
testimony unreliable and it is the matter of experience and the
contradiction if any is of minor nature which does not go to the root of
the case. Therefore, their statements are reliable and the lower court has
wrongly disbelieved their statements on the imaginary appreciation of
evidence which is perverse.
31.    From the perusal of Chik report (Ext.Ka.3) it reveals that the
distance between the police station and place of occurrence is 9 kms and
it is mentioned in the Chik report that first information report was lodged
on 28.02.1985 at 20:30 P.M. The scriber of the Chik report has been
examined as PW5 who has deposed that the Chik report was scribed by
him at 20:30 P.M. on 28.02.1985 in his own handwriting on the basis of
written complaint of the informant. He also deposed that he registered
the case as Case Crime No. 58 of 1985, under Section 302 I.P.C. by
making entry in GD (Ext.Ka.4) vide Rapat No. 17 on 28.02.1985 at
20:30 P.M. He also proved the GD Rapat No.17 that it is in his
handwriting and further deposed that the copy of the GD Rapat No. 17 is
a carbon copy of original GD which was before him at the time of his
deposition. He further stated that Daroga Ji was present at police station
at the time of lodging of first information report who undertook the
investigation of the case. He sent the special report to superior officers
on next day through home-guard because of non-availability of
conveyance in late hours of evening. He further deposed that his
departure from police station for delivering the special report was
entered in the GD in his own handwriting and entry was also made in
GD regarding arrival of home-guard after delivery of special report. The
copy of the aforesaid is filed as Ext.Ka.5&6. In cross-examination, he
stated that home-guard Ram Saran was posted at the police station since
before one month of the incident due to election duty. On the day of
occurrence no other cognizable report was lodged at his police station.
32.    From the perusal of Chik report, it reveals that the Chick report
was ascribed by Head Constable Ram Singh (PW5) on 28.02.1985 at
20:30 P.M. The statement of PW1 Chandra Bhushan regarding his
departure from police station at 09:00 P.M. after lodging the first
information report is not challenged by the counsel of the accused-
respondents who has stated that after lodging the first information report
he reached at the place of occurrence at about 09:30 P.M. He has further
stated that Daroga Ji had not done anything in the night and had also not
conducted the panchayatnama in night. The un-controverted testimony
of PW1 regarding lodging of first information report and returning at
09:30 P.M. from the police station on the same day rule out that the GD
was delayed after occurrence and first information report was lodged
ante timed. From the evidence on record, it is clear that the first
information report was lodged promptly, therefore, it rules out any sort
of concoctions.
33.    Hon’ble Supreme Court in Motiram Padu Joshi vs. The State of
Maharashtra, 2018 SCC OnLine SC 676, decided on 10.07.2018 has
observed in para 14 as under:-
“14. ………… In the present case, FIR was registered without
delay and prompt registration of FIR itself lends assurance to
the prosecution case. The object of the FIR is to set the law in
motion…...”
34.    Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Mehraj Singh vs State Of
U.P, 1994 SCC (5) 188, has observed in para 12 as follows:-
“12. FIR in a criminal case and particularly in a murder case is
a vital and valuable piece of evidence for the purpose of
appreciating the evidence led at the trial. The object of insisting
upon prompt lodging of the FIR is to obtain the earliest
information regarding the circumstance in which the crime was
committed, including the names of the actual culprits and the
parts played by them, the weapons, if any, used, as also the
names of the eyewitnesses, if any. Delay in lodging the FIR often
results in embellishment, which is a creature of an afterthought.
On account of delay, the FIR not only gets bereft of the
advantage of spontaneity, danger also creeps in of the
introduction of a coloured version or exaggerated story. With a
view to determine whether the FIR was lodged at the time it is
alleged to have been recorded, the courts generally look for
certain external checks. One of the checks is the receipt of the
copy of the FIR, called a special report in a murder case, by the
local Magistrate. If this report is received by the Magistrate late
it can give rise to an inference that the FIR was not lodged at
the time it is alleged to have been recorded, unless, of course the
prosecution can offer a satisfactory explanation for the delay in
despatching or receipt of the copy of the FIR by the local
Magistrate. Prosecution has led no evidence at all in this behalf.
The second external check equally important is the sending of
the copy of the FIR along with the dead body and its reference
in the inquest report. Even though the inquest report, prepared
under Section 174 Cr.P.C., is aimed at serving a statutory
function, to lend credence to the prosecution case, the details of
the FIR and the gist of statements recorded during inquest
proceedings get reflected in the report. The absence of those
details is indicative of the fact that the prosecution story was
still in an embryo state and had not been given any shape and
that the FIR came to be recorded later on after due
deliberations and consultations and was then ante-timed to give
it the colour of a promptly lodged FIR. In our opinion, on
account of the infirmities as noticed above, the FIR has lost its
value and authenticity and it appears to us that the same has
been 'ante-timed and had not been recorded till the inquest
proceedings were over at the spot by PW 8.”
35.    Dr. M.C. Mittal has been examined by the prosecution as PW2 to
prove the postmortem report (Ext.Ka.2). He has also proved the injuries
found during postmortem as mentioned earlier in the body of judgment.
He has also recovered WAD piece (Material-Ext.1) and 65 metallic
pellets from the injury no.2 which was proved as Material-Ext.2. He has
further deposed that the deceased has died on the spot after sustaining
the aforementioned injuries. He has deposed that the deceased might
have died on 28.02.1985 at about 04:30 P.M. In cross-examination he
has deposed that there is variation in the time of death mentioned in the
postmortem report of about 4-5 hours either side. In the case in hand he
has also deposed that the deceased would have hardly survived for 10-15
minutes after sustaining the injuries. He has further deposed that it is not
possible that the injuries found on the body of the deceased may be
caused by one shot. The postmortem report has not been challenged in
cross-examination. Normally, there is variation in time of death about six
hours either side in 24 hours. The witnesses had given detailed
description that one accused was armed with double barrel gun and two
accused were armed with single barrel gun and pellets were found in
side the injury no.2 which establishes that the manner in which the
occurrence is said to have been taken place is corroborated by the
medical evidence.
36.    Moreover, from the evidence of witnesses PW1, PW3 and PW4 it
is proved that accused came out from a Khanti of road side and stopped
the bullock cart and two accused from one side and one accused from
another side of the bullock cart encircled the son of the informant and
stated indiscriminate firing upon him. In this incident, the bullock which
was on the right flung has also sustained injuries. PW6 Shyam Pal Singh
Investigating Officer has found the bullock and bullock cart near the
place of occurrence and he has also found four injuries on the right
buttock of one bullock and send it to LDO, Bisanda for medical
37.    Dr. H.S. Saraswat, LDO, Bisanda has been examined as PW7. He
has corroborated that he has examined the injury of one bullock on
01.03.1985 at 04:00 P.M. which was sent by S.O., Bisanda. The owner of
that bullock was Chandra Bhushan. He has found following injuries
during medical examination of the bullock:-
38.    He has stated that all injuries were caused by hard object and all
the injuries could be cured by treatment. He has proved the aforesaid
injuries by injury report (Ext.Ka.7). He has further clarified that all the
injuries sustained by the bullock were caused by pellets of the firearm.
This witness was cross-examined and he has clarified that the injury was
caused by hard object means that injury was caused by firearm. The only
suggestion put to this witness was that he was giving evidence on
tutoring which was denied by him. In above circumstance, the statement
of this witness remained unchallenged and from his deposition it is
proved that the bullock has also sustained four firearm pellet injuries on
28.02.1985 at about 04 P.M. which also corroborates the prosecution
case because this witness has clarified in his examination-in-chief that he
mentioned in the injury report of the bullock that injury caused by hard
object means that injury was caused by pellets of firearm, therefore, it
also corroborates the prosecution version.
39.    Investigating Officer Shyam Pal Singh has been examined as PW6
who has proved that the Chik report bears his signature. He has further
deposed that he has recorded the statement of informant at the police
station and thereupon he reached at the place of occurrence in the night
at 03:30 A.M. and due to non-arrangement of proper light he could not
conduct inquest of the dead body on the same day and on the next day
i.e. on 01.03.1985 he has conducted the inquest of the dead body and
appointed Panch for that purpose and prepared inquest report (Ext.Ka.6),
(Ext.Ka.9). He has further stated that he has also taken bloodstained and
plain soil from the place of occurrence and prepared the memo
Ext.Ka.15. He has taken bloodstained scarf of the deceased, sealed it and
prepared the memo Ext.Ka.12. Further, he has taken two empty
cartridges and three ticklies from the place of occurrence and prepared
the memo Ext.Ka.13. He has also prepared letter to Medical Officer
Civil Hospital, Banda (Ext.Ka.10) and letter to CMO, Banda (Ext.Ka.11)
and sent the dead body for postmortem. He has also proved the steps
taken in the investigation. He has further stated that he has prepared the
site-plan (Ext.Ka.14) and has also indicated the place by letter ‘A’ from
where the witnesses had witnessed the incident which is about 05 paces
away from the place where dead body was found. He has also shown the
place in the site-plan where the accused were ambushing in the Khanti.
He has also shown the place by letter ‘X’ from where he has recovered
two empty cartridges and three ticklies. He has also stated that he has
found the bullock cart of the informant near the place of occurrence.
40.    In above circumstances, the prosecution case is fully supported by
the deposition of Investigating Officer SI Shyam Pal Singh (PW6) and it
is also proved that he reached at the place of occurrence at 09:30 P.M.
which corroborates that informant also came along with him which rules
out any sort of concoction. In above circumstance, the prosecution case
is proved beyond reasonable doubt.
41.    Learned lower court by wrong appreciation of evidence passed the
perverse judgment. In above circumstances, the case against accused-
respondents Ram Swaroop and Deoraj is proved beyond reasonable
42.    Now, the question arises that the eye-witnesses are consists of
father, step-mother and one relative of the deceased. The witnesses are
related witness and how it can be appreciated?
43.    In this case, first information report has been lodged promptly
citing the witnesses by the informant. The prompt registration of FIR
lends credence to the prosecution case which is also strengthened by
medical evidence as well as injuries sustained by the bullock on his right
buttock. There are three eye-witnesses namely Chandra Bhushan (PW1),
Arimardan Singh (PW3) and Smt. Asha Devi (PW4) who have
consistently stated that on the day of incident when the deceased was
coming from Murwal to Milathu by bullock cart in which PW4 Smt.
Asha Devi was lying and his father PW1 Chandra Bhushan and witness
PW3 Arimardan were following the bullock cart and as soon as they
reached near Lalwa Debra Har, the accused Laxmi (who died during
pendency of appeal) and Deoraj armed with single barrel gun and
accused Ram Swaroop armed with double barrel gun came out from
Khanti and stopped the bullock cart which was being driven by the
deceased and started firing from the side of bullock cart in which
deceased sustained injuries and fell down and the entire incident was
witnessed by them. On the alarm raised by the informant accused-
respondents fled from the place of occurrence towards North side. The
witnesses have consistently deposed about the overt acts of the accused
that all of them had opened fire on the deceased. Their evidence was
attacked by the accused-respondents that they are interested/related
witness. The relationship of the witnesses PW1, PW3 & PW4 2 with the
deceased cannot be the reason for doubting their testimony. It is fairly
well-settled that relationship is not a ground affecting the credibility of a
witness. Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Mohabbat vs. State of
M.P., (2009) 13 SCC 630, has held as under:-
“11. Learned counsel for the respondent State on the other hand
supported the judgment of the High Court.
“12. Merely because the eyewitnesses are family members their
evidence cannot per se be discarded. When there is allegation of
interestedness, the same has to be established. Mere statement
that being relatives of the deceased they are likely to falsely
implicate the accused cannot be a ground to discard the
evidence which is otherwise cogent and credible. We shall also
deal with the contention regarding interestedness of the
witnesses for furthering the prosecution version.
13. ‘5. … Relationship is not a factor to affect credibility of a
witness. It is more often than not that a relation would not
conceal actual culprit and make allegations against an innocent
person. Foundation has to be laid if plea of false implication is
made. In such cases, the court has to adopt a careful approach
and analyse evidence to find out whether it is cogent and
credible.
……… To the same effect are the decisions in State of Punjab v.
Jagir Singh (1974) 3 SCC 277, Lehna v. State of Haryana
(2002) 3 SCC 76 (SCC pp. 81-82, paras 5-9) and Gangadhar
Behera v. State of Orissa (2002) 8 SCC 381.” The above
position was also highlighted in Babulal Bhagwan Khandare v.
State of Maharashtra (2005) 10 SCC 404, Salim Sahab v. State
of M.P. (2007) 1 SCC 699 and Sonelal v. State of M.P. (2008) 14
SCC 692 (SCC pp. 695-97, paras 12-13).” As held in various
decisions, judicial approach has to be cautious in dealing with
such evidence. It is unreasonable to contend that evidence given
by related witness should be discarded only on the ground that
such witness is related.”
44.    While appreciating the evidence of witness, approach must be
whether the evidence of witness read as a whole appears to have a ring
of truth and consistent with the prosecution case or to find out whether it
is against the general tenor of the case. Their evidence cannot be doubted
merely because they are related witness. All that is required is that their
evidence is to be scrutinized with care and caution. We are of the opinion
that evidence of PW1 Chandra Bhushan, PW3 Arimardan and PW4 Smt.
Asha Devi are consistent and credit worthy and are corroborated by
medical evidence. In this case five gunshot injuries were found on the
body of the deceased and 65 pellets were taken out from the body of the
deceased and 04 pellets were also found on the right buttock of one
bullock. The pellets itself indicate that accused were armed with 12 bore
gun. Dr. M.C. Mittal has deposed that deceased might have died on the
spot on account of that injury or have survived for about 10-15 minutes
which again is consistent with the testimony of witnesses PW1, PW3
and PW4. Medical evidence of Dr. M.C. Mittal (PW2) who conducted
the postmortem report and Dr. H.S. Saraswat (PW7) lends assurance to
the evidence of above mentioned eye-witnesses. In the postmortem
report of the deceased (Ext.Ka.2), it also finds mention that blackening
and tattooing were also found on entry wound of the deceased which
establishes that the fire was shot from a very close range. From the
statement of PW7 and injury report of the bullock (Ext.Ka.17), it is also
established beyond reasonable doubt that bullock had sustained four
pellet injuries on the right side of hip just below the tale. The
postmortem report (Ext.Ka.2) and injury report of bullock (Ext.Ka.17)
also corroborate the manner in which occurrence has taken place as
stated by the prosecution witnesses. The statements of the witnesses
PW1 Chandra Bhushan, PW3 Arimardan and PW4 Smt. Asha Devi get
assurance from the postmortem report (Ext.Ka.2) and injury report of the
45.    There are compelling and substantial reasons that this Court can
interfere with the order of acquittal in the present case because of the
perversity of appreciation of evidence by lower court. From the evidence
on record, we find glaring mistake in appreciation of evidence in the
impugned judgment of the trial court which resulted into miscarriage of
justice, therefore, the judgment of acquittal is liable to be interfered.
46.    So far as the law relied on by learned counsel for the accused-
respondents in State of UP vs. Kalim Ullah and others (supra) is
concerned wherein it is held that “while exercising the powers in appeal
against the order of acquittal the court of appeal would not ordinarily interfere with
the order of acquittal unless the approach of the lower court is vitiated by some
manifest illegality and the conclusion arrived at would not be arrived at by any
reasonable person and, therefore, the decision is to be characterized as perverse.”
In the case in hand, lower court has appreciated the evidence in perverse
way and the presence of witnesses is proved and the manner in which
accused-respondents have assaulted the deceased is corroborated by the
testimony of PW1, PW3 and PW4 and even corroborated by the medical
evidence as well as the testimony of Dr. M.C. Mittal (PW2) and Dr. H.S.
Saraswat (PW7). Therefore, the law relied on by learned counsel for the
accused-respondents is of no help to the accused-respondents.
47.    So far as the law relied on by learned counsel for the accused-
respondents in State of Rajasthan vs. Darshan Singh @ Darshan Lal
(supra) wherein it is held that if the judgment of lower court is perverse
High Court may set-aside the order of acquittal and reverse the order of
acquittal and convict the accused, is concerned it is also of no help to the
48.    So far as the argument of learned counsel for the accused-
respondents that special report is not produced and Bhagwan Das,
A.J.A./Clerk Collectorate, Banda (DW2) has stated that special report of
the case was not received in his office is concerned, in this case it might
have been misplaced, therefore, reliance placed in Gopal Singh and
others vs. State of M.P. (supra) is also of no help to the accused-
respondents because case against the accused-respondents is proved
beyond reasonable doubt.
49.    It is fairly well-settled that in an appeal against the order of
acquittal, the appellate court would be slow to disturb the findings of the
trial court which had the opportunity of seeing and hearing the
witnesses. In an appeal against the order of acquittal, there is no embargo
for reappreciating the evidence and to take a different view; but there
must be strong circumstances to reverse the order of acquittal. In the
appeal against order of acquittal, the paramount consideration of the
appellate court should be to avoid miscarriage of justice.
50.    In view of the above facts and circumstances of the case, we are of
the view with the principles as discussed in the body of judgment that
the trial court has appreciated the evidence in perverse way and has
discarded the testimony of eye-witnesses PW1, PW3 an PW4 on flingy
ground by recording perverse finding.
51.    In the result, we are satisfied that the conclusion reached by the
trial court is erroneous and the order of acquittal recorded by the trial
court is liable to be reversed.
52.    Therefore, we find that the judgment of the lower court is
perverse, illegal and the impugned judgment and order dated 30.07.1985
passed by Sessions Judge, Banda by which accused-respondents
Lakshmi, Ram Swaroop and Deoraj have been acquitted from the charge
of offence punishable under Sections 302/34 I.P.C. in Sessions Trial No.
291 of 1985 (State vs. Lakshmi and others), arising out of Case Crime
No. 58 of 1985, under Section 302 I.P.C., Police Station- Bisanda,
District- Banda is liable to be reversed and set-aside and the accused-
respondents Ram Swaroop and Deoraj are liable to be held guilty for
offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 I.P.C.
53.    In view of the aforesaid discussion, the instant appeal stands al-
lowed. The judgment and order dated 30.07.1985 passed by Sessions
Judge, Banda by which accused-respondents Lakshmi, Ram Swaroop
and Deoraj have been acquitted from the charge of offence punishable
under Sections 302/34 I.P.C. in Sessions Trial No. 291 of 1985 (State vs.
Lakshmi and others), arising out of Case Crime No. 58 of 1985, under
Section 302 I.P.C., Police Station- Bisanda, District- Banda is set-aside
and reversed. Since, the accused-respondent no.1 Laxmi has died during
pendency of the appeal, the appeal against him has been abated vide or-
der dated 11.09.2014. The remaining accused-respondent no. 2 Ram
Swaroop son of Ram Kumar and accused-respondent no.3 Deoraj son of
Ram Kumar are hereby held guilty of committing offences punishable
54.    Keeping in view the fact that the incident occurred on 28.02.1985
and a period of more than 37 years have elapsed since the incident, as
also the fact that presently the accused respondent no. 2 Ram Swaroop is
aged about 72 years and the accused-respondent no.3 Deoraj is aged
about 75 years, they are awarded the following sentences: -
(i) For the offence under Section 302/34 I.P.C., the accused-respondent
no. 2 Ram Swaroop son of Ram Kumar, accused-respondent no. 3 De-
oraj son of Ram Kumar are sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life
and to pay a fine of Rupees Twenty Thousand Only (Rs. 20,000/-) each
and if they fail to pay the amount of fine, they shall have to further un-
dergo imprisonment for a period of six months in lieu thereof.
55.        The accused-respondent no.2 Ram Swaroop son of Ram Kumar,
accused-respondent no.3- Deoraj son of Ram Kumar are directed to sur-
render before the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Banda within a
period of 15 days from the date of this order to serve out the sentences
awarded to them. In case they do not surrender within the stipulated
time, learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Banda shall get them arrested by
issuing warrant of arrest and other appropriate process according to law
and commit them to jail to server out the sentences awarded to them.
56.        Let a certified copy of this judgment and order be sent to the Court
concerned immediately for ensuring its compliance.