This is a criminal writ petition under Articles 226/227 of the
Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of Habeas Corpus
directing respondents no.2 and 3 to release the detenue, as mentioned in the
head note of the petition, who is stated to be in the custody of Ashiana,
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the
petitioner was born on 10.06.1996 and is 26 years of age and has referred to
the vernacular of the Aadhar card with respect to the same. It is argued that
even as per the reply filed by the Assistant Commissioner of Police,
Panchkula, the date of birth of the detenue is 15.03.2006 and thus, she is
more than 16 years of age. It is stated that even at the time of marriage, the
said detenue was more than 16 years of age and the marriage was performed
by the petitioner and the detenue out of their free will and without any
pressure and for the said purpose, reference has been made to statement
under Section 164 Cr.P.C. which has been annexed as Annexure R-1 with
the reply filed by the State, in which the detenue has specifically stated that
she had run from the house along with the present petitioner out of her own
will as the detenue is fond of the petitioner and wished to marry him. It is
further submitted that both the petitioner and the detenue belong to the
Muslim religion and they have performed Nikah on 27.07.2022 in a Mosque
situated at Manimajra. Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the
judgment of coordinate Bench of this Court in Yunus Khan vs. State of
Haryana & Ors. reported as 2014(3) RCR (Criminal) 518 in support of his
argument that the custody of detenue should be handed over to the
petitioner under such circumstances.
Learned State counsel, on the other hand, has opposed the
present petition and has submitted that the date of birth of the detenue has
been found to be as 15.03.2006 and thus, she is a minor as she is less than
18 years of age and therefore, she is being rightly kept in Ashiana Home,
Sector 16, Panchkula and has prayed that the present petition be dismissed.
This Court has heard learned counsel for the parties and has
perused the paper book.
The petitioner was born on 10.07.1996 as is apparent from his
Aadhar card (Annexure P-1). It is, thus, apparent that petitioner no.1 has
attained the age of majority. As per the reply of the State, it has been found
that the detenue was born on 15.03.2006 and thus, she is more than 16 years
and 6 months of age. A further perusal of the reply as well as statement
under Section 164 Cr.P.C. which has been recorded on 28.07.2022 before
the Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, Panchkula, would show that the detenue
had run away from her house along with the present petitioner out of her
own will and has stated that her family members forcefully engaged her
with her maternal uncle and she has performed Nikah with the present
petitioner on 27.07.2022 in a Mosque at Manimajra and she does not want
to stay with her family and in fact, is married to the petitioner and wishes to
reside with him. The petitioner as well as the detenue are both Muslims
religion. A coordinate Bench of this Court in Yunus Khan's case (supra)
“33. As such, the marriage of a Muslim girl continues to be
governed by the personal law of Muslims. In this regard, it would
be useful to reproduce what is stated in the Principles of
Mohammedan Law by Sir Dinshah Fardunji Mulla, in Article 195
thereof. (10th Edition of 1933):
195. Capacity for marriage (1) Every Mahomedan of sound
mind, who has attained puberty may enter into a contract of
marriage.
(2) Lunatics and minors who have not attained puberty may
be validly contracted in marriage by their respective
guardians.
(3) A marriage of a Mahomedan who is sound mind and
has attained puberty, is void, if it is brought about without
his consent.
Explanation. Puberty is presumed, in the absence of
evidence, on completion of the age of fifteen years.
(This Article is shown as Article 251 in Mullas' Principles of
Mahomedan Law, 19th Edition, by M.Hidayatullah),
The same principle is also reproduced in Article 27 of Muslim Law
by Faiz Badruddin Tyabji, which is also reproduced hereinunder:
27. Age of competence to marry-With reference to the age
of competence to marry, it is presumed in the absence of
evidence of attainment of puberty, that males attain puberty
at the age of 15 years, and females at the age of 9[51]
34.     Keeping in view the above, it is obvious that even taking 15
years to be the age of puberty and not prior to that, the present
applicant. Le. Sanjeeda is well above the said age by appearance
an even by admission of all parties concerned. As such, unless her
marriage can be shown to have been not validly performed for any
other reason, she has, even ex-facie, without any evidence to the
contrary having been shown, performed a valid marriage with her
consent.
35. The wishes of her father would be, therefore, inconsequential,
in law.
As such, this Court cannot direct further detention of the applicant
in the Protection Home and, on the principal issue, it is held that
upon a nikah having been performed by a Muslim female, on her
own willingness and consent, after attaining puberty, such a
marriage would not be void in terms of Section 12 of the
Prohibition of Child Marriage Act 2006, though it may be voidable
at the instance of the minor ("child") in terms of Section 3 thereof.
Therefore, though the present order would amount to modifying
the earlier order to that extent however, as already stated earlier,
the liberty of an individual cannot be curtailed by this Court
against the provisions of law.
38. The issue of the present application not being maintainable,
having been filed by a minor would also lose significance in view
of the fact that such minor has been held to have performed a
nikah) as per her consent, permissible by the personal law which
governs the community to which she belongs. As such, since the
application only seeks that the minor be restored to the custody of
the person she has married by her own consent, she cannot be
refused such permission on the technicality of the application not
having been moved by respondent No.4, in view of the fact that he
is denied access to her in the protection home.
Otherwise also, this order also arises out of a petition seeking a
writ of habeas corpus, and the alleged "detenue" not actually
having been found to be illegally detained by respondent No.4, her
custody would naturally be returned to him, in case the so called
"detenue expresses her wish to go back with him.
39. Still, in view of the fact that the present application (CRM
No.930 of 2014) is not accompanied by an affidavit, the presence
of the applicant, as also of Respondent No.4, would be necessary.
The matter be listed for that limited purpose, on 17.02.2014.
In case the applicant states in Court that she wishes to accompany
respondent No.4 to his home and respondent No.4 also states to
the effect that he wishes to take her to his home, she would be
ordered to be released to his custody immediately thereafter.”
A perusal of the above said judgment would show that a
coordinate Bench of this Court in the above said judgment had observed
that the marriage of a Muslim girl continues to be governed by the personal
law of Muslims and has relied upon the Principles of Mohammedan Law by
Sir Dinshah Fardunji Mulla moreso Article 195 thereof, and after
considering the same, it has been observed that 15 years is the age of
puberty of a Muslim female, and on her own willingness and consent, after
attaining puberty (15 years of age) can marry a person of her choice and
such a marriage would not be void in terms of Section 12 of the Prohibition
of Child Marriage Act 2006 and after considering all the aspects, the
Coordinate Bench of this Court had further observed that in case she
wishes to accompany respondent no.4 therein, then she would be entitled to
the same and respondent no.4 in the said case was a person who had married
the Muslim girl who was more than 15 years of age but below 18 years of
age. The law laid down in the above said judgment would apply to the facts
of the present case. To a similar effect, are the judgments of coordinate
Benches of this Court in Mohd. Samim vs. State of Haryana and others
reported as 2019(1) R.C. R.(Criminal) 685 as well as in Kammu vs. State
of Haryana and others reported as 2010(4) R.C.R. (Civil) 716.
Keeping in view the above said facts and circumstances and
law laid down in the above said judgments, the present petition is allowed
and the Incharge, Ashiana, Sector 16, Panchkula is directed to hand over the
custody of the detenue, as mentioned in the head note of the present
petition, to the petitioner.
Pending miscellaneous application, if any, stands disposed of in
view of the abovesaid order.