CMP(M) No. 1255 of 2022 a/w
Reserved on:      10.03.2023
1.   CMP(M) No. 1255 of 2022
State of H.P. & Others
Kanshi Ram (deceased) through his LRs Raj Kumar &
State of H.P. & Others            .....Applicants/Appellants.
H   3.   CMP(M) No. 1217 of 2022
State of H.P. & Others            .....Applicants/Appellants.
4.   CMP(M) No. 1218 of 2022
State of H.P. & Others            .....Applicants/Appellants.
5.   CMP(M) No. 1219 of 2022
State of H.P. & Others
State of H.P. & Others                .....Applicants/Appellants.
CMP(M) No. 1221 of 2022
State of H.P. & Others                .....Applicants/Appellants.
8.   CMP(M) No. 1222 of 2022
State of H.P. & Others                .....Applicants/Appellants.
9.    CMP(M) No. 1229 of 2022
State of H.P. & Others                .....Applicants/Appellants.
10.   CMP(M) No. 1230 of 2022
of   .....Respondents.
ou                          .....Respondent.
State of H.P. & Others                .....Applicants/Appellants.
Madan Lal (deceased) through his LRs Subhash Chand &
H   12.   CMP(M) No. 1232 of 2022
State of H.P. & Others                .....Applicants/Appellants.
13.   CMP(M) No. 1253 of 2022
State of H.P. & Others                .....Applicants/Appellants.
14.   CMP(M) No. 1254 of 2022
State of H.P. & Others                .....Applicants/Appellants.
State of H.P. & Others                .....Applicants/Appellants.
State of H.P. & Others                .....Applicants/Appellants.
Whether approved for reporting? Yes
For the applicants/ :        Mr. I.N. Mehta, Senior Additional
appellants                   Advocate General with Mr.
For the respondents :          Mr. J.L. Bhardwaj, Senior
Advocate with Mr. Sanjay
Bhardwaj, Advocate, for the
respondents in all the
applications except CMP(M) No.
1229 of 2022.
Mr. Hirday Ram, Advocate, for
the respondents in CMP(M) No.
1229 of 2022.
All these applications have been heard and are
being decided together, as common questions of facts and law
are involved.
The State of Himachal Pradesh acquired land in
village Tepra, Sub Tehsil Namhol, District Bilaspur, H.P. for
construction of Namhol-Bahadurpur road.              Notification under
Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act was issued on 30.7.2005.
The publication of above referred notice was made in Himachal
H   Pradesh Rajpatra and in vernacular news papers ‘Dainik
Bhaskar’ and ‘Divya Himachal’ on 13.8.2005.                      The Land
Acquisition Collector offered the market value of the acquired
land at different rates as per the specification of the land.
3.          The    respondents        herein     preferred         separate
reference petitions against the assessment offered by Land
Acquisition Collector, which came to be registered before the
reference Court i.e. the District Judge, Bilaspur as LAC Nos.
142, 143, 148, 149, 150 and 151 of 2008/2019. The reference
Court vide a common award dated 5.5.2021 decided all the
reference petitions and awarded enhanced compensation at
uniform rate of Rs. 35,000/- per biswa (Rs. 7,00,000/- per
bigha).
Applicants herein have sought to assail the common
award dated 5.5.2021 passed by the reference Court, but they
have not been able to prefer the appeals within the prescribed
period of limitation. Hence, delay in filing the appeals has been
prayed to be condoned by way of instant applications.
The grounds, as urged on behalf of the applicants,
in all the applications, seeking condonation of delay, are
H   common. It is averred that the award was passed on 5.5.2021
by the reference Court. Application for obtaining certified copy
of the award was filed on the same day. The certified copy of
the award was supplied on 30.6.2021. Thereafter, the District
Attorney, Bilaspur forwarded the file, alongwith his opinion, to
Executive Engineer, Bilaspur on 8.7.2021, who received the
same in his office on 12.7.2021. The Executive Engineer
forwarded the file to the Deputy District Attorney, office of the
Chief Engineer, HPPWD, Hamirpur on 13.7.2021 for legal
opinion, from where the case was further forwarded to the office
of Engineer-in-Chief, HPPWD, Shimla on 29.7.2021. The said
office also forwarded the file to the office of Additional Chief
Secretary (PW) to the Government of Himachal Pradesh on
The Additional Chief Secretary (PW) remitted the file
back to Engineer-in-Chief, HPPWD on 1.10.2021 with direction
to file appeals. The file thereafter again was sent to the office of
Executive Engineer, Bilaspur on 11.10.2021. The draft appeal
was prepared in the office of Superintending Engineer, Bilaspur
and was again submitted to the office of Engineer-in-Chief,
HPPWD for approval. The office of Engineer-in-Chief, HPPWD
H   vetted the appeal on 13.12.2021 and thereafter was forwarded
to the office of Advocate General, Himachal Pradesh. The fair
draft was again submitted to the office of Superintending
Engineer, Bilaspur, who after appending his signature forwarded
the same to the office of Advocate General on 23.7.2022. This
entire process is stated to have caused delay of 367 days in
filing the appeal.        As per applicants, the delay is neither
intentional nor wilful.
7.           The    application    has   been    opposed
respondents. In reply (ies) filed on behalf of the respondents, it
has been submitted that the applicants have failed to show any
cause for condonation of delay in filing the appeal.
specifically been pointed out that there is no explanation for
delay between 8.10.2021 and 13.12.2021, as the appeal was
stated to have been prepared on 8.10.2021, but was not got
vetted till 13.12.2021. Once, the office of Advocate General had
vetted the appeal on 13.12.2021, the final draft was not
prepared and signed till 23.7.2022. It is specifically submitted
on behalf of the respondents that there is absolutely no
explanation for delay between 13.12.2021 i.e. the date of
preparation of final draft and 23.7.2022 when the file was
H   allegedly sent to the office of Advocate General for filing the
appeal.
8.           The applicants have filed rejoinder(s). It has been
submitted that when the appeal was vetted by the office of
Advocate General, it transpired that only one certified copy of
the award had been obtained. Accordingly, the certified copies
were applied on 7.12.2021 and were supplied to the applicants
on 12.1.2022. It is further submitted that the delay in filing the
appeal is bonafide.
9.          I have heard learned counsel for the parties and
carefully gone through the record available on the file.
Noticeably, as per the averments made in the
application, the applicants have taken a specific stand that the
certified copy of award sought to be impugned by way of appeal
was supplied by the Copying Agency on 30.6.2021. Thereafter,
the final draft of the appeal could be vetted on 13.12.2021. The
exhausted     for   obtaining   legal     opinion(s)
administrative approval(s), as explained on behalf of the
applicants, have already been noticed in paras supra.
Record reveals that the appeal was filed in the
Registry of this Court on 6.8.2022.        Even as per their own
H   saying, the applicants after preparation of final draft of the
appeal on 13.12.2021 had forwarded the same for filing to the
office of Advocate General on 23.7.2022. By way of averments
made in the rejoinder(s), it has been stated that after
preparation of final draft, it had transpired that the certified
copies of award to be attached in all the appeals, were not
available. Accordingly, the certified copies were again applied
on 7.12.2021 and were received by the applicants from Copying
Agency on 12.1.2022.
Taking all the averments of the
applications as gospel truth, it is clearly found that there is
absolutely no explanation whatsoever for not filing the appeal,
immediately after 12.1.2022, when the applicants had received
the certified copies.
There is no doubt that the conduct of applicants has
throughout been reckless and negligent in dealing with the
matters having serious repercussion. The entire approach of
applicants, without any doubt, can be stated to be lackadaisical.
The prayer for condonation of delay in filing the
appeal can be allowed only if the Court is satisfied that the
delay has been caused by sufficient reasons and such reasons
are bonafide..    However, in the given facts of the case, the
H   applicants have failed to show any cause much less sufficient
cause for not filing the appeal within prescribed period of
limitation. The applicants took about six months for preparation
and vetting of the appeals after receipt of certified copy of the
award.    It cannot be assumed that the applicants, who are
assisted by legal experts at every stage, were not aware about
the period of limitation for filing the appeals. It being so, the
applicants should have acted with sufficient promptness and
expedition. The facts, however, reveal otherwise. At no stage,
urgency was shown at the end of applicants. Above all, for the
period of more than seven months between 12.1.2022 when the
applicants allegedly received certified copies of the award and
6.8.2022 when the appeals were filed before this Court, no
explanation whatsoever has been preferred.
The rigors of Limitation Act apply equally to all
including the Government.      The sufficiency of a cause for
condonation of delay can be assessed keeping in view the facts
and circumstances of each particular case. As noticed above,
what to talk of sufficient cause, applicants have not been able
to assign any reasons whatsoever for delay in filing the appeal
H   specially after 12.1.2022. Undue laxity of government officials
needs strongest deprecation. The law has equal balance for all.
Though, some leeway is permissible in the case of government
but that cannot be construed as an absolute license to flout the
law at whims. In State of Madhya Pradesh Vs. Bherulal,
(2020) 10 SCC 654, Hon’ble Supreme Court observed as
“2.          We are constrained to pen down a detailed
order as it appears that all our counseling to
Government and government authorities have fallen on
deaf ears i.e., the Supreme Court of India cannot be a
place for the Governments to walk in when they       .
choose ignoring the period of limitation prescribed. We
have raised the issue that if the Government
machinery is so inefficient and incapable of filing
appeals/petitions in time, the solution may lie in
requesting the Legislature to expand the time period
for filing limitation for Government authorities because
of their gross incompetence. That is not so. Till the
Statute subsists, the appeals/petitions have to be filed
as per the Statues prescribed.
rt         No doubt, some leeway is given for the
Government inefficiencies but the sad part is that the
authorities keep on relying on judicial pronouncements
C  for a period of time when technology had not advanced
and a greater leeway was given to the Government
(LAO V. Katiji ). This position is more than elucidated
ig  h   by the judgment of this Court in Post Master General V.
Living Media ( India) ltd. (2012) 3 SCC 563 where the
Court observed as under:(Post master General case,
SCC pp. 573-74, paras 27-30)
H             “27)     It is not in dispute that the person(s)
concerned were well aware or conversant with the
issues involved including the prescribed period of
limitation for taking up the matter by way of filing a
special leave petition in this Court. They cannot
claim that they have a separate period of limitation
when    the   Department     was    possessed       with
competent persons familiar with court proceedings.
In the absence of plausible and acceptable
explanation, we are posing a question why the
delay is to be condoned mechanically merely
because the Government or a wing of the
Government is a party before us.
matter of condonation of delay when there was no
gross negligence or deliberate inaction or lack of
Though we are conscious of the fact that in a
bonafide, a liberal concession has to be adopted to
advance substantial justice, we are of the view that
in the facts and circumstances, the Department
bureaucratic
cannot take advantage of various earlier decisions.
The claim on account of impersonal machinery and
inherited                     methodology
several notes cannot be accepted in view of the
modern technologies being used and available. The
law of limitation undoubtedly binds everybody
including the Government.
29)    In our view, it is the right time to inform all the
government       bodies,       their        agencies      and
C  instrumentalities that unless they have reasonable
and acceptable explanation for the delay and there
was bonafide effort, there is no need to accept the
ig  h   usual explanation that the file was kept pending for
several months/years due to considerable degree of
procedural     red-    tape    in     the    process.     The
government departments are under a special
H       obligation to ensure that they perform their duties
with diligence and commitment. Condonation of
delay is an exception and should not be used as an
anticipated benefit for government departments.
The law shelters everyone under the same light and
should not be swirled for the benefit of a few.
30.   Considering the fact that there was no proper
explanation offered by the Department for the delay
except mentioning of various dates, according to us,
the Department has miserably failed to give any
acceptable    and     cogent   reasons    sufficient    to
condone such a huge delay.”
Eight years hence the judgment is still unheeded!
A reading of the aforesaid application shows
that the reason for such an inordinate delay is stated to
be only “due to unavailability of the documents and the
process of arranging the documents”. In paragraph 4 a
reference has been made to “bureaucratic process
works, it is inadvertent that delay occurs.”
The same reiteration is again found in State of Odisha and
ors. Vs. Sunanda Mahakude, ( 2021) 11 SCC 560, in which it
has been observed as under:-
A reading of the aforesaid shows that there is
no reason much less sufficient and cogent reason
C    assigned to explain the delay and the application has
also been preferred in a very casual manner. We may
ig    h           notice that there are number of orders of this State
Government alone which we have come across where
repeatedly matters are being filed beyond the period of
limitation    prescribed.      We have been        repeatedly
discouraging        such       endeavours       where        the
H                 Governments seem to think that they can walk in to the
Supreme Court any time they feel without any
reference to the period of limitation, as if the statutory
Law of Limitation does not exist for them.
4.           There is no doubt that these are cases
including the present one where the Government
machinery has acted in a inefficient manner or it is a
deliberate endeavour. In either of the two situations,
this court ought not to come to the rescue of the
petitioner. No doubt, some leeway is given for
Government inefficiency but with the technological
advancement now the judicial view prevalent earlier
when such facilities were not available has been over
taken by the elucidation of the legal principles in the
judgment of this Court in the Office of the Chief Post
Master General & Ors. v. Living Media India Ltd. & Anr.
– (2012) 3 SCC 563. We have discussed these
aspects in SLP [C] Diary No.9217/2020, State of
Madhya Pradesh v. Bheru Lal decided on 15.10.2020
and thus, see no reason to repeat the same again.
5.       In the present case, the State Government
has not even taken the trouble of citing any reason or
excuse nor any dates given in respect of the period for
which condonation is sought. The objective of such an
exercise has also been elucidated by us in the
aforesaid judgment where we have categorized such
cases as “certificate cases”.
C Thus, there is no escape from the conclusion that
the applicants have failed to make out any case for condonation
of delay in filing the appeals.
H   16.         Learned Senior Additional Advocate General further
sought the indulgence of this Court on the ground that
provisions of Section 5 of Limitation Act be interpreted liberally
and the delay caused in filing the appeals be condoned. Such
prayer also deserves rejection for the reasons that liberal
interpretation does not mean that the party can be allowed to
approach the Court at any time without showing any cause,
which can be termed to be sufficient. Considering such aspect,
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Brahampal Alias Sammy and
512, has held as under:-
The Court in the abovementioned cases,
highlighted upon the importance introducing the
concept of “reasonableness” while giving the clause
“sufficient cause” a liberal interpretation. In furtherance
of the same, this Court has cautioned regarding the
necessity of distinguishing cases where delay is of few
days, as against the cases where the delay is
inordinate as it might accrue to the prejudice of the
rights of the other party. In such cases, where there
exists inordinate delay and the same is attributable to
the party’s inaction and negligence, the Courts have to
C     take a strict approach so as to protect the substantial
rights of the parties.
ig    h            22.       Undoubtedly, the statute has granted the
Courts with discretionary powers to condone the delay,
however at the same time it also places an obligation
upon the party to justify that he was prevented from
abiding by the same due to the existence of “sufficient
H                  cause”. Although there exists no strait jacket formula
for the Courts to condone delay, but the Courts must
not only take into consideration the entire facts and
circumstances of case but also the conduct of the
parties. The concept of reasonableness dictates that,
the Courts even while taking a liberal approach must
weigh in the rights and obligations of both the parties.
When a right has accrued in favour of one party due to
gross negligence and lackadaisical attitude of the
other, this Court shall refrain from exercising the
aforesaid discretionary relief.”
17.          Accordingly, there is no merit in the applications and
the same are dismissed, without any orders as to costs.