Dated this the 17th day of January, 2023
This Crl.M.C has been filed to quash Annexures A1 FIR and
A2 Final Report in Crime No.3516/2017 of Kollam East Police
Station u/s 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Cr.P.C).
2.    The petitioner is the accused. The 2nd respondent is the
victim/defacto complainant. The offences alleged against the
petitioner are punishable under Sections 417, 354 A, 354B and
376 of IPC.
3.    The prosecution case in short is that the petitioner by
giving false promise of marriage to the 2 nd respondent, sexually
assaulted her at several places in Palakkad and Coimbatore. It is
further alleged that the petitioner later on withdrew from his
promise to marry the 2nd respondent and also made preparation
to marry another girl.
4.    I have heard Sri C.S. Sumesh, the learned counsel for
the petitioner, Smt K.V Rashmi, the learned counsel for the 2 nd
respondent and Sri C.N Prabhakaran, the learned senior public
5.   The learned counsel for the petitioner Sri C.S. Sumesh
submitted that even if the entire allegations in the FI statement
together with the materials collected during investigation are
believed in its entirety, no offence under Sections 376, 354A,
354B and 417 of IPC is made out. The learned counsel further
submitted that the statement given by the victim reveals that the
petitioner and the 2nd respondent were in love and the alleged
sexual relationship they had was only consensual in nature. The
learned Public Prosecutor submitted that the FI statement given
by the victim would show that the ingredients of the offence of
rape and cheating have been attracted and when prima facie
case is made out, the jurisdiction vested with this Court under
Section 482 of Cr.P.C cannot be invoked.
6.   I went through the FI statement in detail. The reading
of the FI statement would show that both the petitioner and the
2nd   respondent    worked   together   in  a   T.V  serial   called
‘Akashadooth’ and fell in love. The statement would further show
that they voluntarily went to several places and stayed in hotels
at  Palakkad    and   Coimbatore   and   had   consensual    sexual
relationship. In the meanwhile, petitioner went abroad, gradually
relation broke down, thereafter the 2nd respondent came to know
about the marriage of the petitioner with another girl, the 2 nd
respondent was strained on account of the same and lodged the
7.   Section 375 of IPC, inter alia states that a man
commits rape if he has had any form of sexual intercourse with a
woman without her consent. Consent is at the center of the
offence of rape. If we analyze Section 375 of IPC, there is no such
mention of the consent obtained under the false promise of
marriage. Section 90 of IPC refers to the expression ‘consent’.
Section 90, though, does not define ‘consent’, describes what is
not consent. It says that ‘consent’ is not consent if it is given by a
person under a misconception of fact and if the person doing the
act knows or has reason to believe that the consent was given in
consequence of such misconception. Relying on this, the courts
have interpreted the word ‘consent’ in the description 'secondly'
under Section 375 of IPC, i.e., 'without her consent', and held that
any consent given under a misconception of fact is vitiated.
Explanation 2 to Section 375 of IPC refers to the form of consent.
It specifically says that consent means an unequivocal voluntary
agreement when the woman by words, gestures or any form of
verbal or non-verbal communication, communicates willingness
to participate in the specific sexual act. Thus, if the consent as
described in Explanation 2 could be made out from the statement
of the victim, the offence under Section 375 of IPC cannot be said
to be attracted. The Apex Court in Deepak Gulati v. State of
Haryana [(2013) 7 SCC 675] and in Dhruvaram Murlidhar
Sonar (Dr) v. State of Maharashtra (AIR 2019 SC 327)
drawing distinction between rape and consensual sex observed
that the court must very carefully examine whether the
complainant had actually wanted to marry the victim or had
malafide motives and had made a false promise to this effect
only to satisfy his lust. Drawing distinction between mere breach
of a promise and non-fulfilling a promise, it was observed that if
the accused has not made the promise with the sole intention to
seduce the prosecutrix to indulge in sexual acts, such an act will
not amount to rape and that if the accused had any malafide
intention or clandestine motives, it is a clear case of rape. In
Sonu alias Subhash Kumar v. State of Uttar Pradesh (AIR
2021 SC 1405), while quashing a charge sheet alleging an
offence under Section 376 of IPC, the Apex Court observed that if
there is no allegation to the effect that the promise to marry
given to the victim was false at the inception, no offence of rape
has been attracted. In Pramod Suryabhan Pawar v. State of
Maharashtra [(2019) 9 SCC 608], the Apex Court held that
“consent” of a woman with respect to Section 375 must involve
an active and reasoned deliberation towards the proposed act. To
establish whether the “consent” was vitiated by a “misconception
of fact” arising out of a promise to marry, two propositions must
be established. The promise of marriage must have been a false
promise, given in bad faith and with no intention of being
adhered to at the time it was given. The false promise itself must
be of immediate relevance, or bear a direct nexus to the woman’s
decision to engage in the sexual act. Recently in Shambhu
Kharwar v. State of Uttar Pradesh (AIR 2022 SC 3901), the
Apex Court held that in a prosecution for rape on the false
promise of marriage, the crucial issue to be considered is whether
the allegation indicates that the accused had given a promise to
the victim to marry which at the inception was false and based on
which the victim was induced into a sexual relationship.
8.    Admittedly, the petitioner and the 2nd respondent were
in consensual relationship. It is also not in dispute that they
voluntarily went together to several places and stayed in hotels
and had sexual relationship, which included oral sex. It is also
notable that the 2nd respondent paid the bills of the hotels in
which they stayed. It is absolute that the allegations in the FI
statement do not on their face indicate that the petitioner had
given promise to the 2nd respondent to marry which at the
inception was false and based on which the 2nd respondent was
induced into a sexual relationship. There is also no allegation in
the FI statement that when the petitioner promised to marry the
2nd respondent, it was done with bad faith and with intention to
deceive her. That apart, it is seen from the FIS of the 2 nd
respondent as well as from her         statement recorded under
Section 164 of Cr.P.C that the petitioner before departing to Dubai
on visiting visa in April, 2015, persuaded the 2 nd respondent to
register the marriage, but she declined the said move stating that
she wanted the marriage to be conducted with the consent of
their respective families. Moreover, it is apparent from the
statement of the 2nd respondent that the stumbling block for the
2nd respondent to marry the petitioner is the stubborn opposition
from the part of the petitioner’s family and more than anybody
else, the 2nd respondent was well aware of this factum of
opposition as the same was conveyed to her unequivocally by
none     other  than   the   mother   of  the   petitioner. These
circumstances do indicate that the petitioner was in fact ready to
marry the 2nd respondent and the promise made by him was not a
false one or lacking bonafide even if there was a promise to
9.    The records show that the relationship between the
petitioner and the 2nd respondent strained over time. In short, the
alleged sexual relationship between the petitioner and the 2 nd
respondent can only be termed as something out of love and
passion     for  the   petitioner  and    not   on    account    of
misrepresentation made to her by the petitioner. That apart, a
reading of the FI statement would disclose the consent on the
part of the 2nd respondent as defined under Explanation 2 of
Section 375 of IPC. Therefore, I am of the view that even if the
facts set out in the FI statement are accepted in totality, no
offence under Section 375 of IPC is made out.
10.   In the light of the above findings, I am of the view that
no useful purpose will be served by allowing the criminal
prosecution against the petitioner to continue. Hence, all further
proceedings pursuant to Annexures A1 FIR and A2 Final Report in
Crime No. 3516/2017 of Kollam East Police Station stands hereby