Case :- PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION (PIL) No. - 574 of 2020
Respondent :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Petitioner :- Gaurav Kumar Gaur,Abhinav Gaur,Aditya
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Arun Kumar,Ashish Mishra,Dhiraj
1. We have heard learned counsel appearing for the respective
parties, the President Allahabad High Court Bar Association, Sri
Amrendra Nath Singh, learned Advocate Commissioners, Sri
Raghav Dwivedi and Sri Rohit Pandey, learned Advocate who
have all appeared through video conferencing.
2. The recent spike of COVID-19 infection has hit every corner
of various districts of State. The surge has absolutely paralysed
public life and all the medical aid systems have reached to a
stage of complete saturation. We have been informed that Covid
hospitals are over-flooded with Covid patients and there is both
manpower shortage and available facilities in hospitals. The
situation is so alarming that if it is not handled carefully and
cautiously we may lead to stage of complete collapse of public
health system.
3. Sri Raghav Dwivedi, learned Advocate has pleaded in his
application that Covid hospitals are not admitting patients and
thus covid infected people who could be saved from the
pandemic have been left to the mercy of Nature.
4. Sri Amrendra Nath Singh, President of Bar Association has
urged that High Court should be closed for at-least two weeks
so that litigants and lawyers may not rush to the Court and the
spread of infection is contained. Looking to the current
situation, he has submitted that courts below may be directed to
not to pursue non bailable warrants that may have been issued
in various cases until 30th April, 2021. He has further submitted
that while window for filing of cases in the High Court may
remain open but there should be no physical hearing of cases
and even online hearing of cases should be done where issues
regarding demolition, eviction and recovery are involved. He
has also emphasized the need for complete lock-down looking
to the current situation.
5. Sri Rohit Pandey, learned Advocate has informed us that in
the mass Covid testing that had taken three days ago in his
residential colony/ area no nasopharyngeal swab was taken and
swab was taken from under the tongue which means an ultimate
RTPCR to be negative. This itself amounts to fraud and playing
with public lives. Showing lesser number of Covid patients in
this way, in our considered opinion, neither can help the
medical department nor, those sitting in administration to deal
with pandemic. This can only defraud people to face ugly surge
of pandemic only in near future.
6. There is yet another complaint that testing samples are kept
in waiting for more than 12 hours. The issue is why the samples
are not being sent at certain intervals. Pandemic has hit the state
since 2020 and it does not lie in the month of either the
Government or the district administrations and Nodal officers
of the Districts dealing with Covid, to say that there is shortage
of manpower.
7. There are complaints that RTPCR are not updated in time i.e.
24 hours and this has resulted in people remaining unaware of
their covid infection status leading to fare chances of further
spread of infection.
8. We have been informed that there is acute shortage of
Remdesivir, an injectable anti viral medicine which is in great
demand for covid patients.
9. The above discussions lead us to conclude that following
issues needed emergent attention so that we may save condition
from worsening further and reaching to a point of collapse:
i Public movement restrictions and stoppage of public activities.
iii Extra ordinary steps to provide basic health needs.
iv To save and create infrastructure for non Covid patients.
v Boosting up immunization programme.
(i) Night curfew or Corona curfew is a very small step. It can
curb. only night parties and large religion congregation in the
coming month of Ramzan and Navratri. What we need to
ensure is that there is no unnecessary public movement even
during day timings. We know that when river acquires velocity
no band can stop it and yet efforts are made to restrict it. We
need to restrict public movement at least for a week or 10 days
to break the chain. If life survives one would regain wealth and
improve his economy. After all every development is for people
and if there are no men there will be no use of any development
activity. We understand that complete lock-down for weeks
together may not be feasible but looking to the current surge of
pandemic, we direct the government to look into the viability of
complete lock-down in those districts were spread has increased
alarmingly, for at least two weeks or three weeks and at least
immediately all public gatherings must be restricted to 50
The district administrations are directly to religiously comply
with the guidelines issued by Stae Government on 11.04.2021.
(ii) Urgent medical help is the need of the hour. One would be
lamenting only, if even after suffering for long one year from
this pandemic, still infrastructure is not sufficient to meet the
requirement of population. While we insist for emergent
purchases of bipap machines and high flow cannula masks to
meet the demand of patients who may even be lying in the
corridors of Covid hospitals/ centres, we direct the Government
to acquire open places in the city areas of districts that are worst
hit in the state, to set up temporary level 1 hospital in a make
shit structure. Arrange man power on contract basis
immediately to serve all those who are admitted to temporary
level 1 Covid hospitals/ centres. We also direct for immediate
purchase and supply of bipap machine and high flow cannula
mask in ambulance to all the district hospitals and level 2 and
level 3 hospitals of the districts like Prayagraj, Lucknow,
Varanasi,Kanpur, Gorakhpur, were covid infection has got
widely spread.
(iii) Basic health needs includes the triple 'TTT' programme i.e.
Testing, Tracking and Treatment. For this we have to ensure
that people are tested before hand. At every center the District
administration must ensure large-scale testing and all clinical
samples that are collected must be sent to the laboratory at
every six hourly interval so that RTPCR comes within 18 to 24
hours to start with medication. The containment zones must be
updated every day to be notified and Rapid Force team be made
vigilant and must be put to task. Proper sanitation of
containment zones at every 48 hourly rest must be a rule.
Certain medicines that may be useful in arresting spread of
COVID-19 may be notified to be used by people themselves.
Testing team and work force involved in the process must be
properly trained to take nasopharyngeal and oropharyngeal
swab only and to take care of clinical samples in its storage and
transportation to laboratory for testing. Government must
ensure that all testing laboratories are properly functioning.
We have been informed that a new Covid testing machine
(COVAS) is not functioning for want of testing kit. We direct
the State Goverenment to provide/arrange testing kit available
for COBAS machine at Moti LaL Nehru College, Allahabad
within twenty four hours.
(iv) Immunization programme must be vigorously carried out
through vaccination of large number of people.Central
Government and Indian Counsel for Medical Research must
rethink for extending the benefit of vaccination to students
pursuing higher education and those appearing in Board
examination of high school and intermediate looking to the
large scale infection in population of younger generation. If the
Board and other examination conducting bodies are going for
offline examination then government must explore viability to
extend benefit of vaccination to such students as well.
(v) We must not forget that people suffer from various other
diseases and so they may need not only urgent medical help but
incentive care admission as well.
In the above regard we take the example of Prayagraj where
140 bed ICU for Covid patients have been created but this has
been possible by converting various ICUs into Covid ICUs and
so the government must increase ICU beds well equipped with
ventilators in Swaroop Rani Nehru Hospital and such other
hospitals of the other districts. Looking to the election code of
conduct presently prevailing, the Government must take
pragmatic view to the demand of Hospitals for increasing the
number of ICU beds by permitting purchases at the rate
previously done matching with Government approved hospital's
rates like that of Sanjay Gandhi Post Graduate Institute of
Medical Science in the past, instead of going for long drawn
process of public tender.
10. We must give priority to public health over elections and
Government is expected to streamline every department of
public health and public care in the light of the observations
made hereinabove .
11. Last but not the least , public awareness programme
regarding spread of COVID-19 must go on. District and Police
administration must follow our last order dated 06.04.2021 in
its letter and spirit.We make it clear that if we are apprised on
the next date fixed of any one moving on roads without mask,
we shall take it as an act of contempt on the part of police and
will certainly haul up the SSP, Prayagraj and other concerned
districts for the same.
12. We also direct both the Central as well as State Government
to ensure production of remdesivir, an injectable anti viral
medicine by pharmaceuticals making them available easily the
necessary ingredients and its supply in open market. We further
direct the district administration of every districts in State to
take stern action against those who are hoarding it and black
marketing it.
13. The Chief Medical Officer Dr. Prabhakar Rai also appeared
in person on our request before the Court to render his
assistance regarding plan to check surge of pandemic in the
District of Prayagraj. He apprised us of various steps taken to
contain the pandemic. He showed us deep green facts behind
the pandemic. He told us how people despite being made aware
of the pandemic did not follow the guidelines. He submitted
that people's cooperation is the only answer to the pandemic.
He also showed us the plan afloat in the city by District and
public health administration. We do not find any reason to
doubt in what he submitted but we must observe that a lot is
needed to be done in raising more effective infrastructure to
meet the current challenge posed by Covid-19.
14. We also request the High Court to consider request of Bar
Association for its closer for at least two weeks as suggested by
the President of the High Court Bar Association. The High
Court should remain open only for online hearing in limited
number of benches for urgent matters only looking to the
present scenario. Regarding request made by the President of
High Court Bar Association for stay over all pending non
bailable warrants and extension of interim orders, we are of the
view that since there is already pending PIL Writ Petition No.
564 of 2020, applications should be moved in that very PIL for
appropriate directions.
15. The State shall file affidavit of an officer not below the rank
of Secretary in this Court by the next date fixed detailing out
the measures taken in the light of the observations made
16. Put up this matter again on 19th April, 2021. The District
Magistrate and Chief Medical Officer, Prayagraj shall appear
through video conferencing on the next date fixed.
17. Let a copy of this order be sent to the Chief Secretary
Government of U.P., District Magistrate, S.S.P. Prayagraj,
Lucknow, Varanasi, Kanpur and Gorakhpur Within 24 hours for
immediate necessary action at his end.