1.    Registry is directed to number the afore-noted application.
2.    Considering the fact that there has been only a short delay in filing the
present appeal, application is allowed and the delay is condoned.
3.    Disposed of.
4.    Petitioner’s Indian Patent Application No. 2170/DEL/2008 for the
invention “Text Selection Using a Touch Sensitive Screen of a Handheld
Mobile Communication Device” [hereinafter, “subject invention”], was
filed on 16th September, 2008, claiming priority since 26th October, 2007
from a corresponding European application.1 First Examination Report was
issued on 28th August, 2014, to which, Appellant responded on 13th March,
2015. Hearing was scheduled after four years on 23rd October, 2019,
whereafter, vide order dated 23rd June, 2020, the Assistant Controller of
Patents and Designs refused the application under section 15 of the Patents
Act, 1970 [hereinafter, “impugned order”].
5.      As nearly three-quarters of the twenty-year patent term have expired,
the Appellant is confronted with a scenario in which, even if the questioned
order were to be nullified, their battle continues. They must re-engage with
the patent office to establish their invention’s validity in order to secure a
patent.
6.      Having set out the chronology of events, let us briefly take note of
subject invention and ‘grounds’ for rejection in the impugned order. Subject
invention, comprising of 23 claims, is a method and system for facilitating
character/ text selection by a user on touch screen of a handheld device
where displayed characters available for selection are small enough that user
contact with the screen is capable of overlapping a plurality of
simultaneously displayed characters. It is intended to provide for accurate
control for selection of text/ icons displayed on the touch screen.
7.      The impugned order rejecting the application, has been structured as
7.1. It begins noting the procedural history of the application. Then, in
paragraph No. 2, the Assistant Controller reproduces the objections
entailed in the hearing notice. Paragraph No. 3 records that
Appellant’s agent attended the hearing on 23rd October, 2019 and
submitted written submissions on 27th November, 2019.
7.2. Paragraph No. 4 is devoted to summarising the invention and the
succeeding sub-paragraphs, record the points on which Appellant laid
“4. I now turn my attention to the claimed subject matter. The alleged invention
is summarized as follows:
A system and method is disclosed that provides for character or text selection
and editing. The text and character selection is made by user contact with a
touch sensitive screen. In order to allow for refinement of the selection, a
second expanded view is implemented as compared to the original display
configuration of the screen. Furthermore, the selection is described in relation
to two endpoints of the block of text. Additionally, a point is specified as the
point desired for insertion of the selected text. The expanded view is
implemented along with the original view as required when making character
selection.
Applicant has also emphasized on following points in submitted reply
1. present invention provides technical effect in terms of providing an efficient
system of selection of text without compromising with storage capacity and
thus, making the system more robust and resource effective. It is submitted that
therein lies a technical effect of the invention.
2 . The method claims do not refer to an executable list of defined instructions
at all and they do not claim a logical, arithmetical or computational method at
all. Accordingly, the method claims of the present application do not fall within
the scope of 3(k) as defined in the Manual of Patent Practice and Procedure.”
7.3. In the subsequent paragraph (No. 5), it is mentioned that
Assistant        Controller        was      unpersuaded      by     Appellant’s
submissions in view of the following:
“5. Without prejudice to the above said, having considered the aforesaid
submission, I do not find the submission persuasive in view of following:
Claims 1-18 claims mainly A method for accommodating character or text
selection by a user on a touch screen of a handheld electronic device (300)
where displayed characters available for selection are small enough that user
contact with the touch screen (322) when making a character selection is
capable of overlapping a plurality of simultaneously displayed characters, said
method comprising: displaying text on a touch screen (322) of a handheld
electronic device in which selectable characters are smaller than an area of
user contact with the screen, said display of text constituting an original display
configuration; detecting that a first area of the touch screen (322) has been user
contacted, said first area encompassing a plurality of characters of which at
least two have been partially covered by the user's contact with the touch
screen; displaying an expanded view of the first area that has been expanded to
an extent that each of the at least two partially covered characters is
individually sufficiently large that only one of said at least two characters can
be predominantly covered by similar user contact with the touch screen (322);
detecting a first character from the at least two characters that is being selected
in the first expanded view by being predominantly covered by said similar user
contact with the touch screen in said expanded view; and resuming the original
display configuration of the text with the first character that has been detected
as being user selected in the first expanded view being signified.”
7.4.  Paragraph No. 6 contains the conclusion that the subject invention is
not patentable. The said paragraph is extracted below:
“6. The oral argument and the written submission of the agent of the applicant
have been carefully considered. However without prejudice, although the
hearing submissions have attempted to address the other requirements, yet the
substantive requirement of the Patents Act, 1970 i.e. Section 3(K) is not found
complied with. Hence, in view of the above and unmet requirements, this instant
application is not found in order for grant Also I agree with the findings of the
examiner that the subject matter as described and claimed attract the provisions
of sections 2(l)(j) of the Patent Act, 1970.”
8.    Although the initial sentences of paragraphs No. 5 and 6 may appear
to demonstrate thoughtful consideration and rationale, a more meticulous
examination of the text unveils a contrasting reality. The reasons for
dismissing the Appellant’s arguments, as detailed in paragraph No. 5, are
merely a word-for-word replication of their own claims. Therefore, no
reasoning is discernible in this paragraph. The miniscule reasoning is then
found in paragraph No. 6 in the expression “without prejudice, although the
hearing submissions have attempted to address the other requirements, yet
the substantive requirement of the Patents Act, 1970 i.e. Section 3(k) is not
found complied with. Hence, in view of the above and unmet requirements,
this instant application is not found in order for grant”. The above lines are
the only shred of rationale in the impugned order. The Court is therefore
unable to comprehend as to how this conclusion has been drawn. Simply
remarking that subject invention is not patentable being a mathematical or
business method, a computer programme per se, or an algorithm is not
sufficient. The Controller ought to have disclosed reasons to support his
conclusion. Reasoning through a speaking order is a vital aspect of the
principles of natural justice and is of utmost importance, which needs to be
underscored. If the patent office’s orders lack proper reasoning, it may be
difficult for the applicant to identify the grounds for appeal. The legal
proposition that an order of such kind should be supported by reasons, needs
no reiteration. Not only does this benefit the applicant, whose rights are
likely to be affected, but also assists the Court in ascertaining how the
concerned officer applied their minds and reached the impugned conclusion,
while exercising judicial review. This Court, in an earlier decision of SK
Geo Centric Co Ltd. v. The Controller of Patents,2 observed that such
reasoning should be discernible to the Court and in absence thereof, the
entire order stands vitiated. In the impugned order, the Court is bewildered
as to how the Controller has concluded that subject invention is hit by
Section 3(k) of Patents Act and has plainly agreed with the Examiner’s
opinion that the claimed patent is not an invention.
9.       The entire text of the impugned order has been dedicated to noting the
details of the invention, claims made therein and how the proceedings were
Dated 08th February, 2023 in C.A. (COMM. IPD-PAT) 241/2022.
conducted. That may be necessary, and no fault lies there; however, the crux
of the issue is lack of reasoning supporting the final decision, a task at which
the Assistant Controller has completely fallen short. This makes the decision
arbitrary, suggesting a subjective determination without any objective
criteria. Such kind of mechanical, template and cut-and-paste orders cannot
sustain and must be stridently discouraged. In a recent decision of Dolby
International AB v. The Assistant Controller of Patents and Designs,3
Hon’ble Mr. Justice C. Hari Shankar had the occasion to consider an
unreasoned order of the Controller. The Judge was at pains to identify the
reasoning in the order impugned therein and observed that concerned
officers of the Controller of Patents and Designs office must bear in mind
that question of grant and rejection of a patent is a serious matter. Indeed,
these words must resonate with the authorities, and it must be ensured that
Patent Controller’s officers practice due application of mind while rendering
decisions. Well-articulated reasons in such orders would demonstrate that
the decision has been made with proper consideration and allows for more
effective judicial review, if necessary.
10.      The impugned order fails to satisfy the basic requirements of any
order adjudicating on patentability of an invention. It is for this arbitrary
approach of the Assistant Controller that the Court is not in a position to
examine the impugned order on merits. Accordingly, same is quashed and
set aside, and following directions are issued:
10.1. The matter is remanded back to the Controller of Patents for re-
consideration.
10.2. Prior to deciding the matter afresh, Appellant shall be granted a
hearing.
10.3. Application for subject invention shall not be decided by the Officer
who passed the impugned order.
10.4. Above exercise be completed and a fresh order be passed within a
period of three months from the date of release of this order.
11.    Needless to say, de novo consideration would proceed independently,
uninfluenced by the impugned order.
12.    The appeal is disposed of in above terms, along with pending
applications.
13.    A copy of the order be also brought to the notice of the Controller
General of Patents, Designs and Trademarks for information and necessary
administrative action.