For the Petitioner :  ou             Mr. Ajay Sharma, Sr. Advocate with Mr.
For the Respondents : Mr. Anup Rattan, A.G. with Mr. Y. W.
C      A.G. and Mr. Rajat Chauhan, Law
ig  h                   The instant petition has been filed for the grant of
following substantive reliefs:-
H                      (a) That impugned acts of the respondents in the
shape of raising construction of proposed dam
(bandh) on Bagna nalla somewhere in between
villages Balaog and Bawana may very kindly be
quashed and set aside and directions may very
kindly       be     issued        to   the     respondents          not     to
raise/construct dam at the said place, to secure the
ends of law and justice;
Whether reporters of the local papers may be allowed to see the judgment? yes
(b) That the respondents may very kindly be
restrained from raising/constructing any bandh (dam)
at Bagna nalla somewhere in between villages
Balaog and Bawana having been proposed by the
respondents by issuing a writ of mandamus to the
respondents;
The petitioners are aggrieved by the action of the
respondents whereby a bandh (dam) has been proposed to be
built/constructed on Bagna nalla in Gram Panchayat, Bagi, Tehsil
According to the petitioners, almost 90 to 95%
inhabitants of Gram Panchayat Dhamoon, Shilru and Panti Up-
Mohal of Gram Panchayat Bagi will          be affected by the
construction of such dam to the extent that the very source of
livelihood would be snatched. The residents of these panchayats
are not only dependent upon the water sources for agriculture
purpose and also for running their water mills, catering to the
H   needs of cattle and other ancillary purposes. Majority of the
inhabitants of these panchayats are unemployed and are, thus,
dependent on agriculture. It was further averred that there is
already a IPH Scheme, namely, Jhakri Water Supply i.e. under
construction, which could cater to the needs of the adjoining
inhabitants of the villagers. In case, water from Bagna nalla is
diverted to the dam, then there will be no water in the bagna
nalla for the inhabitants of the panchayats referred to above.
It is also averred that as per the naksha Riwazat
Abpshi (irrigation by custom), the water flowing from Jadeni kuhl
is only source of irrigation available to the land of the petitioners
and other inhabitants, that too, of a specific khasra numbers as
given therein. Further, as per Wazib-ul-Arj of the above three
villages, it has been specifically provided in Clause-6 that the
water of Jadeni Kuhl is available to the villagers for irrigation
purpose and also for the use of cattle.
Even though the respondents have not filed the
reply, however, they have placed on record instructions dated
06.03.2023, the relevant portion whereof read as under:-
On the above cited subject, I have honour to say that the
ig  h          respondent department has framed the detailed project report
for construction of rain water harvesting structures over Kuni
Khad in G.P Dhamoon Tehsil and district Shimla for
strengthening of various water supply scheme and irrigation
H              schemes under Gram Panchayat Dhamoon, Baggi and
The A/A & E/S of this project was accorded in the year 2018-
19 amounting to Rs. 749.76 Lakhs for construction of 3 Nos.
Rain water harvesting structures at Bagna Nala in G.P Baggi,
Jhakri nala in G.P. Dhamoon and at kuni khad in G.P. Chanog
in the same stream. The project was approval under MLA
priority. It is humbly submitted that on completion of this
project   approximately           4500       people    of    above      three
Panchayats will be benefited and further 152.33 Hect.
Command culturable area will be irrigated properly after
completion of this Project. The project has been approved
with a view that strengthen the existing schemes as it    .
becomes very difficult to meet out the existing demand of
water supply in the vicinity. The overflowing water during
rainy season is proposed to be stored and further using in
summer       season     for
Moreover, it is pertinent to submit here that these structures
will also recharge the existing water sources in surrounding
purpose.
area, which will increase the water retaining capacity of soil
and will further help in increasing the agricultural yield of
farmers. It is submitted that the feasibility of the project has
been ascertain by the Geological survey of India regarding
geological    survey,     investigation        and     structural     design
C  approximately 10 lacs of Rupees has been incurred and
geological survey report has been submitted by the
Geological Survey of India. The works have already been
ig  h   awarded to the contractors for amounting to Rs. 635.71 lacs
The respondent department has already incurred about
176.47 lacs on the project.
H       It is humbly submitted that the said work is being constructed
for the benefit of the public at large and large population of
the area will be benefited after completion of this work. The
concerned Gram Panchayat Dhamoon vide resolution No. 11
dated 30.05.2015 issued No Objection Certificate for
construction of the project. It is also submitted that the
necessary flow water in the Khad on downstream side will be
maintained for running of Gharat, irrigation channel and
fauna and flora, hence there is no adverse effect on the
interest of the petitioners as such the present petition being
devoid of any merits deserves dismissal at this initial stage in
present scenario.
the public interest as this is the need base project in the
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and
have gone through the record of the case.
At the outset, we may clear the air regarding the
ownership of water sources. It is a misconception that water
belongs to the villagers who use the same, whereas it is more
than settled that water is the property of the State and no
individual(s), whosoever has any right to claim this property
even though situated within his personal property.
7.          In M. C. Mehta vs. Kamal Nath & Ors. (1997) 1
SCC 388, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has laid down that the
river is a public property. It cannot be given for private use.
Public at large is the beneficiary of the sea-shore, running
waters, airs, forests and ecologically fragile lands. The State as a
H   trustee is under a legal duty to protect the natural resources.
These resources meant for public use cannot be converted into
private ownership. The public trust doctrine is a part of law at
present. Even in absence of legislation, the executive acting
under the doctrine of public trust cannot abdicate the natural
resources and convert them into private ownership or for
commercial use. Large area of the bank of River Beas which is
part of protected forest has been given on a lease purely for
commercial purposes to the Motels. The area being ecologically
fragile full of scenic beauty should not have been permitted to be
converted into private ownership and for commercial gains. The
Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the Government of Himachal
Pradesh has committed patent breach of public trust by leasing
the ecologically fragile land to the Motel management. The lease
transactions are in patent breach of the trust held by the State
Therefore, the Motel shall pay compensation by
way of cost for the restitution of the environment and ecology of
the area.
The Public Trust Doctrine primarily rests on the
principle that certain resources like air, sea, waters and the
forests have such a great importance to the people as a whole
that it would be wholly unjustified to make them a subject of
private ownership. The said resources being a gift of nature.
They should be made freely available to everyone irrespective of
H   the status in life. The doctrine enjoins upon the government to
protect the resources for the enjoyment of the general public
rather than to permit then-use for private ownership or
commercial purposes.
9.          In Tirupathi vs. State of A.P. & Ors. AIR 2006 SC
1352, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has laid down that the
government is bound to protect historical tanks qua concept of
'sustainable development' and 'public trust doctrine'. Destruction
of local ecological resources is not permissible. Property subject
to trust must not only be used for a public purpose, but it must
be held available for use by general public. Property must be
maintained for particular types of use (I) either traditional uses,
or (ii) some uses particular to that form of resources. Principle of
'Inter-Generational Equity' also to be applied for protecting
natural resources has also been taken into consideration by their
Lordships of the Hon'ble Supreme Court. The Hon'ble Supreme
Court has held that the tank is a communal property and State
authorities are trustees to hold and manage such properties for
benefits of community. State cannot be allowed to commit any
act or omission which will infringe right of community and
alienate property to any other person or body. Fact that the party
has spent money on developing land is immaterial.
10.         In Susetha vs. State of T.N. & Ors (2006) 6 SCC
H   543, the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that natural water
storage resources are not only required to be protected but also
steps are required to be taken for restoring the same if it has
fallen in disuse. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has also observed
that the same principle cannot be applied in relation to artificial
tanks.
11.         In Centre for Public Interest Litigation and Ors.
vs. Unon of India & Ors (JT 2012 (2) SC 154), the Hon'ble
Supreme Court observed that there is no universally accepted
definition of natural resources, they are generally understood as
elements having intrinsic utility to mankind. Natural resources
belong to the people but the State legally owns them on behalf
of its people and from that point of view natural resources are
considered as national assets, more so because the State
benefits immensely from their value. The State is empowered to
distribute natural resources. However, as they constitute public
property/national asset, while distributing natural resources, the
State is bound to act in consonance with the principles of
equality and public trust and ensure that no action is taken which
may be detrimental to public interest. The government is bound
to protect environment, forest, air, water, coastal zones etc. the
State Government is bound to act as guardian and trustee in
relation to catchment area of the pond, lake or river. People are
H   owner of the natural resources.
12.         The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Centre
for Public Interest Litigation (supra) referred to the decision
in Fomento Resorts and Hotels Limited vs. Minguel
Martins (2009) 3 SCC 571 and has laid down that the public
trust doctrine enjoins upon the Government to protect the
resources for enjoyment of the general public rather than to
permit their use for private ownership or commercial purposes. It
has also observed that public has special interest in public land
water etc. It is the duty of the State not to impair such resources.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court emphasized that there is obligation
to use such resources in such a manner as not to impair or
diminish the people's rights and the people's long-term interest
in that property or resources, including down slope lands, waters
and resources.
In Fomento Resorts and Hotels Limited vs.
Minguel Martins (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court has laid
C      53. The    public   trust   doctrine    enjoins      upon
Government to protect the resources for the enjoyment of
the general public rather than to permit their use for
ig  h             private ownership or commercial purposes. This doctrine
puts an implicit embargo on the right of the State to
transfer public properties to private party if such transfer
affects public interest, mandates affirmative State action
H                 for effective management of natural resources and
management thereof.
citizens    to     question       ineffective
54.The heart of the public trust doctrine is that it imposes
limits and obligations upon government agencies and
their administrators on behalf of all the people and
especially future generations. For example, renewable
and non-renewable resources, associated uses, ecological
values or objects in which the public has a special interest
(i.e. public lands, waters, etc.) are held subject to the
duty of the State not to impair such resources, uses or
values, even if private interests are involved. The same
obligations apply to managers of forests, monuments,
parks, the public domain and other public assets.
Professor Joseph L. Sax in his classic article "The Public
Trust Doctrine in Natural Resources Law: Effective Judicial
Intervention" (1970), indicates that the Public Trust
Doctrine, of all concepts known to law, constitutes the
best practical and philosophical premise and legal tool for
protecting public rights and for protecting and managing
resources, ecological values or objects held in trust.
55. The Public Trust Doctrine is a tool for exerting long-
established public rights over short-term public rights and
private gain. Today, every person exercising his or her
right to use the air, water, or land and associated natural
ecosystems has the obligation to secure for the rest of us
C   the right to live or otherwise use that same resource or
property for the long term and enjoyment by future
generations. To say it another way, a landowner or lessee
ig  h          and a water right holder has an obligation to use such
resources in a manner as not to impair or diminish the
people's rights and the people's long term interest in that
property or resource, including down-slope lands, waters
There cannot be any two opinions that natural
resources are the assets of the nation and its citizens. It is the
obligation of all concerned, including the Central and the State
Governments,    to conserve and not          waste such valuable
resources. Article 48A of the Constitution requires that the State
shall endeavour to protect and improve the environment
and safeguard the forests and wildlife of the country. Similarly,
Article 51A enjoins a duty upon every citizen to protect and
improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers
and wildlife, and to have compassion for all the living creatures.
In view of the constitutional provisions, the doctrine of public
trust has become the law of the land. The said doctrine rests on
the principle that certain resources like air, sea, water and
forests are of such great importance to the people as a whole
that it would be highly unjustifiable to make them a subject of
private ownership.
The State holds all the water bodies in public trust
for the welfare of this generation and all the succeeding
generations and, therefore, protecting water bodies must be
given as much weightage, if not more as allowing house-sites or
other buildings to come up on such tanks poramboke lands, and
water charged lands.
16.         Now, as regards the rights of the petitioners to use
H   water, we find that the respondents have already taken
adequate steps to safeguard their interests, because the project
in question is being undertaken for the benefit of public at large
by maintaining the necessary flow of water in the khud down
stream for running of gharat and irrigation channels. That apart,
the Gram Panchayat Dhamoon has already passed a resolution
No. 11, dated 30.05.2015 and issued no objection certificate in
consequences thereof for the construction of the project.
Noticeably, only four people, that two residents from
village Bawana, one each from village Shilru and Panti have filed
the instant petition, therefore, the same cannot be termed to be
the voice of the people, as the voice of the people would be best
reflected if the local rural elected bodies like gram panchayat or
gram sabha would come up before the Court.
Nonetheless, even if the allegations, as set out in the
petition, are taken on the face value even then, as observed
above, we find that the interests of the villagers represented by
the petitioners have already been adequately safeguarded, as
the over flowing water during rainy season is proposed to be
stored and further used     in summer season for drinking and
irrigation purposes. The stored water would recharge the existing
water sources in the surrounding areas, which will increase the
water retaining capacity of soil and further held in increasing the
H   agricultural yield of farmers. After all the respondents have
obtained a feasibility report of the project, that too, from the
prestigious institution of Geological Survey of India by spending
Rs. 10 lacs. Moreover, the work has already been awarded to the
contractors amounting to Rs. 635.71 lacs and the respondent
department has already incurred an amount of Rs. 176.47 lacs
on the project so far.
From the aforesaid discussion, it is evidently clear
that the instant petition is more in the nature of speculation as.
the   interests       of   the
safeguarded and protected while formulating and implementing
the scheme for raising construction of bandh (dam).
Accordingly, we find no merit in this petition and the
same is accordingly dismissed, leaving the parties to bear their
own costs.