No.22, City Civil Court, Ahmedabad (hereinafter referred to as “the
learned Judge”) below Application Exh. 48 in Civil Suit No. 1224 of
2015, whereby the learned Judge has rejected the Application Exh.48 of
the Petitioner / Original Plaintiff, whereby the Petitioner / Original
Plaintiff has prayed for necessary repairs in the suit property.
2.     The facts leading rise to the present Petition in nutshell are that
the petitioner is the Original Plaintiff and the Respondents are the
Original Defendants in Civil Suit No. 1224 of 2015, which is filed for
permitting repairs in the property situated at Godown No.58, Balaji
Estate, Narol, Isanpur, Ahmedabad of which the owners are the
Respondents / Original Defendants. The said property was taken on
rent in the year 2003. The Petitioner is doing the business of selling
readymade garments from the suit property.         That the portion of suit
premises is broken and would likely to cause injuries. The Petitioner is
the tenant of the disputed property and is paying regularly rent to the
Respondents. As far as the ceiling portion of the rented premises is
concerned, there is some damage to the same for which they have
produced some photographs and have stated that in the go-down, the
workers are doing the work and there are all chances that the said
portion of the ceiling can fell down and so the portion is required to be
repaired and though its was let known to the Respondents, the
Respondents are not getting it repaired and so the relief for repairing
the same was made before the Trial Court which came to be rejected.
Being aggrieved by the same, the Petitioner has preferred this Petition.
3.     Heard learned Advocate Mr. N.S.Sheth for the Petitioner and
learned Advocate Mr. R.C.Jani for R.C.Jani & Associate for the
4.     Learned Advocate Mr. Sheth for the Petitioner has heavily
contended that in the present case the impugned order passed by the
learned Judge is ex-facie bad in law, erroneous and without jurisdiction
and hence the same deserves to be quashed. He has further submitted
that the petitioner has submitted that the impugned order is passed in
most cryptic and mechanical, without appreciating the facts and
circumstances of the case, and hence the impugned order is without
application of mind and perverse and hence same deserves to be
quashed and set aside.
4.1     Learned Advocate for the Petitioner has submitted that the
impugned order is against the principles of equity as enshrined in the
Transfer of Property Act and that the repairs ought to have been
permitted for the purpose of making the premises habitable for labour
work since the suit premises consist of a go-down and therefore the
learned Judge has gravely erred in not allowing the Application and
gravely erred in holding that the Petitioner is trying to linger the matter.
4.2     Learned Advocate for the Petitioner has further submitted in the
memo of Petition that the Application for injunction came to be
dismissed for default, and thereafter, second application for injunction
was also came to be rejected against which the Petitioner has filed
Appeal from Order No.189 of 2017 with Civil Application No. 7840 of
2017 with Civil Application No. 10437 of 2017 before this Hon’ble Court,
which came to be rejected by this Hon’ble Court vide order dated
30.9.2017, against which the Petitioner has preferred Special Leave
Petition (C) No. 50228 of 2017 before the Hon’ble Apex Court and the
same was dismissed for non-prosecution on 2.1.2019. That during the
proceeding of the Suit, the Respondents filed cross objection in Civil
Suit No. 1224 of 2015 wherein the Respondents have filed Application
Exh.25 for the purpose of obtaining appropriate interim relief pertaining
to peaceful and vacant possession of the suit property as well as
pertaining to deposit of rent. The said Application was partially allowed
by the Trial Court against which the Appeal from order No. 214 of 2019
is filed before this Hon’ble Court which is pending for final disposal and
the interim orders pertaining to deposit of rent with arrears have been
passed by this Hon’ble Court on 27.9.2021. The learned Advocate for
the Petitioner has further submitted the Advocate before the Trial Court
has never informed the Petitioner about the rejection of his Application
below Exh.48 on 15.9.2018. It pertains to permissible repairs of the suit
property. The Petitioner states that he had no knowledge about the
rejection of the Application Exh.48.            After having perusal of the
documents in the paper book the Advocate for the Petitioner informed
about the rejection of Exh.48 on 15.9.2018 by the Trial Court. The
Petitioner was in great financial difficulty.       Even otherwise, after the
onset of the corona pandemic the Petitioner was in dire financial straits
because the business was not going on. Moreover the Respondents
never permitted the Petitioner to carry out the repair work in the suit
property.     Learned Advocate for the Petitioner has therefore submitted
that the impugned order deserves to be quashed and set aside.
4.3     It is also submitted that the learned Trial Court failed to take into
consideration the factual aspects involved in the case, and the legal
proposition governing the issue, and passed the impugned order, which
cannot be sustained in the eye of law and hence, the same deserves to
be quashed and set aside. It is therefore submitted that this Court may
exercise the powers under Article 227 of the Constitution of India and
the impugned order is required to be quashed and set aside.
5.      Per contra, learned Advocate Mr. R.C.Jani for R.C.Jani &
Associate for the Respondents supported the impugned order passed
by the Trial Court and argued that the order passed by the Trial Court is
just and proper and the Trial Court has not committed any error. He
has therefore urged that present Petition may be dismissed as no
interference is called for from this Hon’ble Court under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India.
6.      At the outset, the Court finds it apt to mention here that this writ
petition is filed under Article 227 of the Constitution of India. In the case
of Shalini Shyam Shetty and Another Vs. Rajendra Shankar Patil,
(2010) 8 SCC 329, the Apex Court has considered in detail the scope of
interference by this Court to hold and observe that, Article 227 can be
invoked by the High Court Suo motu as a custodian of justice. An
improper       and   a  frequent   exercise     of this  power       would         be
counterproductive and will divest this extraordinary power of its strength
and vitality. The power is discretionary and has to be exercised very
sparingly on equitable principle. The observations of the Apex Court
“57. Articles 226 and 227 stand on substantially different footing.
As noted above, prior to the Constitution, the Chartered High
Courts as also the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council could
issue prerogative writs in exercise of their original jurisdiction.
[See 1986 (suppl.) SCC 401 at page 469)].
58. However, after the Constitution every High Court has been
conferred with the power to issue writs under Article 226 and
these are original proceeding. [State of U.P . and others vs. Dr.
Vijay Anand Mahara j - AIR 1963 SC 946, page 951].
59. The jurisdiction under Article 227 on the other hand is not
original nor is it appellate. This jurisdiction of superintendence
under Article 227 is for both administrative and judicial
superintendence. Therefore, the powers conferred under Articles
226 and 227 are separate and distinct and operate in different
fields.
60.      Another distinction between these two jurisdictions is that
under Article 226, High Court normally annuls or quashes an
order or proceeding but in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article
227, the High Court, apart from annulling the proceeding, can
also substitute the impugned order by the order which the inferior
tribunal should have made. {See Surya Dev Rai (supra), para 25
page 690 and also the decision of the Constitution Bench of this
Court in Hari Vishnu Kamath vs. Ahmad Ishaque and others -
[AIR 1955 SC 233, para 20 page 243]}.
61. Jurisdiction under Article 226 normally is exercised where a
party is affected but power under Article 227 can be exercised by
the High Court suo motu as a custodian of justice. In fact, the
power under Article 226 is exercised in favour of persons or
citizens for vindication of their fundamental rights or other
statutory rights. Jurisdiction under Article 227 is exercised by the
High Court for vindication of its position as the highest judicial
authority in the State. In certain cases where there is infringement
of fundamental right, the relief under Article 226 of the
Constitution can be claimed ex-debito justicia or as a matter of
right. But in cases where the High Court exercises its jurisdiction
under Article 227, such exercise is entirely discretionary and no
person can claim it as a matter of right. From an order of a Single
Judge passed under Article 226, a Letters Patent Appeal or an
intra Court Appeal is maintainable. But no such appeal is
maintainable from an order passed by a Single Judge of a High
Court in exercise of power under Article 227. In almost all High
Courts, rules have been framed for regulating the exercise of
jurisdiction under Article 226. No such rule appears to have been
framed for exercise of High Court's power under Article 227
possibly to keep such exercise entirely in the domain of the
discretion of High Court.
62. On an analysis of the aforesaid decisions of this Court, the
following principles on the exercise of High Court's jurisdiction
under Article 227 of the Constitution may be formulated:
(a) A petition under Article 226 of the Constitution is
different from a petition under Article 227. The mode of
exercise of power by High Court under these two Articles is
also different.
(b) In any event, a petition under Article 227 cannot be
called a writ petition. The history of the conferment of writ
jurisdiction on High Courts is substantially different from the
history of conferment of the power of Superintendence on
the High Courts under Article 227 and have been
discussed above.
(c) High Courts cannot, on the drop of a hat, in exercise of
its power of superintendence under Article 227 of the
Constitution, interfere with the orders of tribunals or Courts
inferior to it. Nor can it, in exercise of this power, act as a
Court of appeal over the orders of Court or tribunal
subordinate to it. In cases where an alternative statutory
mode of redressal has been provided, that would also
operate as a restrain on the exercise of this power by the
(d) The parameters of interference by High Courts in
exercise of its power of superintendence have been
repeatedly laid down by this Court. In this regard the High
Court must be guided by the principles laid down by the
Constitution Bench of this Court in Waryam Singh (supra)
and the principles in Waryam Singh (supra) have been
repeatedly followed by subsequent Constitution Benches
and various other decisions of this Court.
(e) According to the ratio in Waryam Singh (supra),
followed in subsequent cases, the High Court in exercise of
its jurisdiction of superintendence can interfere in order
only to keep the tribunals and Courts subordinate to it,
`within the bounds of their authority'.
(f) In order to ensure that law is followed by such tribunals
and Courts by exercising jurisdiction which is vested in
them and by not declining to exercise the jurisdiction which
is vested in them.
(g) Apart from the situations pointed in (e) and (f), High
Court    can    interfere    in    exercise   of   its    power         of
superintendence when there has been a patent perversity
in the orders of tribunals and Courts subordinate to it or
where there has been a gross and manifest failure of
justice or the basic principles of natural justice have been
flouted.
(h) In exercise of its power of superintendence High Court
cannot interfere to correct mere errors of law or fact or just
because another view than the one taken by the tribunals
or Courts subordinate to it, is a possible view. In other
words the jurisdiction has to be very sparingly exercised.
(i) High Court's power of superintendence under Article 227
cannot be curtailed by any statute. It has been declared a
part of the basic structure of the Constitution by the
Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of L.Chandra
Kumar vs. Union of India & others, reported in (1997) 3
SCC 261 and therefore abridgement by a Constitutional
amendment is also very doubtful.
(j) It may be true that a statutory amendment of a rather
cognate provision, like Section 115 of the Civil Procedure
Code by the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment) Act, 1999
does not and cannot cut down the ambit of High Court's
power under Article 227. At the same time, it must be
remembered that such statutory amendment does not
correspondingly expand the High Court's jurisdiction of
superintendence under Article 227.
(k)     The power is discretionary and has to be exercised
on equitable principle. In an appropriate case, the power
can be exercised suo motu.
(l)     On a proper appreciation of the wide and unfettered
power of the High Court under Article 227, it transpires that
the main object of this Article is to keep strict administrative
and judicial control by the High Court on the administration
of justice within its territory.
(m)     The object of superintendence, both administrative
and judicial, is to maintain efficiency, smooth and orderly
functioning of the entire machinery of justice in such a way
as it does not bring it into any disrepute. The power of
interference under this Article is to be kept to the minimum
to ensure that the wheel of justice does not come to a halt
and the fountain of justice remains pure and unpolluted in
order to maintain public confidence in the functioning of the
tribunals and Courts subordinate to High Court.
(n)    This reserve and exceptional power of judicial
intervention is not to be exercised just for grant of relief in
individual cases but should be directed for promotion of
public confidence in the administration of justice in the
larger public interest whereas Article 226 is meant for
protection of individual grievance. Therefore, the power
under Article 227 may be unfettered but its exercise is
subject to high degree of judicial discipline pointed out
above.
(o) An improper and a frequent exercise of this power will
be counter-productive and will divest this extraordinary
power of its strength and vitality.”
7.     In yet another judgment in the case of Puri Investments v.
Young Friends and Co. and Ors. - MANU/SC0290/2022 the Hon’ble
Apex Court has observed as under:
“There was no perversity in the order of the Appellant Tribunal on
the basis of which the High Court could have interfered. In our
view, the High Court tested the legality of the order of the
Tribunal through the lens of an appellate body and not as a
supervisory Court in adjudicating the application Under Article
227 of the Constitution of India.      This is impermissible.          The
finding of the High Court that the appellate forum’s decision was
perverse and the manner in which such finding was arrived at
was itself perverse.”
8.       Thus, exercise of powers under Article 227 of the Constitution of
India should be with a view to keep the Tribunals / Courts within the
bounds of their authority, to ensure that law is followed by the
Tribunals / Courts by exercising jurisdiction which is vested in them and/
or when there has been a patent perversity in the orders of tribunals
and Courts subordinate to it or where there has been a gross and
manifest failure of justice or the basic principles of natural justice have
been flouted. In exercise of its power of superintendence, High Court
cannot interfere to correct mere errors of law or fact or just because
another view than the one taken by the Tribunals or Courts subordinate
to it, is a possible view. In other words the jurisdiction has to be very
sparingly exercised.
9.       Having heard the arguments advanced by the learned Advocates for the
parties and the discussions made herein above, this Court finds that there is no
error committed by the learned Chamber Judge, Court No.22, City Civil Court,
Ahmedabad in the order passed below Application Exh. 48 in Civil Suit No.
1224 of 2015. The Petition is therefore devoid of merit and deserves to be
dismissed and accordingly stands dismissed. No order as to costs.