This Report filed by the Special Commissioner, Sabarimala,
regarding the functioning of Safe Zone Project, Sabarimala, by
the Motor Vehicles Department was disposed of by the order
Ker HC 203] with the directions contained in paragraph 120 of
the said order. The 2nd respondent Transport Commissioner and
the 3rd respondent State Police Chief were directed to file action
taken reports before this Court on or before 01.07.2022, which
was directed to be place before the Bench on 11.07.2022.
Registrar General was directed to forward a copy of the said
order to the Secretary, Supreme Court Committee on Road
Safety for information. Despite the directions contained in the
order dated 10.01.2022, the Enforcement Officers under the 2 nd
respondent Transport Commissioner and the Police Officers
under the 3rd respondent State Police Chief are not taking
earnest efforts to ensure strict enforcement of the provisions
under the Motor Vehicles Act and the Rules and Regulations
made thereunder, taking note of the law laid down in the
decisions referred to supra and also in the order of this Court
dated 10.01.2022. Though, by the order dated 10.01.2021, the
2nd respondent Transport Commissioner and the 3rd respondent
State Police Chief were directed to file action taken reports
before this Court on or before 01.07.2022, which were directed
to be placed before the Bench on 11.07.2022, we have directed
Registry to list this matter before Bench today, since for the last
few months several contract carriages were involved in major
accidents, in which the passengers in those vehicles and other
road users sustained serious/fatal injuries. Since the use of
such vehicles on public place is posing potential threat to the
safety of the passengers and other road users, the learned
Assistant Solicitor General of India was requested to address
arguments on behalf of the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways. We viewed in open court a few video clippings of
motor accidents involving contract carriages and use of contract
carriages fitted with unauthorised LED/laser/neon lights in
public place, downloaded from ‘YouTube’.
2.    Paragraphs     119   to   121    of    the   order   dated
10.01.2022 in S.S.C.R.No.20 of 2021 read thus;
“119. As evident from the image of the vehicles involved
in  the   accident  which   occurred   on   09.12.2021,   at
Amalagiri in State Highway-220, which is reproduced
hereinbefore at paragraph 77, various objects have been
placed/hanged in front of the windscreen of contract
carriage bearing No.AP-05/TT-7929, causing obstruction to
the clear vision of the driver to the front, in violation of
the provisions under Rule 339 of the Andhra Pradesh
Motor Vehicles Rules, which is pari materia to Rule 278 of
the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules. As per the report of the
Joint Regional Transport Officer, the said contract carriage
hit on the rear of Tempo Traveller bearing No.AP-39/TB-
1599, which moved forward and ran over two passengers
(Sabarimala pilgrims) who were standing on the road, in
front of that Tempo Traveller. The image of another Tempo
Traveller involved in an accident, which occurred on
22.12.2021, along Edappally-Vyttila stretch of Ernakulam
bypass     in   National   Highway-66,      is   reproduced
hereinbefore at paragraph 78. In that accident, sixteen
Sabarimala pilgrims from Telangana, which included two
children aged 11 and 13 years, sustained injuries. As per
the news report, the Tempo Traveller in which they were
travelling rammed into a lorry, around midnight, while the
driver of that lorry was taking a reverse. Most of the
transport vehicles in the State are being used on public
place without maintaining lighting and light-signalling
devices and also retro-reflectors, at rear, as per the
individual specifications specified in AIS-008. Transport
vehicles, which do not have proper reverse lamp with
white light, poses potential threat to the safety of other
road users.
120. In     the   aforesaid circumstances,    we   deem   it
appropriate to dispose of this SSCR with the following
(I) The 2nd respondent Transport Commissioner, through
the Enforcement Officers in the Motor Vehicles
Department, and the 3rd respondent State Police
Chief, through the District Police Chief of the
concerned Districts shall ensure strict enforcement
of the Road Safety Policy and also the provisions
under the Motor Vehicles (Driving) Regulations,
2017, in terms of the directions contained in the
decision of the Apex Court in S. Rajaseekaran v.
Union of India [(2018) 13 SCC 516] and they
shall   also  ensure  strict enforcement     of the
prohibition contained in the decision of the Apex
Court in Avishek Goenka v. Union of India
[(2012) 5 SCC 321], against tampering with the
percentage of visual transmission of light of the
safety glass of the windscreen, rear window and
side windows of motor vehicles.
(II) In view of the law laid down in the decisions in
Jijith and others v. State of Kerala and others
and Principal, Sabari PTB Smaraka H.S.S. v.
Additional Registering Authority and others
[2020 (2) KLJ 662] the 2nd respondent Transport
Commissioner, through the Enforcement Officers in
the   Motor    Vehicles    Department,     and    the   3 rd
respondent State Police Chief, through the District
Police  Chief   of   the   concerned     Districts,   shall
prevent the use of contract carriages and other
transport vehicles on public place (i) flouting the
safety standards prescribed in AIS-008 and AIS-
052 (Rev.1) 2008, after replacing the prototype
approved     lights,   light-signalling    devices     and
reflectors     with    after-market        multi-coloured
LED/laser/neon lights, flash lights, etc.; (ii) without
maintaining lighting and light-signalling devices
and also retro-reflectors as per the individual
specifications, namely, number, position, width,
height, length, geometric visibility, orientation, etc.
specified in AIS-008; (iii) with high-power audio
systems producing loud sound with rating of
several    thousand    watts    PMPO,     impairing    the
hearing of the driver and the passengers and
causing distraction to other road users; (iv) with
continuously blinking DJ rotating LED lights, multi-
coloured LED/laser/neon lights in the passenger
compartment,       by    converting     the    passenger
compartment as a dancing floor, causing distraction
to the driver of that vehicle and also to other road
users;   (v)   with   multi-coloured     LED/laser/neon
lights and also booster amplifiers, equalizer, DJ
mixer, etc., with illuminated control panels in the
driver cabin, causing glare and reflection of light on
the windscreen of the vehicle, endangering the
safety of the passengers and other road users; (vi)
mixing up of AC and DC power supply for high-
power audio systems with DJ mixer, DJ dancing
lights, laser lights, etc., violating safety standards,
posing a potential fire hazard to the passengers of
such vehicles; (vii) tampering with the percentage
of visual transmission of light of the safety glass of
the windscreen, rear window and side windows, by
pasting stickers, tint films, etc. upon the safety
glass, fixing sliding cloth cutrains, etc., in violation
of sub-rule (2) of Rule 100 of the Central Motor
Vehicles    Rules;    (viii)   placing/hanging   various
objects in front of the windscreen and writing the
name of the bus in the middle of the windscreen,
above     the   level   of    the   dashboard,  causing
obstruction to the clear vision of the driver, both to
the front and through an angle of ninety degrees to
his right or left hand side, in violation of Rule 278
of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules; and (ix)
exhibiting    writings,      advertisements,   graphics,
figures, etc. with the sole object to invite public
attention and to promote the contract carriage
service, causing distraction to the drivers of other
vehicles and also cyclists and pedestrians on public
road; since use of such vehicles in public place,
flouting the standards in relation to road safety, is
likely to endanger the safety of the passengers of
such vehicles and also other road users.
(III) The 2nd respondent Transport Commissioner, through
the Enforcement Officers in the Motor Vehicles
Department, and the 3rd respondent State Police
Chief, through the District Police Chief of the
concerned    Districts,   shall  prevent   the   use   of
contract carriages and other transport vehicles on
public   place   with    multi-toned   horn   giving    a
succession of different notes or horn giving unduly
harsh, shrill, loud or alarming noise, in violation of
sub-rule (2) of Rule 119 of the Central Motor
(IV) In view of the provisions under sub-section (2) of
Section 190 of the Motor Vehicles Act, any person
who drives or causes or allows to be driven, in any
public place a motor vehicle, which violates the
standards prescribed in relation to road safety,
control   of   noise    and   air-pollution,   shall  be
punishable for the first offence with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to three months, or
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees
or with both and he shall be disqualified for holding
licence for a period of three months and for any
second or subsequent offence with imprisonment
for a term which may extend to six months, or with
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or
with both. Therefore, any person, who drives or
causes or allows to be driven in any public place a
contract   carriage    or   other   transport    vehicle,
violating the standards prescribed in AIS-008 and
AIS-052 (Rev.1) 2008, without maintaining lighting
and light-signalling devices and also retro-reflectors
as   per    the    individual    specifications,    namely,
number, position, width, height, length, geometric
visibility, orientation, etc. specified in AIS-008; or
after replacing the prototype approved lights, light-
signalling devices and reflectors with after-market
multi-coloured LED/laser/neon lights, flash lights,
etc., shall be proceeded against under sub-section
(2) of Section 190 of the said Act for an offense
punishable      with   the    imprisonment       and    fine
specified in that sub-section and he shall be
disqualified for holding licence for a period of three
months and for any subsequent offence with
imprisonment and fine as specified in that sub-
section.
(V)    In view of the provisions under sub-section (4) of
Section 206 of the Motor Vehicles Act, inserted by
Section 88 of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act,
2019, with effect from 01.10.2020, a police officer
or other person authorised in this behalf by the
State Government shall seize the driving licence
held by the driver of a motor vehicle who has
committed an offence under Section 190 and
forward      it  to    the    licensing    authority      for
disqualification or revocation proceedings under
(VI) A transport vehicle governed by AIS-008, which is
not    installed   with    lighting  and     light-signalling
devices and also retro-reflectors referred to in
Para.6.0, conforming to the individual specifications
for such lighting and light-signalling devices and
also for retro-reflectors prescribed in Paras.6.1 to
6.20, or a transport vehicle governed by AIS-008,
which is installed with lighting and light-signalling
devices or retro-reflectors other than those referred
to in Para.6.0, cannot be granted fitness certificate,
since such a vehicle cannot be treated as a vehicle
which complies with the provisions of the Motor
Vehicles Act and the Rules made thereunder, for the
purpose of grant of certificate of fitness. The
certificate of fitness granted to such vehicle shall be
cancelled by the prescribed authority, in accordance
with the provisions under sub-section (4) of Section
56 of the Motor Vehicles Act. In appropriate cases,
the registering authority shall initiate proceedings
to suspend or cancel the letter of authority granted
or renewed under sub-rule (5) of Rule 63 of the
Central Motor Vehicles Rules or forfeit security
deposit, after affording the holder of letter of
authority an opportunity of being heard.
121. The 2nd respondent Transport Commissioner and the
3rd respondent State Police Chief shall file action taken
reports before this Court on or before 01.07.2022, which
shall be placed before the Bench on 11.07.2022.
Registrar General shall forward a copy of this judgment to
the Secretary of Supreme Court Committee on Road
Safety for information.”
3.    As per the report dated 21.12.2021 of the Special
Officer, Safe Zone Project, which was enclosed along with the
report of the Special Commissioner, Sabarimala, Safe Zone
Project 2021-22 was operational from 15.11.2021, on the
commencement of Mandala-Makaravilakku Festival. Safe Zone
Project has attended 40 major accidents, 758 major break
downs and 536 minor break downs.
4.    In Paragraphs 77 and 78 of the order dated
10.01.2022 the images of the vehicles involved in two accidents
occurred on 09.12.2021 at 11.45 am, at Amalagiri in State
Highway-220       and  on  22.12.2021,     along  Edappally-Vyttila
stretch of Ernakulam bypass in National Highway-66, involving
Sabarimala pilgrims, were reproduced. Paragraphs 77 and 78 of
“77. The image of the vehicles involved in the accident
which occurred on 09.12.2021 at 11.45 am, at Amalagiri
in State Highway-220, taken from the news report that
appeared in an online media (referred to in the order of
this Court dated 05.01.2022) is reproduced hereunder;
As evident from the image, various objects have been
placed/hanged in front of the windscreen of contract
carriage bearing No.AP-05/TT-7929, causing obstruction
to the clear vision of the driver to the front, in violation of
the provisions under the Central Motor Vehicles Rules and
also the rules made by the State Government, in exercise
of its rule making power under the relevant provisions of
the Motor Vehicles Act. As per the report of the Joint
Regional Transport Officer, the said contract carriage hit
on the rear of Tempo Traveller bearing No.AP-39/TB-1599,
which moved forward and ran over two passengers who
were standing on the road, in front of that Tempo
78.    Another accident occurred on 22.12.2021, along
Edappally-Vyttila stretch of Ernakulam bypass in National
Highway-66, involving Sabarimala pilgrims. The image of
the vehicle involved in that accident, taken from the news
report that appeared in an online media is reproduced
In   that  accident,   sixteen  Sabarimala     pilgrims   from
Telangana, which included two children aged 11 and 13
years, sustained injuries. As per the news report that
appeared in an online media, the Tempo Traveller in which
they    were  travelling   rammed     into  a  lorry,  around
midnight, while the driver of that lorry was taking a
reverse.”
5.    In Paragraph 79 of the order dated 10.01.2022 we
have noticed that, despite the specific directions contained in
the decisions of this Court in Jijith [2019 (1) KHC 463], Saji
K.M. [2019 (3) KHC 836] and Principal, Sabari PTB
Smaraka H.S.S. [2020 (2) KLJ 662] large number of motor
vehicles, including contract carriages, stage carriages and
goods vehicles are being permitted to be used in public place,
flouting   the   safety standards   prescribed  in  AIS-008/AIS-
009/2001/AIS-030/2001 and even the safety standards in AIS-
052 (Rev.1) 2008. Large number of motor vehicles, especially
contract carriages, stage carriages and goods vehicles are being
permitted to be used in public place without maintaining
lighting and light-signalling devices and also retro-reflectors as
per the individual specifications, namely, number, position,
width, height, length, geometric visibility, orientation, etc.
specified in AIS-008, which is likely to endanger the safety of
other road users. Video contents of the alterations made on
motor vehicles and use of such vehicles in public place are
being uploaded on online video platforms like ‘YouTube’, by
registered owners of such vehicles or by vloggers. Such vehicles
are fitted with high-power audio systems with rating of several
thousand watts PMPO, with multiple booster/power amplifiers,
speakers and sub-woofers. Loud sound produced by such audio
systems impairs the hearing of the driver and passengers of
that vehicle, which also causes distraction to other drivers and
road users. Paragraphs 79 to 81 of the said order read thus;
“79. Despite the specific directions contained in the
decisions of this Court in Jijith [2019 (1) KHC 463],
Saji K.M. [2019 (3) KHC 836] and Principal, Sabari
PTB Smaraka H.S.S. [2020 (2) KLJ 662] large number
of motor vehicles, including contract carriages, stage
carriages and goods vehicles are being permitted to be
used in public place, flouting the safety standards
prescribed in AIS-008/AIS-009/2001/AIS-030/2001 and
even the safety standards in AIS-052 (Rev.1) 2008. Large
number of motor vehicles are being permitted to be used
in public place after replacing the prototype approved
reflectors on the rear bumper with after-market LED
lights. Flashing lamps are being permitted to be used in
lamps other than direction indicators and hazard warning
signal, in violation of Para.5.9 of AIS-008. Large number
of motor vehicles, especially contract carriages, stage
carriages and goods vehicles are being permitted to be
used in public place with red flashing stop lamps, flashing
lamps     inside    headlight    assembly,   multi-coloured
LED/laser/neon lights, flashing lamps on the roof top of
the cabin, etc. Such vehicles are being used in public
place after tampering with the percentage of visual
transmission of light of the safety glass of the windscreen,
rear window and side windows, by pasting stickers, tint
films, etc. upon the safety glass, fixing sliding cloth
cutrains, etc., in violation of sub-rule (2) of Rule 100 of
the Central Motor Vehicles Rules. Lighting and light-
signalling devices (i.e., headlights, tail lights, indicators,
etc.) or reflectors of such vehicles are ‘tinted’ with vinyl
tint film sticker, which violates the standards prescribed in
AIS-008 in relation to road safety. In addition to this,
large number of motor vehicles, especially contract
carriages, stage carriages and goods vehicles are being
permitted to be used in public place without maintaining
lighting    and   light-signalling  devices   and   also retro-
reflectors as per the individual specifications, namely,
number,      position,   width,    height,  length,   geometric
visibility, orientation, etc. specified in AIS-008, which is
likely to endanger the safety of other road users. Video
contents of the alterations made on motor vehicles and
use of such vehicles in public place are being uploaded on
online video platforms like ‘YouTube’, by registered owners
of such vehicles or by vloggers. Two images of such
vehicles (contract carriages) uploaded on online video
The light emitted from the additional headlamps/lamps
installed on such vehicles is capable of dazzling the drivers
of the oncoming vehicles directly, and also the drivers of
the vehicles proceeding in front, indirectly, through the
rear-view mirrors and/or other reflecting surfaces of their
vehicle.    The   light  emitted    from    such    additional
headlamps/lamps       is also    capable  of    dazzling   the
pedestrians and other road users, which poses potential
threat to their safety.
80. Such vehicles are fitted with high-power audio
systems with rating of several thousand watts PMPO, with
multiple booster/power amplifiers, speakers and sub-
woofers. Loud sound produced by such audio systems
impairs the hearing of the driver and passengers of that
vehicle, which also causes distraction to other drivers and
road users. An image of the passenger compartment of a
contract carriage fitted with high-power audio systems,
uploaded     on  online  video   platforms   is  reproduced
The continuously blinking DJ rotating LED lights, multi-
coloured LED/laser/neon lights fitted in the passenger
compartment of contract carriages fitted with high-power
audio systems, in order to convert it as a dancing floor for
the passengers, will certainly cause distraction to the
driver of that vehicle and also to other drivers and road
users. Sub-regulation (10) of Regulation 5 of the Motor
Vehicles Driving Regulations mandates that the driver
shall ensure that loud music is not played in the vehicle.
Moreover, mixing up of AC and DC power supply for such
high-power audio systems with DJ mixer, DJ dancing
lights, laser lights, etc., violating safety standards, poses
a potential fire hazard to the passengers of such vehicles.
81. In violation of the provisions under sub-rule (2) of
Rule 100 of of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules and the
law laid down in Avishek Goenka [(2012) 5 SCC 321],
Jijith [2019 (1) KHC 463], etc., the percentage of
visual transmission of light of the safety glass of the
windscreen, rear window and side windows of such
vehicles are tampered with, by pasting materials upon the
safety glass, by fixing sliding ‘cloth curtains’, etc.
6.    In Paragraph 82 of the order dated 10.01.2022 we
have noticed that, the images of contract carriages fitted with
additional headlamps/lamps capable of dazzling the drivers of
the oncoming vehicles and high-power audio systems with
continuously blinking DJ rotating LED lights, multi-coloured
LED/laser/neon lights fitted in the passenger compartment,
capable of causing distraction to the driver of that vehicle and
also to other drivers and road users, which met with major
accidents, are uploaded on online video platforms like ‘YouTube’.
Paragraph 82 of the said order reads thus;
82. The images of contract carriages fitted with additional
headlamps/lamps capable of dazzling the drivers of the
oncoming vehicles and high-power audio systems with
continuously   blinking DJ  rotating  LED   lights, multi-
coloured LED/laser/neon lights fitted in the passenger
compartment, capable of causing distraction to the driver
of that vehicle and also to other drivers and road users,
which met with major accidents, are uploaded on online
video platforms like ‘YouTube’. Few images taken from a
video with the caption “Kerala top 5 bus accident” are
LED/laser/neon     lights   and  also  booster   amplifiers,
equalizer, DJ mixer, etc., with illuminated control panels
are fitted in the driver cabin of the contract carriages,
causing glare and reflection of light on the windscreen of
the vehicle, endangering the safety of the passengers and
other road users. In violation of the provisions under sub-
rule (2) of Rule 100 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules
and Rule 278 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules, the
name of the bus is written in the middle of the
windscreen, above the level of the dashboard, obstructing
the clear vision of the driver.
7.    In Paragraph 87 of the order dated 10.01.2022, we
have noticed that, in violation of the provisions under sub-rule
(2) of Rule 119 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989,
contract carriages and stage carriages are fitted with multi-
toned horn giving a succession of different notes and horn
giving unduly harsh, shrill, loud or alarming noise. Motor
vehicles fitted with multi-toned horn or horn giving unduly
harsh, shrill, loud or alarming noise, which violates the
standards prescribed in relation to road safety, control of noise
and air-pollution, which do not comply with the requirements of
the Motor Vehicles Act and the Rules made thereunder, are
issued with fitness certificate based on false certification by the
inspecting authority or the authorised testing stations. Video
contents of use of contract carriages and stage carriages, which
are fitted with multi-toned horn giving a succession of different
notes and horn giving unduly harsh, shrill, loud or alarming
noise, in public place, are being uploaded on online video
platforms like ‘YouTube’, by registered owners of such vehicles
or by vloggers, who are permitted to record such videos inside
the driver cabin, even while the vehicle is moving in a higher
speed, disturbing the concentration of the driver while driving,
posing potential threat to the safety of the passengers and
other road users.
8.    In Jijith [2019 (1) KHC 463] this Court held that
the internal lighting in a contract carriage, which is a public
service vehicle, is for the purpose of providing reasonable
illumination    throughout   the   passenger    compartment.     As
provided under Rule 286 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules, the
passenger compartment of a public service vehicle shall be
furnished with electric lights adequate to give reasonable
illumination throughout the passenger compartment. Therefore,
the passenger compartment of a contract carriage cannot be
fitted with continuously blinking multi-coloured LED lights, laser
lights, etc., in order to convert it as a dancing floor. Plying
vehicles fitted with DJ rotating LED lights, continuously blinking
multi-coloured LED lights, laser lights, etc. for internal lighting
will certainly cause distraction to other drivers and also to road
users. Moreover, the continuously blinking multi-coloured LED
lights, laser lights, etc. used for internal lighting in the
passenger compartment pose a potential health hazard to the
passengers. Contract carriages, which are fitted with DJ rotating
LED lights, continuously blinking multi-coloured LED lights, laser
lights, etc. for internal lighting cannot be treated as vehicles
which comply with the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act and
the rules made thereunder, for the purpose of grant of
certificate of fitness.
9.   In Saji K.M. [2019 (3) KHC 836] this Court
reiterated the law laid down in Jijith [2019 (1) KHC 463]
that, as per the mandate of Rule 278 of the Kerala Motor
Vehicles Rules, every vehicle shall be so constructed that save
for the front pillars of the body, the driver shall have a clear
vision both to the front and through an angle of ninety degrees
to his right or left-hand side, as the case may be, and the front
pillars of the body shall be so constructed as to cause the least
possible obstruction to the vision of the driver. In order to use
the vehicles as contract carriages, the petitioners therein will
have to remove all writings, figures, etc. and maintain the
safety glass in such a condition that the visual transmission of
light is not less than that prescribed under sub-rule (2) of Rule
100 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, and with a clear vision
to the driver, both to the front and through an angle of ninety
degrees to his right or left-hand side, as the case may be, as
prescribed under Rule 278 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules.
(2) KLJ 662] this Court noticed that, in violation of Rule 278 of
the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules, the safety glasses of the
windscreen of public service vehicles are being pasted with
stickers, graphics, etc. Various objects are being placed/hanged
in front of the windscreen of such vehicles, causing obstruction
to the clear vision of the driver, both to the front and through
an angle of ninety degrees to his right or left hand side.
Therefore, this Court directed the Transport Commissioner,
Kerala to take necessary steps to ensure through the concerned
officers in the Motor Vehicles Department that no public service
vehicle is permitted to be used in any public place after
placing/hanging various objects in front of the windscreen,
causing obstruction to the clear vision of the driver, both to the
front and through an angle of ninety degrees to his right or left
hand side, in violation of Rule 278 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles
11.   In Jijith [2019 (1) KHC 463] this Court held that,
neither the provisions of Rule 289 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles
Rules, 1989 nor the provisions under AIS-052 (Rev.1) 2008
enable installation of high-power audio system with multiple
power amplifiers, speakers and sub-woofers in a contract
carriage. Loud music from such high-power audio systems will
certainly endanger the safety of other road users and will cause
inconvenience to them; will distract the attention of the driver
of the vehicle and impair his hearing; thereby violating the
provisions under Regulations 3 and also sub-regulations (3) and
(6) of Regulation 5 of the Motor Vehicle (Driving) Regulations.
Loud music from such high-power audio systems will also
violate the provisions of sub-regulation (10) of Regulation 5,
which provides that the driver shall ensure that loud music is
not played in the vehicle.
12.   In Jijith [2019 (1) KHC 463] this Court held that,
installation of high-power audio system with multiple booster/
power     amplifiers,  speakers  and  sub-woofers    cannot   be
permitted in a motor vehicle, since the loud sound produced by
such audio systems with rating of several thousand watts PMPO
will not only impair the hearing of the driver and the
passengers, but also cause distraction to other drivers and road
users. Therefore, no motor vehicle can be fitted with high-
power speakers or sub-woofers with multiple booster/power
amplifiers. Fixing high-power speakers or sub-woofers, with
enclosures made of wood or other materials, inside the
passenger      compartment   of  a  motor   vehicle  cannot   be
permitted. Similarly, installation of DJ (Disc Jockey) sound
system with DJ mixer, DJ rotating LED lights, laser lights,
Karaoke systems, etc. which are typically meant for dance
party, cannot be permitted in the passenger compartment of a
transport vehicle. The continuously blinking DJ rotating LED
lights, multi-coloured LED/laser lights fitted in the passenger
compartment, in order to convert it as a dancing floor for the
passengers, will certainly cause distraction to other drivers and
also to road users. Moreover, mixing up of AC and DC power
supply for such high-power audio systems with DJ mixer, DJ
dancing lights, laser lights, etc., violating safety standards,
poses a potential fire hazard to the passengers.
13.   Despite the directions contained in the order dated
10.01.2022, the Enforcement Officers under the 2 nd respondent
Transport Commissioner and the Police Officers under the 3 rd
respondent State Police Chief are not taking earnest efforts to
ensure strict enforcement of the provisions under the Motor
Vehicles Act and the Rules and Regulations made thereunder,
taking note of the law laid down in the decisions referred to
supra and also in the order of this Court dated 10.01.2022. For
the last few months several contract carriages were involved in
major accidents, in which the passengers in those vehicles and
other    road     users sustained  serious/fatal   injuries.   On
01.04.2022, a contract carriage enroute to Kerala with college
students on board was burnt to ashes after it caught fire at
Banastarim, Ponda. As per media reports the passengers
noticed smoke emanating from the rear of the moving bus.
Later, the flames started engulfing the vehicle from the rear.
After the passengers brought this to the notice of the driver, he
alighted everyone on board. The Firemen from Ponda and Old
Goa Fire Stations took around two hours to bring the fire under
control. Two images of the said accident taken from the video
uploaded on ‘YouTube’ are reproduced hereunder;
14.   The promotion video of that contract carriage, which
is uploaded on ‘YouTube’ would show that the said vehicle was
fitted with high-power audio system with multiple booster/
power amplifiers, speakers and sub-woofers with rating of
several thousand watts PMPO. Three images of the said contract
carriage (two images - passenger compartment) taken from the
video uploaded on ‘YouTube’ are reproduced hereunder;
15.   The passenger compartment of the said vehicle was
fitted with DJ sound system with DJ mixer, DJ rotating LED
lights, laser lights, Karaoke systems, etc. which are typically
meant for dance party. In the order dated 10.01.2021 we
noticed that, mixing up of AC and DC power supply for such
high-power audio systems with DJ mixer, DJ dancing lights,
laser lights, etc., violating safety standards, poses a potential
fire hazard to the passengers.
16.   Three images of the another contract carriage, which
met with a major accident, taken from the videos uploaded on
17.   The promotion video of that contract carriage, which
is uploaded on ‘YouTube’ would show that, in violation of Rule
278 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules, the safety glasses of the
windscreen of the said vehicle, which is a public service vehicle,
are pasted with stickers, graphics, etc. Various objects are
placed/hanged in front of the windscreen of the said vehicle,
causing obstruction to the clear vision of the driver, both to the
front and through an angle of ninety degrees to his right or left
hand side. Flouting the safety standards prescribed in AIS-008,
the said vehicle is fitted with additional headlamps/lamps
capable of dazzling the drivers of the oncoming vehicles, multi-
coloured LED/laser/neon lights capable of causing distraction to
the drivers of other vehicles and also other road users. Flashing
lamps are used in lamps other than direction indicators and
hazard warning signal, in violation of Para.5.9 of AIS-008, even
on the rooftop of the cabin.
18.   The learned Special Government Pleader has made
available for the perusal of this Court the accident report
prepared by Safe Kerala Enforcement Wing, Kozhikode, in
respect of a motor accident, which occurred on 23.05.2022 at
3.40 a.m., at Chevarambalam Signal Junction in Kozhikode,
involving two contract carriages bearing registration Nos.KL-
35/D-7111      and KL-17/U-3633.     In  that  accident,   several
passengers in those contract carriages sustained injuries. In the
accident report it is stated that, contract carriage bearing
registration No.KL-17/U-3633 is fitted with additional colour
lights on front roof top and on both left and right side, laser
beam light assembly on the front side and also ‘bull bar’ and
spot lights on the front side. Contract carriage bearing
registration No.KL-35/D-7111 is fitted with additional colour
lights on front roof top and on both left and right side of the bus
body. Spot lights are also fitted on the front side. The image of
the said accident taken from online media report is reproduced
19.   As evident from the image of the said accident taken
from    online     media  report,    contract    carriages   bearing
registration     No.KL-17/U-3633     is   fitted   with    additional
headlamps/lamps       capable  of   dazzling   the  drivers  of   the
oncoming       vehicles, multi-coloured   LED/laser/neon   lights
capable of causing distraction to the drivers of other vehicles
and also other road users, flouting the safety standards
prescribed in AIS-008. Flashing lamps are used in lamps other
than direction indicators and hazard warning signal, in violation
of Para.5.9 of AIS-008, even on the roof top of the cabin.
LED/laser/neon lights and also booster amplifiers, equalizer, DJ
mixer, etc., with illuminated control panels are fitted in the
driver cabin of contract carriage bearing registration No.KL-
17/U-3633, causing glare and reflection of light on the
windscreen of the vehicle, endangering the safety of the
passengers and other road users. The said vehicle is fitted with
DJ sound system with DJ mixer, DJ rotating LED lights, laser
lights, Karaoke systems, etc., which is evident from the
presence of booster amplifiers, equalizer, DJ mixer, etc. in the
driver cabin. However, the said violations finds no place in the
accident report. The CCTV footage of the accident uploaded by
the online media on ‘YouTube’ would show that, the additional
headlamps/top lamps lamps, etc. fitted on the said vehicle is
capable of dazzling the drivers of the oncoming vehicles.
20.   The learned Special Government Pleader has made
available for the perusal of this Court the accident report dated
24.05.2022, prepared by Safe Kerala Enforcement Wing,
Palakkad, in respect of a motor accident, which occurred on
22.05.2022      at 11.15   a.m.,    at Valliyode  -  Karippali  in
Vadakkencherry - Govindapuram State Highway-58, involving a
contract carriage (HPV) bearing registration No.KL-66/A-3908
and a Force Traveller (LPV) bearing registration No.KL-04/AM-
2026. In the said accident, three passengers in the tempo
traveller sustained fatal injury, three other persons sustained
serious injuries and 16 passengers in both contract carriages
sustained minor injuries. Two images of the said accident taken
from the video uploaded on YouTube are reproduced hereunder;
21.  As per the accident report prepared by Safe Kerala
Enforcement Wing, Palakkad, in respect of a motor accident,
which occurred on 22.05.2022, contract carriage (HPV) bearing
registration No.KL-66/A-3908 is fitted with multi-coloured laser
lights on the front and rear, spot lights, music system with sub-
woofers, DJ lights, air-horn, multi-toned horn giving harsh and
shill sound, etc.
22.  Use of high-power audio systems with multiple
booster/power amplifiers, speakers and sub-woofers producing
loud noise is legally impermissible in a motor vehicle, in view of
the provisions under sub-regulations (5) and (10) of Regulation
5 of the Motor Vehicles (Driving) Regulations, 2017 and also the
provisions under Noise Pollution (Regulation and Control) Rules,
2000. Loud sound produced by such audio systems with rating
of several thousand watts PMPO will not only impair the hearing
of the driver and the passengers, but also cause distraction to
other drivers and road users. Moreover, mixing up of AC and DC
power supply for such high-power audio systems with DJ mixer,
DJ dancing lights, laser lights, etc., violating safety standards,
poses a potential fire hazard to the passengers.
23.   A contract carriage, which is fitted with high-power
audio    systems    having    multiple  booster/power   amplifiers,
speakers and sub-woofers producing loud noise, and also DJ
rotating LED lights, continuously blinking multi-coloured LED
lights, laser lights, etc., cannot be treated as vehicles which
comply with the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act and the
Rules made thereunder, for the purpose of grant of certificate of
24.   In violation of the provisions under sub-rule (2) of
Rule 119 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, contract carriages
are fitted with multi-toned horn giving a succession of different
notes and horn giving unduly harsh, shrill, loud or alarming
noise, attracting penal provisions under under Section 194F of
the   Motor    Vehicles  Act,  inserted  by   the  Motor   Vehicles
(Amendment) Act, 2019. Motor vehicles fitted with multi-toned
horn or horn giving unduly harsh, shrill, loud or alarming noise,
which violates the standards prescribed in relation to road
safety, control of noise and air-pollution, do not comply with the
requirements of the Motor Vehicles Act and the Rules made
25.   Video contents of use of contract carriages and stage
carriages, which are fitted with multi-toned horn giving a
succession of different notes and horn giving unduly harsh,
shrill, loud or alarming noise, in public place, are being
uploaded on online video platforms like ‘YouTube’, by registered
owners of such vehicles or by vloggers, who are permitted to
record such videos inside the driver cabin, even while the
vehicle    is   moving   in  a   higher   speed,   disturbing   the
concentration of the driver while driving, posing potential threat
to the safety of the passengers and other road users.
26.   In view of the prohibition contained in the first
proviso to sub-rule (1) of Rule 62 of the Central Motor Vehicles
Rules, the renewal of fitness certificate in respect of a transport
vehicle shall be made only after an Inspecting Officer or
authorised testing stations as referred to in sub-section (1) of
Section 56 of the Motor Vehicles Act has carried the tests
specified in the Table given below the first proviso to sub-rule
(1), in order to certify that the vehicle complies with the
provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act and the Rules made
thereunder. A transport vehicle fitted with unauthorised lights
cannot be granted fitness certificate.
27.   A transport vehicle governed by AIS-008, which is
not installed with lighting and light-signalling devices and also
retro-reflectors referred to in Para.6.0, conforming to the
individual specifications for such lighting and light-signalling
devices and also for retro-reflectors prescribed in Paras.6.1 to
6.20, or a transport vehicle governed by AIS-008, which is
installed with lighting and light-signalling devices or retro-
reflectors other than those referred to in Para.6.0, cannot be
granted fitness certificate, since such a vehicle cannot be
treated as a vehicle which complies with the provisions of the
Motor Vehicles Act and the rules made thereunder, for the
purpose of grant of certificate of fitness. Similarly, a transport
vehicle which is fitted with high-power audio system having
multiple booster/power amplifiers, speakers and sub-woofers
producing loud noise, DJ rotating LED lights, continuously
blinking multi-coloured LED lights, laser lights, etc. in the
passenger compartment and the driver cabin, cannot be treated
as a vehicle which complies with the provisions of the Motor
Vehicles Act and the rules made thereunder, for the purpose of
grant of certificate of fitness. A transport vehicle in which safety
glass is not maintained with the visual transmission of light not
less than that prescribed under sub-rule (2) of Rule 100 or with
a clear vision to the driver, both to the front and through an
angle of ninety degrees to his right or left-hand side, as per the
mandate of Rule 278 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules, cannot
be granted fitness certificate. In case, fitness certificate is
granted to any such vehicle, which cannot be treated as a
vehicle that complies with the provisions of the Motor Vehicles
Act and the rules made thereunder, the certificate of fitness
granted to such vehicle is liable to be cancelled at any time, in
accordance with the provisions under sub-section (4) of Section
56 of the Motor Vehicles Act, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, if the prescribed authority is satisfied that the vehicle
no longer complies with all the requirements of the said Act and
the   Rules    made    thereunder.    In  appropriate   cases,   the
registering authority shall initiate proceedings to suspend or
cancel the letter of authority granted or renewed under sub-rule
(5) of Rule 63 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules or forfeit
security deposit, after affording the holder of letter of authority
an opportunity of being heard.
28.   As per sub-section (4) of Section 182A of the Motor
Vehicles Act, whoever, being the owner of a motor vehicle,
alters a motor vehicle, including by way of retrofitting of motor
vehicle parts, in a manner not permitted under the Act or the
Rules and Regulations made thereunder shall be punishable
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months,
or with fine of five thousand rupees per such alteration or with
both. As per sub-section (2) of Section 190 of the Motor
Vehicles Act, any person who drives or causes or allows to be
driven, in any public place a motor vehicle, which violates the
standards prescribed in relation to road safety, control of noise
and air-pollution, shall be punishable for the first offence with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with both
and he shall be disqualified for holding licence for a period of
three months and for any second or subsequent offence with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees or with
29.   As per sub-section (3) of Section 190 of the Motor
Vehicles Act, any person who drives or causes or allows to be
driven, in any public place a motor vehicle which violates the
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder relating to
the carriage of goods which are of dangerous or hazardous
nature to human life, shall be punishable for the first offence
with a fine of ten thousand rupees and he shall be disqualified
for holding licence for a period of three months, or with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with
both, and for any second or subsequent offence with fine of
twenty thousand rupees, or with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years, or with both.
30.   As per sub-section (4) of Section 206 of the Motor
Vehicles Act, inserted by Section 88 of the Motor Vehicles
(Amendment) Act, 2019, with effect from 01.10.2020, a police
officer or other person authorised in this behalf by the State
Government shall, if he has reason to believe that the driver of
a motor vehicle has committed an offence under any of
Sections 183, 184, 185, 189, 190, 194C, 194D, or 194E, seize
the driving licence held by such driver and forward it to the
licensing authority for disqualification or revocation proceedings
under Section 19. As per the proviso to sub-section (4) of
Section 206, the person seizing the licence shall give to the
person surrendering the licence a temporary acknowledgement
therefor, but such acknowledgement shall not authorise the
holder to drive until the licence has been returned to him.
31.   Even after the order of this Court dated 10.01.2022,
video contents of use of contract carriages on public place
flouting the safety standards prescribed in AIS-008 and even
the safety standards in AIS-052 (Rev.1) 2008, after replacing
the prototype approved lights, light-signalling devices and
reflectors   with  after-market    multi-coloured  LED/laser/neon
lights, flash lights, etc., capable of dazzling the drivers of the
oncoming vehicles and distraction to the drivers of other
vehicles and also other road users, which are fitted with audio
systems with rating of several thousand watts PMPO, which
impair the hearing of the driver and the passengers, but also
cause distraction to other drivers and road users, which are
fitted with multi-toned horn giving a succession of different
notes or horn giving unduly harsh, shrill, loud or alarming
noise, are being uploaded on online video platforms like
‘YouTube’, by registered owners of such vehicles or by vloggers,
who are permitted to record such videos inside the driver cabin,
even while the vehicle is moving in a higher speed, disturbing
the concentration of the driver while driving, thereby posing
potential threat to the safety of the passengers and other road
users. Such vehicles have met with accidents in which several
passengers      and other   road   users  sustained   fatal/serious
32.   The images reproduced hereinbefore at paragraphs
13, 14, 15, 18 and 20 would make it explicitly clear that,
flouting the safety standards in AIS-008, flashing lamps are
used in such vehicles in lamps other than direction indicators
and hazard warning signal. Flashing lamps are even fitted on
the rooftop of the cabin. LED/laser/neon lights and also booster
amplifiers, equalizer, DJ mixer, etc., with illuminated control
panels are fitted in the driver cabin, causing glare and reflection
of light on the windscreen of the vehicle, endangering the
safety of the passengers and other road users. The images of
motor accidents taken from the videos uploaded on 'YouTube',
which are reproduced hereinbefore at paragraphs 13, 14, 16,
18 and 20 would make explicitly clear that the 2nd respondent
Transport Commissioner, through the Enforcement Officers in
the Motor Vehicles Department, and the 3rd respondent State
Police Chief, through the District Police Chief of the concerned
Districts have not taken any earnest efforts to prevent use of
contract carriages on public place flouting the safety standards
prescribed in AIS-008, provisions under sub-regulations (5) and
(10) of the Motor Vehicles (Driving) Regulations, etc.
33.   The images of the contract carriage, which was
burned to ashes on 01.04.2022, enroute to Kerala with college
students on board, reproduced hereinbefore at paragraphs 13
and 14, would show that the said vehicle was fitted with high-
power audio system with multiple booster/power amplifiers,
sub-woofers, etc., with rating of several thousands watts PMPO.
The passenger compartment of the said vehicle was fitted with
DJ sound system with DJ mixer, DJ rotating LED lights, laser
lights, etc., which is evident from the images of that contract
carriage reproduced hereinbefore at paragraph 14. In the order
dated 10.02.2022, we noticed that mixing up of AC and DC
power supply for such high-power audio systems with DJ mixer,
DJ dancing lights, laser light, etc., violating safety standards,
posses a potential fire hazard to the passengers.
34.   The images of the contract carriages reproduced
hereinbefore in paragraphs 16 and 18 would show that, in
violation of the provisions under sub-rule (2) of Rule 100 of the
Central Motor Vehicles Rules and Rule 278 of the Kerala Motor
Vehicles Rules, various objects are placed/hanged in front of the
windscreen of contract carriages, causing obstruction to the
clear vision of the driver, both to the front and through an ankle
of ninety degrees to his right or left hand side. Flouting the
safety standards prescribed in AIS-008, the said vehicles are
fitted with additional headlamps/lamps capable of dazzling the
drivers of the oncoming vehicles. Multi-coloured LED/laser/neon
lights capable of causing distraction to the drivers of other
vehicles and also other road users. Flashing lamps are used in
those   contract   carriages,   in   lamps  other   than  direction
indicators and hazard warning signal, in violation of para 5.9 of
AIS-008, even on the rooftop of the cabin. As evident from the
image reproduced hereinbefore in paragraph23, LED/laser/neon
lights are even fitted in the buses owned by the Kerala State
35.   As per sub-rule (1) of Rule 92 of the Central Motor
Vehicles Rules, no person shall use or cause or allow to be used
in any public place any motor vehicle which does not comply
with the provisions of Chapter V, which deals with construction,
equipment and maintenance of motor vehicles. Similarly, as per
sub-rule (1) of Rule 249 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules, no
person shall use and no person shall cause or allow to be used
or to be in any public place any motor vehicle which does not
comply with the rules contained in Chapter VII or with any
order thereunder made by the competent authority. Part III of
Chapter VII of the said Rules deals with special rules applicable
to every public service vehicle other than an autorickshaw.
36.    As already noticed hereinbefore, for the last few
months several contract carriages were involved in major
accidents, in which the passengers in those vehicles and other
road users sustained serious/fatal injuries. The use of such
vehicles on public place is posing potential threat to the safety
of the passengers and other road users. Despite the specific
direction contained in our order dated 10.01.2022, the 2nd
respondent Transport Commissioner, through the Enforcement
Officers   in   the Motor  Vehicles   Department,   and  the   3 rd
respondent State Police Chief, through the District Police Chief
of the concerned Districts, failed to prevent the use of contract
carriages    on    public place flouting the   safety  standards
prescribed in AIS-008, the provisions under the Motor Vehicles
Act and the Rules made thereunder and also the provisions the
Motor Vehicles (Driving) Regulations, 2017. Contract carriages
are being permitted to be used on public place flouting the
statutory provisions referred to hereinbefore, the law laid down
in the decisions referred to supra and also the directions
contained in our order dated 10.01.2022.
37.   Flouting the safety standards prescribed in AIS-008,
the said vehicle is fitted with additional headlamps/lamps
capable of dazzling the drivers of the oncoming vehicles, multi-
coloured LED/laser/neon lights capable of causing distraction to
the drivers of other vehicles and also other road users. Such
lights are even fitted on buses owned by the Kerala State Road
Transport Corporation (KSRTC), which is evident from the image
taken from the video uploaded on ‘YouTube’, reproduced
38.   The    images of  contract   carriages   fitted with
additional headlamps/lamps capable of dazzling the drivers of
the oncoming vehicles and high-power audio systems with
continuously blinking DJ rotating LED lights, multi-coloured
LED/laser/neon lights fitted in the passenger compartment,
capable of causing distraction to the driver of that vehicle and
also to other drivers and road users, are being uploaded on
online video platforms like ‘YouTube’ by registered owners of
such vehicles or by vloggers. Two images of such a contract
carriage taken from the video uploaded on ‘YouTube’ are
39.   As evident from the images reproduced hereinbefore,
flashing lamps are used in lamps other than direction indicators
and hazard warning signal, in violation of Para.5.9 of AIS-008.
Flashing lamps are even fitted on the roof top of the cabin.
LED/laser/neon lights and also booster amplifiers, equalizer, DJ
mixer, etc., with illuminated control panels are fitted in the
driver cabin, causing glare and reflection of light on the
windscreen of the vehicle, endangering the safety of the
passengers and other road users. The passenger compartment
of the said vehicle is fitted with DJ sound system with DJ mixer,
DJ rotating LED lights, laser lights, Karaoke systems, etc. which
are typically meant for dance party.
40.   As already noticed hereinbefore at paragraph 12 we
have directed the Registry to list this matter before the Bench
today, since for the last few months several contract carriages
were involved in major accidents, in which the passengers in
those vehicles and other road users sustained serious/fatal
injuries. Since the use of such vehicles on public place is posing
potential threat to the safety of the passengers and other road
users,    the learned Assistant Solicitor General of India was
requested to address arguments on behalf of the Ministry of
Road Transport and Highways. We viewed in open Court a few
video clippings of motor accidents involving contract carriages
and    use    of   contract carriages  fitted  with  unauthorised
LED/laser/neon lights, multi-toned horn giving a succession of
different   notes,    high-power   audio   system   with  multiple
amplifiers, sub-woofers, etc. Various objects are placed/hanged
in the front windscreen of such vehicles, causing obstruction to
the clear vision of the driver, both to the front and through an
angle of ninty degrees to his left or right hand side, in violation
of sub-rule (2) of Rule 100 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules
and also Rule 278 of the Kerala Motor Vehicles Rules.
41.   Registry to copy the video clippings referred to above
in a compact disc and incorporate the same in the Judges
papers in a sealed cover. An additional copy of that compact
disc shall be kept under the safe custody of Registrar (Judicial).
The learned Assistant Solicitor General of India, for the Ministry
of   Road     Transport  and   Highways,    the   learned   Special
Government       Pleader  for   the  2nd   respondent     Transport
commissioner and the learned Senior Government Pleader for
the 3rd respondent State Police Chief shall be furnished with
copy of those video clippings in a compact disc, so as to enable
them to get necessary instructions.
42.   Registry to show the name of the learned Assistant
Solicitor General of India in the cause list and issue a copy of
SSCR No.20 of 2021 and also the order dated 10.01.2022.
43.   The learned Assistant Solicitor General of India seeks
time to get instructions from the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways on the use of contract carriages in public place,
posing potential threat to the safety of passengers and other
road users.
44.   The learned Special Government Pleader for the 2 nd
respondent Transport Commissioner and the learned Senior
Government Pleader for the 3rd respondent State Police Chief
would submit that, as per the direction contained in the order
dated 10.01.2022, the 2nd and 3rd respondents shall file action
taken reports before this Court on or before 01.07.2022. They
seek time to get instructions and file statements on behalf of
the 2nd and 3rd respondents, on the motor accidents referred to
hereinbefore at paragraphs 13, 16, 18 and 20.
45.   The learned Special Government Pleader shall place
on record the accident reports in respect of the motor accidents
which occurred on 01.04.2022, 23.05.2022 and 22.05.2022
referred to hereinbefore at paragraphs 18 to 21, and also the
report of the 2nd respondent Transport Commissioner on the use
of contract carriages on public place, as evidenced by the video
clippings in the compact disc, flouting the safety standards in
AIS-008 and also the standards prescribed in relation to control
of noise.
46.   The 2nd respondent Transport Commissioner, through
the Enforcement Officers in the Motor Vehicles Department and
the 3rd respondent State Police Chief, through the District Police
Chief of the concerned Districts shall take necessary steps to
ensure strict compliance of the directions contained in the order
dated 10.01.2022, by preventing the use of contract carriages
and other transport vehicles on public place
(i)   flouting the safety standards prescribed in AIS-008
and AIS-052 (Rev.1) 2008, after replacing the
prototype approved lights, light-signalling devices
and    reflectors   with   after-market     multi-coloured
LED/laser/neon lights, flash lights, etc.;
(ii)  without     maintaining   lighting   and    light-signalling
devices and also retro-reflectors as per the individual
specifications,    namely,    number,     position,    width,
height, length, geometric visibility, orientation, etc.
(iii) with high-power audio systems producing loud sound
with    rating   of   several  thousand      watts     PMPO,
impairing     the   hearing   of   the   driver   and     the
passengers and causing distraction to other road
(iv)  with continuously blinking DJ rotating LED lights,
multi-coloured       LED/laser/neon      lights     in    the
passenger       compartment,       by    converting       the
passenger compartment as a dancing floor, causing
distraction to the driver of that vehicle and also to
(v)   with multi-coloured LED/laser/neon lights and also
booster amplifiers, equalizer, DJ mixer, etc., with
illuminated     control  panels   in   the   driver    cabin,
causing     glare   and   reflection   of   light    on   the
windscreen of the vehicle, endangering the safety of
(vi)   mixing up of AC and DC power supply for high-power
audio systems with DJ mixer, DJ dancing lights, laser
lights, etc., violating safety standards, posing a
potential fire hazard to the passengers of such
(vii) tampering with the percentage of visual transmission
of light of the safety glass of the windscreen, rear
window and side windows, by pasting stickers, tint
films, etc. upon the safety glass, fixing sliding cloth
cutrains, etc., in violation of sub-rule (2) of Rule 100
(viii) placing/hanging various objects in front of the
windscreen and writing the name of the bus in the
middle of the windscreen, above the level of the
dashboard, causing obstruction to the clear vision of
the driver, in violation of Rule 278 of the Kerala
(ix)   exhibiting    writings,     advertisements,     graphics,
figures, etc. with the sole object to invite public
attention and to promote the contract carriage
service, causing distraction to the drivers of other
vehicles and also cyclists and pedestrians on public
road; since use of such vehicles in public place,
flouting the standards in relation to road safety, is
likely to endanger the safety of the passengers of
such vehicles and also other road users; and
(x)    with multi-toned horn giving a succession of different
notes or horn giving unduly harsh, shrill, loud or
alarming noise, in violation of sub-rule (2) of Rule
119 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules.
47.   Any person, who drives or causes or allows to be
driven in any public place a contract carriage or other transport
vehicle, violating the standards prescribed in AIS-008 and AIS-
(i)   without    maintaining  lighting  and   light-signalling
devices and also retro-reflectors as per the individual
specifications,  namely,   number,    position,  width,
height, length, geometric visibility, orientation, etc.
(ii)  after replacing the prototype approved lights, light-
signalling devices and reflectors with after-market
multi-coloured LED/laser/neon lights, flash lights,
or violating the standards prescribed in relation to control of
noise using multi-toned horn giving a succession of different
notes or horn giving unduly harsh, shrill, loud or alarming
noise; shall be proceeded against under sub-section (2) of
Section 190 of the said Act for an offence punishable with the
imprisonment and fine specified in that sub-section and he shall
be disqualified for holding licence for a period of three months
and for any subsequent offence with imprisonment and fine as
specified in that sub-section.
48.   In view of the provisions under sub-section (4) of
Section 206 of the Motor Vehicles Act, inserted by Section 88 of
the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019, with effect from
01.10.2020, a police officer or other person authorised in this
behalf by the State Government shall seize the driving licence
held by the driver of a motor vehicle who has committed an
offence under Section 190 and forward it to the licensing
authority for disqualification or revocation proceedings under
49.   The certificate of fitness granted to a transport
vehicle governed by AIS-008, which is not installed with
lighting and light-signalling devices and also retro-reflectors
referred    to    in Para.6.0,  conforming    to   the  individual
specifications for such lighting and light-signalling devices and
also for retro-reflectors prescribed in Paras.6.1 to 6.20, or a
transport vehicle governed by AIS-008, which is installed with
lighting and light-signalling devices or retro-reflectors other
than those referred to in Para.6.0, which cannot be treated as a
vehicle that complies with the provisions of the Motor Vehicles
Act and the Rules made thereunder, for the purpose of gran t of
certificate of fitness, shall be cancelled by the prescribed
authority, in accordance with the provisions under sub-section
(4) of Section 56 of the Motor Vehicles Act. In appropriate
cases, the registering authority shall initiate proceedings to
suspend or cancel the letter of authority granted or renewed
under sub-rule (5) of Rule 63 of the Central Motor Vehicles
Rules or forfeit security deposit, after affording the holder of
letter of authority an opportunity of being heard.
50.   The 2nd respondent Transport Commissioner, through
the Enforcement Officers in the Motor Vehicles Department and
the 3rd respondent State Police Chief, through the District Police
Chief of the concerned Districts shall ensure that colour
photographs and video clippings of the exterior body of the
contract carriage or other transport vehicle, the driver cabin
and the passenger cabin are enclosed along with the accident
report/inspection report and that, the person, who drives or
causes or allows to be driven in any public place such a
transport vehicle, flouting the safety standards in AIS-008 and
the standards prescribed in relation to control of noise, are
proceeded against in accordance with law.
51.   The 2nd respondent Transport Commissioner shall
publish 'WhatsApp' number of the Enforcement Officer in each
district, in print and visual media, and also in the official
website of the Motor Vehicle Department, so as to enable the
road users to bring to the notice of the concerned Enforcement
Officers, the use of motor vehicles on public place flouting the
safety standards regarding the lighting and light-signalling
devices, retro-reflectors and also the standards prescribed in
relation to control of noise. The Enforcement Officers shall also
collect evidence regarding such violations of safety standards,
from the video contents available on online video platforms like,
52.   Registry to issue copy of this order to the learned
Assistant Solicitor General of India, learned Special Government
Pleader and also to the learned Senior Government Pleader.
53.   Registry to mail a soft copy of this order to the e-
mail    id  of   the  2nd respondent     Transport  Commissioner
(tcoffice.mvd@kerala.gov.in/tc.mvd@kerala.gov.in) and the 3rd
respondent State Police Chief (dgp.pol@kerala.gov.in), who
shall forward the same to the concerned Enforcement Officers
in the Motor Vehicles Department/District Police Chief of the
concerned Districts, for ensuring strict compliance.
54.   Registrar General shall forward a copy of this order
along with compact disc containing the video clippings to the
Secretary of Supreme Court Committee on Road Safety for
information.
List on 28.06.2022 at 4.00 p.m.