Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned
counsel for the respondent.
3.            By invoking the jurisdiction of writ, the question raised
by the petitioner in the present writ petition is whether the
respondent-Bank has right to withhold the documents of security in
view of Section 171 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (hereinafter
referred to as ‘the said Act’ for short) under the right of general lien
especially when petitioner has fully repaid the amount of loan.
4.            Brief facts are as under :
A]            The petitioner was in need of financial assistance.
Accordingly, he approached to the respondent-Bank. He applied for
loan of Rs.21,00,000/- (Rs. Twenty one lacs) before the
respondent-Bank by way of loan application dated 13/08/2011.
B]            The respondent-Bank sanctioned loan vide its sanction
letter dated 06/09/2011 on condition that loan is repayable in 300
monthly installments. The petitioner is also a Director and Personal
Guarantor in the Company under the name and style as ‘Sunil
Hitech Limited’.       As the Company was in debt went in the
liquidation.      By an order of National Company Law Tribunal
(hereinafter referred to as ‘NCLT’ for short), Liquidator was
appointed. As per the contention of the petitioner due to financial
crisis he could not pay monthly installments, therefore, he
approached the respondent-Bank for seeking permission to sale the
flat which was purchased by him after obtaining the loan. The Title
Deeds of said flat was handed over to the Bank as security. Despite
repeated requests no response received from the Bank.             The
petitioner issued a legal notice to the respondent with request to
issue No Objection Certificate to sale the flat. But instead of giving
No Objection Certificate, respondent-Bank issued notice under
Section 13(2) of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (hereinafter
referred to as ‘SARFAESI Act’ for short). By the said notice, loan
account of the petitioner was declared as NPA and the petitioner
was called upon to pay the loan amount. The respondent-Bank
vide reply dated 24/03/2021 gave no objection to the petitioner to
sale out the flat.    The respondent-Bank further intimated the
petitioner that he shall adjust the sale amount towards home loan
and remaining amount is to be adjusted towards loan account of
the Company. Accordingly, the petitioner closed the loan account
i.e. Home Loan.     After the amount was satisfied, the petitioner
requested to remit the property papers to the purchaser Shri Ishwar
Narsing Phunde but respondent-Bank has not paid any heed
towards it.
C]            Therefore, the petitioner by invoking jurisdiction under
writ, made a grievance that despite repeated request the
respondent-Bank has not remitted the papers. It was informed to
him that due to orders by Superior Officers they are unable to remit
the papers, therefore, the petitioner approached Assistant General
Manager with request to remit the paper but his efforts were futile.
Hence, this petition.
5.            In response to the notice, respondent-Bank has filed its
reply.    As per the respondent-Bank the petitioner has alternate
efficacious remedy before the Debt Recovery Tribunal, New Delhi
and other Forum to deal, therefore, writ petition needs to be
dismissed.     It is further contention of the respondent-Bank that
respondent-Bank has filed an application before the Debt Recovery
Tribunal, New Delhi bearing Original Application No.491/2019
against the petitioner and others for recovery of loan amount. The
petitioner is a guarantor/Director/Borrower of Company namely
Sunil Hitech. The respondent-Bank has also moved an application
for attachment of property owned and possessed by the petitioner
and the said matter is pending for final hearing on 14/01/2022,
therefore, till the out come of order of Debt Recovery Tribunal, the
respondent-Bank is unable to release the documents as prayed in
this petition.
6.            Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that
the documents of title had been furnished as security towards loan
account. He has already satisfied the amount towards the said loan
account. After satisfaction of the loan amount Bank has no right to
retain the documents of title.     In support of this contention he
relied upon the decision of the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of
Zonal Manager, Central Bank of India vs. Devi Ispat Limited and
others (2010) 11 SCC 186, it is submitted that the respondent-Bank
had no legal right to retain the said documents of title.
7.            On the other hand, learned Counsel for the respondent
submitted that in view of Section 171 of the said Act the action of
the Bank of retaining the documents of title is justified.     It is
submitted that though the petitioner has satisfied the loan amount
obtained to purchase the flat but he is also the borrower and the
guarantor in respect of another loan account regarding the loan
which was obtained for the Company. The said Company went in
the liquidation. The liquidator has appointed and, therefore, the
said Title Deed is required by the Bank for obtaining necessary
orders from the Debt Recovery Tribunal regarding the attachment
of the property. The Bank was justified in exercising its right of
general lien over the said documents and sought dismissal of the
said writ petition.
8.            Admittedly, the petitioner has approached to the Bank
and obtained the loan of Rs.21,00,000/-(Rs. Twenty one lacs) to
purchase the flat.     The bank has sanctioned the loan vide its
sanction letter on condition that loan is repayable in 300 monthly
installments. It is also an admitted position that the petitioner is
also a Director in the Company under the name and style as Sunil
Hitech Limited. It is further not disputed that as the Company was
in debt, Liquidator was appointed by the order of NCLT. It is also
an admitted position that as the petitioner could not pay monthly
installments, he approached to the respondent-Bank for seeking
permission to sell the flat. Accordingly, the respondent-Bank has
given no objection by reply to sell out the said flat. Accordingly,
the petitioner has sold out the said flat to one Shri Ishwar Narsing
Phunde and the amount was deposited in the Bank thus, the loan
account of the petitioner against the purchase of the flat appears to
be satisfied. Admittedly, it is not in dispute that the respondent-
Bank has initiated action against the petitioner and other Directors
of the Company by filing an application bearing No.491/2019
before the Debt Recovery Tribunal against the petitioner and others
for recovery of loan amount.
9.            Now, the question is whether the respondent-Bank has
general lien over the documents of security under Section 171 of
the Indian Contract Act, 1872? The provision of Section 171 of the
said Act reads as under :
“Section 171 General lien of bankers, factors,
wharfingers, attorneys and policy brokers. -
Bankers, factors, wharfingers, attorneys of a
High Court and policy brokers may, in the absence
of contract to the contrary, retain as a security for
a general balance of account, any goods bailed to
them; but no other persons have a right to retain,
as a security for such balance, goods bailed to
them, unless there is an express contract to that
effect.”
10.           Learned Counsel for the petitioner relied upon the
decision of the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Zonal Manager,
Central Bank of India Vs. Devi Ispat Limited and others (supra)
wherein it is held that when the Company had cleared the dues
which were pending at the relevant point of time, they are entitled
to get the Title Deeds to enable them to deposit the same with the
State Bank of India as their security for the amount advanced.
11.           Section 171 of the said Act expresses the “common law
principle that if a man has an article delivered to him, on the
improvement of which he has to bestow trouble and express, he has
right to retain each until his demand is paid”. In its primary or
legal sense, “lien” means “a right of common law in a person to
retain that which is rightfully and continuously in their possession
belonging to another until the present and accrued claims (of the
person in possession) are satisfied”.      Thus, from the expression
“bankers lien” it is cleared that Bank overall forms of security that
are deposited by the borrower in the ordinary course of business,
there has to be a relationship of banker and customer between
them. In Brandao vs. Barnett, it was stated as under (All ER page
722-H) “Bankers, most undoubtedly, have a general lien on all
securities deposited with them, as bankers, by a customer, unless
there be an express contract, or circumstances that show an implied
contract, inconsistent with lien”. It was held that by mercantile
system the bank has a general lien over all forms of securities or
negotiable instruments deposited by or on behalf of the customer in
the ordinary course of banking business and that the general lien is
a valuable right of the banker judicially recognised and in the
absence of an agreement to the contrary, a banker has a general
lien over such securities or bills received from a customer in the
ordinary course of banking business and has a right to use the
proceeds in respect of any balance that may be due from the
customer by way of the reduction of customer’s debit balance. Lien
contemplated under Section 171 of the said Act relates to goods
bailed to bank. Strictly, it is confined to securities and properties in
the custody of a banker. Section 171 of the said Act expresses
‘goods bailed to them’. The provision, therefore, indicates that the
right to retain goods bailed is based on contract and retaining the
same in absence of contract is not permissible. A Division Bench of
this Court in the case of Surendra s/o Laxman Nikose vs. Chief
Manager and Authorised Officer, State Bank of India, Nagpur
2013(5) Mh.L.J. 283 held that Bank cannot exercise its right of
general lien over the Title Deeds deposited by the petitioner after
the entire loan amount was fully repaid by the petitioner. It is
further held in para 10 of the judgment by the Division Bench of
this Court which reads thus :
“10. Section 171 of the said Act employs the expression
“goods bailed to them”. The word “bailment” has been defined
in section 148 of the said Act to mean delivery of goods by one
person to another for some purpose, upon a contract that they
shall, when the purpose is accomplished, be returned or
otherwise disposed of according to the directions of the person
delivering them. Section 160 of the said Act stipulates that it is
the duty of the bailee to return the goods bailed, without
demand, or the purpose for which they were bailed having
been accomplished. Similarly, under section 172 of the said
Act, pledge has been defined as bailment of goods as security
for payment of a debt or performance of a promise. Under
section 174 of the said Act, the pawnee cannot in absence of a
contract to that effect, retain the goods pledged for any debt or
promise other than the debt or promise over which they are
pledged.
These provisions, therefore, indicate that the right to
retain goods bailed is based on a contract and retaining the
same in absence of any contract is not permissible. The only
right that has been recognized with regard to goods bailed is
the right of general lien of a banker to retain as security for a
general balance of account any goods bailed to them. It is,
therefore, clear that such right of general lien cannot be
extended by a Banker for any other purpose after the general
balance of account has been cleared by the person bailing the
goods. Permitting a Banker to extend its right of general lien
even after clearance of the debt would result in negating the
effects of the words “as a security for a general balance of
account”. In any event, exercise of such general lien after
determination of the relationship of Banker and customer does
not arise at all.”
12.           In the present case also the petitioner has repaid the
entire amount of loan regarding the loan obtained to purchase the
flat.    The petitioner has produced on record Annexure-K the
account extract which shows that no balance amount remains to be
paid in respect of loan account of the petitioner. It is also admitted
by the respondent-Bank that the petitioner has paid the entire
amount against the loan which was obtained to purchase the flat.
Only contention of the respondent-Bank is that the petitioner is also
borrower of Sunil Hitech Company. The petitioner as well as other
Directors have obtained the loan but the said Company went in
liquidation and Liquidator is appointed. The amount is due from
the Company.        The petitioner being the Director of the said
Company is liable to pay the loan amount and, therefore, the
documents regarding the title of the property is not remitted by the
Company. It is further submitted by the Bank that Bank has already
moved an application before the Debt Recovery Tribunal, New
Delhi bearing Original Application No.491/2019 against the
petitioner and others for recovery of loan amount which is due
against the Company and said application is pending for the
hearing. It is further submitted by the respondent-Bank that till the
out come of the order of the Debt Recovery Tribunal the respondent
is unable to release the said documents. Thus, the material on
record shows that the petitioner has cleared the entire dues in
respect of loan which was obtained by him in his individual
capacity to purchase the flat. The said loan transaction came to an
end, therefore, the relationship of the banker and customer
between the petitioner and the respondent in respect of the
concerned loan account came to an end as he has repaid the
amount. The relationship of banker and customer could not have
been continued when the petitioner has repaid the amount on
31/05/2021 as the entire loan account is satisfied.         The said
transaction has been completed and there is no further relationship
between the petitioner and the Bank as a banker and customer.
13.           In  such   circumstances,    the  contention   of   the
respondent-Bank that it was exercising the right of general lien
under Section 171 of the said Act is not sustainable. Bank has also
raised the issue that other alternate efficacious remedy is available
to the petitioner before Debt Recovery Tribunal and, therefore, the
writ petition needs to be dismissed.       In other words, it is the
contention of the respondent-Bank that writ jurisdiction is not
available to the petitioner as other remedy is available.
14.           Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the
writ jurisdiction is rightly available to the petitioner. In support of
this contention, he invited our attention towards the observation
made by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Zonal Manager,
Central Bank of India Vs. Devi Ispat Limited and others (supra)
wherein it is observed that where public sector bank, discharging
public functions and having status of “State”, despite clearance of
its outstanding dues in entirely by a borrower, failed to return
latter’s title deeds held, High Court, rightly issued writ of
mandamus for returning said deeds. Hon’ble Apex Court further
held that it is not in dispute that the appellant-Bank being a public
Sector Bank discharging public functions is a State under Article
15.           In view of the settlement of the dues on the date of
filing of the writ petition by arrangement made through another
nationalized bank, namely, State Bank of India and the statement of
accounts furnished by the appellant Bank subsequent to the same
was 0.00 (nil) outstanding. The High Court was fully justified in
issuing a writ of mandamus for return of the Title Deeds.
16.           The Hon’ble Bombay High Court in the case of DB
(BKC) Realtors Pvt. Ltd. and anr. vs. Punjab National Bank 2017
SCC Online Bom 957 held that the writ petition filed under Section
226 of the Constitution of India is maintainable against the
respondent-Bank which is a nationalised bank.
17.           Admittedly, there was a relationship between the
petitioner and the respondent as banker and customer. It is further
clear from the pleadings that the Title Deed of the property in
question was handed over to the respondent-Bank as a security.
Admittedly, said loan amount is repaid by the petitioner. Though
the respondent-Bank has submitted that there is another loan
account against the petitioner and Bank has already moved an
application to the Debt Recovery Tribunal for obtaining necessary
orders, Bank is at liberty to move against the petitioner and other
Directors to recover the said loan amount. Admittedly, said security
was given against the loan amount which was already satisfied by
the petitioner. In such a situation, it is not open for the respondent-
Bank to continue to exercise its general lien for the security
deposited with it especially when the entire amount was repaid.
Such a general lien is not being exercised for a general balance of
account as required under Section 171 of the said Act. Moreover, it
would not be open for the Bank to exercise its right of general lien
for the securities on the pretext of the banker and customer
relationship. It cannot exercise such general lien under Section 171
of the said Act thus, there is no justification on the part of the
respondent-Bank to retain the said documents by relying upon the
provisions of Section 171 of the said Act.
18.           In view of observation of the Hon’ble Apex Court in the
case of Zonal Manager, Central Bank of India Vs. Devi Ispat Limited
and others (supra) relied upon by the petitioner it was held that
Central Bank of India being a nationalised bank was amenable to
writ jurisdiction. In the present case also respondent-Union Bank
of India is a nationalised bank and, therefore, is amenable to writ
jurisdiction. According to the Bank another loan account is yet to
be cleared by the petitioner and, therefore, it’s security documents
were not returned. On the basis of the same the bank sought to
exercise its right under Section 171 of the said Act and not remitted
the said documents to the respondent. Admittedly, said documents
were kept with the bank as a security towards the loan amount
which is obtained by the petitioner in his individual capacity for
purchase of the flat. The said amount is duly paid and, therefore,
bank was not justified in retaining the said documents by exercising
right of lien on the said documents. Admittedly, bank has right to
recover the loan amount regarding the loan advanced to the
Company wherein the petitioner and other Directors are borrowers
and guarantors. Bank is at liberty to recover the said loan amount
and also at liberty to take the legal recourse but merely because
another loan account is there, wherein the petitioner and other
Directors are borrowers, bank has no right to retain the said
documents by exercising the right of lien.
19.           Respondent-Bank has already filed an application
before the Debt Recovery Tribunal for attachment of the property.
Said application is already pending before the Debt Recovery
Tribunal and the respondent-Bank is exercising its right to recover
the loan amount by attaching the property. Bank is at liberty to
exercise its right by taking legal recourse to recover the said
20.           It is open for the respondent-Bank to take such steps to
secure its interest regarding the said loan account however, by
invoking the provision of Section 171 of the said Act respondent-
Bank has no right to withhold the Title Deeds especially when there
is no relationship between the petitioner and the respondent as
banker and customer. Said act of the bank is not justifiable. Hence,
for the reasons recorded we have no hesitation to hold that the
respondent-Bank has no right of general lien over the Title Deeds
deposited by the petitioner after the entire loan amount was fully
satisfied by the petitioner.     Therefore, we are satisfied that the
petitioner has made out a case for grant of relief.
21.           We, therefore, pass the following order :
(b)    The respondent-Bank is directed to release the
documents of title and other documents within a period
of four weeks from today kept as a security in relation
to Flat No.202, 2nd Floor, Adisun Terraces, Shilpa
(c)    The Bank shall consider the petitioner’s request
for issuance of no-dues certificate in respect of his loan
account and take necessary steps within a period of four
weeks from today.
(d) Respondent-Bank is at liberty to take appropriate
steps for recovery of loan amount before the Debt
Recovery Tribunal in respect of loan account maintained
in the name of Sunil Hitech Limited in accordance with
22.           Rule is accordingly made absolute. There will be no
order as to costs.