1.    Suit 488/2017 was instituted by the respondent Wahid Malik
against the appellants Saleem and others. The respondent, as plaintiff,
claimed to have purchased a property admeasuring 90 sq. yds. located
in Khasra No. 67-68, Gali No. 27, Jafrabad, Delhi-110053 (“the suit
property”) for a consideration of ₹ 6 lakhs from its previous owner,
under a general power of attorney (GPA), agreement to sell, receipt,
Will and affidavit duly notarized by the notary public in the presence
of witnesses. The plaint asserted that the respondent was in peaceful
possession of the suit property and was using the suit property as a
godown.
2.    The plaint alleged that, on 28th April 2017, the petitioners-
defendants broke the locks on the suit property and effected forcible
ingress.   This misfeasance, it was alleged, was repeated by the
petitioners on 1st May 2017.           The plaint also alleged that the
petitioners had extended verbal threats to the respondent, resulting in
the respondent having to lodge a written complaint at PS Jafrabad on
4th May 2017. As no action was taken by the police authorities, the
respondent claimed to have been constrained to approach the learned
Trial Court.     The respondent prayed for a decree of permanent
injunction in favour of the respondent and against the petitioners,
restraining the petitioners from trespassing on the suit property or
breaking the locks thereon and from dispossessing the respondent
from the suit property without following due process of law.
3.     The petitioners filed a written statement, by way of response to
the aforesaid suit of the respondent. The written statement alleged that
the respondent was neither the owner, nor in possession, of the suit
property. The assertion of the respondent, that he had purchased the
suit property from the previous owner under GPA, agreement to sell,
Will and receipt dated 14th August 2003 was also denied in para 2 of
the written statement, which reads thus:
“2.     That the contents of para 2 of the plaint are wrong and
hence denied. It is wrong and denied that on 14.08.2003 the
plaintiff has purchased the suit property admeasuring 90
sq.yds. vide Khasra no. 67-68, bearing no.709, Gali no. 27,
Jafrabad, Delhi-53 for a consideration amount of Rs.
6,00,000/- from its previous owner namely Sh.
Mohammeddeen son of Sh. Bundu by virtue of GPA,
Agreement to sell, Receipt, Will and Affidavit which is duly
notarized by notary public in the presence of witnesses. It is
submitted here that the photocopy of the title documents
attached with the plaint are forged and fabricated documents
by the plaintiff and because of the same reason the said
documents have no authenticity in the eye of law. It is also
submitted here that on the basis of the said documents the
plaintiff has no right, title or interest in the suit property. Even
the plaintiff is not in possession of the suit property and thus,
the suit of plaintiff is liable to be dismissed on this ground
alone. The site plan filed by the plaintiff is also not correct.
The plaintiff should be put to the strict proof of the allegations
made in the para under reply.”
4.     The petitioners further claimed that the suit property was their
ancestral property and consequently, claimed titular rights in respect
thereof, in para 6 to 8 of the written statement. Needless to say, all
allegations of the petitioners having ever tried to effect forcible ingress
into the suit property were also denied.
5.     The respondent filed a replication to the written statement of the
petitioners, broadly reiterating the contents of the plaint and denying
the assertions, to the contrary, in the written statement.
6.     Consequent to completion of pleadings, the respondent-plaintiff
tendered, in evidence, the following documents which were duly
(vi)    receipt dated 23rd September 2003 issued by BSES in the
name of the respondent (Ex. PW-1/G)
(vii) electricity bill dated 27th February 2007 issued in the
name of the respondent (Ex. PW-1/H), and
(viii) complaint dated 4th May 2017 filed at PS Jafrabad (Ex.
7.     The petitioners chose not to file any document in their support.
8.     Consequent to completion of pleadings, the following issues
were framed by the learned ASCJ:
“(i) Whether the plaintiff is in possession of suit property
and was in possession of the suit property on the date of filing
(ii)    Whether the plaintiff is entitled to decree of permanent
injunction as prayed for? OPP
(iii)   Whether the suit of plaintiff is under valued? OPD
9.     The respondent tendered his affidavit in evidence which was
exhibited as Ex. PW-1/1. He vouchsafed the contents of the affidavit
in his examination-in-chief.         He was cross examined by learned
Counsel for the petitioners.       In cross examination, the respondent
submitted, inter alia that (i) he had purchased the stamp paper, for
purchasing the suit property, on 30th July 2002, (ii) the title documents
were prepared at Tis Hazari Courts in the presence of two witnesses,
namely Shamsher and Suresh, (iii) the title documents were also
notarized by the notary public on 14 th August 2003, and (iv) except for
the electricity bill, the respondent had not filed any other document or
photograph to show that he remained in possession of the suit
property. He denied the suggestions that he was not in possession of
the suit property at any point of time and that the titular documents
(Ex. PW-1/A, Ex. PW-1/B, PW-1/C, PW-1/E and PW-1/H) were
forged and fabricated.
10.    No other witness was cited by the respondent.
11.    Consequent to closure of the respondent’s evidence (PE), the
petitioners, as defendants in the suit, made a statement, on 14th August
2019, that the defendants did not seek to lead the evidence of any
witness. Accordingly, DE was closed on 14th August 2019.
12.    As such, the petitioners did not choose to lead any evidence
either documentary or oral, though they did cross examine the
respondent who deposed as PW-1.
Order dated 26th September 2019 passed by the learned ASCJ
13.    On Issue 1, the learned ASCJ noted that the respondent had, as
PW-1, deposed that he was in possession of the suit property and had
also proved the GPA, agreement to sell, receipt and affidavit, which
were exhibited as Ex. PW-1/A to Ex. PW-1/C, Ex. PW-1/E
respectively as well as the electricity bills of the suit property, for 15th
September 2015 and 27th February 2007 as Ex. PW-1/H, which was
issued to him. This, it was held, proved that the respondent was in
possession of the suit property during the years 2007, 2015 and 2017.
Nothing contrary to this position, it was noted, was elicited in cross
examination of the respondent, as PW-1, by the petitioners.
14.       The petitioners, for their part, never chose to step into the
witness box or lead any evidence to show that they were in possession
of the suit property. A bald assertion to the effect that, after the death
of the previous owner of the suit property, locks were placed on the
suit property by the respondent as well as the petitioners, was made
without any supportive evidence.
15.       In these circumstances, the learned ASCJ held that, applying the
principles of preponderance of probability, the respondent had
succeeded in proving that he was in possession of the suit property.
16.       Issue (i) was, therefore, decided against the petitioners and in
favour of the respondent.
17.       Qua Issue (ii), the learned ASCJ noted the submission of the
petitioners that the suit was not maintainable in view of the law laid
down in Anathula Sudhakar v. P. Buchi Reddy1. The respondent
having succeeded in proving possession over the suit property, and no
evidence having been led by the petitioners to indicate to the contrary,
or that the possession of the suit property by the respondent was
wrongful,        a   simplicitor  suit   for injunction    against    forcible
dispossession was maintainable without having to seek any titular
rights over the suit property.
18.       Issue (ii) was also, therefore, decided against the petitioners and
19.    No dispute has been raised with respect to Issue (iii) and,
therefore, the need to refer to the said issue is obviated.
20.    In these circumstances, the learned ASCJ held that the
respondent had made out a case for an injunction against forcible
dispossession. The respondent’s suit was, therefore, decreed, and a
decree of permanent injunction was passed, restraining the appellants
from trespassing in the suit property or from forcibly dispossessing the
respondent therefrom without following due process of law.
21.    Aggrieved, the petitioners appealed to the learned ADJ by way
of RCA DJ 132/2019 (Saleem & Ors. v. Wahid Malik).
22.    By the impugned order dated 25th July 2022, the learned ADJ
has dismissed the said appeal. He has observed, in doing so, relying
on the following passages from Anathula Sudhakar1, that, where
there was no cloud on the title or possession of the plaintiff over the
suit property, a simplicitor suit for injunction was maintainable:
“13. The general principles as to when a mere suit for
permanent injunction will lie, and when it is necessary to file
a suit for declaration and/or possession with injunction as a
consequential relief, are well settled. We may refer to them
briefly.
13.1. Where a plaintiff is in lawful or peaceful possession of
a property and such possession is interfered or threatened by
the defendant, a suit for an injunction simpliciter will lie. A
person has a right to protect his possession against any
person who does not prove a better title by seeking a
prohibitory injunction. But a person in wrongful possession is
not entitled to an injunction against the rightful owner.
13.2. Where the title of the plaintiff is not disputed, but he is
not in possession, his remedy is to file a suit for possession
and seek in addition, if necessary, an injunction. A person out
of possession, cannot seek the relief of injunction simpliciter,
without claiming the relief of possession.
13.3. Where the plaintiff is in possession, but his title to the
property is in dispute, or under a cloud, or where the
defendant asserts title thereto and there is also a threat of
dispossession from the defendant, the plaintiff will have to
sue for declaration of title and the consequential relief of
injunction. Where the title of the plaintiff is under a cloud or
in dispute and he is not in possession or not able to establish
possession, necessarily the plaintiff will have to file a suit for
declaration, possession and injunction.”
(Emphasis supplied)
23.    Apropos the contentions advanced by the petitioners, the
learned ADJ holds that, barring bald assertions in the written
statement, no evidence had been led, at all, by the petitioners, to make
out the case propounded therein. Not a single document was filed in
support of the assertions in the written statement, and no oral evidence
was led. The petitioners sought to aver that the suit property was their
ancestral property. The petitioners also sought to aver that the title
documents, on which the respondent placed reliance, were forged and
fabricated.      No effort, whatsoever, had been made to substantiate
either of these assertions/allegations by way of any evidence, oral or
documentary. The cross examination of the respondent, as PW-1, by
the petitioners, did not elicit any material on the basis of which the
title documents of the respondent, or the possession of the respondent
over the suit property could be regarded as having been rendered
vulnerable.
24.       The petitioners sought to contend, before the learned ADJ, that
no title could pass under a GPA, Will, agreement to sell and receipt.
Reliance was placed, for the said purpose, on the judgment of the
Supreme Court in Suraj Lamp & Industries v. State of Haryana2.
The learned ADJ has dealt with this submission by relying, inter alia,
on the judgment of this Court in Ramesh Chand v. Suraj Chand3
which took note of Suraj Lamp & Industries2 and held that, even if
title could not pass under Agreement to Sell, GPA and Will, the said
documents, if executed validly/properly, did convey certain rights over
the property in question, under Section 53A4 of the Transfer of
25.       In these circumstances, the learned ADJ has chosen not to
interfere with the decision of the learned ASCJ.
26.       Aggrieved thereby, the defendants have approached this Court
53-A. Part performance. – Where any person contracts to transfer for consideration any immovable
property by writing signed by him or on his behalf from which the terms necessary to constitute the transfer
can be ascertained with reasonable certainty:
and the transferee has, in part performance of the contract, taken possession of the property or any
part thereof, or the transferee, being already in possession, continues in possession in part performance of the
contract and has done some act in furtherance of the contract,
and the transferee has performed or is willing to perform his part of the contract,
then, notwithstanding that , where there is an instrument of transfer, that the transfer has not been
completed in the manner prescribed therefor by the law for the time being in force, the transferor or any
person claiming under him shall be debarred from enforcing against the transferee and persons claiming under
him any right in respect of the property of which the transferee has taken or continued in possession, other
than a right expressly provided by the terms of the contract:
Provided that nothing in this section shall affect the rights of a transferee for consideration who has no notice
of the contract or of the part performance thereof.
by means of the present appeal, under Section 100 of the CPC.
27.       I have heard Mr. Rakesh Dudeja, learned Counsel for the
appellant at length.
28.       Mr. Dudeja has sought to contend that the courts below were in
error in failing to note that the title as well as the possession, of the
respondent, over the suit property was seriously disputed. He has
drawn my attention to para 2 of the written statement, reproduced
hereinabove, in which it was specifically alleged that the photocopies
of the title documents dated 14th August 2003, placed on record by the
respondent, were forged and fabricated.             It was also alleged, in the
said paragraph, that the respondent was not in possession of the suit
property.
29.       It is well settled that, in a suit for possession simplicitor or a suit
for injunction against dispossession simplicitor, the plaintiff is not
required to establish title or ownership. The plaintiff is only required
to establish a better right to remain in possession of the suit property
as compared to the right of the defendant.
30.       In Poona Ram v. Moti Ram5, the legal position was clearly
exposited by the Supreme Court, thus:
“11. The law in India, as it has developed, accords with
jurisprudential thought as propounded by luminaries like
Salmond. Salmond on Jurisprudence (12 Edn. at paras 59-60)
“These two concepts of ownership and possession,
therefore, may be used to distinguish between the de
facto possessor of an object and its de jure owner,
between the man who actually has it and the man who
ought to have it. They serve also to contract the
position of one whose rights are ultimate, permanent
and residual with that of one whose rights are only of a
temporary nature.
In English law possession is a good title of right
against anyone who cannot show a better. A wrongful
possessor has the rights of an owner with respect to all
persons except earlier possessors and except the true
owner himself. Many other legal systems, however, go
much further than this, and treat possession as a
provisional or temporary title even against the true
owner himself. Even a wrongdoer, who is deprived of
his possession, can recover it from any person
whatever, simply on the ground of his possession.
Even the true owner, who takes his own, may be
forced in this way to restore it to the wrongdoer, and
will not be permitted to set up his own superior title to
it. He must first give up possession, and then proceed
in due course of law for the recovery of the thing on
the ground of his ownership. The intention of the law
is that every possessor shall be entitled to retain and
recover his possession, until deprived of it by a
judgment according to law.
Legal remedies thus appointed for the protection of
possession even against ownership are called
possessory, while those available for the protection of
ownership itself may be distinguished as proprietary.
In the modern and medieval civil law the distinction is
expressed by the contrasted terms petitorium (a
proprietary suit) and possessorium (a possessory suit).”
12. As far back as 1924, in Midnapore Zamindary Co.
Ltd. v. Naresh Narayan Roy6, the learned Judge observed
that in India, persons are not permitted to take forcible
possession; they must obtain such possession as they are
entitled to through a court. Later, in Nair Service Society
Ltd. v. K. C. Alexander7, this Court ruled that when the facts
disclose no title in either party, possession alone decides. It
was further held that if Section 9 of the Specific Relief Act,
1877 (corresponding to the present Section 6) is employed,
the plaintiff need not prove title and the title of the defendant
does not avail him. When, however, the period of six months
has passed, questions of title can be raised by the defendant,
and if he does so the plaintiff must establish a better title or
fail. In other words, such a right is only restricted to
possession in a suit under Section 9 of the Specific Relief Act
(corresponding to the present Section 6) but does not bar a
suit on prior possession within 12 years from the date of
dispossession, and title need not be proved unless the
defendant can provide one.
13. It was also observed by this Court in Nair Service Society
Ltd.7 that a person in possession of land in assumed character
of owner and exercising peaceably the ordinary rights of
ownership has a perfectly good title against the entire world
except the rightful owner. In such a case, the defendant must
show in himself or his predecessor a valid legal title and
probably a possession prior to the plaintiff's, and thus be able
to raise a presumption prior in time.
14. In Rame Gowda v. M. Varadappa Naidu8, a three-Judge
Bench of this Court, while discussing the Indian law on the
subject, observed as under: (SCC p. 775, para 8)
“8. It is thus clear that so far as the Indian law is concerned,
the person in peaceful possession is entitled to retain his
possession and in order to protect such possession he may
even use reasonable force to keep out a trespasser. A rightful
owner who has been wrongfully dispossessed of land may
retake possession if he can do so peacefully and without the
use of unreasonable force. If the trespasser is in settled
possession of the property belonging to the rightful owner,
the rightful owner shall have to take recourse to law; he
cannot take the law in his own hands and evict the trespasser
or interfere with his possession. The law will come to the aid
of a person in peaceful and settled possession by injuncting
even a rightful owner from using force or taking the law in
his own hands, and also by restoring him in possession even
from the rightful owner (of course subject to the law of
limitation), if the latter has dispossessed the prior possessor
by use of force. In the absence of proof of better title,
possession or prior peaceful settled possession is itself
evidence of title. Law presumes the possession to go with the
title unless rebutted. The owner of any property may prevent
even by using reasonable force a trespasser from an attempted
trespass, when it is in the process of being committed, or is of
a flimsy character, or recurring, intermittent, stray or casual in
nature, or has just been committed, while the rightful owner
did not have enough time to have recourse to law. In the last
of the cases, the possession of the trespasser, just entered into
would not be called as one acquiesced to by the true owner.”
15. The crux of the matter is that a person who asserts
possessory title over a particular property will have to show
that he is under settled or established possession of the said
property. But merely stray or intermittent acts of trespass do
not give such a right against the true owner. Settled
possession means such possession over the property which
has existed for a sufficiently long period of time, and has
been acquiesced to by the true owner. A casual act of
possession does not have the effect of interrupting the
possession of the rightful owner. A stray act of trespass, or a
possession which has not matured into settled possession, can
be obstructed or removed by the true owner even by using
necessary force. Settled possession must be (i) effective, (ii)
undisturbed, and (iii) to the knowledge of the owner or
without any attempt at concealment by the trespasser. There
cannot be a straitjacket formula to determine settled
possession. Occupation of a property by a person as an agent
or a servant acting at the instance of the owner will not
amount to actual legal possession. The possession should
contain an element of animus possidendi. The nature of
possession of the trespasser is to be decided based on the facts
and circumstances of each case.
31.     In Rame Gowda8, the Supreme Court held that “in the absence
of proof of better title, possession or prior peaceful settled possession
is itself evidence of title”.
32.     Mr Dudeja is correct in his submission that, in para 2 of the
written statement filed in response to the suit instituted by the
respondent, the petitioners alleged that the titular documents on which
the respondent was seeking to place reliance were forged and
fabricated. However, having thus alleged, the petitioners, apparently,
decided to sit back and relax. They appear to have been harbouring a
misconception, throughout, that mere allegations in a written
statement were sufficient to dispute the case set up by the respondent,
and that no responsibility, thereafter, lay on the petitioners to support
the allegations with evidence. This is not a case in which a suit had
been decreed at an initial stage. It has suffered trial. The respondent
had led his own evidence as PW-1. He was cross examined by the
petitioners.    The record of cross examination does not disclose
anything which would serve to cast any cloud either on the
genuineness of the title documents dated 14 th August 2003 or on the
assertion, by the respondent, that he was in possession of the suit
property. The respondent also placed on record electricity bills with
respect to the suit property, which were in the name of the respondent,
dated 15th September 2015 and 27th February 2017.                In these
circumstances, applying the principle of preponderance of probability,
the learned ASCJ and the learned ADJ held, correctly, that, while the
respondent had proved the execution of titular documents dated 14 th
August 2003 in his favour and had also proved the fact that he was in
possession of the suit property in 2007, 2015 and 2017, no evidence to
the contrary, whatsoever had been led by the petitioners. Nor had the
assertions to that effect, been rendered questionable, in any manner, in
the testimony of the respondent in cross examination.
33.    The petitioners, it was further noted, had sought to claim titular
rights in respect of the suit property, claiming it to be their ancestral
property.     Having thus asserted in the written statement, the
petitioners, true to form, decided not to place any document on record
in support of their assertion or lead any evidence in that regard. The
assertion, therefore, remained a mere assertion, unsupported by any
material.
34.    In these circumstances, the learned ASCJ and learned ADJ were
perfectly justified in holding that the fact that the respondent was in
settled possession of the suit property stood established, and the
petitioners, per contra, had failed to establish any titular or possessory
right over the suit property.
35.    The findings in the impugned order with respect to the
submission that no title to the suit property could pass under GPA,
agreement to sell, Will and receipt, has also been correctly addressed
by the courts below. While it is true that agreement to sell, GPA,
receipt and Will do not pass title in respect of immoveable property,
Suraj Lamps itself states, in the following passage, that, where the
documents were genuine, they did confer certain rights in respect of
the property even if they were not titular rights:
“26. We have merely drawn attention to and reiterated the
well-settled legal position that SA/GPA/will transactions are
not “transfers” or “sales” and that such transactions cannot be
treated as completed transfers or conveyances. They can
continue to be treated as existing agreements of sale. Nothing
prevents the affected parties from getting registered deeds of
conveyance to complete their title. The said “SA/GPA/will
transactions” may also be used to obtain specific performance
or to defend possession under Section 53-A of the TP Act. If
they are entered before this day, they may be relied upon to
apply for regularisation of allotments/leases by development
authorities. We make it clear that if the documents relating to
“SA/GPA/will transactions” have been accepted/acted upon
by DDA or other developmental authorities or by the
municipal or Revenue Authorities to effect mutation, they
need not be disturbed, merely on account of this decision.”
36.    A suit which does not claim titular rights and merely claims a
right to continue in possession without possession being disturbed
save and except in accordance with law, is not required to make out a
case of title. The law respects possessory rights over immoveable
property, even in the absence of valid title.          A person in settled
possession of immoveable property is entitled under Section 9 of the
Specific Relief Act, to continue in such possession, without being
dispossessed save and except in accordance with law. In that view of
the matter, the learned ADJ was correct in holding that no question
relating to title arose for consideration. The reliance, by the learned
ADJ, on the decision in Anathula Sudhakar1 is also apt.
37.    Mr. Dudeja sought to question the validity of the title
documents on which the respondent sought to place reliance by
submitting that the stamp papers, on which the documents had been
executed, were purchased more than six months prior to the execution
of the documents.      No such contention has been advanced either
before the learned ASCJ or before the learned ADJ.             No such
contention has even been advanced in the present appeal. The said
contention, therefore, cannot make out any substantial question of law,
within the meaning of Section 100 of the CPC, at a second appellate
stage.
38.    In the aforesaid circumstances, no error can be said to exist in
the orders either of the learned ASCJ or of the learned ADJ. No
substantial question of law arises in the present second appeal, which
is accordingly dismissed in limine with no orders as to costs.