The Supreme Court, in a judgment passed last week, examined the applicability of res judicata between co-defendants.The court observed that the requisite conditions to apply the principle of res judicata as between co-defendants are that :(a) there must be conflict of interest between the defendants concerned; (b) it must be necessary to decide this conflict in order to give the...
The Supreme Court, in a judgment passed last week, examined the applicability of res judicata between co-defendants.The court observed that the requisite conditions to apply the principle of res judicata as between co-defendants are that :(a) there must be conflict of interest between the defendants concerned; (b) it must be necessary to decide this conflict in order to give the plaintiff the relief he claims; and (c) the question between the defendants must have been finally decided.It also observed that the principle of Res Judicata will not apply if the subject matter of the suit is not same as that of earlier suit. For res judicata to apply, the matter in the former suit must have been alleged by one party and either denied or admitted, expressly or impliedly by the other, the bench of Justices Sanjay Kishan Kaul and Hemant Gupta reiterated.Background facts
Legal heirs of Late S.V. Srinivasulu Naidu filed an application before the Special Court, Hyderabad (Tribunal) under Section 8 of the Andhra Pradesh Land Grabbing (Prohibition) Act,1982, alleging that their land grabbed by the Union of India. The applicants alleged that their father had purchased the said land from one Shaik Ahmed. That, their father sold it to some persons, who later filed a suit against their father, Union of India, State of Andhra Pradesh. In the said suit, the Plaintiff claimed that his vendor Shaik Ahmed and then the father of the applicants was the owner in possession of the property since purchase of the property on 20.3.1964, but the contractors of the Union of India, trespassed into the schedule property. That their father filed written statement in which he asserted that he had no objection to the Plaintiff suit being decreed. This suit was thus decreed on 13.8.1970 declaring the plaintiffs as title holders of the suit property. An appeal filed by the Union of India before the High Court of Andhra Pradesh was dismissed on 31.3.1975. Later, before the Tribunal, the applicants contended that they are original owners of the land in question and the Government had no right or title over the property. The Tribunal allowed the application and the High Court affirmed the order of tribunal.

