This appeal is filed by the claimant challenging the
judgment   and    award    dated     25.08.2014      passed   in
M.V.C.No.7585/2012 on the file of the III Additional Senior Civil
Judge and MACT, Bengaluru (‘the Tribunal’ for short).
2.    Heard   the    learned    counsel  appearing  for the
appellant and the learned counsel appearing for respondent No2.
3.  The factual matrix of the case of the claimant before
the Tribunal is that on 06.10.2012 at about 1.00 a.m., the
claimant was driving the autorickshaw, at that time, the driver of
the offending vehicle i.e., the lorry suddenly stopped the same in
the middle of the road without giving any signal carelessly, due
to which, the claimant touched his auto to the lorry as a result,
the claimant had sustained injuries and immediately he was
shifted to Mallige Medical Center and then, he was shifted to
NIMHAS hospital and thereafter, he was shifted to Shekar
hospital wherein he has taken treatment as an inpatient for a
period of 9 days and again he was referred to NIMHAS hospital
and thereafter, he took treatment at Victoria hospital.       The
claimant in order to substantiate his contention, examined
himself as PW1 and got marked the documents at Ex.P1 to P15
and examined another witness as PW2. On the other hand, the
respondents have examined one witness as RW1 and got marked
the documents at Ex.R1 to R7.          The main contention of the
Insurance Company is that the cheque which was issued for
policy was dishonoured hence, the Insurance Company is not
liable to pay the compensation. The Tribunal after considering
both the oral and documentary evidence available on record
fastened the liability on the owner and granted the compensation
of Rs.1,57,200/- with 8% interest.
4.    Being aggrieved by the judgment and award of the
Tribunal, the present appeal is filed by the claimant contending
that   the  Tribunal    has  erred  in  holding  that  the  second
respondent     herein   has  issued   proper  notice  to  the  first
respondent and also to the RTO in respect of dishonour of
cheque received by it towards the premium.             The learned
counsel vehemently contend that the Tribunal has committed an
error in relying upon the documents at Ex.R2 to R7 and held that
the notice, in question, was deemed to be served on the first
respondent      and    the   concerned    RTO    but   the   postal
acknowledgment for having served the notice is not produced.
The Tribunal also committed an error in not awarding just and
reasonable compensation and the compensation awarded in all
the heads are very meager when the claimant had suffered the
fracture of maxilla, diffuse axonal injury and fright frontal sulcus
sub arrchnoid haemorrhage and he was shifted to several
hospitals for the treatment and he has taken the treatment as
inpatient for 12 days and the Tribunal has not awarded
compensation on the head of ‘future medical expenses’ hence, it
requires interference of this Court.
5.     Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the
Insurance Company would vehemently contend that the Tribunal
has rightly fastened the liability on the insured and exonerated
the liability of the Insurance Company since, the cheque which
was issued was dishonoured.        The counsel also filed a memo
along with the copy of Insurance Regulatory and Development
Authority notification dated 16.10.2002 and brought to notice of
this Court that the regulations 3 as well as 4 are with regard to
the manner of premium payments as well as commencement of
risk and the counsel would vehemently contend that the
attachment of risk to an insurer will be in consonance with the
terms of Section 64VB of the Act and except in the cases where
the premium has been paid in cash, in all other cases the insurer
shall be on risk only after the receipt of the premium by the
insurer.    Provided that in the case of a policy of general
insurance that where the remittance made y the proposer or the
policyholder is not reaslised by the insurer, the policy shall be
treated as void ab-initio. Hence, the Insurance Company is not
liable to pay the compensation.
6.    Having heard the arguments of the respective
counsel appearing for the parties and also on perusal of the
material on record, the points that would arise for consideration
1.    Whether the Tribunal has committed an error in not
awarding   just and    reasonable compensation    as
contended by the claimant?
2.    Whether the Tribunal has committed an error in
fastening the liability on the insured instead of
insurer and whether it requires interference of this
7.   Having heard the arguments of the respective
counsel appearing for the parties and also on perusal of the
material on record it is not in dispute with regard to the accident
and in order to prove the same, the claimant has relied upon the
documents at Ex.P1 to P5 and the Tribunal also given the finding
with regard to the accident and the same has not been
questioned by the Insurance Company.
8.   The main contention of the claimant that he had
suffered the fracture of maxilla and also other injuries as a
result, he has suffered permanent disability and also he was
unable to attend the duty of driver for a period of 4 months.
Having considered the material available on record, it discloses
that the accident was occurred in the year 2012 and the records
also reveals that he was taken the treatment at Mallige hospital
i.e., immediately after the accident wherein he was an inpatient
only for one day and then he was shifted to NIMHANS and then
he was referred to Shekar hospital wherein he was an inpatient
for a period of 9 days and again he was referred to NIMHANS
wherein also he took treatment and thereafter at Victoria
hospital and the same is evident from the document at Ex.P11-
discharge summary wherein it discloses that he was an inpatient
from    16.10.2012    to  19.10.2012   and    thereafter  he   was
discharged.    Hence, it is clear that he was an inpatient for a
period of 12 days and having considered the nature of injuries
and also he was referred to NIMHANS hospital since he has
suffered   facial  injury  and   head  injury   and   Ex.P6-wound
certificate discloses that he has suffered fracture of maxilla,
diffuse axonal injury and fright frontal sulcus sub arrchnoid
haemorrhage and though the doctor has opined that the injury
No.1 is grievous in nature and injuries No.2 and 3 are simple in
nature, he was referred to NIMHANS hospital and also he was
taken to Shekar hospital with the history of loss of conscious and
there was a bleeding in the ear and there was omitting and once
again he was referred to the NIMHANS hospital on 13.10.2012
and he took treatment at Victoria hospital for a period of 4 days
and the Tribunal has failed to take note of the said fact into
consideration and awarded the compensation of Rs.35,000/-
towards pain and sufferings hence, it requires to be enhanced to
Rs.45,000/- as against Rs.35,000/-.
9.   The Tribunal has awarded an amount of Rs.97,200/-
towards medical expenses and the same is based on the
documentary     evidence  hence,   it  does   not   require  any
10.  The Tribunal has awarded an amount of Rs.5,000/-
towards loss of income during laid up period. When the claimant
had suffered the fracture of maxilla and head injury which
requires to be reunite and he has to take rest for the same, the
Tribunal ought to have considered the period of treatment which
has been required though he was an inpatient for a period of 12
days. The accident is of the year 2012 and the notional income
would be Rs.7,000/- and rightly pointed out by the claimant
counsel that it requires minimum 4 months to reunite the
fracture. Hence, taking the income of Rs.7,000/- for a period of
4 months, it comes to Rs.28,000/- (7,000 x 4) as against
11.    The Tribunal has awarded only Rs.10,000/- towards
nourishment, conveyance and attendant charges and records
also reveals that immediately after the accident, the claimant
was taken to the Mallege hospital, then NIMHANS hospital and
thereafter he was taken to Shekar hospital and once again he
was shifted to NIMHANS hospital and then he took treatment as
an inpatient at Victoria hospital hence, it is appropriate to
enhance the same as Rs.15,000/- as against Rs.10,000/-.
12.    The claimant has not examined any doctor with
regard to disability is concerned and no material is placed before
the Tribunal to show that he had suffered the permanent
disability or not on account of the said injuries and the Tribunal
also rightly comes to the conclusion that when the doctor has
not been examined with regard to assessing the disability, the
question of awarding the compensation towards ‘future loss of
income’ does not arise. However, the Tribunal would have taken
note of the nature of the injuries though it cannot be assessed
by way of permanent disability, ought to have awarded the
compensation considering the nature of fracture and also the
head injury hence, it is appropriate to award the compensation
on the head of disability in the absence of medical evidence to
the tune of Rs.50,000/-.
13.   The Tribunal has awarded the compensation of
Rs.10,000/- towards loss of amenities and he was aged about 32
years at the time of the accident and hence, it is appropriate to
enhance the same to Rs.15,000/- as against Rs.10,000/-. In all,
the claimant is entitled for an amount of Rs.2,50,200/-. Hence,
Point No.1 is answered accordingly.
14.   The main contention of the counsel appearing for the
claimant that though notice was issued against the insured and
the same has not been served and when the cancellation of
policy has not been notified to the insured, the insurer cannot
absolve its liability and no doubt, RW1 who has been examined
by the company who is a Legal Manager, in his evidence in
paragraphs 3 to 5 contended that the policy was not in force and
the cheque issued was dishonoured and in the cross-examination
of RW1, he categorically admits that when the claim was made
before the Court, they used to give the details of the insured but
he claims that notice was issued to him but no such copy of
notice is produced. It is also elicited that when the cheque was
bounced, the same was not intimated to the Rajajinagar RTO. It
is also admitted that if the notice was sent through RPAD, they
used to give the receipt but the same is also not produced. But
claims that Ex.R5 is produced and admits that in Ex.R5 nowhere
it is mentioned that the same was addressed to the RTO and also
for having served Ex.R4, they have not having any document.
The witness volunteers that the liability is subject to honouring
of the cheque and admits that they can produce the proposal
application and whether they have served the notice to the said
address or not, he cannot tell.        But in the further cross-
examination, he admits that he cannot produce the proposal
application and admits that for having given the notice to the
insured they have not produced acknowledgment for the same
since they have not received the acknowledgment and further he
admits that after the bouncing of cheque also they have not
personally met the insured and made an attempt to inform the
same to the insured. The admissions which have been elicited
from the mouth of RW1 has not been discussed by the Tribunal
while considering the issue involved between the parties but the
Tribunal while considering the issue of liability, in paragraph 28
only considered the document at Ex.R3 – bank’s               memo
regarding the dishonour of cheque and comes to the conclusion
that the Insurance Company has intimated about the dishonour
of cheque as well as cancellation of policy to the owner of the
offending vehicle but not discussed whether it was served or not
and simply comes to the conclusion that the policy was not in
force and also comes to the conclusion that the respondent No.2
is not liable to pay compensation to the claimant and fails to
consider the evidence of RW1 in toto.      No material before the
Court that they have intimated the same to the insured.
15.    The counsel for the respondent also brought to
notice of this Court the manner of receipt of premium regulations
of 2002 and I have already discussed regulation Nos.3 and 4
with regard to mode of payment as well as commencement of
risk. The issue involved between the parties also considered by
the Apex Court in the case of ORIENTAL INSURANCE CO.
LTD., vs INDERJIT KAUR AND OTHERS reported in (1998) 1
SCC 371. The counsel would contend that the Apex Court has
not discussed the same but in this judgment particularly
Insurance Act, 1938, Section 64VB was discussed by the Apex
Court regarding liability of insurer when cheque received towards
premium dishonoured but policy not avoided.        Insurer issuing
insurance policy on receiving cheque towards premium, cheque
dishonoured, insurer informing the insured that the cheque
having been dishonoured, the insurer would not be at risk. In
such circumstances, the insurer, even if he was entitled to avoid
the   policy   for  not   having   received the  premium,    held,
nonetheless liable for third party risks as the public interest
served by an insurance policy must prevail over the insurer’s
interest.   It is further observed that the insurance policy, left
open, public interest. It is held that despite the bar created by
Section 64VB of the Insurance Act, the appellant, an authorized
insurer, issued a policy of insurance to cover the bus without
receiving the premium therefore. By reason of the provisions of
Sections 147(5) and 149(1) of the Motor Vehicles Act, the
appellant became liable to indemnify third parties in respect of
the liability which that policy covered and to satisfy award of
compensation in respect thereof notwithstanding its entitlement
(upon this question the supreme Court did not express any
opinion) to avoid or cancel the policy for the reason that the
cehque issued in payment of the premium thereon had not been
16.    It is further held that the policy of insurance that the
appellant issued was a representation upon which the authorities
and third parties were entitled to act.       The appellant was not
absolved of its obligations to third parties under the policy
because it did not receive the premium.          It remedies in this
behalf lay against the insured. It is further held that it was the
appellant-insurer itself who was responsible for its predicament.
It had issued the policy of insurance upon receipt only of a
cheque towards the premium in contravention of the provisions
of Section 64VB of the Insurance Act. The public interest that a
policy of insurance serves must, clearly, prevail over the interest
of the appellant. In view of the principles laid down in the said
judgment, the very contention of the Insurance Company that in
view of the regulations, the company liability has to be
exonerated cannot be accepted and the terms of Section 64VB of
the Insurance Act also considered by the Apex Court.
17.    The Apex Court also in the judgment reported in
(2012) 5 SCC 234 in the case of UNITED INDIA INSURANCE
COMPANY LIMITED vs LAXMAMMA AND OTHERS wherein
also discussed Section 149, 146 and 147 with regard to the
insurer’s liability against the third party risk. Wherein discussed
extent of, when cheque issued for payment of premium was
dishonoured and subsequent to the accident, insurer cancelled
the policy of insurance, held, in such circumstances, statutory
liability of insurer to indemnify third parties which policy covered
subsists and insurer has to satisfy award of compensation unless
policy of insurance was cancelled by insurer and intimation of
such cancellation had reached insured before the accident. It is
further discussed with regard to the facts of the case that the
owner of bus obtained policy of insurance from insurer who
cancelled insurance policy only after the accident on ground of
dishonour of cheque, hence, appellant insurer became liable to
satisfy award of compensation passed in favour of claimants. It
is observed that no interference with High Court’s order called
for, insurer, however, could prosecute its remedy to recover
amount paid by it to claimants, from insured. In this judgment
also, the Apex Court has discussed with regard to Insurance Act,
1938 and Section 64VB.
18.   The Apex Court also in the judgment reported in
(2001)3 SCC 151 in the case of NATIONAL INSURANCE CO.
LTD. vs SEEMA MALOTRA AND OTEHRS held that in a case of
bouncing of cheque discussed with regard to Section 64VB in a
case of contract of insurance, held, consists of a reciprocal
promise, therefore if the insured fails to pay the promised
premium or his cheque is returned dishonoured by the bank, the
insurer is under no obligation to perform his part of the contract,
except in relation to his statutory liabilities in respect of third
parties.   Further held that in case insurer has disbursed the
amount insured to the insured before cheque was dishonoured,
insurer is entitled to be reimbursed.
19.   The Apex Court in the judgment reported in 2013
SCC ONLINE SC 592 in the case of NATIONAL INSURANCE
CO. LTD. vs BALKAR RAM AND OTEHRS held that in a similar
circumstances of bouncing of cheque, liability of Insurance
Company to indemnify claimants policy for failure on the part of
Insurance Company to give intimation regarding the dishonour
of the cheque and cancellation of policy to the policy-holder
before the date of the accident. The defence that the policy of
insurance was not valid since the cheque had been dishonoured
prior to the accident, would not exonerate Insurance Company.
20.   The   Apex   Court    referring the   judgment   of
Laxmamma’s caseheld that the Insurance Company is liable to
satisfy the award if the intimation with regard to the dishonour
of cheque and cancellation of policy is intimated to the policy
holder after the date of the accident. Thus, the defence of the
Insurance Company that the policy of insurance was not valid
since the cheque had been dishonoured prior to the accident
would not exonerate them for making payment of compensation.
22.    Having considered the principles laid down in the
judgments     referred  supra   and  these  are   the  judgments
considered by the Apex Court after the regulations of 2002 which
have been pointed out by the counsel for the Insurance
Company. The Apex Court also discussed with regard to Section
64VB of the Insurance Act and the judgment of Balkar Ram and
Laxmamma and also the earlier judgments which have been
referred, it is very clear that the Court has to take note of the
public interest in respect of third parties are concerned and
ordered to pay the compensation. In the case on hand also the
claimant is a third party who was the driver of the auto and
offending vehicle was suddenly stopped as a result, he went and
dashed against the said lorry and sustained injuries and when
the claimant is a third party, as observed by the Apex Court in
the judgment of Inderjit Kaur held that even if he was entitled
to avoid the policy for not having received the premium, held,
nonetheless liable for third party risk as the public interest
served by an insurance policy must prevail over the insurer
interest and hence, I do not find any force in the contention of
the counsel for the Insurance Company that the Insurance
Company is not liable to pay compensation. In the subsequent
judgment of Seema Malotra’ case, the Apex Court held that the
insurer is under no obligation to perform his part of the contract,
except in relation to his statutory liabilities in respect of third
parties. Hence, it is clear that it is a statutory liability in relation
to third parties.     The Apex Court also in the judgment of
Laxmamma’s case it is held that the statutory liability of
insurer to indemnify third parties which policy covered subsists
and insurer has to satisfy award of compensation unless policy of
insurance was cancelled by insurer and intimation of such
cancellation had reached insured before the accident.            In the
case on hand also I have already pointed out that no document
is placed for having given the intimation and the same was
acknowledged by the insured and unless the same is reached the
insured the Insurance Company cannot avoid the liability and I
have already pointed out that the Tribunal has not discussed
anything about reaching of notice to insured.               Under the
circumstances, the contention of the Insurance Company cannot
be accepted and the Tribunal has committed an error in
fastening the liability on the insured instead of insurer. Hence,
the claimant has made out the case to fasten the liability on the
Insurance Company. Hence, I answer point No.2 accordingly.
22.    In view of the discussion made above, this Court
(i)    The appeal is allowed in part.
(ii)   The impugned judgment and award of the
Tribunal    dated    25.08.2014       passed     in
M.V.C.No.7585/2012      is     modified   granting
compensation     of  Rs.2,50,200/-     as  against
Rs.1,57,200/- with interest at 6% per annum
from the date of petition till deposit.
(iii)  The liability fastened on the insured is set
aside and the Insurance Company is directed
to pay the compensation amount with interest
within six weeks from today.
(iv)   The Registry is directed to transmit the records
to the concerned Tribunal, forthwith, if any.