Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned A.G.A. for
Notice to respondent no. 2 is dispensed with.
This petition has been filed for quashing the impugned order
dated 22.09.2021 passed by the court of learned District
Magistrate, Bahraich in case No. 1120/2021, "Himanshu Singh
Vs. Pushpa Singh" under Section 411 Cr.P.C., Police Station
Visheshwarganj, District Bahraich wherein a prayer was made
to transfer the case No. 000175/2020, "Himanshu Singh Vs.
Pushpa Singh", under Section 145 Cr.P.C. in any other court of
Sub-Divisional Magistrate of District Bahraich in the interest of
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that transfer
application under Section 411 Cr.P.C. was filed on the ground
that the husband of opposite party no. 2 namely Udai Pratap
Singh is a local BJP leader and has contested election of
member of Jila Panchayat from ward no. 46 of Visheshwarganj,
District Bahraich and he meets the Sub-Divisional Magistrate in
his chamber and due to this reason the petitioner has a suspicion
that he may not get justice from the hands of the aforesaid Sub-
Divisional Magistrate before whom the proceedings under
Section 145 Cr.P.C. are pending.
Apart from this there is no other ground take in this petition for
transferring or withdrawal of the pending proceedings under
Section 145 Cr.P.C. from the concerned court.
Learned A.G.A. on the other hand has opposed the prayer of
learned counsel for the petitioner submitting that apart from this
bald assertion nothing has been pleaded by the petitioner, nor in
support whereof any material has been filed either before this
Court or before the District Magistrate Bahraich who has
passed the impugned order. There is no illegality in the order.
On due consideration to the arguments advanced by learned
counsel for the parties as well as perusal of the record, it
appears that simply because the husband of respondent no. 2 is
member of BJP from a particular ward and the petitioner is
under apprehension that he may not get justice, however, he has
not filed any material in support of this case to show as to why
he will not get justice. So far as the contention of the petitioner
that the husband of respondent no. 2 meets the Sub-Divisional
Magistrate is concerned, the same is also misconceived. First of
all it is not supported with any material to substantiate these
pleadings, even otherwise if it is taken to be true the Executive
Officers such as Sub-Divisional Magistrate also do various
administrative functions wherein they are supposed to meet the
general public in day to day basis for discharging his duties and
regular Tehsil Divas are hosted in every Tehsil at least once in a
week where the general member of public come and meet him.
This ground alone cannot be a ground for transferring or
withdrawing the case from a particular court.
The impugned order does not suffer from any illegality as while
passing the impugned order the District Magistrate Bahraich
has recorded the reasons as to why the prayer of the petitioner
has been rejected. I am satisfied with the reasoning recorded by
the District Magistrate. The petition lacks merit and is
accordingly dismissed.
The prayer made by the petitioner is refused, however, in the
interest of justice, it is provided that the pending proceedings
under Section 145 Cr.P.C. shall be expedited at an early date.