1.      The instant writ petition has been filed as a Public Interest Litigation
(PIL) for a direction to the Union of India, Govt. of NCT of Delhi and the
Indian Medical Association for mandatorily making available and ensuring
video laryngoscope along with conventional laryngoscope in all desirable
areas especially crash cart trolley in the healthcare system to manage
difficult intubation systems.
By:RAHUL SINGH          W.P.(C) 1127/2023                                             Page 1 of 8
2.      The Petitioner has also prayed for issuance of a direction to the
Respondents to issue directions to medical colleges, institutions for using
video laryngoscopes along with conventional laryngoscopes for teaching
and training purposes. It has also been prayed that the medical practitioners
may be trained and equipped for proper usage of video laryngoscope.
3.      The Petitioner states that he is a respected citizen of this country and
is involved in working for the welfare of the society. It is stated that the
technology in the last two decades has progressed by leaps and bounds and
that the nation must adopt new technologies. It is stated that the current
market size of medical devices sector in India is estimated to be
approximately USD 11 Billion and India’s share in the global medical
device market is estimated to be about 1.5%. It is stated that India is the 4th
largest market for medical devices in Asia after China, Japan and South
4.      It is contended that the government schemes for strengthening of
infrastructure in public health space have been largely under-funded and the
State is not working towards creating a greater role for itself in the delivery
of health services. The Petitioner states that various Parliamentary
Committees have found that the medical devices industry is facing several
challenges such as inadequacy of indigenous research and development on
high end technology including lack of adequate funding, non-availability of
adequately trained and qualified manpower in high end technology with
entrepreneurial skills. The Petitioner further states that intubation is a
procedure that can help save the life of a person who cannot breathe.
5.      It is stated that when a person cannot breathe, the healthcare provider
uses a laryngoscope to guide an endotracheal tube (ETT) into the mouth,
By:RAHUL SINGH          W.P.(C) 1127/2023                                              Page 2 of 8
nose or voice box, then it widens the trachea to keep the airway open so that
air can get into the lungs. It is stated that intubation is usually performed in
hospitals during an emergency or before surgery.
6.      The Petitioner submits that the instruments used for intubation is
called a laryngoscope and the procedure for intubation is called
laryngoscopy. The Petitioner thereafter states that medical science has
improved and with the advancement in technology, laryngoscopy is
available with videos. The Petitioner has relied on certain journals and
publications to highlight the advantages of video laryngoscope.
7.      The Petitioner has stated that despite various studies and guidelines,
the authorities have not taken any substantial step towards implementation
and usage of video laryngoscope and for training of doctors, medical staff
etc. along with conventional laryngoscopes. The Petitioner has, therefore,
approached this Court by filing the instant PIL.
8.      India has taken huge strides in terms of providing medical facilities
and this Court can take judicial notice of the fact that many patients from
neighbouring countries come to India to avail the medical facilities provided
by the hospitals in India. The medical facilities and the equipment that is
available in the hospitals of our country are world class and are easily
accessible to the public at large. In fact, India is famous for its medical
tourism as it combines the latest technologies with qualified professionals at
accessible costs.
9.      The Petitioner has only placed on record a few journals to highlight
the benefits of a video laryngoscope. The Petitioner is not a doctor and has
not done any research work to demonstrate that unless a video laryngoscope
is not used, the process of laryngoscopy will end in a failure. This petition
By:RAHUL SINGH          W.P.(C) 1127/2023                                              Page 3 of 8
seems to be sponsored by certain manufacturers to promote the video
laryngoscope technology produced by them and are abusing the judicial
process by filing the present PIL.
10.     The Petitioner has not brought any material to show that absence of
video laryngoscope will result in fatalities. Furthermore, it is settled law that
in case of policy decisions that are taken by the State, Courts should tread
lightly, especially when such decisions pertain to the health sector. The
Apex Court in Jacob Puliyel v. Union of India and Ors., 2022 SCC OnLine
SC 533, was broadly examining policy decisions pertaining to health and
had observed that in exercise of their judicial review, Courts should not
ordinarily interfere with the policy decisions of the Executive unless the
policy can be faulted on grounds of mala fide, unreasonableness,
arbitrariness or unfairness, etc. The relevant portion of the said judgment
“21. We shall now proceed to analyse the precedents
of this Court on the ambit of judicial review of public
policies relating to health. It is well settled that the
Courts, in exercise of their power of judicial review, do
not ordinarily interfere with the policy decisions of the
executive unless the policy can be faulted on grounds
of mala fide, unreasonableness, arbitrariness or
unfairness etc. Indeed, arbitrariness, irrationality,
perversity and mala fide will render the policy
unconstitutional. It is neither within the domain of the
courts nor the scope of judicial review to embark upon
an enquiry as to whether a particular public policy is
wise or whether better public policy can be evolved.
Nor are the courts inclined to strike down a policy at
the behest of a petitioner merely because it has been
urged that a different policy would have been fairer or
wiser or more scientific or more logical. Courts do not
By:RAHUL SINGH          W.P.(C) 1127/2023                                               Page 4 of 8
and cannot act as appellate authorities examining the
correctness, suitability and appropriateness of a
policy, nor are courts advisors to the executive on
matters of policy which the executive is entitled to
formulate. The scope of judicial review when
examining a policy of the Government is to check
whether it violates the fundamental rights of the
citizens or is opposed to the provisions of the
Constitution, or opposed to any statutory provision or
manifestly arbitrary.”           (emphasis supplied)
11.     The aforementioned Judgment had relied upon the observations of the
Apex Court in Academy of Nutrition Improvement v. Union of India, (2011)
8 SCC 274 wherein the Apex Court had explicitly noted that Courts should
be reluctant to interfere with policy decisions taken by the State in matters of
public health. The observation reiterating the same read as under:-
“35. This Court in a series of decisions has reiterated
that courts should not rush in where even scientists
and medical experts are careful to tread. The rule of
prudence is that courts will be reluctant to interfere
with policy decisions taken by the Government, in
matters of public health, after collecting and analysing
inputs from surveys and research. Nor will courts
attempt to substitute their own views as to what is
wise, safe, prudent or proper, in relation to technical
issues relating to public health in preference of those
formulated by persons said to possess technical
expertise and rich experience.
36. This Court in Directorate of Film Festivals v.
Gaurav Ashwin Jain [(2007) 4 SCC 737] , pointed
out: (SCC p. 746, para 16)
“16. The scope of judicial review of governmental
policy is now well defined. Courts do not and
By:RAHUL SINGH          W.P.(C) 1127/2023                                              Page 5 of 8
cannot act as appellate authorities examining the
correctness, suitability and appropriateness of a
policy, nor are courts advisors to the executive on
matters of policy which the executive is entitled to
formulate. The scope of judicial review when
examining a policy of the Government is to check
whether it violates the fundamental rights of the
citizens or is opposed to the provisions of the
Constitution, or opposed to any statutory provision
or manifestly arbitrary. Courts cannot interfere
with policy either on the ground that it is erroneous
or on the ground that a better, fairer or wiser
alternative is available. Legality of the policy, and
not the wisdom or soundness of the policy, is the
subject of judicial review….” (emphasis supplied)
12.     The observation that Courts should restrain themselves from
interfering in policy decisions relating to the economy or health has been
made in Small Scale Industrial Manufacturers Association (Regd.) v. Union
of India, (2021) 8 SCC 511 as well wherein the Court has observed that
correctness of reasons that have prompted the Government to take certain
decisions should not be a concern of judicial review. The paragraphs stating
the same are as follows:-
“71. The correctness of the reasons which prompted
the Government in decision taking one course of
action instead of another is not a matter of concern in
judicial review and the court is not the appropriate
forum for such investigation. The policy decision
must be left to the Government as it alone can adopt
which policy should be adopted after considering of
the points from different angles. In assessing the
propriety of the decision of the Government the court
cannot interfere even if a second view is possible from
that of the Government.
By:RAHUL SINGH          W.P.(C) 1127/2023                                               Page 6 of 8
72. Legality of the policy, and not the wisdom or
soundness of the policy, is the subject of judicial
review. The scope of judicial review of the
governmental policy is now well defined. The courts
do not and cannot act as an appellate authority
examining        the     correctness,      stability     and
appropriateness of a policy, nor are the courts
advisers to the executives on matters of policy which
the executives are entitled to formulate.
73. Government has to decide its own priorities and
relief to the different sectors. It cannot be disputed that
pandemic affected the entire country barring few of the
sectors. However, at the same time, the Government is
required to take various measures in different
fields/sectors like public health, employment, providing
food and shelter to the common people/migrants,
transportation of migrants, etc. and therefore, as such,
the Government has announced various financial
packages/reliefs. Even the Government also suffered
due to lockdown, due to unprecedented COVID-19
Pandemic and also even lost the revenue in the form of
GST. Still, the Government seems to have come out
with various reliefs/packages. Government has its own
financial constraints. Therefore, as such, no writ of
mandamus         can     be     issued     directing      the
Government/RBI to announce/declare particular relief
packages and/or to declare a particular policy, more
particularly when many complex issues will arise in
the field of economy and what will be the overall effect
on the economy of the country for which the courts do
not have any expertise and which shall be left to the
Government and RBI to announce the relief
packages/economic policy in the form of reliefs on the
basis of the advice of the experts. Therefore, no writ of
mandamus can be issued.”             (emphasis supplied)
By:RAHUL SINGH          W.P.(C) 1127/2023                                                 Page 7 of 8
13.     Laryngoscopy is a common procedure done in all hospitals which
does not even require hopitalization. Courts cannot force Governments to
procure video laryngoscope in all hospitals as it is a matter of policy.
14.     It is well settled that the Courts do not run governments and decisions
to procure instruments in hospitals are taken by the government depending
on several circumstances. It is not for the courts to take a decision whether
video laryngoscope should be mandatorily made available or not. No data
has been provided by the Petitioner that absence of video laryngoscope has
resulted in a number of failures leading to deaths of patients. This petition is
ill conceived and the Petitioner has been only used as a front by
manufacturers of video laryngoscope who wish to promote their products.
Of late, this Court is witnessing that the jurisdiction of Public Interest
Litigation is being misused only to secure personal benefits and such PILs
are abuse of the process of law which must be discouraged.
15.     This Court, is, therefore, inclined to dismiss the petition with a
warning to the Petitioner to not file such frivolous petitions in the future.
16.     The petition is dismissed, along with pending application(s), if any,
with the above observations.
By:RAHUL SINGH          W.P.(C) 1127/2023                                             Page 8 of 8