Counsel for Petitioner :- Chandra Shekhar Singh
1.      Heard Sri S.N.Shukla, learned Standing Counsel for the
State of U.P. appearing for the petitioners.
2.      The present petition seeks to raise a challenge to an order
dated 09.09.2021 passed by the U.P. State Public Services
Tribunal, Lucknow1 in terms of which Claim Petition No. 444 of
2008 (Krishna Kumar Tevatia and others Vs. State of U.P. and
others) filed by the deceased respondent no. 2 has been allowed
and the order of punishment dated 30.04.2005, the appellate order
dated 24.12.2005 and the revisional order dated 18.10.2007, have
been set aside and benefits withheld due to the said punishment
order have been directed to be refunded to the legal
representatives of the deceased respondent no. 2.
3.      The facts of the case as reflected from the pleadings are that
disciplinary proceedings were initiated against the respondent no.
2 while he was posted as Collection Amin at Jahanabad, District
Pilibhit and a charge-sheet dated 30.09.2004 was issued
whereupon an inquiry was conducted and a report was submitted
on 20.01.2005 holding the respondent no. 2 guilty of the charges.
A show cause notice was issued to him on 05.02.2005 to which he
submitted a reply on 28.02.2005 and thereafter the order of
punishment was passed on 30.04.2005 whereby the respondent no.
2 was reverted to his original pay scale in addition to award of
adverse entry in his character role. The appeal and revision filed
thereagainst were dismissed on 24.12.2005 and 18.10.2007
4.      The Tribunal taking into consideration the inquiry report
came to a conclusion that neither any date, time or place was fixed
by the inquiry officer nor any oral evidence was led and only on
the basis of some documentary evidence, the respondent no. 2 was
held guilty of the charges. It was also held that the respondent no.
2 was not afforded any opportunity to adduce evidence and was
denied reasonable opportunity of defence. Referring to Rule 7 of
the U.P. Government Servant (Discipline and Appeal) Rules,
19992 and also certain legal authorities for the proposition that
even in a case where the delinquent employee does not submit
any reply to the charge-sheet, the inquiry officer is not absolved
from his duty to record oral evidence and provide an opportunity
to adduce evidence in defence, the inquiry was held to be vitiated.
It was also held that the disciplinary authority has proceeded only
on the basis of the inquiry report and therefore the order of
punishment being in violation of the principles of natural justice
was not sustainable and was accordingly quashed and the claim
petition was allowed. Taking notice of the fact that the respondent
no. 2 had expired during the pendency of the claim petition, the
Tribunal held that no fruitful purpose would be served in remitting
the matter for fresh inquiry and in view thereof while setting aside
the orders of punishment, the appellate order and the revisional
order, the benefits withheld due to the punishment order have been
directed to be refunded to the legal representatives of the
respondent no. 2.
5.     Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has sought to
urge that once the charges stood proved there was no need for any
formal oral inquiry or cross-examination of the witnesses and for
the said reason the order passed by the Tribunal is manifestly
erroneous and legally unsustainable. It is also sought to be
contended that the order passed by the Tribunal does not give any
cogent reason to set aside the order of punishment and also the
orders passed in appeal and revision.
6.     The procedure with regard to holding of disciplinary
proceedings against government servants in State of U.P. is
governed as per the provisions of the Uttar Pradesh Government
Servant (Discipline and Appeal), Rules 1999. The procedure for
imposing major penalties, the manner in which charge-sheet is
required to be given, the holding of an enquiry by the inquiry
officer designated for the purpose the grant of opportunity to call
witnesses and record their oral evidence are also provided for
under the said Rules.
7.     The report of the inquiry officer, as has been noticed in the
order passed by the Tribunal, shows that neither any date, time
and place was fixed by the inquiry officer nor any oral evidence
was led to prove the charges. It also records that only on the basis
of the certain documentary evidence the employee was held guilty
of the charges and therefore it was a case of denial of reasonable
opportunity to him to place his defence. The Tribunal has referred
to Rule 7 of the Rules, 1999 and also the legal position that even
in a situation where the delinquent employee does not submit any
reply to the charge-sheet, the inquiry officer is not absolved from
his duty to record oral evidence and to provide an opportunity to
him to adduce evidence in his defence.
8.      The legal position with regard to grant of reasonable
opportunity to a delinquent employee to place his defence during
the course of a departmental inquiry and the necessity of
observance of principles of natural justice and following the due
procedure is fairly well setted.
9.      A Division Bench of this Court in the case of Radhey Kant
Khare vs. U.P. Cooperative Sugar Factories Federation Ltd.3,
has held that after a charge sheet is given to the employee, an oral
inquiry is must whether the employee requests for it or not.
Further, it is mandatory to give a notice to him indicating the date,
time and place of the enquiry, the principle being that charge-
sheeted employee should not only know the charges against him
but should also know the evidence against him so that he can
properly reply to the same.
10.     In State of U.P. and others Vs. Saroj Kumar Sinha 4, the
inquiry officer has been held to be in the position of an
independent adjudicator and acting in a quasi-judicial authority
with a duty enjoined upon him that even in the absence of the
delinquent, he is to see whether the unrebutted evidence is
sufficient to hold that the charges are proved. It was also observed
that in a case where no oral evidence was examined and the
documents have not been proved, the charges could not be held to
have been proved against the delinquent employee.
11.     The aforementioned judicial authorities have been referred
to by the Tribunal in its order to record its conclusion that the
inquiry officer was legally bound to conduct an oral inquiry
informing the date, time and place of the enquiry, providing an
opportunity to the delinquent employee to cross-examine the
witnesses, whether or not any request had been made for the
purpose and in the absence thereof, the charges against the
employee could not be held to have been proved.
12.    The Tribunal has also recorded that even the reply
submitted by the employee to the show cause notice issued by the
disciplinary authority consequent to the inquiry and the defence
raised therein have not been accorded consideration and the
disciplinary authority has passed the order of punishment only on
the basis of inquiry report in gross disregard to the provisions
under the Rules, 1999 and also the principles of natural justice.
13.    The departmental proceedings pursuant to which the
punishment order has been passed having thus not followed the
procedure prescribed under the Rules, 1999 and there being
several procedural infirmities in the conduct of enquiry, the order
of punishment has rightly been held to be legally unsustainable.
14.    It has been consistently held that a departmental inquiry
against government servant is not to be treated as a casual exercise
and the principles of natural justice are required to be observed so
as to ensure not only that justice is done but is manifestly seen to
be done; the object being to ensure that the delinquent is treated
fairly in proceedings which may culminate in imposition of a
major penalty against him.
15.    The meaning of a reasonable opportunity of showing cause
against the action proposed to be taken is that the delinquent
employee is afforded a reasonable opportunity to defend himself
against charges on which inquiry is held and has to be given an
opportunity to deny his guilt and establish his innocence.
16.    The administrative authorities are obliged in law to follow
their own regulations, policies and procedures with regard to
conduct of departmental proceedings and non-adherence thereto
would have potential of causing serious prejudice to the person
concerned in the inquiry proceedings and would clearly amount to
denial of a reasonable opportunity to submit a plausible and
effective rebuttal to the charges being enquired into.
17.    In the present case, as the inquiry officer failed to fix any
date, place or time in the conduct of inquiry and the absence of
any witness having been examined to support the charges levelled
against the respondent-employee has led to a situation where the
delinquent has been condemned unheard. The entire proceedings,
being a violation of principles of natural justice and total disregard
of procedural fairness, have rightly been held by the Tribunal to be
18.    The principal contention sought to be raised by the learned
counsel for the petitioner that once the charges stand proved, there
is no need of any formal oral inquiry or cross-examination of the
witnesses, cannot be held to be sustainable for the reason that the
same would amount to gross denial of a fair opportunity to the
delinquent to place his defence and would amount to by-passing
the procedure under the Rules, 1999, apart from being violative of
the principles of natural justice.
19.    The Tribunal upon taking notice of the fact that the
respondent no. 2 (petitioner in the claim petition) had expired
during the pendency of the claim petition held that no fruitful
purpose would be served in remitting the matter for fresh enquiry
and while allowing the petition and quashing the order of
punishment, the appellate order and the revisional order, the
Tribunal has rightly directed the benefits withheld due to the said
punishment order, be refunded to the legal representatives of the
deceased respondent no. 2.
20.   No other ground has been urged on behalf of the petitioner
to support the challenge to the order passed by the Tribunal.
21.   The petition thus fails and is accordingly dismissed.