3. The prayer in the petition is to issue direction to
issue an appointment order to the petitioner for the
post of Sales Tax Inspector, Class-III.
4. The case of the petitioner is that pursuant to an
advertisement            for    recruitment       of      Sales         Tax
Inspector, Class-III, the petitioner being a Scheduled
Tribe candidate, applied for appointment.
5. Ms.Niyati          Vaishnav       learned      counsel         for       the
petitioner would submit that appointment was orally
denied on the ground that the caste from which the
petitioner belongs is under scrutiny of the State
Government. Reliance is placed on an order dated
15.03.2020          passed     in     Special   Civil     Application
No.1168 of 2022, which reads as under:
“1    Rule returnable forthwith. Mr.Kurven Desai, learned
Assistant Government Pleader, waives service of rule on
behalf of the respondent – State.
2     Heard Mr.Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate
with Mr.Hemang Shah, learned advocate for the petitioner
and Mr.Kurven Desai, learned Assistant Government
Pleader for the State respondents.
3     The petitioner belongs to the Rabari community,
which is covered under the Scheduled Tribes category. The
Gujarat Public Service Commission, issued an
advertisement No.112/2018-19 on 17.07.2017 for filling up
60 vacant posts of Police Inspector (Unarmed), Class-2.
3.1 The petitioner submitted his application and appeared
for the written examination. The petitioner was found
eligible to be appointed to the post of Police Inspector
(Unarmed), Class-II. His name figured at serial no.56 on the
select list prepared on 22.02.2021.
3.2 No appointment orders have been issued in the case
of the present petitioner, since February, 2021 because of
the Caste Certificate controversy pending consideration
before the Scrutiny Committee.
4      Mr.Shalin Mehta, learned Senior Advocate, would
submit that the scrutiny for examining the petitioner’s caste
certificate is pending now for more than a year and though
the petitioner has been selected for appointment to the post
of Police Inspector (Unarmed), Class-II, but for the exercise
at the hands of the Scrutiny Committee which is pending, no
appointment orders are being issued. He would rely on an
order passed by this Court in Special Civil Application
No.1858 of 2021.
5      Mr.Kurven Desai, learned Assistant Government
Pleader, would rely on an affidavit-in-reply filed in SCA
No.1171 of 2022. Reading the affidavit-in-reply would
indicate that due to certain protest and agitations, and by
virtue of the pendency of the issue, caste certificates have
not been given to the Rabari, Bharvad and Charan
community living in the ness areas in the forest of Alech, Gir
and Barda of Gujarat. Since the petitioner belong to this
area and the issue pertains to the veracity of the caste of the
petitioner who belong to this area, the Caste Certificate will
not be issued for the time being till the Committee takes a
decision.
6      Considering the order of a Co-ordinate Bench of this
Court dated 26.07.2021, the respondent authorities are
hereby directed to give provisional appointment to the
petitioner to the post of Police Inspector (Unarmed), subject
to the result of the Scrutiny Committee. Such order shall be
issued within a period of 02 (two) months from the date of
receipt of the writ of this order. It is clarified that the
appointment of the petitioner would be provisional and in
case, it is found by the Scrutiny Committee that the
certificate of the petitioner is not genuine, the petitioner will
not be entitled to any benefit of the provisional service. It is
also clarified that if the Caste Certificate of the petitioner is
found to be genuine, it will be open for the petitioner to
claim his actual appointment from the date of his juniors
and also continuity of service and other benefits.
7      The petition is allowed to the aforesaid extent. Rule is
made absolute accordingly. Direct service is permitted.”
6. Having heard Ms.Vaishnav learned advocate for the
petitioner and Mr.Desai learned AGP for the State,
and in view of the order referred to herein above,
the petition is allowed. The respondent authorities
are directed to give provisional appointment to the
petitioner to the post of Sales Tax Inspector, Class-
III, subject to result of the Scrutiny Committee.
Such orders shall be issued within a period of four
months from the date of receipt of writ of this Court.
7. It is clarified that the appointment of the petitioner
would be provisional and in case, it is found by the
Scrutiny Committee that the certificate of the
petitioner is not genuine, the petitioner will not be
entitled to the benefit of being in provisional service.
8. It is also clarified that if the caste certificate of the
petitioner is found to be genuine, it will be open for
the petitioner to claim his actual appointment from
the date of his juniors and also continuity of service
and other benefits.
9. The petition is allowed to the aforesaid extent. Rule
is made absolute accordingly. Direct service is
permitted.