This is a petition seeking bail in FIR No. 0069/2021 dated 08.03.2021
registered at PS Special Cell u/s 21/29 NDPS Act.
As per the FIR, information was received regarding supply of Heroine
and one Uday Patel was involved in the said transaction. It also transpired
that Kapil alias Vivek was to receive the consignment from Uday Patel. A
trap was laid and Uday Patel, Kapil and Ram Naresh Yadav were
apprehended. 3 Kg heroine was recovered from Kapil and 7 Kg from Uday.
Hence the FIR.
The accused persons were arrested and interrogated and were
produced before the Court and PC remand was obtained.
During the course of interrogation, accused Kapil named the applicant
as one of the persons in the drug trafficking racket.
As per the status report, the evidence against the applicant is 1)
disclosure statement of the accused himself; 2) the voice sample of the
applicant has matched with the intercepted call between the applicant and
Kapil regarding drug transaction.
The applicant has been apprehended primarily on the basis of the
disclosure statement of one Kapil. There is no recovery made from the
Further, admittedly, the applicant is running a shop of fertilizer at
The intercepted conversation between Kapil and the applicant shows
that they were talking about supply of ‘Khad’ which cannot be solely
interpreted to mean drugs/contraband.
The applicant has been in custody since 09.03.2021.
As regards the bar of Section 37 is concerned, in the present case, the
public prosecutor has been granted an opportunity to oppose the application.
There is no recovery from the applicant, there is no money trail or
possession of any drugs/contraband with the applicant.
The applicant has clear antecedents and there is no other case pending
against him and the only material against the applicant is the disclosure
statement of Kapil and the intercepted conversation which talks about
The applicant is in the business of fertilizers and hence the use of
word ‘Khad’ is neither unusual nor strange.
I have reasonable ground to believe that he is not guilty of the
I am also, prima facie, of the view that he is not likely to commit any
offence while on bail. Hence the application needs to be allowed.
For the aforesaid reasons, the applicant is directed to be enlarged on
bail on the following conditions:
i.  The applicant shall furnish a personal bond and a surety bond in
the sum of Rs. 50,000/- each, to the satisfaction of the Trial Court;
ii.  The applicant shall appear before the Court as and when the matter
is taken up for hearing;
iii.   The applicant shall join investigation as and when called by the I.O
iv.   The applicant shall provide his mobile number to the Investigating
Officer (IO) concerned, which shall be kept in working condition
at all times. The applicant shall not switch off, or change the same
without prior intimation to the IO concerned, during the period of
v.   The applicant shall report to the local Police Station on the first
Monday of every month;
vi.   In case the applicant changes his address, he will inform the IO
concerned and this Court also;
vii.   The applicant shall not leave the country during the bail period and
surrender his passport, if any, at the time of release before the I.O.
viii.   The applicant shall not indulge in any criminal activity during the
ix.   The applicant shall not communicate with, or come into contact
with any of the prosecution witnesses or tamper with the evidence
of the case.
NOVEMBER 3, 2022/dm              Click here to check corrigendum, if any