(Order of the Court was made by The Hon'ble Chief Justice)
The matter pertains to the mushrooming of law colleges in
the State.
2. Thankfully, some attention has been given to ensure that
law colleges do not come up every other day in every locality, but
the standard of education imparted at some of the existing law
colleges and the infrastructure available need also to be looked into.
3. The State Bar Council says that it is vigilant and sufficient
steps have been taken, but unless there is uniformity all over the
country, whether under the aegis of the Bar Council of India or
pursuant to orders of Court, the situation cannot be appropriately
addressed.
4. There is substance in what the Bar Council says since the
regulation of law colleges in one State is undone if unregulated law
colleges in a contiguous State allow easy access.                There are
previous orders of this Court pertaining to the matter and only thing
that can be said is for the Bar Council to be vigilant as far as this
State is concerned, since it cannot go beyond the territorial limits.
5. There is a letter of the year 2019 that the petitioner relies
on. It is a press release issued by the then Chairperson of the Bar
Council of India. The first paragraph refers to a moratorium for a
period of three years on the opening of new law colleges in the
country. A resolution to such effect was taken at a meeting of the
Bar Council on August 11, 2019.
6. The matter has to be looked into, in depth, by the Bar
Council and possible orders have to be sought at an all India level
to ensure that the quality is not compromised in course of more law
colleges being born and in the guise of opportunities being created.
7. However, at the end of the day, no mandamus can be
issued of the nature sought by the petitioner herein. Further, since
it may not be effective merely to regulate the opening of law
colleges within the boundaries of this State as easy access to law
colleges across the neighbouring States will always be open, no
meaningful order is possible to be issued at this level.
8. It will be open to the petitioner to continue the crusade, but
he may carry the request to a different level.
9. W.P.No.1858 of 2021 is disposed of. There will be no order
as to costs. Consequently, W.M.P.No.6490 of 2021 is closed.
10. Nothing in this order will prevent the Bar Council from
considering      the  petitioner's representation  and    affording    the
petitioner a hearing on the matter within the next four weeks.
2.The Secretary to Government,