1.     An application has been preferred on behalf of the petitioner under
Section 439 Cr.PC for grant of regular bail in FIR No. 118/2021 under
Sections 363/366/376/506 IPC read with Section 6 of the POCSO Act, 2012
registered at Police Station Neb Sarai.
2.     A copy of the petition be supplied to the learned counsel for the
prosecutrix, as prayed.
3.     Learned counsel for the petitioner has claimed that the age of the
prosecutrix as per the copy of the Aadhar Card in his possession is 07.03.2001
and as such, she was a major on the alleged date of incident. Reliance is also
placed upon the PAN Card as well copy of the voter I.D. Card issued to the
prosecutrix.
4.     On the other hand, it is pointed out by the learned APP for the State that
as per investigation, the copy of the Aadhar Card furnished by the prosecutrix
reflects date of birth as ‘2004’. Further, as per the date of birth certificate
issued by the GNCT of Delhi, the date of birth is 07.03.2004.
5.     In the aforesaid background, it was directed by this Court vide order
dated 27.07.2022 that it is it is imperative that the correct particulars of the
date of birth of proseeutrix/victim entered in Aadhar Card be confirmed by
6.     It is submitted by the learned APP for the State as well as by Mr.
Abhishek, learned counsel for the UIDAI that specific orders need to be
passed by this Court in terms of Section 33 (1) of the Aadhar (Targeted
Delivery of Financial and Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016
in case correct particulars are to be ascertained and shared by UIDAI. Learned
counsel for the prosecutrix submits that he has no objection for verification of
the correct date of birth by UIDAI on instructions from the brother of the
victim.
7.     However, the ascertainment of the correct date of birth of the
prosecutrix/victim as per Aadhar Card is vehemently opposed by the learned
counsel for the petitioner placing reliance upon the orders passed by the
Co-ordinate Bench of this Court in Bail Application No. 1926/2022 dated
BAIL APPLN. 1177/2022                                                  Page 2 of 4
24.08.2022 in Hanzla Iqbal Vs. The State & Anr.
8.      The proper determination of the age of the victim is important from
jurisdictional perspective which determines the applicability of provisions of
POCSO Act. It is imperative that the law operates in a balanced manner to
ensure that the rights of the victim child are protected under the provisions of
POCSO Act and at the same time, it is of paramount importance that the
accused is not forced to face the trial under the rigorous provisions of POCSO
Act which provides for stringent punishment, in case the victim happens to be
a major on the date of the incident. The investigating agency during the course
of investigation as well as Special Court during the course of trial have a duty
to ascertain or determine and satisfy itself as to the age of victim considering
the fact that trial under provisions of POCSO Act places presumption and
existence of mental state under Sections 29 & 30 of the Act. Sub-section (2)
of Section 34 of the POCSO Act also requires the Special Court to satisfy
itself about the age of child and record in writing its reasons for arriving at a
conclusion in this regard. The aforesaid objectives need to be kept in
perspective even at the stage of bail or charge.
9.      I am of the considered opinion that the objections raised by the learned
counsel for the petitioner appear to be completely misplaced, as the
ascertainment of correct date of birth of the prosecutrix is imperative to
ensure that the trial proceeds in the correct direction. The authority cited by
the learned counsel for the petitioner is distinguishable on facts as it never
involved the issue of two dates of birth being claimed in respect of the same
document. The date of birth furnished in one of the copies of Aadhar Card
could be correct while the other would be fake, until and unless the same is
BAIL APPLN. 1177/2022                                                   Page 3 of 4
explainable on any other hypothesis, since the cards are updated in case of a
child after a period of five years, as clarified by learned counsel appearing for
In the facts and circumstances, UIDAI is directed to furnish the details
of the date of birth of prosecutrix as per records relating to Aadhar Card
maintained in the Department.