It is brought to our notice that the Bar Association of the
High   Court  of  Rajasthan  at  Jaipur  went  on  one   day  strike  on
27.09.2021.    To go on strike by the Bar Association and the lawyers
is   absolutely   contemptuous  and   just  contrary   to   the  earlier
decisions of this Court in the case of Ex-Capt. Harish Uppal vs.
Union of India, (2003) 2 SCC 45; Common Cause, A Registered Society
vs. Union of India, (2006) 9 SCC 295; Krishnakant Tamrakar vs.
State of M.P., (2018) 17 SCC 27 and        District Bar Association,
Dehradun through its Secretary vs Ishwar Shandilya & Ors., 2020 SCC
In the case of Ex-Capt. Harish Uppal (supra), this Court has
specifically observed and held that the lawyers have no right to go
on strike or even token strike or to give a call for strike. It is
also further observed that nor can they while holding Vakalat on
behalf of clients, abstain from appearing in courts in pursuance of
a call for strike or boycott. It is further observed by this Court
that it is unprofessional as well as unbecoming for a lawyer to
refuse to attend the court even in pursuance of a call for strike
or boycott by the Bar Association or the Bar Council. It is further
observed that an Advocate is an officer of the court and enjoys a
special  status  in  the  society;   Advocates  have  obligations  and
duties to ensure the smooth functioning of the court; they owe a
duty to their clients and strikes interfere with the administration
of justice. They cannot thus disrupt court proceedings and put
interest of their clients in jeopardy.
Despite the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid
decisions and even the concern expressed by this Court against the
strikes by the lawyers, things did not improve and again the issue
of lawyers going on strikes came to be considered in the case of
Common  Cause,  A  Registered  Society   (supra)  and  this  Court  in
paragraph 4 of that judgment, held as under:
“4. The Constitution Bench has, in Ex Capt. Harish
Uppal case [(2003) 2 SCC 45] culled out the law in
the following terms: (SCC pp. 64 & 71-74, paras
“20. Thus the law is already well settled. It is
the duty of every advocate who has accepted a
brief to attend trial, even though it may go on
day to day and for a prolonged period. It is also
settled law that a lawyer who has accepted a brief
cannot refuse to attend court because a boycott
call is given by the Bar Association. It is
settled law that it is unprofessional as well as
unbecoming for a lawyer who has accepted a brief
to refuse to attend court even in pursuance of a
call for strike or boycott by the Bar Association
or the Bar Council. It is settled law that courts
are under an obligation to hear and decide cases
brought before them and cannot adjourn matters
merely because lawyers are on strike. The law is
that it is the duty and obligation of courts to go
on with matters or otherwise it would tantamount
to becoming a privy to the strike. It is also
settled law that if a resolution is passed by Bar
Associations expressing want of confidence in
judicial officers, it would amount to scandalising
the courts to undermine its authority and thereby
the advocates will have committed contempt of
court. Lawyers have known, at least since Mahabir
Singh case [Mahabir Prasad Singh v. Jacks Aviation
(P) Ltd., (1999) 1 SCC 37] that if they
participate in a boycott or a strike, their action
is ex facie bad in view of the declaration of law
by this Court. A lawyer's duty is to boldly ignore
a call for strike or boycott of court(s). Lawyers
have also known, at least since Ramon Services
case [Ramon Services (P) Ltd. v Subhash Kapoor,
(L&S) 152], that the advocates would be answerable
for the consequences suffered by their clients if
the non-appearance was solely on grounds of a
strike call.
21. It must also be remembered that an advocate is
an officer of the court and enjoys special status
in society. Advocates have obligations and duties
to ensure smooth functioning of the court. They
owe a duty to their clients. Strikes interfere
with administration of justice. They cannot thus
disrupt court proceedings and put interest of
their clients in jeopardy.
34. One last thing which must be mentioned is that
the right of appearance in courts is still within
the control and jurisdiction of courts. Section 30
of the Advocates Act has not been brought into
force and rightly so. Control of conduct in court
can only be within the domain of courts. Thus
Article 145 of the Constitution of India gives to
the Supreme Court and Section 34 of the Advocates
Act gives to the High Court power to frame rules
including rules regarding condition on which a
person (including an advocate) can practise in the
Supreme Court and/or in the High Court and courts
subordinate thereto. Many courts have framed rules
in this behalf. Such a rule would be valid and
binding on all. Let the Bar take note that unless
self-restraint is exercised, courts may now have
to consider framing specific rules debarring
advocates guilty of contempt and/or unprofessional
or unbecoming conduct, from appearing before the
courts. Such a rule if framed would not have
anything to do with the disciplinary jurisdiction
of the Bar Councils. It would be concerning the
dignity and orderly functioning of the courts. The
right of the advocate to practise envelops a lot
of acts to be performed by him in discharge of his
professional duties. Apart from appearing in the
courts he can be consulted by his clients, he can
give his legal opinion whenever sought for, he can
draft instruments, pleadings, affidavits or any
other documents, he can participate in any
conference involving legal discussions, he can
work in any office or firm as a legal officer, he
can appear for clients before an arbitrator or
arbitrators etc. Such a rule would have nothing to
do with all the acts done by an advocate during
his practice. He may even file vakalat on behalf
of a client even though his appearance inside the
court is not permitted. Conduct in court is a
matter concerning the court and hence the Bar
Council cannot claim that what should happen
inside the court could also be regulated by them
in exercise of their disciplinary powers. The
right to practise, no doubt, is the genus of which
the right to appear and conduct cases in the court
may be a specie. But the right to appear and
conduct cases in the court is a matter on which
the court must and does have major supervisory and
controlling power. Hence courts cannot be and are
not divested of control or supervision of conduct
in court merely because it may involve the right
of an advocate. A rule can stipulate that a person
who has committed contempt of court or has behaved
unprofessionally and in an unbecoming manner will
not have the right to continue to appear and plead
and conduct cases in courts. The Bar Councils
cannot overrule such a regulation concerning the
orderly conduct of court proceedings. On the
contrary, it will be their duty to see that such a
rule is strictly abided by. Courts of law are
structured in such a design as to evoke respect
and reverence to the majesty of law and justice.
The   machinery   for   dispensation  of   justice
according to law is operated by the court.
Proceedings inside the courts are always expected
to be held in a dignified and orderly manner. The
very sight of an advocate, who is guilty of
contempt   of    court    or   of  unbecoming   or
unprofessional conduct, standing in the court
would erode the dignity of the court and even
corrode   its   majesty    besides  impairing  the
confidence of the public in the efficacy of the
institution of the courts. The power to frame such
rules should not be confused with the right to
practise law. While the Bar Council can exercise
control over the latter, the courts are in control
of the former. This distinction is clearly brought
out by the difference in language in Section 49 of
the Advocates Act on the one hand and Article 145
of the Constitution of India and Section 34(1) of
the Advocates Act on the other. Section 49 merely
empowers the Bar Council to frame rules laying
down conditions subject to which an advocate shall
have a right to practise i.e. do all the other
acts set out above. However, Article 145 of the
Constitution of India empowers the Supreme Court
to make rules for regulating this practice and
procedure of the court including inter alia rules
as to persons practising before this Court.
Similarly Section 34 of the Advocates Act empowers
High Courts to frame rules, inter alia to lay down
conditions on which an advocate shall be permitted
to practise in courts. Article 145 of the
Constitution of India and Section 34 of the
Advocates Act clearly show that there is no
absolute right to an advocate to appear in a
court. An advocate appears in a court subject to
such conditions as are laid down by the court. It
must be remembered that Section 30 has not been
brought into force, and this also shows that there
is no absolute right to appear in a court. Even if
Section 30 were to be brought into force control
of proceedings in court will always remain with
the court. Thus even then the right to appear in
court will be subject to complying with conditions
laid down by courts just as practice outside
courts would be subject to conditions laid down by
Bar Council of India. There is thus no conflict or
clash between other provisions of the Advocates
Act on the one hand and Section 34 or Article 145
of the Constitution of India on the other.
35. In conclusion, it is held that lawyers have no
right to go on strike or give a call for boycott,
not even on a token strike. The protest, if any is
required, can only be by giving press statements,
TV interviews, carrying out of court premises
banners and/or placards, wearing black or white or
any colour armbands, peaceful protect marches
outside and away from court premises, going on
dharnas or relay fasts, etc. It is held that
lawyers holding vakalats on behalf of their
clients   cannot  refuse   to  attend   courts  in
pursuance of a call for strike or boycott. All
lawyers must boldly refuse to abide by any call
for strike or boycott. No lawyer can be visited
with any adverse consequences by the Association
or the Council and no threat or coercion of any
nature including that of expulsion can be held
out. It is held that no Bar Council or Bar
Association can permit calling of a meeting for
purposes of considering a call for strike or
boycott and requisition, if any, for such meeting
must be ignored. It is held that only in the
rarest of rare cases where the dignity, integrity
and independence of the Bar and/or the Bench are
at stake, courts may ignore (turn a blind eye) to
a protest, abstention from work for not more than
one day. It is being clarified that it will be for
the court to decide whether or not the issue
involves dignity or integrity or independence of
the Bar and/or the Bench. Therefore in such cases
the President of the Bar must first consult the
Chief Justice or the District Judge before
advocates decide to absent themselves from court.
The decision of the Chief Justice or the District
Judge would be final and have to be abided by the
Bar. It is held that courts are under no
obligation to adjourn matters because lawyers are
on strike. On the contrary, it is the duty of all
courts to go on with matters on their boards even
in the absence of lawyers. In other words, courts
must not be privy to strikes or calls for
boycotts. It is held that if a lawyer, holding a
vakalat of a client, abstains from attending court
due to a strike call, he shall be personally
liable to pay costs which shall be in addition to
damages which he might have to pay his client for
loss suffered by him.
36. It is now hoped that with the above
clarifications, there will be no strikes and/or
calls for boycott. It is hoped that better sense
will prevail and self-restraint will be exercised.
The petitions stand disposed of accordingly.”
While considering the issue of delay/speedy disposal, in case
of Krishnakant Tamrakar (supra), this Court had the occasion to
consider how uncalled for frequent strikes obstructs the access to
justice and what steps are required to remedy the situation. In the
aforesaid decision, it is observed by this Court that access to
speedy justice is a part of the fundamental rights under Articles
14 and 21 of the Constitution of India. This Court was of the
opinion that one of the reasons/root cause for delay is uncalled
for strikes by the lawyers. In the aforesaid decision, this Court
also took note of 266th Law Commission Report, in which there was a
reference  to   the  strikes  by the  lawyers  in  the  Dehradun  and
Haridwar districts itself. In the aforesaid decision, this Court
also took note of the recommendations made by the Law Commission.
This Court further observed that since the strikes are in violation
of the law laid down by this Court, the same amounts to contempt
and at least the office bearers of the Associations who give call
for the strikes cannot disown their liability for contempt.” (See
In spite of the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid
decisions and this Court time and again deprecated the lawyers to
go  on  strike   the  strikes/boycotting  the courts   are  continued
unabated.   Even in the present case also, the Advocates in the High
Court of Rajasthan at Jaipur went on strike on 27.09.2021.       Shri
Manan Kumar Mishra, Learned Senior Advocate and Chairman of the Bar
Council of India has submitted that the Bar Council of India has
issued the notice to the Bar Association of High Court of Rajasthan
at Jaipur.   He has stated that there was a call to boycott only one
court.   Even that also cannot be tolerated.     To boycott only one
court will hamper the independence of judiciary and there may be a
pressure on the particular judge whose court is boycotted and it
may lead to demoralize the judiciary.
Issue   notice upon  the  President, Secretary  and  the Office
Bearers of the Bar Association of High Court of Rajasthan at Jaipur
to show cause why contempt proceedings may not be initiated against
Notice be made returnable on 25.10.2021.
The Registry is directed that notices be served through the
Registrar General of the High Court of Rajasthan at Jaipur.       The
Registrar General of High Court of Rajasthan at Jaipur is directed
to see that the notices upon the office bearers/President/Secretary
of the Bar Association of the High Court of Rajasthan at Jaipur is
served upon them well in time.