The Bombay High Court has taken suo motu cognisance of a "shocking" news report about the pitiable conditions in which young girls from a village in Satara District in Maharashtra are forced to take the arduous journey to school, in a boat and then through a dense forest. "..the laudable moto 'beti bachao, beti padhao' can be achieved only by providing a safe passage and a...
The Bombay High Court has taken suo motu cognisance of a "shocking" news report about the pitiable conditions in which young girls from a village in Satara District in Maharashtra are forced to take the arduous journey to school, in a boat and then through a dense forest.
 "..the laudable moto 'beti bachao, beti padhao' can be achieved only by providing a safe passage and a friendly atmosphere and environment for the girl children by the State," the bench of Justices Prasanna Varale and Anil Kilor observed and directed the High Court Registry to place the matter before the appropriate bench. 
 According to the report, girls from Khirvandi village, a protected area, are forced to ply boats from one end of Koyna Dam to the other end and from there take a nearly 4 km journey through a dense forest to school. Their school begins at 9am. The news item in online portal MumbaiTak states that the forest is inhabited by wild animals including bears and tigers. 
 Moreover, even though certain schools in the State were closed due to pandemic situation, the students of Khirvandi village are attending the school by taking this daily routine.
 "We are short of words to express the suffering and plight of students in general and girls in particular," the bench observed. It said that the State Government can take all measures to provide necessary assistance to the children of Khirvandi village of District Satara.
 The court applauded the girls for their courage and will to educate themselves. 
 "Considering the situation reflected in the news item, we state that on one hand the adversities being faced by the girl children, and on the other hand, there is courage, will and strong determination of these students to pursue academic career," the bench observed. 
 

 

