The petitioner calls in question a declaration notification dated
28-09-2022 issued by the respondent declaring Popular Front of
India (‘PFI’ for short) to be an unlawful organization and bringing
into force the notification with immediate effect.
2. Shorn of unnecessary details, the facts in brief, are as
The petitioner claims to be the President of PFI organization
and claims that the said organization is registered under the
Karnataka Societies Registration Act, 1960. He further claims to be
working for the empowerment of down trodden section of the
Society. What brings the petitioner to this Court is declaration of
PFI to be an unlawful organization. The petitioner, by virtue of
being a member of the organization claims to be aggrieved by the
action of declaring the organization to be unlawful. Insofar as
declaration of the organization to be unlawful under Section 3 of the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (‘the Act’ for short), the
issue has been referred to the Tribunal constituted under Section 4
of the Act where it is pending consideration. What drives the
petitioner to this Court, at this juncture, is the act of the
respondent/Union of India in bringing the Notification of declaration
of PFI with immediate effect.
3. Heard Sri Jayakumar S.Patil, learned senior counsel
appearing for the petitioner and Sri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor
General of India appearing for the respondent/Union of India.
4. The learned senior counsel for the petitioner would contend
that there was no warrant to bring the notification into operation
with immediate effect; there are no separate reasons recorded for
the said purpose; non-recording of reasons is violative of sub-
section (3) of Section 3 of the Act; the result of bringing the
notification into effect immediately results in declaration under
Sections 7, 8 and 10 of the Act and, therefore, is illegal. The
learned senior counsel would submit that a fundamental right under
Article 19(4) of the Constitution of India cannot be taken away in a
perfunctory manner without recording separate reasons for bringing
into effect the Notification with immediate effect. He would place
reliance upon the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of
MOHAMMAD JAFAR v. UNION OF INDIA – 1994 Supp (2) SCC
5. On the other hand, the learned Solicitor General of India
Sri Tushar Mehta would seek to refute the submissions of the
learned senior counsel to contend that no reasons need be
recorded. Reasons must be available in the notification itself and
reasons, in fact, are available in the notification. The notification is
into two parts – one declaring it to be unlawful and the other
bringing it into effect immediately. Therefore, no fault can be found
in the notification on both counts particularly, for bringing into
effect immediately. He would place reliance upon the judgments
rendered by several High Courts in (i) ABDUL NAZAR v. STATE
RESEARCH FOUNDATION v. UNION OF INDIA – 2017 SCC
OnLine Del 7489 and (iii) MUHAMMAD RAISUDDIN v. UNION
6. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions
made by the learned senior counsel and the learned Solicitor
General of India and have perused the material on record.                 In
furtherance whereof, the only issue that false for consideration is:
“Whether the Notification declaring PFI to be unlawful
and bringing the notification into effect immediately violates
sub-section (3) of Section 3 of the Act?
7. To consider the aforementioned issue it is germane to
notice concerned provisions of the Act. Section 3 reads as follows:
“3. Declaration of an association as unlawful.—(1) If the
Central Government is of opinion that any association is, or has
become, an unlawful association, it may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, declare such association to be unlawful.
(2) Every such notification shall specify the grounds on which
it is issued and such other particulars as the Central Government
may consider necessary:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall require the
Central Government to disclose any fact which it considers to be
against the public interest to disclose.
(3) No such notification shall have effect until the
Tribunal has, by an order made under Section 4, confirmed
the declaration made therein and the order is published in
the Official Gazette:
Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion
that circumstances exist which render it necessary for that
Government to declare an association to be unlawful with
immediate effect, it may, for reasons to be stated in writing,
direct that the notification shall, subject to any order that
may be made under Section 4, have effect from the date of
its publication in the Official Gazette.
(4) Every such notification shall, in addition to its publication
in the Official Gazette, be published in not less than one daily
newspaper having circulation in the State in which the principal
office, if any, of the association affected is situated, and shall also
be served on such association in such manner as the Central
Government may think fit and all or any of the following modes
may be followed in effecting such service, namely:
(a)    by affixing a copy of the notification to some
conspicuous part of the office, if any, of the
(b)    by serving a copy of the notification, where possible,
on the principal office-bearers, if any, of the
(c)    by proclaiming by beat of drum or by means of
loudspeakers, the contents of the notification in the
area in which the activities of the association are
ordinarily carried on; or
(d)    in such other manner as may be prescribed.”
(Emphasis supplied)
Sub-section (3) of Section 3 mandates that no such notification
shall have effect until the Tribunal has, by an order made under
Section 4, confirmed the declaration made therein and the order of
such declaration is published in the official gazette. Therefore,
under sub-section (3) of Section 3 the notification of declaration of
any organization to be unlawful would come into effect only if the
declaration is confirmed by the Tribunal and that confirmation is
published in the official gazette. The proviso to sub-section (3) of
Section 3 permits the Central Government that in the event it is of
the opinion that circumstances exist which renders it necessary for
the Government to declare an association to be unlawful with
immediate effect, it may for reasons to be stated in writing direct
that the notification shall have effect from the date of its publication
in the official gazette. Therefore, the Central Government is
empowered under the proviso to bring in any notification declaring
any organization to be unlawful with immediate effect.         The only
rider is that there should be reasons for doing so. Section 7 of the
Act reads as follows:
“7. Power to prohibit the use of funds of an unlawful
association.—(1) Where an association has been declared
unlawful by a notification issued under Section 3 which has
become effective under sub-section (3) of that section and
the Central Government is satisfied, after such inquiry as it
may think fit, that any person has custody of any moneys,
securities or credits which are being used or are intended to
be used for the purpose of the unlawful association, the
Central Government may, by order in writing, prohibit such
person from paying, delivering, transferring or otherwise
dealing in any manner whatsoever with such moneys,
securities or credits or with any other moneys, securities or
credits which may come into his custody after the making of
the order, save in accordance with the written orders of the
Central Government and a copy of such order shall be served
upon the person so prohibited in the manner specified in
(2) The Central Government may endorse a copy of the
prohibitory order made under sub-section (1) for investigation to
any gazetted officer of the Government it may select, and such
copy shall be a warrant whereunder such officer may enter in or
upon any premises of the person to whom the order is directed,
examine the books of such person, search for moneys, securities or
credits, and make inquiries from such person or any officer, agent
or servant of such person, touching the origin of any dealings in
any moneys, securities or credits which the investigating officer
may suspect are being used or are intended to be used for the
purpose of the unlawful association.
(3) A copy of an order made under this section shall be
served in the manner provided in the Code for the service of a
summons, or, where the person to be served is a corporation,
company, bank or other association, it shall be served on any
secretary, director or other officer or person concerned with the
management thereof, or by leaving it or sending it by post
addressed to the corporation, company, bank or other association
at its registered office, or where there is no registered office, at the
place where it carries on business.
(4) Any person aggrieved by a prohibitory order made under
sub-section (1) may, within fifteen days from the date of the
service of such order, make an application to the Court of the
District Judge within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such
person voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally
works for gain, to establish that the moneys, securities or credits in
respect of which the prohibitory order has been made are not being
used or are not intended to be used for the purpose of the unlawful
association and the Court of the District Judge shall decide the
(5) Except so far as is necessary for the purposes of any
proceedings under this section, no information obtained in the
course of any investigation made under sub-section (2) shall be
divulged by any gazetted officer of the Government, without the
consent of the Central Government.
(6) In this section, “security” includes a document whereby
any person acknowledges that he is under a legal liability to pay
money, or whereunder any person obtains a legal right to the
payment of money.”
Where an association has been declared unlawful by a notification
issued under Section 3 has become effective under sub-section (3),
it empowers conduct of an inquiry against any person who is in
custody of any moneys, securities or credits which are being used
or intended to be used for the purpose of unlawful association.
Section 8 of the Act reads as follows:
“8. Power to notify places for the purpose of an
unlawful association.—(1) Where an association has been
declared unlawful by a notification issued under Section 3
which has become effective under sub-section (3) of that
section, the Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, notify any place which in its opinion is used
for the purpose of such unlawful association.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this sub-section,
“place” includes a house or building, or part thereof, or a
tent or vessel.
(2) On the issue of a notification under sub-section (1), the
District Magistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such
notified place is situate or any officer authorised by him in writing
in this behalf shall make a list of all movable properties (other than
wearing-apparel, cooking vessels, beds and beddings, tools of
artisans, implements of husbandry, cattle, grain and foodstuffs and
such other articles as he considers to be of a trivial nature) found in
the notified place in the presence of two respectable witnesses.
(3) If, in the opinion of the District Magistrate, any articles
specified in the list are or may be used for the purpose of the
unlawful association, he may make an order prohibiting any person
from using the articles save in accordance with the written orders
of the District Magistrate.
(4) The District Magistrate may thereupon make an order
that no person who at the date of the notification was not a
resident in the notified place shall, without the permission of the
District Magistrate, enter, or be on or in, the notified place:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to any
near relative of any person who was a resident in the notified place
at the date of the notification.
(5) Where in pursuance of sub-section (4), any person is
granted permission to enter, or to be on or in, the notified place,
that person shall, while acting under such permission, comply with
such orders for regulating his conduct as may be given by the
(6) Any police officer, not below the rank of a sub-inspector,
or any other person authorised in this behalf by the Central
Government may search any person entering, or seeking to enter,
or being on or in, the notified place and may detain any such
person for the purpose of searching him:
Provided that no female shall be searched in pursuance of
this sub-section except by a female.
(7) If any person is in the notified place in contravention of
an order made under sub-section (4), then, without prejudice to
any other proceedings which may be taken against him, he may be
removed therefrom by any officer or by any other person
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government.
(8) Any person aggrieved by a notification issued in respect
of a place under sub-section (1) or by an order made under sub-
section (3) or sub-section (4) may, within thirty days from the date
of the notification or order, as the case may be, make an
application to the Court of the District Judge within the local limits
of whose jurisdiction such notified place is situate—
(a)    for declaration that the place has not been used for
the purpose of the unlawful association; or
(b)    for setting aside the order made under sub-section (3)
or sub-section (4),nand on receipt of the application
the Court of the District Judge shall, after giving the
parties an opportunity of being heard, decide the
question.”
Section 8 empowers the Central Government to notify places used
for the purpose of unlawful association. This again relates back to
sub-section (3) of Section 3 of the Act. Section 10 of the Act reads
“10. Penalty for being member of an unlawful
association, etc.—Where an association is declared unlawful by a
notification issued under Section 3 which has become effective
under sub-section (3) of that section,—
(i)    is and continues to be a member of such association;
(ii)   takes part in meetings of such association; or
(iii)  contributes to, or receives or solicits any contribution
for the purpose of, such association; or
(iv) in any way assists the operations of such association,
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to two years, and shall also be liable to fine; and
(b)    a person, who is or continues to be a member of such
association, or voluntarily does an act aiding or promoting in
any manner the objects of such association and in either
case is in possession of any unlicensed firearms,
ammunition, explosive or other instrument or substance
capable of causing mass destruction and commits any act
resulting in loss of human life or grievous injury to any
person or causes significant damage to any property,—
(i)    and if such act has resulted in the death of any
person,     shall   be    punishable     with  death     or
imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine;
(ii)   in any other case, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
five years but which may extend to imprisonment for
life, and shall also be liable to fine.”
Section 10 directs penalty to be imposed when an association is
declared to be unlawful by a notification under sub-section (3) of
Section 3 and if a person continues to be a member of such
association. Therefore, Sections 7, 8 and 10 are follow up of sub-
section (3) of Section 3 of the Act, as they all hinge upon the
Notification. It is, therefore, the submission of the learned senior
counsel for the petitioner that separate reasons have to be recorded
in writing to bring the Notification into effect immediately. But, the
crux of the challenge is only to the extent that there are no reasons
recorded for bringing the notification of such declaration with
immediate effect. It, therefore, becomes necessary to notice the
notification. The notification reads as follows:
“And Whereas, the investigations have established clear
linkages between PFI and its associates or affiliates or fronts’
And Whereas, Rehab India Foundation collects funds
through PFI members and some of the members of the PFI are also
members of Campus Front of India, Empower India Foundation,
Rehab Foundation, Kerala, and the activities of Junior Front, Al
India Imams Council, National Confederation of Human Rights
Organization (NCHRO) and National Women’s Front are monitored/
coordinated by the PFI leaders;
And Whereas, the PFI has created the above mentioned
associates or affiliates or fronts with objective of enhancing its
reach among different sections of the society such as youth,
students, women, Imams, lawyers or weaker sections of the society
with the sole objective of expanding its membership, influence and
fund raising capacity.
And Whereas, the above associates or affiliates or fronts
have a ‘Hub and Spoke’ relationship with the PFI acting as the Hub
and utilizing the mass outreach and fund raising capacity of its
associates or affiliates or fronts for strengthening its capability for
unlawful activities and these associates or affiliates or fronts
function as ‘roots and capillaries’ through which the PFI is fed and
And Whereas, the PFI and its associates or affiliates or
fronts operate openly as socio-economic educational and political
organization but, they have been pursuing a secret agenda to
radicalize a particular section of the society working towards
undermining the concept of democracy and show sheer disrespect
towards the constitutional authority and constitutional set up of the
And Whereas, the PFI and its associates or affiliates or
fronts have been indulging in unlawful activities, which are
prejudicial to the integrity, sovereignty and security of the country
and have the potential of disturbing public peace and communal
harmony of the country and supporting militancy in the country.
And Whereas, some of the PFI’s founding members are the
leaders of Students Islamic Movement of India (SIMI) and PFI has
linkages with Jamat-ul-Mujahideen Bangaldesh (IMB), both of
which are proscribed organizations;
And Whereas, there had been a number of instances of
international linkages of PFI with Global Terrorist Groups like
Islamic State of Iraq and Syria (ISIS).
And Whereas, the PFI and its associates or affiliates or
fronts have been working covertly to increase radicalization of one
community by promoting a sense of insecurity in the country, which
is substantiated by the fact that the some PFI cadres have joined
international terrorist organizations;
And Whereas, the Central Government is of the opinion
that it is necessary to exercise its powers under sub-=section () of
Section 3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, (37 of
1967) (hereinafter referred to as the Act) in view of the above
stated reasons, which is substantiated by the following facts;
(i)    the PFI is involved in several criminal terror cases and shows
sheer disrespect towards the constitutional authority of the
country and with funds and ideological support from outside
it has become a major threat to internal security of the
country.
(ii)   investigations in various cases have revealed that the PFI
and its cadres have been repeatedly engaging in violent and
subversive acts. Criminal violent acts carried out by PFI
include chopping off limb of a college professor, cold blooded
killings of persons associated with organizations espousing
other faiths, obtaining explosives to target prominent people
and places and destruction of public property.
(iii)  the PFI cadres have been involved in several terrorist acts
and murder of several persons, including Sh.Sanjith (Kerala,
(Karnataka, 2016), Sh. Sasi Kumar (Tamil Nadu, 2016) and
Sh.PraveenNettaru (Karnataka, 2022) and the above criminal
activities and brutal murders have been carried out by PFI
cadres for the sole objective of disturbing public peace and
tranquility and creating reign of terror in public mind.
(iv)   there had been a number of instances of international
linkages of PFI with Global Terrorist Groups and some
activities of the PFI have joined Islamic State of Iraq and
Syria (ISIS) and participated in terror activities in Syria, Iraq
and Afghanistan. Some of these PFI cadres linked to ISIS
have been killed in these conflict theaters and some have
been arrested by State Police and Central Agencies and also
the PFI has linkages with Jamat-ul-Mujahideen Bangladesh
(JMB), a proscribed terrorist organization.
(v)   the Office bearers and cadres of the PFI along with others
are conspiring and raising funds from within India and
abroad through the banking channels, and the hawala,
donations, etc. as part of a well-crafted criminal conspiracy,
an then transferring, layering and integrating these funds
through multiple accounts to project them as legitimate and
eventually using these funds to carry out various criminal,
unlawful and terrorist activities in India.
(vi)  the courses of deposits on behalf of PFI with respect to its
several bank accounts were not supported by the financial
profiles of the account holders and the activities of PFI were
not being carried out as per their declared objectives and
therefore, the Income Tax Department cancelled the
registration granted to PFI under Section 12A or 12AA of the
Income Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961). The Income Tax
Department also cancelled the registration granted to Rehab
India Foundation under Section 12A or Section 12AA of the
(vii) The State Government of Uttar Pradesh, Karnataka and
Gujarat have recommended to ban PFI.
And Whereas, the PFI and its associates or affiliates or
fronts have been involved in the violent terrorist activities
with an intent to create a reign of terror in the country,
thereby endangering the security and public order of the
state, and the anti-national activities of PFI disrespect and
disregard the constitutional authority and sovereignty of the
state and hence an immediate and prompt action is required
against the organization;
And Whereas, the Central Government is of the opinion
that if there is no immediate curb or control of unlawful
activities of the PFI and its associates or affiliates or fronts,
the PFI and its associates or affiliates or fronts, will use this
(i)   continue its subversive activities, thereby
disturbing public order and undermining the
constitutional set up of the country;
(ii)  encourage and enforce terror based regressive
(iii) continue propagating anti-national sentiments
and radicalize a particular section of society with
the intention to create disaffection against the
(iv)  aggravate activities which are detrimental to the
integrity, security and sovereignty of the
And Whereas, the Central Government for the above-
mentioned reasons is firmly of the opinion that having
regard to the activities of the PFI, it is necessary to declare
the PFI and its associates or affiliates or fronts to be
unlawful association with immediate effect.”
(Emphasis supplied)
The afore-quoted notification dated 27-09-2022 has two parts.
One, the reason for declaring the organization to be unlawful and
the other, to bring it into effect immediately. The reasons rendered
to bring the notification with immediate effect are that the PFI and
its associates or affiliates have been involved in violent terrorist
activities with an intention to create a reign of terror in the country,
thereby endangering the security and public order of the State and
in the opinion of the Central Government, if there was no
immediate curb or control on the activities, it is likely that they
would     continue    to    disturb   public   order     undermining     the
constitutional set up of the country. Therefore, in the opinion of the
Government, the notification is to be brought into force with
immediate effect. In the notification itself sufficient reasons are
indicated for bringing into effect the notification with immediate
effect. Though no separate notification is issued, it is not a case
where there are no reasons recorded in writing as is necessary
under the proviso to sub-section (3) of Section 3 of the Act.
8. The learned senior counsel for the petitioner seeks to rely
on Article 19(4) of the Constitution of India to contend that a
fundamental right under Article 19(4) cannot be taken away by a
stroke of pen. This submission is again unacceptable. Article 19(4)
of the Constitution of India reads as follows:
“19. Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of
speech, etc.—              …           ….
(4) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of the said clause shall affect
the operation of any existing law in so far as it imposes, or prevent
the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of the
sovereignty and integrity of India or public order or morality,
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the
said sub-clause.”
Article 19(4) mandates that nothing in Article 19(1)(c) which deals
with fundamental right to form Associations and Unions shall have
the effect or prevent the State from making any law imposing, in
the interests of the sovereignty and integrity or public order or
morality reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the said right
conferred by clause (c) of Article 19(1).        The purport of Article
19(4) is that the Government is empowered to impose reasonable
restrictions even on the fundamental right under Article 19(1)(c) if
it would harm the sovereignty, integrity, public order or morality.
All that is found in the reasons recorded in the impugned
notification.   Therefore, it is in compliance with sub-section (3) of
Section 4 of the Act qua the right of any organization in its freedom
to establish any organization or unit under Article 19(1)(c) of the
9. It is not that sub-section (3) of Section 3 of the Act had not
fallen for consideration before the Courts of law. Two High Courts,
one the Division Bench of High Court of Kerala and the other
Division Bench of High Court of Calcutta, consider the purport of the
proviso to sub-section (3) of Section 3 of the Act. A Division Bench
of the High Court of Kerala in the case of ABDUL NAZAR v. STATE
OF KERALA1 (supra) has held as follows:
“6. The following questions arise for consideration:
(1)     Whether the bringing into immediate effect, Ext.
P2 notification dated 10-12-1992,-issued under
S. 3(1) of the Act is invalid on the ground that no
reasons are stated in the notification as to why
the ban should come into effect immediately?
(2)     Whether there is any reasonable nexus between the
activities of the ISS and 10-12-1992, the date on
which Ext. P2 notification was issued banning the
(3)     Whether there is effective dissolution of the ISS so as
not to attract S. 15 of the Act?
(4)     Whether the sealing or the premises by the police
authorities as per the further notification dated 13-12-
1992 issued by the District Magistrate, Kollam, is
(5)     Whether the petitioner can be said to be a resident
entitled to re-delivery of the property under S. 8 of the
(6)     Whether the petitioner can claim a blanket order on
the ground that the contentions made against him
have to be ignored till they are actually proved?
7.Point No. 1: For the purpose of appreciating this
point, it is necessary to refer to sub-sections (1) to (3) of S.
3, which read as follows:
“3. Declaration of an association as unlawful:—
(1) If the Central Government is of opinion that any
association is, or has become, an unlawful association it
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare such
association to be unlawful.
(2) Every such notification shall specifygrounds on
which it issued and such other particulars as the Central
Government may consider necessary:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall require
the Central Government to disclose any fact which it
considers to be against the public interest to disclose.
(3) No such notification shall have effect unt it the
Tribunal has, by an order made under S. 4, confirmed the
declaration made therein and the order is published in the
Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion
that circumstances exist which render it necessary for that
Government to declare an association to be unlawful
with immediate effect it may for reasons to be slated in
writing, direct that the notification shall, subject to any order
that may be made under S. 4, have effect from the date of
its publication in the Official Gazette.
8. It is necessary to refer to Ext. P2 notification dated 10-12-
1992, issued by the Central Government:
Chairman of the Islamic Sevak Sangh (hereinafter referred to
as ISS) had been giving inflammatory speeches with a view
to promoting, on grounds of religion, disharmony or feelings
of e???m ity, hatred or ill-will between different communities.
And whereas Shri I.C.S. Abdul Nazar Madani in a
public meeting at Poonthura, District Trivandrum on the 30th
June, 1992, has stated that thousands of Muslims were killed
and tortured in Kashmir and authorities were not taking
effective steps and Muslim women were being raped by
Hindus with the support of authorities.
And whereas Sri. I.C.S. Abdul Nazar Madani, in a
recorded speech for public circulation, has stated that a
Muslim cannot live as a Muslim in this country and Muslim
brothers should be prepared to get organised as also
question the right of the people to hoist national flag in
And whereas the following criminal cases have been
registered against Shri. I.C.S. Abdul Nazar Madani, u/s. 153A
and 153B of the Penal Code, 1860:
dated 20th March, 1992 u/s. 153A:
(b)    Kundara PS (District Kollam) Case No. 117/92 dated
25th March, 1992 u/s. 153A;
(c)    Kasba PS (???v I Calicut) Case No. 103/92 dated 21st
May, 1992, u/s. 153B;
And whereas the ISS has been encouraging and aiding its
followers to undertake unlawful activities within the meaning of the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967);
And whereas for all or any of the grounds set out in
the preceding paragraphs as also on the basis of other facts
and materials in ils possession which the Central
Government considers to be against the public interest to
disclose, the Central Government is of the opinion that the
ISS is an unlawful association;
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by
sub-section (1) of S3 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Act, 1967 (37 of 1967) the Central Government hereby
declares the ‘Islamic Sevak Sangh’ to be an unlawful
association, and directs, in exercise of the powers conferred
by the proviso to sub-section (3), of that Section, that this
notification shall, subject to any order that may be made
under S. 4 of the said Act, have effect from the date of its
publication in the Official Gazette.”
9. It will be noticed from the preamble of the Act that
the Act is intended to provide for the more effective
prevention of certain unlawful activities of individuals and
associations and for the matters connected therewith. S.
2(f) defines ‘unlawful activity’, while S. 2(g) defines
‘unlawful association’. S. 3(1) permits the Central
Government to declare any association as unlawful
association, provided that the grounds for such declaration
must be specified in the said notification as required by S.
3(2). S. 3(3) states that the notification shall not come into
effect unless confirmed by the Tribunal under S. 4, except in
cases where the Central Govt, is of opinion that ‘for reasons
to be stated in writing’ the Central Government considers
that the declaration must come into effect immediately. S. 4
deals with reference to Tribunal, and S. 5 deals with the
procedure before it.
10. In the present case, it is not in dispute that the Tribunal
has since been constituted at New Delhi. It has been reported in
the Press that the said Tribunal has issued notices to the various
banned organisations, including the ISS, in the last few days.
11. But the point is whether the bringing into effect of
Ext:P2 notification from the date of its publication namely, 10-12-
1992, is invalid. There are two answers to this point.
12. The first one is that notification Ext. P2 dated 10-12-
1992 contains in its preamble namely, paragraphs 1 to 6, various
reasons as to why the Government opinion under S. 3(1) that the
ISS is an unlawful organisation. Then in the last paragraph comes
the declaration under S. 3(1) declaring the ISS as unlawful
association. Thereafter the later part of the last paragraph deals
with the bringing into effect of the said declaration with immediate
effect under S. 3(3).
13. In our view, the last paragraph of the notification when it
starts with the words ‘now, therefore’ the said words are intended
not only to govern the exercise of powers under S. 3(1), but also
the exercise of powers under the proviso to S. 3(3) of the Act
bringing the declaration into immediate effect. As noticed above, in
paragraphs 1 to 6, the Central Government had given various
reasons as to why it was declaring the ISS an an unlawful
association under S. 3(1), and in our considered view, the same
reasons in paragraphs 1 to 6 of the notification were considered by
the Central Government to be sufficient for the purpose of the
proviso to S. 3(3). In our opinion, the words ‘now, therefore‘, in the
last para tiraph of the notification dated 10-12-1992, and the words
and directs’ in the said paragraph have to be read closely and
should be given their due importance. If the Central Government
considers paragraphs 1 to 6 as indicating the reasons as to why the
notification should be brought into immediate effect, it is not, in our
opinion, necessary for the Central Government to repeat
paragraphs 1 to 6 after the words ‘and directs’ and before the
words ‘in exercise of the power conferred by the proviso to sub-
section (3)’. When this aspect of the matter was put to the learned
counsel for the petitioner, he had virtually no answer.
14. If the Central Government states that certain
activities of an association are unlawful and the association
should be declared as such, not from a future date, when the
Tribunal would confirm such a declaration, but with
immediate effect, it may be, in certain circumstances,
necessary for the Central Government to mention the
reasons for the declaration under S. 3(1) separately, and the
reasons for bringing into effect the notification immediately,
again separately. Obviously such a situation may arise if
both set;; of reasons are different. But where both sets of
reasons either wholly or partly overlap, it may not be
necessary for the Central Government to repeat in the
notification issued under S. 3(I) the reasons forbringing the
notification into immediate effect once again when such
reasons have already been set out in the grounds for the
issuance of the notification under S. 3(2). In such a latter
situation, when the Central Government uses the words
‘now therefore’ referring to the reasons, and exercises
powers under Ss. 3(1) and 3(3), such a notification cannot
be challenged on the ground that no reasons have been
given separately under the proviso to S. 3(3) for bringing
the notification into immediate effect. This is one first
15. We shall advert to the second reason as to why the
bringing into Ext. P2 with immediate effect is not bad. In
this context we adopt the reasons given by the learned
Judges Varghese Kalliath, and Sreedharan, JJ. in their order
on C.M.P. No. 30464 of 1992 in C.M.P. No. 30248 of 1992 in
O.P. No. 16849 of 1992 dated 22-12-1992. That was a Writ
Petition filed by Jamaat-E-Islami Hind. The learned Judges
referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in Satyavir
Singh v. Union of India, AIR 1986 SC 555 : (1985) 4 SCC
252, wherein in the context of second proviso (b) to Art.
311(2) the Supreme Court observed as follows:
“……it is however not necessary that the reasons
should find a place in the final order but it would be
advisable to record it in the final order in order to
avoid an allegation that the reason was not recorded
in writing before passing the final order but was
subsequently fabricated.”
At paragraph 6, the first issue that fell for consideration was,
whether there were reasons stated to bring the ban with immediate
effect.  The ban therein was claimed to be Islamic Seva Sangha.
Therefore, what fell for consideration before the Division Bench is
akin to what is now contended in the case at hand.
10. The Division Bench of Calcutta High Court in the case of
MUHAMMAD RAISUDDIN v. UNION OF INDIA AND OTHERS2
(supra) has held as follows:
“5. The provisions are clear. While the body of the sub-
section mandates that no Notification shall have effect until
the Tribunal has confirmed the declaration made therein
under S. 4, the Proviso provides that immediate and pre-
confirmation effect may be given if the Central Government
“for reasons to be stated in writing” so directs on being of
opinion that circumstances exist which render it necessary
for that Government to declare an association to be unlawful
“with immediate effect”. Mr. Chatterjee has urged that in
the impugned Notification, as quoted hereinabove, no
reason has been stated for the opinion of the Central
Government that immediate effect of the Notification was
necessary on any ground, even though reasons may have
been stated for declaring the association unlawful.
6. Not that the reasons must always be incorporated in
the order itself, though it would be very much advisable to
do so. It may be permissible to state or record the reasons
separately, but the order would be incomplete unless either
reasons are incorporated therein or are served separately
along with the order on the affected party. As non-
communicated offer is no offer, a non-communicated order is also
no order unless the relevant law expressly dispenses with
communication to the party aggrieved. This is obviously clear on
principle. But the decision of the five-Judge Bench of the Supreme
Court in C.B. Gautam(1993) 1 SCC 78 at 105 is also a clear
authority for such proposition arrived at on a construction of the
analogous provisions of S. 269-UD of the Income-tax Act.
(emphasis supplied)”
In the case before the Calcutta High Court the reasons were neither
found in the order nor a separate order was passed. The reasons
were found in the file. It was held, that would suffice. Both these
judgments were rendered prior to the judgment being rendered by
the Apex Court in the case of MOHAMMAD JAFAR.
11. It now becomes germane to notice and consider the sheet
anchor of the submission of the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner - the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of
MOHAMMAD JAFAR v. UNION OF INDIA3 (supra).                      The Apex
Court in the case of MOHAMMAD JAFAR has held as follows:
“7. The impugned notification reads as follows:
“Whereas Shri Sirajul Hasan, Amir of the Jamaat-e-
Islami Hind (hereinafter referred to as JEIH) declared in a
meeting at Delhi held on 27-5-1990 that the separation of
Kashmir from India was inevitable;
And whereas Shri Abdul Aziz, Naib-Amir of JEIH,
addressing a meeting at Malerkotla on 1-8-1991, observed
that the Government of India should hold plebiscite on
And whereas JEIH has been disclaiming and
questioning the sovereignty and territorial integrity of India;
And whereas for all or any of the grounds set out in
the preceding paragraphs, as also on the basis of other facts,
and materials in its possession which the Central
Government considers to be against the public interest to
disclose, the Central Government is of the opinion that the
JEIH is an unlawful association;
conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of
1967), the Central Government hereby declares the
‘Jamaat-e-Islami Hind’ to be an unlawful association,
and directs, in exercise of the powers conferred by the
proviso to sub-section (3) of that section, that this
notification shall, subject to any order that may be
made under Section 4 of the said Act, have effect from
the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.”
It is apparent from the notification that no additional reasons have
been given for declaring the JEIH as an unlawful association with
immediate effect, viz., from the date of the publication of the
notification. In other words, the Central Government does not give
any further or added reasons for immediacy. On the contrary, it
relies on the same reasons which are stated in the notification for
taking immediate action under the proviso to sub-section (3) of
Section 3 which prompted it to declare JEIH as unlawful under sub-
section (1) of Section 3. Before us also, it is not the case of the
Union of India that it has some facts and material in its possession
to declare it unlawful with immediate effect in addition to the facts
and material for taking action against JEIH under sub-section (1) of
Section 3. The question, therefore, is whether the Central
Government has to have facts and material showing the need for
immediate action under the proviso to sub-section (3) of Section 3
which are in addition to and distinct from those which are
necessary for taking action under sub-section (1) of Section 3. We
may here reproduce sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) of Section 3.
“(1) If the Central Government is of opinion that any
association is, or has become, an unlawful association, it
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare such
association to be unlawful.
(2) Every such notification shall specify the grounds on
which it is issued and such other particulars as the Central
Government may consider necessary:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall require
the Central Government to disclose any fact which it
considers to be against the public interest to disclose.
(3) No such notification shall have effect until the
Tribunal has, by an order made under Section 4, confirmed
the declaration made therein and the order is published in
the Official Gazette:
Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion
that circumstances exist which render it necessary for that
Government to declare an association to be unlawful with
immediate effect, it may, for reasons to be stated in writing,
direct that the notification shall, subject to any order that
may be made under Section 4, have effect from the date of
its publication in the Official Gazette.”
8. An analysis of the aforesaid provisions shows that for the
purpose of declaring an association unlawful, the Central
Government has to have material on the basis of which it forms its
opinion that the association is or has become unlawful. The
declaration is to be made by a notification. Such a notification has
to specify the grounds on which the declaration is made and also
such other particulars as the Central Government may consider
necessary. The proviso to sub-section (2) of Section 3 only enacts
the usual privilege clause which entitles the Central Government
not to disclose such fact as it considers to be against the public
interest to disclose. The main provision of sub-section (3) then
makes it clear that such a notification shall not have effect until the
Tribunal after a due adjudication has confirmed the notification. As
pointed out above, there is enough time-lag between the date of
the issue of notification under Section 3(1) and the date of the
publication of the order of the Tribunal under Section 4(4). The
proviso vests the Central Government with a power to declare an
organisation unlawful with immediate effect. This means that all
its activities come to an end the moment the notification is
issued under Section 3(1) even without waiting for the due
adjudication of the Tribunal under Section 4. It has
obviously a situation in mind which cannot brook delay and
await the outcome of the adjudication. The proviso,
therefore, envisages a situation which has to be remedied
urgently and cannot be met except by putting an end to the
activities of the organisation with immediate effect. The
legislative intention to that effect is also clear otherwise.
The proviso requires firstly that the Government must be of
opinion (i) that circumstances exist which render it
necessary for the Government to declare the association to
be unlawful with immediate effect and (ii) the reasons for
such declaration must be stated in writing. The language of
the said proviso is different from the language of sub-
section (1) of Section 3 which merely states that the
Government has to be of opinion that any association is or
has become an unlawful association. The very fact further
that the legislature has provided a machinery in the form of
the Tribunal to hold a full-fledged inquiry to adjudicate on
the issue whether the notification issued under Section 3(1)
should be confirmed or cancelled, shows that the legislature
has no intention of banning an organisation and its activities
without giving it a due opportunity to show cause and
represent its case fully. It must be remembered in this
connection that Article 19(1)(c) of the Constitution
incorporates one of the precious freedoms of the citizens,
viz., to form associations or unions. The provisions of the
Act banning an organisation with immediate effect without
giving it an opportunity to represent its case would be
violative of the Constitution being in breach of the
provisions of the said article, unless such ban has been
covered by the exception enacted by clause (4) of the said
article. It cannot be overemphasised that the invocation of
the proviso to sub-section (3) of Section 3 has a drastic
effect of curtailing the freedom under Article 19(1)(c) with
immediate effect. If such a ban is imposed arbitrarily it
would operate till at least the date of the publication of the
Tribunal's order under Section 4(4). Thus the action taken
under the proviso amounts to suspension of the citizens'
right under Article 19(1)(c), for the period in question. Even
a temporary suspension of the fundamental right, unless it
is covered by the exception provided under Article 19(4),
would be invalid in law. Hence it is necessary that the
Central Government justifies its action under the said
proviso by bringing it within the exception of Article 19(4).
Thus both by the language of the said proviso as well as by
the requirement of the Constitution, it is necessary for the
Central Government to justify by adducing proper reasons,
the immediacy by bringing it within the purview of Article
19(4) which reads as follows:
“19. Protection of certain rights regarding
freedom of speech, etc.—***
(4) Nothing in sub-clause (c) of the said clause
shall affect the operation of any existing law insofar as
it imposes, or prevent the State from making any law
imposing, in the interests of the sovereignty and
integrity of India or public order or morality,
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right
conferred by the said sub-clause.”
9. Article 19(4) thus requires that the immediate
action contemplated by the said proviso is “in the interests
of the sovereignty and integrity of India or public order or
morality”. The article further requires the restrictions
imposed even for the said purpose, to be reasonable.
10. The notification in question admittedly does not give any
reasons for the immediate ban in exercise of the power under the
proviso to Section 3(3). The reasons given as stated above are the
same as are meant for imposing ban under sub-section (1) of
Section 3. Those reasons, as quoted above, are (a) that Shri Sirajul
Hasan, Amir of the Jamaat-e-Islami Hind declared in a meeting at
Delhi held on 27-5-1990 that the separation of Kashmir from India
was inevitable, (b) that Shri Abdul Aziz, Naib-Amir of JEIH,
addressing a meeting at Malerkotla on 1-8-1991, observed that the
Government of India should hold plebiscite on Kashmir, (c) that the
JEIH has been disclaiming and questioning the sovereignty and
territorial integrity of India, and (d) other facts and materials in the
possession of the Central Government which it considers to be
against the public interest to disclose. As regards the first two
grounds, they are obviously stale — one of 27-5-1990 and the
other of 1-8-1991 and they cannot justify immediacy on 10-12-
1992 when the impugned notification was issued. The language of
the third ground shows that the association has been indulging in
the acts stated therein publicly from its inception or at least for a
long time which again negatives the need for immediate ban. As for
the last ground, viz., other facts and material in the possession of
the association which the Central Government considers to be
against the public interest to disclose, no privilege is claimed before
us, against such other facts and material. If it was claimed, the
court would have looked into them and decided the question of
privilege.”
At paragraph-7 the Apex Court extracts the notification and the
reason for bringing it into force with immediate effect. The Apex
Court finds that there are no reasons recorded in the Notification for
bringing it into force with immediate effect. At paragraph-9 the
Apex Court also records that Article 19(4) requires that in the
interest of sovereignty, integrity or public order or morality, the
State can impose reasonable restriction on such right under Article
19(1)(c). In those facts, the Apex Court held that there were no
separate reasons and the right under Article 19(1)(c) could not
have been taken away without recording reasons.
12. Later in the year 2017, the High Court of Delhi rendered a
judgment in the case of ISLAMIC RESEARCH FOUNDATION v.
UNION OF INDIA4 (supra) which is in post MOHAMMAD JAFAR
time considering a ban of Islamic Research Foundation. The ban
was brought into force with immediate effect. The notification is
extracted and the notification is identical to what the impugned
notification is.   On referring to the notification the learned single
Judge of Delhi High Court has held as follows:
“12. The reason given by the Central Government in
the notification for declaring the organisation as an unlawful
association inter alia is that the organisation and its
members, particularly, the founder and President of the said
Association, Dr. Zakir Naik, has been encouraging and aiding
its followers to promote or attempt to promote, on grounds
of religion, disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-
will between different religious communities and groups.
Reference is also made to certain cases registered against
Dr. Zakir Naik and other members of the organisation under
various sections of the Act and the Penal Code, 1860, inter
alia for being responsible for radicalization of some youths
who are later alleged to have joined the ISIS, for promoting
hatred and ill-will between different religious communities
and forcible conversion of Kerala youth, who went missing
and are suspected to have joined the ISIS and for making
derogatory statements against Hindu gods.
13. Further reference is made in the notification to
information received by the Central Government that the
statements and speeches made by Dr. Zakir Naik, the President of
the organisation are objectionable and subversive in nature and
that he has been extolling the known terrorists like Osama Bin
Laden and proclaiming that every Muslim should be a terrorist and
claiming that if Islam had indeed wanted, eighty percent of Indian
population would not have remained Hindus as they could have
been converted “if we wanted” by sword, justifying the suicide
bombings, posting objectionable comments against Hindu gods,
claiming that Golden Temple may not be as sacred as Mecca and
Medina and making other statements which are derogatory to other
14. It is further noticed in the notification that by his
speeches and statements, Dr. Zakir Naik has been promoting
enmity and hatred between different religious groups and inspiring
Muslim youths and terrorists in India and abroad to commit
terrorist acts and that such divisive ideology is against India's
pluralistic and secular social fabric and it could be viewed as
causing disaffection against India and thereby making it an
unlawful activity. Reference is also made to statements of some
terrorists arrested in the terrorist attack incidents or arrested ISIS
sympathisers which have revealed that they were inspired by the
fundamentalist statements of Dr. Zakir Naik, which was indicative
of the subversive nature of his preachings and speeches.
15. In addition to the reasons, as noticed above, given for
declaring the organisation as an unlawful association, the
notification also records that the aforesaid activities of the
organisation and its President Dr. Zakir Naik are highly
inflammatory in nature and prejudicial to the maintenance of
harmony between various religious groups and communities and if
urgent steps were not taken there was every possibility of many
youth being motivated and radicalized to commit terrorist acts
leading to promoting enmity between different religious groups.
16. Thus, the contention of the learned senior counsel for
the petitioner that the reasons for declaration as an unlawful
association and making the declaration applicable with immediate
effect are the same, is unsubstantiated. As noticed above, the
Notification does give additional reasons for making the declaration
applicable with immediate effect.
17. The record, that was made available by the Central
Government, clearly shows that there is material in
possession of the central government, which necessitated
the declaration of the petitioner organisation as an unlawful
association with immediate effect. Not only is the material
available on the record of the Central Government, the
reason for exercise of powers under the proviso to section
3(3) has been additionally stated in the notification, over
and above the reasons stated for exercise of powers under
section 3(1) of the Act.
18. The Notification records that the necessity for
exercise of powers under the proviso to section 3(3) of
declaring the organisation as an unlawful association with
immediate effect, is that if urgent steps were not taken
many more youths could be motivated and radicalized to
commit terrorist acts leading to promoting enmity between
different religious groups.
19. In MOHAMMAD JAFAR (supra), the notification impugned
therein, inter alia, recorded as under:
“And whereas for all or any of the grounds set out in
the preceding paragraphs, as also on the basis of other facts,
and materials in its possession which the Central
Government considers to be against the public interest to
disclose, the Central Government is of the opinion that the
JEIH is an unlawful association;
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by
sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act, 1967 (37 of 1967), the Central
Government hereby declares the ‘Jamaat-e-Islami Hind’ to
be an unlawful association, and directs, in exercise of the
powers conferred by the proviso to sub-section (3) of that
section, that this notification shall, subject to any order that
may be made under Section 4 of the said Act, have effect
from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.”
20. On      reading     of    the    notification    in    issue
in Mohammad Jafar (supra), the Supreme Court was of the
view that no additional reasons had been given by the
Central Government for declaration as an unlawful
association with immediate effect. Even before the Supreme
Court, the case of the government was not that it had some
facts or material in its possession to declare the association
as unlawful with immediate effect, in addition to facts and
material for taking action under section 3(1) of the Act.
21. The Supreme Court in MOHAMMAD JAFAR (supra) thus
held that for justification of the immediate ban under proviso to
section 3(3), something distinct and different, which calls for the
urgent step, has to be in possession of the Central Government and
the same has to be communicated to the Association.
22. In contra-distinction, in the impugned notification, as
noticed above the additional reason is specifically stated. The
impugned notification, in my view, satisfies the test laid down by
Supreme Court in MOHAMMAD JAFAR (supra).
23. The contention of learned Senior Counsel for the
petitioner that the ban has been imposed based on stale material
and that there is nothing stated in the notification with regard to
the organisation and the allegations are vis a vis its president,
members and employees and that the notification is based on
incorrect facts, in my view is unsubstantiated.
24. The reason stated in the notification is that the petitioner
organisation and its members, particularly, the founder and
President of the said Association, Dr. Zakir Naik, have been
encouraging and aiding its followers to promote or attempt to
promote, on grounds of religion, disharmony or feelings of enmity,
hatred or ill-will between different religious communities and
groups. Reference made to the cases registered against Dr. Zakir
Naik and other members of the organisation under various sections
of the Act and the Penal Code, 1860 is to show that the kind of
activities the members are alleged to be indulging in. The
statements and speeches made by Dr. Zakir Naik, the President of
the organisation are stated to be objectionable and subversive in
nature and that he has been extolling the known terrorists like
Osama Bin Laden and proclaiming that every Muslim should be a
terrorist and claiming that if Islam had indeed wanted, eighty
percent of Indian population would not have remained Hindus as
they could have been converted “if we wanted” by sword, justifying
the suicide bombings, posting objectionable comments against
Hindu gods, claiming that Golden Temple may not be as sacred as
Mecca and Medina and making other statements which are
derogatory to other religions.
25. Dr. Zakir Naik, by his speeches and statements, is stated
to have been promoting enmity and hatred between different
religious groups and inspiring Muslim youths and terrorists in India
and abroad to commit terrorist acts. Material is stated to contain
statements of some terrorists arrested in the terrorist attack
incidents or arrested ISIS sympathisers which have revealed that
they were inspired by the fundamentalist statements of Dr. Zakir
Naik, which was indicative of the subversive nature of his
preachings and speeches. In addition, the notification records that
the activities of the organisation and its President Dr. Zakir Naik
are highly inflammatory in nature and prejudicial to the
maintenance of harmony between various religious groups and
communities and there is every possibility of many youth being
motivated and radicalized to commit terrorist acts leading to
promoting enmity between different religious groups.
26. An “unlawful association” has been defined by
Section 2(g) of the Act to mean an association which, inter
alia, encourages or aids persons to undertake any unlawful
activity, or of which the members undertake such activity.
“Unlawful activity” has been defined under section 2(f) of
the Act to means any action taken which is intended, or
supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground
whatsoever, the cession of a part of the territory of India or
the secession of a part of the territory of India from the
Union, or which incites any individual or group of individuals
to bring about such cession or secession or which disclaims,
questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of India.
27. The activities which the petitioner organisation
and its president and members are alleged to have indulged
in, would clearly come within the purview of “unlawful
activity” and since the petitioner organisation and its
members are alleged to have been indulging in the said
activities it would come within the definition of “unlawful
28. Thus, it cannot be held that the impugned
notification insofar as it relates to, the exercise of power
under proviso to section 3(3) of the Act and the declaration
of the petitioner association to be an unlawful association
with immediate effect, is an arbitrary and unreasonable
exercise of power. Not only is the material available on the
record of the Central Government but the reasons for
exercise of the said power has been disclosed in the
notification. The record, that was made available for the
perusal of the court, discloses material for exercise of such
power. The action of the Central Government would be
covered under the exception of Article 19 (4) of the
Constitution of India. The immediate action appears to have
been taken in the interest of sovereignty and integrity of
India and public order.
The Delhi High Court was considering an identical notification which
contained identical reasons considering the judgment rendered by
the Apex Court in the case of MOHAMMAD JAFAR. Therefore, the
common thread that runs through the judgments in the pre-
MOHAMMAD JAFAR time, judgment in the case of MOHAMMAD
JAFAR or the judgment of the Delhi High Court in the post
MOHAMMAD JAFAR time, is that reasons must be recorded in
writing for bringing the notification which declares an organization
to be unlawful with immediate effect.
13. A perusal at the notification under challenge would
indicate that reasons are present in the notification itself. Article
19(1)(c) of the Constitution of India on which much emphasis is laid
on is also hedged with reasonable restrictions to be imposed in
certain circumstances under Article 19(4) of the Constitution of
India. Therefore, in the light of the judgment rendered by the High
Court of Delhi in the case of ISLAMIC RESEARCH FOUNDATION
which was considering the case of MOHAMMAD JAFAR rendered
by the Apex Court and the fact that reasons are found in the
impugned notification itself, I do not find any warrant that would
entail interference at the hands of this Court. Any further
consideration of the submissions made by the learned senior
counsel for the petitioner would prejudice the proceedings before
14. For the aforesaid reasons, the petition lacking in merit, is