1.     Heard Sri Manish Misra, learned counsel for the petitioner, Sri Niteesh Kumar for
U.P. State Legal Services Authority, Lucknow- respondent No.4 as well as learned
Standing counsel for the State-respondent No.1 to 3.
2.     By means of the present petition the petitioners have assailed the order dated
12.9.2018 thereby rejecting the representation and claim of the petitioners seeking grant
of minimum of pay scale.
3.     It has been submitted that as there was urgent need in High Court Legal Services
Cell at Lucknow, the U.P. State Legal Services Authority took decision in its meeting held
on 7.8.1999 for sending proposal to the State Government for creating of additional posts
of two posts of Clerk and two posts of Peons. The proposal of the Legal Services Authority
remained pending with the State Government and no action was taken on it. The said
posts were not created and consequently considering the requirement of the personnel
on class IV post, the petitioners were appointed on contract basis by the order dated
14.9.2005 passed by Chairman, U.P. State Legal Services Authority. Subsequently
according to the requirements various works has been taken from them and also they
were attached with High Court Legal Services Sub Committee, Lucknow. It is undisputed
that the petitioners are continuing since then without any break on the fixed salary of
Rs.5,000/- per month. It has been submitted by learned counsel for the petitioner that now
they are getting Rs.7500/- per month.
4.     Learned counsel for the petitioners further contended that the action of the
respondents itself is arbitrary as the petitioners are receiving salary which is below the
minimum of wages fixed by the government in this regard. The petitioners had approached
this Court earlier seeking some direction by filing writ petition No.6946 (S/S) of 2015 which
was disposed of by this Court by means of order dated 21.2.2018 directing the
respondents to decide the representation of the petitioner, expeditiously. It is in
compliance of the orders of this Court dated 21.2.2018 that the impugned order has been
passed rejecting the claim of the petitioner
5.     This Court has noticed that while rejecting the claim of the petitioners the
respondents have not even considered the case of the petitioner for grant of minimum of
pay scale. The respondents, in fact, had considered granting of regular scale in light of
the Government Order dated 30th August, 2013 which is regarding fixation of salary of the
State Government employees for regular scale of pay as well as for contract workers. The
case of the petitioner is not for grant of regular scale of pay but for grant of minimum of
pay scale. It has been submitted that the petitioners have been continuing regularly since
2005 and after working for more than 13 years had claimed that he may be granted
minimum of pay scale as per the direction of Apex Court in the case of State of Punjab
Vs. Jagjeet Singh, (2017) 1 SCC 148. The relevant portion of the judgment is quoted as
"57. There is no room for any doubt, that the principle of ‘equal pay for equal work’ has emerged
from an interpretation of different provisions of the Constitution. The principle has been
expounded through a large number of judgments rendered by this Court, and constitutes law
declared by this Court. The same is binding on all the courts in India, under Article 141 of the
Constitution of India. The parameters of the principle, have been summarized by us in paragraph
42 hereinabove. The principle of ‘equal pay for equal work’ has also been extended to temporary
employees (differently described as work-charge, daily-wage, casual, ad-hoc, contractual, and
the like). The legal position, relating to temporary employees, has been summarized by us, in
paragraph 44 hereinabove. The above legal position which has been repeatedly declared, is
being reiterated by us, yet again.
58. In our considered view, it is fallacious to determine artificial parameters to deny fruits of labour.
An employee engaged for the same work, cannot be paid less than another, who performs the
same duties and responsibilities. Certainly not, in a welfare state. Such an action besides being
demeaning, strikes at the very foundation of human dignity. Any one, who is compelled to work
at a lesser wage, does not do so voluntarily. He does so, to provide food and shelter to his family,
at the cost of his self-respect and dignity, at the cost of his self-worth, and at the cost of his
integrity. For he knows, that his dependents would suffer immensely, if he does not accept the
lesser wage. Any act, of paying less wages, as compared to others similarly situate, constitutes
an act of exploitative enslavement, emerging out of a domineering position. Undoubtedly, the
action is oppressive, suppressive and coercive, as it compels involuntary subjugation.......
60.     Having traversed the legal parameters with reference to the application of the principle of
‘equal pay for equal work’, in relation to temporary employees (daily-wage employees, adhoc
appointees, employees appointed on casual basis, contractual employees and the like), the sole
factor that requires our determination is, whether the concerned employees (before this Court),
were rendering similar duties and responsibilities, as were being discharged by regular
employees, holding the same/corresponding posts. This exercise would require the application of
the parameters of the principle of ‘equal pay for equal work’ summarized by us in paragraph 42
above. However, insofar as the instant aspect of the matter is concerned, it is not difficult for us
to record the factual position. We say so, because it was fairly acknowledged by the learned
counsel representing the State of Punjab, that all the temporary employees in the present bunch
of appeals, were appointed against posts which were also available in the regular
cadre/establishment. It was also accepted, that during the course of their employment, the
concerned temporary employees were being randomly deputed to discharge duties and
responsibilities, which at some point in time, were assigned to regular employees. Likewise,
regular employees holding substantive posts, were also posted to discharge the same work,
which was assigned to temporary employees, from time to time. There is, therefore, no room for
any doubt, that the duties and responsibilities discharged by the temporary employees in the
present set of appeals, were the same as were being discharged by regular employees. It is not
the case of the appellants, that the respondent-employees did not possess the qualifications
prescribed for appointment on regular basis. Furthermore, it is not the case of the State, that any
of the temporary employees would not be entitled to pay parity, on any of the principles
summarized by us in paragraph 42 hereinabove. There can be no doubt, that the principle of
‘equal pay for equal work’ would be applicable to all the concerned temporary employees, so as
to vest in them the right to claim wages, at par with the minimum of the pay-scale of regularly
engaged Government employees, holding the same post.
61.     In view of the position expressed by us in the foregoing paragraph, we have no hesitation
in holding, that all the concerned temporary employees, in the present bunch of cases, would be
entitled to draw wages at the minimum of the payscale (- at the lowest grade, in the regular pay-
scale), extended to regular employees, holding the same post."
6.      On the strength of the aforesaid facts and circumstances as well as the law laid
down by Apex Court the petitioner claims to be entitled to minimum of pay scale and
consequently has assailed the validity of the impugned order.
7.      Learned Standing counsel, on the other hand, has submittedthat there is no
provision or any government order providing for minimum of pay scale and, hence the
benefit of the same could not have been granted to the petitioner. He further submits that
the petitioner was appointed dehors the rules and consequently according to the
government orders regular scale of pay is not admissible to such persons.
8.      I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused therecord.
9.      It is noticed that the State Legal Services Authority had maderepeated requests to
the State Government for creation of two posts of Peons and two post of Clerks and when
for a long length of time the posts were not created then considering the requirement and
urgency of personnel the petitioners were appointed on contract basis on Rs.5000/- per
month by means of order dated 14.9.2005. After their appointment they are working and
the Legal Services Authority has been taking work from them in various places including
in the Counseling and Conciliation Centre, Lucknow. It is noticed that in the aforesaid
circumstances the Supreme Court in the case of State of Punjab Vs. Jagjeet Singh
(Supra) has considered this aspect that the persons who have been appointed and are
continuously discharging duties commensurate with regularly appointed persons, such
persons are also entitled to be paid the same wages in accordance with the provisions of
'equal pay for equal work' and also considering that fact that the petitioners have been
working for a substantially long length of time and are getting only Rs.7500/- per month
which admittedly is below the minimum wages fixed by the State Government and
accordingly, this Court is of the considered view that the petitioners are also entitled for
being granted minimum of pay scale as is being granted to regular employees as the same
services are being rendered by them.
10.     In light of the above, the writ petition is allowed. The order dated 12.9.2018 passed
by the State Government is quashed.
11.     The respondents are directed to pass fresh orders granting minimum of pay scale
to the petitioners, expeditiously say within four weeks from the date a certified copy of this
order is placed before them.