Case :- MATTERS UNDER ARTICLE 227 No. - 3562 of 2021
Counsel for Respondent :- Ajay Kumar Singh,Ashish Kumar Singh
Case :- MATTERS UNDER ARTICLE 227 No. - 3844 of 2021
Counsel for Petitioner :- Syed Ahmed Faizan, Sr. Advocate Shri S.F.A.
1.     Since controversy involved in both the petitions are, similar,
therefore, they are heard together.
2.     Heard Sri S.F.A. Naqvi, learned Senior Counsel assisted by Sri
Syed Ahmad Faizan Advocate, appearing in Petition No. 3844 of 2021
and Sri Punit Kumar Gupta, Advocate appearing in Petition No.3562 of
2021 and Sri Ajay Kumar Singh, learned counsel and Sri Vijay Shankar
Rastogi, learned counsel for respondent Nos.1 to 6, Sri Shashi Prakash
Singh, Senior Advocate/Assistant Solicitor General of India assisted by
Sri Manoj Kumar Singh learned counsel is present on behalf of
respondent No.7 and Sri M.C. Chaturvedi, learned Additional Advocate
General/Senior Counsel assisted by Sri Saurabh Srivastava Chief
Standing Counsel and Sri Vineet Pandey, Chief Standing Counsel put
appearance on behalf of respondent No.8.
3.     Facts in brief as contained in the petitions are that Original Suit
No.610 of 1991 (Swayambhu Lord Vishweshwar and others Vs. Anjuman
Intezamiya Masjid Varanasi and others) has been filed by the
respondents-plaintiffs on 15.10.1991 in the Court of Civil Judge (Junior
Division), Varanasi with the following reliefs:-
“(a) By a decree of this Hon’ble Court it be declared that the
structure standing over and above the collors (Tahkhana) and the
adjoining part of the old temple of plaintiff no.1 together with the
Naubat Thana fully detailed and descried in Shchedule “A” and
shown with red hatched lines in the plaint map towards North of
the temple of lord Visheweshwar and a house lying to the east of
the said Naubat Khana is the property of the plaintiff no.1 and the
devotees of lord Vishwashwar i.e. the Hindus at large have every
right to use it as place of worship and to renovate and reconstruct
their temple adding it with the remaining portion of the temple
structure still in existence in any manner they decide in which the
defendants have no right, title or interest or any kind whatsoever
and the entire Muslim community represented by the defendants
have no right to occupy their occupation is illegal.
(b) By a decree mandatory injunction the defendants in ordered to
remove its effects from the portion shown with red hatched lines
in the plaint map fully detailed and described in Schedule A of the
plaint by handing over possession over the said structures to the
plaintiffs.
(c) By decree of prohibitory injunction the defendants their agents
and servants be permanently restrained from interfering in
peaceful possession of the plaintiffs over properties and the
structures mentioned in Schedule “A” of the plaint in any way
from performing religious, ceremonies, Sewa Puja and Rag Bhog
etc. and re-modeling, repairing, reconstructing adding with the
remaining portion of the temple of lord Visheshwar existing at
spot.
(d) Plaintiff be permitted to file the present suit under Order 1
(e) A decree for entire cost of the present suit be awarded to the
plaintiffs as against the defendants.
(f) Any other relief to which the plaintiffs found entitled a decree for
the same be also passed in favour of the plaintiffs as against the
4.      It is stated in the plaint that the property in dispute has been
divided in two parts. First is, the part and partial of the old temple of Lard
Vishweshwar lying in the centre of Gyanwapi Compound, over and
above the cellers (Tehkhana) situated on Plot No.9130 Mauza Shahar
Khas Pargana Dehat Amanat Tehsil & District Varanasi alleged to be
Masque, Naubatkhana over the Northern Gate of the Gyanwapi
compound and the house towards east of the Naubatkhana, i.e., the
Norther Gate. The aforesaid property has been mentioned as Schedule
“A” property. The entire property of the Gyanwapi Compound forming
settlement Plot Nos. 9130, 9131 & 9132 situated at Mauza Shahar Khas,
Pargana Dehat, Amanat Tahsil & District Varanasi, surrounded by the
boundary wall containing ancient temple of Lard Visheshwar together
with four Mandaps and its ruins Gyankoop, Mukti Mandap newly
constructed Vyas Gaddi, Idol of Sri Ganeshwar, Ganga Devi, Sri
Hanuman Ji, Nandi, Sri Gauri Shanker, Sri Ganesh and several other
idols of Hindu Gods and Goddesses visible and non-visible duly
consecrated three trees standing over Idols Nandi, Naubatkhana over the
Northern Gate and house of servants of temple towards the east of the
Northern Gate and Naubatkhana with its boundaries has been mentioned
as Schedule “B” property.
5.      From perusal of the plaint it appears that the case of the
plaintiffs/respondents is that the temple of Lord Visheshwar has been in
existence from ancient time, i.e., Satyug uptill now and the Swayambhu
Jotrilinga is situating in the disputed structure which has never been
removed from its place because the aforesaid land in dispute is itself the
part and partial of Lord Visheshwar, therefore, the place in dispute is the
abode of the Deity Swayambhu Lord Visheshwar and the same cannot be
made the place of worship for other religion. It is stated in the plaint that
the temple, irrespective of its shape, the ground floor cellar is still in
possession of the plaintiff which is the structure of old temple built prior
to 15th Century. It is further stated in the plaint that the property in dispute
has never been dedicated to the masque by Emperor Aurangzed. The
emperor Aurangzeb was not the owner of the aforesaid property in
dispute, he could not create any Waqf in favour of the masque or Allah,
therefore, the said property in dispute is not a masque. In the
circumstances, the alleged Masque cannot be said to be a Masque in true
spirit of Muslim Law. The defendant No.2 has illegally and
unauthorizedly alleged to have registered the property in dispute as
alleged masque in its register which is illegal and void. It is stated that
the Waqf Act is not applicable on plaintiff as well as other Hindus,
therefore, the religious character of the aforesaid property in dispute can
never be changed and converted into Masque and the same is belong to
6.     During the pendency of the suit, defendant No.1, i.e. Anjuman
Intezamia Masjid filed an application being Application No.71/C on
23.02.1995/24.03.1995 under Order VII Rule 11(d) of C.P.C. for rejecting
the plaint on the ground that it is barred by the provisions of Places of
Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991 (Act No.42 of 1991) (hereinafter
referred to as “the Act, 1991”). During the pendency of the aforesaid
application, the defendant Nos.1 & 2 filed their written statements on
15.11.1996 & 23.02.1995 respectively. After considering the pleadings of
the plaint and written statements, the court below framed ten issues vide
its order dated 17.07.1997. The issue no.2 was in respect of Order VII
Rule 11(d) of C.P.C which is reproduced below:-
“D;k okn /kkjk & 4 miklukLFky fo’ks"k micU/k vf/kfu;e 1991 ls oftZr gksus
ds dkj.k okn i= vkns’k &7 fu;e & 11 lhihlh ds vUrZxr ukeatwj
gksus ;ksX; gS ?”
7.     By the aforesaid order, the trial Court also directed issue Nos.1 & 2
to be decided as preliminary issues. Against the order dated 17.07.1997,
the plaintiffs filed an application being Application No.96C for recalling
of the aforesaid order on the ground that the issue No.2 needs to be
adjudicated on merits by taking evidence as it involves questions of fact
and law both.
8.     The trial Court passed order dated 18.10.1997 by which it decided
that the Relief Nos.(a) &(c) are not barred by the provisions of Section 4
of the Act, 1991 but the relief (b) is barred by the provisions of Section 4
of Act, 1991. In view of the aforesaid, directions were given to the
plaintiffs/defendants to move an amendment application in this regard
within 15 days. With the aforesaid observations the application no.96-C
was disposed of.
9.     Aggrieved against the aforesaid order, three revisions were filed,
Revision No.286 of 1997 filed by the plaintiffs, Revision No.285 of 1997
by the defendant no.1 and Revision No.281 of 1997 was filed by the
defendant no.2. All the revisions were clubbed together and decided by a
common judgment and order dated 23rd September, 1998 passed the
District Judge, Varanasi. By the aforesaid order, order passed by the trial
Court dated 18.10.1997 was set aside on the ground that Issue No.2 could
not be decided without taking evidence.
10.    Aggrieved against the aforesaid order dated 23.09.1998, the
Anjuman Intazamia Masjid, Varanasi has preferred a Writ Petition before
this Court being Writ Petition No.32565 of 1998 which was later
converted into Matters Under Article 227 No.3341 of 2017 (Anjuman
aforesaid writ petition was duly entertained and an interim order was
granted by this Court staying the further proceedings in respect of Suit
No.610 of 1991 pending in the Court below. The aforesaid order was also
challenged by the U.P. Sunni Central Board Of Waqfs Lucknow by filing
Writ C No. 18576 of 1999, which was subsequently converted into
Petition Under Article 227 of the Constitution of India and registered as
MATTERS UNDER ARTICLE 227 No. - 234 of 2021 (U.P. Sunni
The said petition was connected with the petition filed by Anjuman
11.         It is so happened that during the pendency of the aforesaid
petitions, an order was passed by the Hon’ble Apex Court in Asian
Resurfacing Of Road Agency ... vs Central Bureau Of Investigation (2018)
16 SCC 299 on 28.3.2018. In the aforesaid judgement it has been held by
the Hon’ble Apex Court that all orders staying the proceeding of any matter
sub-judiced before the courts shall be treated automatically vacated after
expiry of six months from the grant of stay, staying the proceedings.
12.     Since more than six months have expired from the date of said order
passed by this Court dated 13.8.1998, an application on 10.12.2019 being
Paper No.266 Ga was filed in the Court below by the plaintiffs with the
relief inter-alia for survey of premises in dispute by the Archaeological
Survey of India. In the aforesaid application, the following reliefs were
13.    When the proceedings started for hearing on the aforesaid
application, two applications were filed by the defendant Nos.1 & 2 in
Original Suit No.610 of 1991 being Application Nos.270Ga and 274 Ga.
Both the applications were rejected by the Court below vide order dated
04.02.2020. Aggrieved against the aforesaid order, the petition being
Matters Under Article 227 No.1521 of 2020 was preferred before this
Court in which interim order was granted on 26.02.2020. The aforesaid
“An interim order was passed by this Court on 13.10.1998 in Writ
Petition No. 32565 of 1998 (current registration is Matters Under
Article 227 No. 3341 of 2017),Anjuman Intezamiya Masajid
Varanasi Vs. Ist Additional District Judge, Varanasi and Others, is
"Untill further orders by this court further proceeding pursuant to
order dated 23.09.1998 in suit no. 610 of 1991 pending in the court
Placing reliance on a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Asian Resurfacing of Road Agency Pvt. Ltd. and another Vs.
Central Bureau of Investigation, reported at 2018 (16) SCC 299, the
learned trial court in the impugned order dated 04.02.2020, has held
that the interim order dated 13.10.1998 is no longer subsisting and
has commenced with the trial proceedings.
Shri S.F.A. Naqvi, learned Senior Counsel assisted by Shri F.
Husain, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the learned
trial court was misdirected in law to find that the interim order dated
13.10.1998 was not subsisting by relying on the judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Asian Resurfacing(supra). He calls
attention to the various provisions of the Constitution to contend that
the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Asian
Resurfacing(supra) will not apply to the facts of this case and the
interim order dated 13.10.1998, passed by this Court still survives.
The learned Senior Counsel submits that the directions issued by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in paragraphs 36 and 37 of the Asian
Resurfacing (supra), do not fall within the purview of law declared
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court under Article 141 of the Constitution
of India which is binding on all the Courts. The paragraphs 36 and
37 of the Asian Resurfacing (supra) are reproduced below:
"36. In view of the above, situation of proceedings remaining
pending for long on account of stay needs to be remedied. Remedy
is required not only for corruption cases but for all civil and criminal
cases where on account of stay, civil and criminal proceedings are
held up. At times, proceedings are adjourned sine die on account of
stay. Even after stay is vacated, intimation is not received and
proceedings are not taken up. In an attempt to remedy this situation,
we consider it appropriate to direct that in all pending cases where
stay against proceedings of a civil or criminal trial is operating, the
same will come to an end on expiry of six months from today unless
in an exceptional case by a speaking order such stay is extended. In
cases where stay is granted in future, the same will end on expiry of
six months from the date of such order unless similar extension is
granted by a speaking order. The speaking order must show that the
case was of such exceptional nature that continuing the stay was
more important than having the trial finalised. The trial court where
order of stay of civil or criminal proceedings is produced, may fix a
date not beyond six months of the order of stay so that on expiry of
period of stay, proceedings can commence unless order of extension
Article 141 of the Constitution of India being relevant to the
"Article 141. Law declared by Supreme Court to be binding on all
courts. ? The law declared by the Supreme Court shall be binding on
Taking his submission further, the learned Senior Counsel would
contend that the aforesaid observations of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in Asian Resurfacing (supra) on which reliance has been
placed are relatable to Article 142 of the Constitution of India. The
directions have been issued in exercise of the extraordinary powers
vested in the Hon'ble Supreme Court by Article 142 of the
Constitution of India.
It is then contended that while all courts and authorities have to
implement the orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court with deference
and in letter and spirit immediately after the judgments are rendered.
However, orders under Article 142 of the Constitution of India can
be enforced only in the manner prescribed therein. Article 142 of the
Constitution of India being one of the spear points of the argument
"142. Enforcement of decrees and orders of Supreme Court and
( 1 ) The Supreme Court in the exercise of its jurisdiction may pass
such decree or make such order as is necessary for doing complete
justice in any cause or matter pending before it, and any decree so
passed or orders so made shall be enforceable throughout the
territory of India in such manner as may be prescribed by or under
any law made by Parliament and, until provision in that behalf is so
made, in such manner as the President may by order prescribe.
(2) Subject to the provisions of any law made in this behalf by
Parliament, the Supreme Court shall, as respects the whole of the
territory of India, have all and every power to make any order for the
purpose of securing the attendance of any person, the discovery or
production of any documents, or the investigation or punishment of
It is asserted by the learned Senior Counsel that the directions in
Asian Resurfacing (supra) can be made enforceable throughout the
territory of India including the State of Uttar Pradesh only in the
manner prescribed by or under any law made by the Parliament and
until such provision in that behalf is so made, in such manner as the
President may by order prescribe under Article 142 of the
Constitution of India. However, according to the learned Senior
Counsel, the law made by Parliament or Presidential order
contemplated under Article 142 of the Constitution of India was not
placed before the learned trial court and the learned trial court was
thus led into error.
Considering the fact that submissions made on behalf of the
petitioner may have serious repercussions on a large number of other
cases, learned advocates from the Bar at large are also invited to
assist the Court in this matter.
Matter needs consideration.
Shri Ajay Kumar Singh, learned counsel for the respondent could
not refute the aforesaid submissions. He has raised some preliminary
objections. These objections shall be considered on 17.03.2020.
Till the next date of listing, the effect and operation of the order
dated 04.02.2020 passed in Original Suit No. 610 of 1991(annexed
as annexure 1 to the petition) shall remain stayed.
Put up this case on 17.03.2020 in the additional cause list at 02:00
The records of Writ Petition No. 32565 of 1998 (current registration
is Matters Under Article 227 No. 3341 of 2017), Anjuman
Varanasi and Others, shall also be placed before the Court. In case
pleadings are complete and this Court has the determination, this
Court may proceed further in the matter.”
14.   Subsequently, another order was passed on 17.03.2020 which is
“Considering the public health emergency which the nation is
facing, the learned counsels for both parties in highest traditions of
the Bar agree that the matter cannot be heard today.
The learned trial court is restrained from proceeding in the matter
since the controversy is engaging attention of this Court and the
petitions are proposed to be heard on merits. Further an interim
order was also passed by this Court on an earlier occasion in Civil
Misc. Writ Petition No. 32565 of 1998 (current registration being
Matters Under Article 227 No. 3341 of 2017) Anjuman Intezamiya
Masajid Varanasi Vs. 1st Additional District Judge, Varanasi and
Others. The controversy engaging attention of this Court in both
petitions go to the root of the proceedings before the learned trial
court. In case the interim order granted by this Court on 13.10.1998
in Civil Misc. Writ Petition No. 32565 of 1998 (current registration
being Matters Under Article 227 No. 3341 of 2017) Anjuman
Varanasi and Others, is allowed to lapse, a serious miscarriage of
justice would result.
Learned counsels also informed that there are other matters
pertaining to the same controversy which are pending before this
The records of Writ C No.18576 of 1999, U.P. Sunni Central Board
of Waqfs Lucknow Vs. Ist ADJ Varanasi and Others, be placed for
perusal.
At the request of the learned counsels for the parties, put up this case
on 15.04.2020 in the additional cause list.”
15.    Thereafter the matter could not be taken up due to Covid-19
pandemic. When this Court were reopened, an application for early
hearing was filed by the counsel for the petitioners in the earlier petition
before this Court. Thereafter all the petitions were heard together and
vide order 15.03.2021, the judgement was reserved by this Court.
16.    After the judgement was reserved, again hearing of Paper
No.266Ga was started by the Trial Court. Thereafter two objections were
filed by the defendants in the Original Suit being Paper Nos.273 Ga and
286Ga. Apart from the same, written arguments were also submitted by
the defendants being Paper No.332 Ga. After considering the matter, in
great detail, the aforesaid objections were rejected and the order dated
08.04.2021 was passed by the Court below. The operative portion of the
“I.     The Director General, Archaeological Survey of India,
Darohar Bhawan, 24 Tilak Marg, New Delhi, functioning under the
Ministry of Culture, Government of India, is hereby directed to get
a comprehensive archaeological physical survey be done of the
entire Settlement Plot No.9130 located at Mauja Shahar Khas,
Pargana Dehat Amanat, Tehsil and District Varanasi including the
Naubat Khana situated at the Northern Gate of Gyanvapi compound
and the house towards the northern gate of the Naubatkhana, i.e.,
the Gate (Hereinbefore termed as disputed site and duly described
II.     For above said purpose, the Director General shall constitute
a five member committee of eminent persons who are experts and
well versed in the science of archaeology, two out of which should
preferably belong to minority community.
III.    The Director General, shall also appoint an eminent and
highly experienced person who can be regarded as expert in the
science of archaeology to act as the observer for the committee so
constituted. Such person should preferably be a scholarly
personality and established academician of any Central University.
The committee so constituted shall report the observer about the
survey work done on a particular day.
IV.     The     committee     shall   prepare     a    comprehensive
documentation along with the drawing, plan, elevation, site map
with precise breadth and width of the disputed site, marked with
hatched lines in the plaint map.
V.      The prime purpose of the archaeological survey shall be to
find out as to whether the religious structure standing at present at
the disputed site is a superimposition, alteration or addition or there
is structural overlapping of any kind, with or over, any other
religious structure. If so then what exactly is the age, size
monumental and architectural design or style of the religious
structure standing at present at the disputed site and what materials
has been used for building the same. The committee shall also trace
as to whether any temple belonging to the Hindu community ever
existed before the mosque in question was built or superimposed or
added upon it at the disputed site. If so, then what exactly is the
age, size, monumental and architectural design or style of the same,
and also, as to which of Hindu deity or deities the same was
devoted to.
VI.     For that purpose the committee shall be entitled to enter into
every portion of the religious structure standing at present at the
disputed site. The committee shall firstly resort to Ground
Penetrating Radar (GPR) or Geo-Radiology system or both, to
satisfy itself a to whether any excavation or extraction work is
needed at any portion of the religious structure standing at present.
Even if by use of GPR system the committee feels satisfied that
further excavation or extraction work is needed to be carried out,
the same shall firtly be done by trial trench method vertically and
that too at a very small scale an not more than four square feet at a
time. Horizontal excavation shall be done only when the committee
is fully satisfied that there is indeed a certainty of belief that by
such excavation they would be able to reach more concretized
conclusion regarding ascertainment of the precise archaeological
remain below the ground level.
VII.    During the entire survey proceeding every artefacts
supporting the plaint or defence version shall be properly
preserved. If any artefacts is so deeply entrenched with the earth or
super structure standing at the disputed site, removal of which can
potentially disturb the existing super structure, or the committee
otherwise feels that the same should not be removed due to being
bulky in nature or for any other reasons to be recorded, then
photography, videography and external measurement, sketching
and drawing (comprehensive documentation of the architectural
remains) of the same shall only be done and the same shall not be
VIII. The committee shall also record its finding to the effect as to
whether true architectural structure traced at the disputed site
(Schedule-A) has any sort of connection with the temples and
artefacts mentioned in the in the Schedule-B of the plaint.
IX. While carrying out the survey, the committee shall ensure that
the people belonging to Muslim community is not prevented to
offer Namaj at the disputed site. If due to ongoing survey work, it is
not practicable to facilitate the offering of Namaj to the persons
belonging to Muslim community at a particular place, then the
committee shall provide such persons an alternative and suitable
place to offer Namaj at any other place within the precincts of the
mosque. The committee is expected be throughout aware of the
sensitivity of the matter, hence the committee shall always ensure
that stakeholders of both Hindu and Muslim religions shall not be
subjected to any partisan or preferential treatment and both shall be
equally respected.
X.      Before entering into survey work at any point of the time,
the committee shall give advance notice to the parties or their
counsels,. The parties to this suit shall be entitled to remain present
in person or through their counsels. But no party appearing through
a counsel shall be entitled to nominate more than one counsel at a
XI.     Entire survey work shall be done in camouflaged manner,
i.e., entire disputed site shall be camouflaged before the
commencement of survey and till the same is finished. Non general
public or media person shall be allowed to have access to witness
the onging survey work. Neither the observer nor any of the
members of the committee will ever brief the media about the status
of ongoing survey work.
XII.    No party shall dictate the committee to interpret this order or
act in particular manner. The committee alone shall be entitled to do
the same.
XIII. Photography (coloured as well as black and white and slides)
and videography of the entire survey proceeding shall be ensured
by the committee as a record of the proceeding. Comprehensive
documentation and preparation of map stating placement of
necessary artefacts and drawings shall be done. A report of survey
work on routine basis shall be prepared stating the time of entering
at the disputed site and exist therefrom.
XIV. To ensure that entire survey work is not tampered with at the
behest of the either party, the committee shall be entitled to get
necessary security personals be deputed at the disputed site during
the survey work as well as after tentative closure thereof.
XV.     It shall be the duty of the district administration to ensure
that complete peace and tranquillity is maintained at the disputed
site and in nearby areas during the entire survey proceeding, and
the committee is given due assistance and co-operation by the
district administration at all point of time till the survey proceeding
is completed so that the committee could be enabled to discharge its
functions without any fear or favour.
XVI. The survey work shall be carried out between 09:00 A.M. to
XVII. The committee and parties participating in the survey
proceeding shall give due adherence to the norms and guidelines
issued time by time by the Central and State Government with
regard to upsurge second wave of pandemic Covid-19.
XVIII. After completion of the survey work, the committee shall
submit its report and the record of the entire survey proceeding in
sealed cover without undue delay.
XIX. Keeping in mind the representative capacity in which the
suit is being prosecuted by the plaintiffs and contested by the
defendants, and the fact that public at large is interested in the
controversy in hand, it would be unjust to burden the plaintiffs
alone to bear the expenses and cost of the survey work. It is
therefore, the cost and expenses of the entire survey proceeding
shall be borne by the Archaeological Survey of India.”
17.    Aggrieved against the aforesaid order, an application was filed by
the petitioners before this Court. Since the aforesaid application could not
be taken up due to Covid 19 pandemic second wave, two Revisions were
filed by both the petitioners being Civil Revision No. Nil of 2021 (U.P.
and others) and Civil Revision No. Nil of 2021 (Anjuman Intezamiya
Masjid Vs. Ancient Idol Gyanwapi Mandir, Varanasi and others).
18.    During the pendency of the aforesaid Revisions, present petitions
have been filed by the petitioners inter-alia with the prayer to direct the
District Judge Varanasi to adjudicate and decide the aforesaid revisions.
When the aforesaid petitions were taken up, a preliminary objection has
been raised by Sri Ajay Kumar Singh, learned counsel for the
respondents that the revision was filed very recently and it is not proper
to pass any order by this Court for disposal of the revision at an early
19.    In the aforesaid revisions, applications were filed by the petitioners
before the Revisional Court for dismissal of the revisions as not pressed
on the ground that the petitioners have already filed petitions before this
Court. Since the aforesaid revisions were not admitted, therefore, the In-
Charge District Judge, Varanasi returned the aforesaid revisions vide
order dated 12.08.2021.
20.    After the order dated 12.08.2021 passed by the In-charge District
Judge, Varanasi, amendment application has been filed in both the
petitions by the petitioners inter-alia with the prayer to set aside the order
dated 08.04.2021 passed by the Civil Judge (Senior Division) F.T.C.
Varanasi in Original Suit No.610 of 1991.
21.    Counter and Rejoinder affidavits have been exchanged in response
to the amendment application. Apart from the same, a supplementary
affidavit has also been filed by Sri S.F.A. Naqvi, learned Senior Counsel
in Petition No.3844 of 2021. Along with supplementary affidavit, various
documents have been filed specially document being Application
No.332Ga, i.e., written argument filed by the opposite party in the
pending suit in the court below. In paragraph 3 of the aforesaid written
statement, it is clearly stated that against the Original Suit No.610 of
1991, Writ Petition No.32565 of 1998 (New No.3341 of 2017) as well as
Writ Petition No.18576 of 1999 (New No. 234 of 2021) is already
pending before this Court in which after hearing the parties in great
detail, the judgement has already been reserved on 15.03.2021. Apart
from the same, a complete order-sheet of Original Suit No.610 of 1991
with effect from 04.02.2021 till 04.08.2021 has been appended. From
perusal of the order-sheets dated 08.04.2021, it is clear that the court
below has full knowledge regarding the pending proceedings before this
22.    In this view of the matter, it is argued by Sri S.F.A. Naqvi, learned
Senior Counsel along with Sri Punit Gupta, learned counsel for the
petitioner that once the Court below has full knowledge in respect of the
pending proceedings before this Court, the court below should have defer
the matter in place of deciding the application No.266Ga. It is further
argued that interim order which was also granted in the petition in the
year 1998 as well as subsequent interim order granted in the year 2020
are continuing even today and in spite of the same, the court below
proceeded to decide the issues.
23.    On the other hand, it is argued by Sri Ajay Kumar Singh, learned
counsel for the respondents that there was no interim order of this court
and only the judgement was reserved on 15.03.2021.There was no
occasion for the court below to defer the hearing in the matter. It is
further argued that the interim order granted even in the petition filed in
the year 2020 came to an end on 05.01.2020 and as such the court below
rightly decided the application on 08.04.2021. It is also argued by Sri
A.K. Singh, learned counsel for the respondents that present amendment
application is barred by the provisions of Order XXIII Rule 1 of C.P.C. It
is argued that while filing the application for withdrawal of the revision,
no permission was sought from the Revisional Court to challenge the
same before this Court. Learned counsel for the respondents also relied
upon a judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Sarguja
Transport Service vs State Transport Appellate reported in 1987 AIR 88.
He was also upon another judgement of Hon’ble the Supreme Court in
the case of Amita Kaushish & Ors vs Sanjay Kaushish & Ors reported in
24.    In response to the same, Sri Punit Kumar Gupta, learned counsel
for the petitioner relied upon a judgement of Hon’ble Supreme Court in
the case of Kandapazha Nadar & Ors vs Chitraganiammal & Ors
reported in AIR 2007 SC 1575. He also relied upon a judgement
delivered by the learned Single Judge of Uttrakhand High Court in the
case of Rajesh Kumar Gautam Vs. Maha Mandeshwar Vedabayasanad
Geeta Ashram reported in 2003 (52) ALR 676.
25.    Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
26.    From perusal of the record, it is clear that the judgment was
reserved in all pending petitions by this Court, after hearing the learned
counsel for the parties at length on 15.03.2021. The court below has full
knowledge to the fact that the judgement has already been reserved on
15.03.2021. In this view of the matter, the court below should not have
proceeded and decided the application filed by the plaintiffs in the
Original Suit for survey by Archaeological Survey of India. In the
opinion of the Court, the Court below should wait for the verdict in the
petitions pending before this Court and not to proceed further in the
matter till the time a judgement is delivered. The judicial courtesy and
decorum warranted such discipline which was expected from the Court
below but for the unfathomable reasons, neither of the courses were
taken. It is to be regretted that the court below departed from this
traditional way in the present case and chose to examine the question
himself. I have said so with the fond hope that judicial enthusiasm should
not obliterate the profound responsibility that is expected from the Court
below The same view has been taken by the Apex Court in the case of
Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited Vs. Rajesh Kumar and others
reported in (2012) 7 SCC 1 has been taken similar view. The relevant
paragraph No.16 of the aforesaid judgement is quoted below:-
“We have reproduced the paragraphs from both the decisions in
extenso to highlight that the Allahabad Bench was apprised about
the number of matters at Lucknow filed earlier in point of time
which were being part heard and the hearing was in continuum. It
would have been advisable to wait for the verdict at Lucknow Bench
or to bring it to the notice of the learned Chief Justice about the
similar matters being instituted at both the places. The judicial
courtesy and decorum warranted such discipline which was
expected from the learned Judges but for the unfathomable reasons,
neither of the courses were taken recourse to.”
27.     In respect of the arguments advanced by Sri A.K. Singh, learned
counsel for the contesting respondents that the present amendment
application is barred by the provisions Order XXIII Rule 1 is concerned,
it is settled law that Court cannot go into and give a finding on the merits
of the amendment sought, without first allowing the amendment. The
Hon’ble Apex Court in Paragraphs 19 and 28 of the case of Rajesh
Kumar Agarwal and others Vs. K.K. Modi and others reported in (2006)
“19. While considering whether an application for amendment
should or should not be allowed, the Court should not go into the
correctness or falsity of the case in the amendment. Likewise, it
should not record a finding on the merits of the amendment and the
merits of the amendment sought to be incorporated by way of
amendment are not to be adjudged at the stage of allowing the
prayer for amendment. This cardinal principle has not been followed
by the High Court in the instant case.
28. Since the Court has entered into a discussion into the
correctness or falsity of the case in the amendment, we have no
other option but to interfere with the order passed by the High Court.
Since it is settled law that the merits of the amendment sought to be
incorporated by way of amendment are not to be adjudged at the
stage of allowing prayer for amendment, the order passed by the
High Court is not sustainable in law as observed by this Court in
Sampath Kumar v. Ayyakannu reported in (2002) 7 SCC 559.”
28.    Thus, the argument of Sri A.K. Singh, learned counsel for the
contesting respondent Nos.1 to 6 that the amendment challeging the order
dated 08.04.2021 is barred by the provision of Order XXIII Rule 1 of
C.P.C. could be considered only when the amendment application is
allowed and challenge to order dated 08.04.2021 is incorporated in the
29.    Moreover, this Court is of the opinion that the High Court in
exercise of its jurisdiction of superintendence can interfere in order to
keep the tribunals and Courts subordinate to it, ‘within the bounds of
their authority.” The High Court can interfere in exercise of its power of
superintendence when there has been a patent perversity in the orders of
tribunals and Courts subordinate to it or where there has been a gross and
manifest failure of justice or the basic principles of natural justice have
been flouted. It is also held by the Hon’ble Apex Court that the main
objection of Article 227 of the Constitution of india is to keep strict
administration of judicial control by the High Court on administration of
justice within its territory.
30.   The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Shalini Shyam Sethi
and others Vs. Rajendra Shanker Patel (2010) 8 SCC 329 , has considered
the entire history and scope of Article 227 in detail and after considering
the various decisions of various High Courts as well as Supreme Court
has formulated principles for exercise of jurisdiction under Article 227 of
the Constitution of India in para 49 of the which is under:-
“49. On an analysis of the aforesaid decisions of this Court, the
following principles on the exercise of High Court’s jurisdiction
under Article 227 of the Constitution may be formulated:
(a) A petition under Article 226 of the Constitution is different from
a petition under Article 227. The mode of exercise of power by
High Court under these two Articles is also different.
(b) In any event, a petition under Article 227 cannot be called a writ
petition. The history of the conferment of writ jurisdiction on High
Courts is substantially different from the history of conferment of
the power of Superintendence on the High Courts under Article 227
and have been discussed above.
(c) High Courts cannot, on the drop of a hat, in exercise of its
power of superintendence under Article 227 of the Constitution,
interfere with the orders of tribunals or Courts inferior to it. Nor can
it, in exercise of this power, act as a Court of appeal over the orders
of Court or tribunal subordinate to it. In cases where an alternative
statutory mode of redressal has been provided, that would also
operate as a restrain on the exercise of this power by the High
(d) The parameters of interference by High Courts in exercise of its
power of superintendence have been repeatedly laid down by this
Court. In this regard the High Court must be guided by the
principles laid down by the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Waryam Singh Vs. Amarnath (AIR 1954 SC 215) and the principles
in Waryam Singh (supra) have been repeatedly followed by
subsequent Constitution Benches and various other decisions of this
(e) According to the ratio in Waryam Singh (supra), followed in
subsequent cases, the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction of
superintendence can interfere in order only to keep the tribunals
and Courts subordinate to it, ‘within the bounds of their authority’.
(f) In order to ensure that law is followed by such tribunals and
Courts by exercising jurisdiction which is vested in them and by not
declining to exercise the jurisdiction which is vested in them.
(g) Apart from the situations pointed in (e) and (f), High Court can
interfere in exercise of its power of superintendence when there has
been a patent perversity in the orders of tribunals and Courts
subordinate to it or where there has been a gross and manifest
failure of justice or the basic principles of natural justice have been
(h) In exercise of its power of superintendence High Court cannot
interfere to correct mere errors of law or fact or just because
another view than the one taken by the tribunals or Courts
subordinate to it, is a possible view. In other words the jurisdiction
has to be very sparingly exercised.
(i) High Court’s power of superintendence under Article 227 cannot
be curtailed by any statute. It has been declared a part of thebasic
structure of the Constitution by the Constitution Bench of this
Court in the case of L. Chandra Kumar vs. Union of India & others,
reported in (1997) 3 SCC 261 and therefore abridgement by a
Constitutional amendment is also very doubtful.
(j) It may be true that a statutory amendment of a rather cognate
provision, like Section 115 of the Civil Procedure Code by the Civil
Procedure Code (Amendment) Act, 1999 does not and cannot cut
down the ambit of High Court’s power under Article 227. At the
same time, it must be remembered that such statutory amendment
does not correspondingly expand the High Court’s jurisdiction of
superintendence under Article 227.
(k) The power is discretionary and has to be exercised on equitable
principle. In an appropriate case, the power can be
exercised suo motu.
(l) On a proper appreciation of the wide and unfettered power of the
High Court under Article 227, it transpires that the main object of
this Article is to keep strict administrative and judicial control by
the High Court on the administration of justice within its territory.
(m) The object of superintendence, both administrative and judicial,
is to maintain efficiency, smooth and orderly functioning of the
entire machinery of justice in such a way as it does not bring it into
any disrepute. The power of interference under this Article is to be
kept to the minimum to ensure that the wheel of justice does not
come to a halt and the fountain of justice remains pure and
unpolluted in order to maintain public confidence in the functioning
of the tribunals and Courts subordinate to High Court.
(n) This reserve and exceptional power of judicial intervention is
not to be exercised just for grant of relief in individual cases but
should be directed for promotion of public confidence in the
administration of justice in the larger public interest whereas Article
226 is meant for protection of individual grievance. Therefore, the
power under Article 227 may be unfettered but its exercise is
subject to high degree of judicial discipline pointed out above.
(o) An improper and a frequent exercise of this power will be
counter-productive and will divest this extraordinary power of its
strength and vitality.”
31.    The principles relating to the scope and applicability of Article 227
of the Constitution of India was considered in great detail by a Division
Bench of this Court in the case of Ram Roop and others Vs. Bishwa Nath
and others reported in AIR 1958 Allahabad 456 which are reproduced
1. The superintendence referred to in Article 227 of the Constitution
includes judcial superintendence.
2. The power conferred by the Article is wide but not unlimited.
The exercise of the power is discretionary and relief under the
Article cannot be claimed as a matter of right. The principles
regulating the exercise of the power are generally speaking the
same as the principles on which writs can be issued under Article
226 but in a sense the power under Article 227 is wider as the High
Court can sometimes issue directions in the exercise of that power
which it could not do under Article 226.
3. The power under the Article can be exercised even in those cases
in which no appeal or revision lies in the High Court.
4. The power should not ordinarily be exercised if any other remedy
is available to the aggrieved party even though the pursuing of that
remedy may involve some inconvenience or delay.
5.The power should not be used to correct mere errors of fact or
law. Error of law may include a wrong decision on a question of
jurisdiction.
6. The power is to be used sparingly only in appropriate cases in
which the conscience of the Court is pricked and it feels that
immediate interference is called for as it is necessary to keep the
Subordinate Courts or Tribunals within their bound or to prevent
some outrageous miscarriage of justice and grave results would
follow if the power is not exercised. Whether a particular case is of
this kind or not will depend on its own facts and circumstances.
Such cases cannot obviously be exhaustively catalogued.”
32.    In this view of the matter, the Court is of the opinion that the
amendment applications filed by the petitioners are liable to be allowed
and they are hereby allowed.
33.    Counsel for the petitioners are permitted to make necessary
amendments in the petition within three days. Counsel for the petitioners
are also directed to serve a fresh amended copy of the petitions upon Sri
A.K. Singh, learned counsel for contesting respondent Nos.1 to 6, Sri
Shashi Prakash Singh, Senior Counsel/Assistant Solicitor General of
India for respondent No.7 and Sri M.C. Chaturvedi, learned Additional
Advocate General/Senior Counsel for respondent No.8 within three days
34.    All the counsel for respondents are granted three weeks time to file
counter affidavit.
35.    Rejoinder affidavit, if any, may be filed within one week thereafter.
36.    List this matter on 08.10.2021 for further hearing.
37.    Till the next date of listing, further proceedings of Original Suit
No.610 of 1991 pending before the court below shall remain stayed.