1. The instant appeal is directed against Judgment and order dated 15th
November, 2017 passed in SWP No. 963/2017 titled as “Mushtaq
Ahmad Naik and Ors. vs. State of JK and Anr.” (hereinafter for short
the impugned judgment).
2. Before adverting to the grounds of challenge urged in the appeal
against the impugned Judgment, it would be appropriate to give a brief
background of the case. The petitioners/respondents herein filed the
aforesaid SWP with the following reliefs:
to count the service of the petitioners from 01-04-
2001 to 30-12-2009 for all service benefits viz.
promotion, seniority, pensionary benefits and other
monetary benefits.
after counting their service for all service benefits
w.e.f. 01-04-2001 and make the payments to the
petitioners in the grade of Rs. 4440-7440 and also
promote the petitioners to the next higher post and
also reckon their seniority accordingly.”
The reliefs aforesaid had been claimed by the writ
petitioners on the premise that they came to be engaged as daily
wagers in the respondents department (appellants herein) in March,
1994 and became entitled, as such, to regularization in terms of SRO
64 of 1994. The petitioners contended that they were entitled to such
regularization from 01-04-2001 on which date the petitioners
completed seven years of their daily wage service.
3. It had been further stated in the petition that the petitioners’ case for
regularization was processed in the year 2001 by the respondents
however, was not finalized for unknown reason and finally petitioners
came to be regularized against Class IV posts of Chowkidar in the pay
scale of 4440-7440 in terms of order dated 412/E of 2009 dated 30-12-
2009 with prospective effect.
4. It had been further stated in the petition that respondents before
regulating the services of the petitioners had obtained affidavits from
them to the extent that the petitioners will not press for previous
service either for the purpose of seniority or for any monetary benefit
taking undue advantage of their hardship and because of unequal
bargaining power despite the fact that the respondents had
retrospectively regularized the services of one Ms. Rashida Akhtar also
having been engaged as a daily wager in the year 1994 along with the
petitioners upon a representation filed by the said Rashida Akhtar
before the respondents/appellants herein.
5. The petitioners have had further contended in the petition that they
approached the respondents and sought extension of all service
benefits like seniority, promotion, pensionary benefits and all
monetary benefits as had been extended in favour of similarly situated
Ms. Rashida Akhtar granted to her in terms of order No. 361/E of 2016
dated 3rd January, 2017, but their requests and representations made in
this regard did not evoke any response from the respondents
compelling them to file the writ petition seeking therein the reliefs
aforesaid.
6. The respondents in the writ petition being appellants herein had filed
objections to the petition resisting and opposing the claim of the
petitioners on the grounds that the petitioners’ services were
regularized vide order dated 30th December, 2009, and though being
satisfied, yet the petitioners challenged the conditions therein after
more-than eight years and that the petitioners have no parity with Ms.
Rashida Akhtar as in her case the post was identified in the year
2001and, as such, she had been regularized w.e.f 2001 and that the
case of the petitioners was not been covered under the policy invoked
and    that  the   petitioners   after   having   accepted   prospective
regularization of their services with all terms and conditions could not
turn around in the year 2001 and seek regularization of their service in
2017 when they were not otherwise entitled to the same as per the
rules.
7. The writ petition came to be disposed of in terms of the impugned
Judgment/order by the writ court firstly, overruling the plea of delay
and latches urged by the respondents/appellants herein on the premise
that a fundamental right cannot be negated by any amount of delay or
latches and secondly, has allowed the claim of the petitioners for
retrospective regularization of their services on the basis of the case of
Ms. Rashida Akhtar who had been regularized retrospectively w.e.f
01-04-2001 though her regularization was ordered in the year 2010.
The writ court summed up the impugned Judgment/order as follows;
“This petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondents to
settle the case of the petitioners for giving effect to their
regularization with effect from the date they have completed
seven years of continuous daily-wager ship, in the manner it has
been given to Ms. Rashida Akhtar vide Horticulture order No.
361/E dated 03-01-2017. This exercise shall be undertaken and
completed within a period of four weeks from today.”
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
8. According to counsel for the appellants, writ petitioners/respondents
were lacking eligibility for regularization after having completed seven
years of daily wage services as they were not possessed of
qualification and the prescribed age for considering the writ
petitioners/respondents herein for regularization it was imperative for
extending relaxation in their case in respect of qualification and age, as
such, as a consequence thereof, the writ petitioners/respondents herein
after relaxation of their qualification and age came to be accorded
regularization in terms of the order dated 30th December, 2009
prospectively.
9. It is further contended by the counsel for the appellants that the writ
petitioners/respondents’ case have had been distinct and different than
that of Ms. Rashida Akhtar and had no similarity with her in the matter
of regularization as in her case no relaxation was required to be
accorded and that the said Rashida Akhtar even though was
regularized in the year 2010 yet was ordered to be regularized
retrospectively owing to the fact that her case had not been
appropriately considered. Learned counsel for the appellants would
thus contend that the writ petitioners/respondents, as such, had no case
against the appellants herein for claiming retrospective regularization
on any grounds much less in terms of the provisions of SRO 64
inasmuch as on the ground of parity with Ms. Rashida Akhtar more so
when the writ petitioners/respondents had consented to their
prospective regularization by submitting affidavits foregoing their
claims therein for claiming regularization from back date.
10. Per contra, learned counsel for the writ petitioners/respondents would
however, controvert the submissions made by the counsel for the
appellants and would contend that the writ petitioners/respondents
have had to be regularized retrospectively after having put in seven
years of continuous daily wage service with the respondents and that
the appellants herein ought to have considered their case for
regularization immediately after completion of their seven years daily
wage service which the respondents failed to consider and that the case
of the writ petitioners/respondents had been similar and identical to
that of Ms. Rashida Akhtar, as such, different treatment could not have
been given to the writ petitioners/respondents in the matter of
regularization and also that the swearing of an affidavit by them for not
claiming regularization from back date in law is in-significant in view
of law laid down by the Apex Court in case titled as “Somesh
Thapliyal and Anr. vs. Vice Chancellor, H. N. B. Garhwal University
and Anr.” reported in (2021) 10 SCC 116 wherein it had been
provided that the employer is always in a dominating position and it is
open to the employer to dictate the terms of the employment and a
court can take judicial notice of the fact, if an employee takes initiation
in questioning the terms and conditions of employment that would cost
his/her job itself and that the bargaining power is vested with the
employer itself and the employee is left with no option but to accept
the conditions dictated by the authority.
11. In the first instance, it becomes imperative to refer to the eligibility
conditions provided under Rule 4 of the provisions of SRO 64 which is
extracted and reproduced hereunder:
“A Daily Rated Worker/Work Charged Employee shall be eligible
for regularisation on fulfilment of the following conditions; namely: -
(a) that he is a permanent resident of the State;
(b) that on the date of his initial appointment his age was within the
minimum and maximum age limit as prescribed for appointment in
(c) that he possesses the prescribed academic and/or technical
qualification for the post against which he is required to be
Provided that in case of eligible Daily Rated Workers to be regularized
against Class IV posts, relaxation of qualification and/or age shall be
considered on merits by the concerned Administrative Department;
(d) that he is not retiree from any State or Central Government service or
any Local Body, Public Sector Undertaking or Autonomous Body in or
(e) that his work and conduct has remained satisfactory during the period
he worked as Daily Rated Worker or Work-charge Employee and no
disciplinary proceedings are pending against him; and
(f) that he has completed seven years continuous period of working as
Daily Rated Worker or Work-charged Employee or partly as Daily
Rated Worker and partly as Work-charged Employee.”
12.  A plain reading of the aforesaid provision would manifestly suggest
that a Daily Rated Worker would become eligible for regularisation on
fulfilment of all the conditions as contained therein. All the conditions
are inter-dependent and have to be fulfilled by a daily wager whose
case is to be considered for regularisation. Completion of seven years
of continuous period of daily wage service alone thus would not entitle
a daily wager for regularisation unless such daily wager fulfills other
eligibility conditions.        Since the writ petitioners/ respondents
admittedly had been lacking the qualification and age conditions, as
such, the appellants initiated a process for the relaxation of the same
and upon concluding and finalizing the same accorded regularization
to the writ petitioners/respondents in terms of the order of
regularisation, in that, the writ petitioners/respondents herein acquired
and got possessed of the complete eligibility only after such relaxation
in the year 2009, therefore, came to be regularized rightly from said
date by the appellants herein. The writ petitioners/respondents in this
regard have submitted an affidavit undertaking that they shall not
claim regularization from the back date which affidavits however, are
being contended to have been submitted under compelling
circumstances by the writ petitioners/respondents. It is not in dispute
that the writ petitioners/respondents while submitting the said
affidavits have neither reserved any right thereupon for enforcement of
any of the rights or else expressed any protest thereof. The writ
petitioner/respondents herein admittedly have consented to abide by
the conditions imposed by the appellants qua the filing of affidavits in
the year 2009 and then turned around and filed the petition in the year
2017. The Judgment of the Apex Court supra relied upon by the
counsel for the writ petitioners/respondents thus has no application to
the facts and circumstances of the case and does not lend any support
to the case of the writ petitioners/respondents.
13.  In so far as the case set up by the writ petitioners/ respondents herein
before the writ court on the ground of parity with Ms. Rashida Akhtar
in respect of their regularisation is concerned, the perusal of the record
manifestly demonstrate that the case of the said Rashida Akhtar and
that of the writ petitioners/respondents is quite distinct and different
with no parity between them except that the said Rashida Akhtar and
the writ petitioners/respondents came to be initially engaged as daily
wagers by the respondents.
14. Admittedly there has been no relaxation required either in the matter of
age or qualification in the case of the said Ms. Rashida Akhtar while
appellants herein considered her case for regularisation. The distinction
between the cases of the writ petitioners/respondents herein and that of
the said Ms. Rashida Akhtar is writ large on the face of the record. The
writ petitioners/respondents herein and the said Rashida Akhtar in fact
have had been unequally circumstanced, as such, could not have been
treated on a par, as unequals in law cannot be treated as equals.
15. For what has been observed, considered and analyzed herein above,
the appeal merits to be allowed. Accordingly, appeal is allowed, the
impugned Judgment and order dated 15th November, 2017 of the writ
court is set aside, as a consequence whereof the writ petition of the
writ petitioners/respondents herein is dismissed.