The unsuccessful plaintiffs filed the present second appeal
against the decree and judgment dated 07.11.2019 in A.S.No.212
of 2014 on the file of the Court of VI Additional District Judge,
Sompeta, confirming the decree and judgment dated 31.12.2001 in
O.S.No.105 of 1988 on the file of the Court of Junior Civil Judge,
2.     For the sake of convenience, parties to this second appeal
are referred to as they were arrayed in suit.
3.     Plaintiffs filed  the  suit seeking    permanent   injunction
restraining the defendants and their men from interfering with the
peaceful possession and enjoyment of the plaint schedule property.
Plaint schedule property is shown in schedule as, an extent of
Ac.0.22½     cents    in  S.No.232/2A/1/B;     Ac.1.37½    cents  in
S.No.232/2A/2/A; Ac.0.40 cents in S.No.232/2A/1/B; Ac.0.62½
cents in S.No.232/2A/1/C; Ac.0.82½ cents in S.No.232/2A/2/B;
Ac.0.25 cents in S.No.232/2A/1/C, totaling an extent of Ac.3.70
cents in Patta No.122 of Parasamba @ Kasibugga, Palasa Mandal,
4.     It was averred in the plaint that the plaint schedule
properties are joint family property of all the plaintiffs; that the
plaint schedule properties were purchased under registered sale
deeds dated 24.07.1971 and 24.11.1972 with the joint family
monies; that the plaintiffs are in exclusive possession and
enjoyment of the same; that the defendants without any manner of
right are trying to invade into the plaint schedule properties; that
the 2nd defendant worked as Tahsildar, Palasa and 3rd defendant is
the daughter of 2nd defendant; that defendants 1 and 2 in
connivance with each other created sham and nominal documents
and tried to trespass into the schedule properties and hence filed
the suit for the reliefs mentioned supra.
5.     Originally, suit was filed against defendants 1 to 3. Pending
suit 1st defendant died and his legal representatives were brought
on record as defendants 4 to 10.         Defendants 11 to 36 were
brought on record being the purchasers from 3rd defendant
pendent lite. Pending the suit, 2nd defendant also died and 3rd
defendant was recognized as his legal representative.
6.     The 7th defendant filed written statement and the same was
adopted by defendants 2 to 6 and 8. In the written statement, it
was contended interalia that the plaintiffs have nothing to do with
the schedule properties in S.No.232/7 in an extent of Ac.3.77
cents; that the 1st defendant sold Ac.2.25 cents of land to 3rd
defendant in the year 1972, which was allotted to him as per the
splitting up joint pattas by the then Deputy Tahsildar, Tekkali on
27.07.1973, and have been enjoying the land with absolute rights
by paying land revenue to the Government; that the authorities
also issued pattadar pass books in favour of defendants; that the
plaint schedule is incorrect and prayed the Court dismiss the suit.
7.     Subsequent purchasers of the schedule properties also filed
written statement. It was contended that total extent of land in
S.No.232 covered by Patta No.121 is Ac.28.02 cents, which is a
joint family property of 1st defendant, Karji Raghunadha Sahu,
Illatom Suryanarayana and Penta Jayalakshmi etc; that the 1st
defendant enjoyed the properties and later sold North-East portion
of an extent of Ac.2.25 cents covered by S.No.232 to 3rd defendant
under a registered sale deed dated 24.06.1972 and delivered
possession by demarcating the boundaries; that the 3rd defendant
applied for sub-division of the properties covered by sale deed
dated 24.06.1972; that sub-division was effected and survey
number was revised as S.No.232/P.1; that the vendors of the
plaintiffs had no title; that pending suit 3rd defendant sold plots to
defendants 11 to 36 and they are in peaceful possession and
enjoyment of the property and prayed the Court dismiss the suit.
8.     During the course of trial, on behalf of plaintiffs, 2nd plaintiff
was examined as P.W.1 and got examined P.W.2 and Exs.A-1 to
A-19 were marked. On behalf of defendants, 9th defendant was
examined as D.W.1 and got examined D.Ws.2 to 5 and Exs.B-1 to
B-65 were marked.
9.     Heard Sri Mohammed Gayasuddin, learned counsel for the
10.    Learned counsel for the appellants would contend that the
judgments of the Courts below vitiated in not granting injunction
basing on Exs.A-1 and A-3 sale deeds. He would further contend
that 3rd defendant executed sale deed in favour of defendants 11 to
36 pending suit and hence, they are hit by doctrine of lis pendens.
He would further contend that in the appeal an interlocutory
application was filed under Order 41 Rule 27 of CPC seeking to
receive additional documents and the first appellate Court ought to
have decided the said application before disposal of the appeal, but
not along with the appeal.       Hence, he prayed this Court to set
aside the decree and judgments of the Courts below.
11.    O.S.No.105 of 1988 was filed for perpetual injunction, basing
on registered sale deeds dated 24.07.1971 and 24.11.1972.
Defendants filed written statement and denied the title of plaintiffs.
Defendants also pleaded title to the property by virtue of Ex.B-2
registered sale deed dated 24.06.1972 executed by 1st defendant in
favour of 3rd defendant. Ex.B-3 pattadar pass book was also
marked, wherein the extent owned by 1st defendant, was shown as
Ac.3.75 cents. The other revenue records were also filed by
defendants to substantiate their contention that the 1st defendant
got the property of Ac.3.75 cents and he sold Ac.2.25 cents to 3rd
12.    Suit was filed on 22.07.1988. By the time, the suit was filed
basing on Exs.A-1 and A-3, Ex B-2 registered sale deed is in
existence. By filing written statement and pleading registered sale
deeds, defendants denied the title of plaintiffs as also title of
vendor of the plaintiff. In view of the said denial, since the denial is
not for the sake of denial, cloud over the property, the plaintiffs
ought to have filed suit for declaration instead of injunction
simplicitor. Though question of title would be incidentally go into
in a suit filed for injunction, when the adversary parties are
claiming the schedule property under registered documents the
plaintiffs ought to have filed suit for declaration. Complicated
question of title will not be determined in a suit for perpetual
injunction. Court would only concerned possession of the plaintiffs
on the date of filing of the suit.
13.    It is interested to note that a suggestion was put to D.W.3,
26th defendant in the suit, that he trespassed into their site under
the guise of Ex.B-60 sale deed dated 31.05.1993. If plaintiffs’ have
been in possession of the property prior to filing of the suit, the
plaintiffs would have been sought for amendment in view of the
subsequent developments pending the suit (alleged trespass). This
instance makes the things more than discernable that the
plaintiffs failed to prove their possession over the schedule
property either as on the date of filing of the suit.
14.    Plaintiffs relied upon Ex.A-5 true copy of Village Account,
wherein Figure Fasli 1400 was struck off by correcting fasli 1395
to 1408 without any signature by the attesting authority or the
staff of revenue department. It shows that faslis on Adangals were
interpolated and it raises doubt about its genuineness. Plaintiffs
also did not examine any person from the revenue department to
establish genuineness of Ex.A-5.       Exs.A-7 to A-11 are post litis
documents and hence, no importance be attached to those
documents. Ex.A-17 also contains corrections in respect of
signature of attestation authority. It is also settled law that entries
in revenue records do not confer title. A perusal of the documents
filed by the plaintiffs prima facie do not establish possession over
the schedule property on the day of filing of the suit, sine qua non,
in a suit filed for perpetual injunction.
15.    The Hon’ble Apex Court in Anathula Sudhakar Vs. P. Buchi
“(a)    Where a cloud is raised over plaintiff's title and he
does not have possession, a suit for declaration and
possession, with or without a consequential injunction, is the
remedy. Where the plaintiff's title is not in dispute or under a
cloud, but he is out of possession, he has to sue for
possession with a consequential injunction. Where there is
merely an interference with plaintiff's lawful possession or
threat of dispossession, it is sufficient to sue for an
injunction simpliciter.
(b)    As a suit for injunction simpliciter is concerned only
with possession, normally the issue of title will not be directly
and substantially in issue. The prayer for injunction will be
decided with reference to the finding on possession. But in
cases where de jure possession has to be established on the
basis of title to the property, as in the case of vacant sites,
the issue of title may directly and substantially arise for
consideration, as without a finding thereon, it will not be
possible to decide the issue of possession.
(c)    But a finding on title cannot be recorded in a suit for
injunction,   unless    there  are   necessary   pleadings   and
appropriate issue regarding title [either specific, or implied as
noticed in Annaimuthu Thevar (supra)]. Where the averments
regarding title are absent in a plaint and where there is no
issue relating to title, the court will not investigate or
examine or render a finding on a question of title, in a suit for
injunction. Even where there are necessary pleadings and
issue, if the matter involves complicated questions of fact and
law relating to title, the court will relegate the parties to the
remedy by way of comprehensive suit for declaration of title,
instead of deciding the issue in a suit for mere injunction.
(d)    Where there are necessary pleadings regarding title,
and appropriate issue relating to title on which parties lead
evidence, if the matter involved is simple and straight-
forward, the court may decide upon the issue regarding title,
even in a suit for injunction. But such cases, are the
exception to the normal rule that question of title will not be
decided in suits for injunction. But persons having clear title
and possession suing for injunction, should not be driven to
the costlier and more cumbersome remedy of a suit for
declaration, merely because some meddler vexatiously or
wrongfully makes a claim or tries to encroach upon his
property. The court should use its discretion carefully to
identify cases where it will enquire into title and cases where
it will refer plaintiff to a more comprehensive declaratory suit,
depending upon the facts of the case.”
16.    In view of the law declared by the Hon’ble Apex Court, the
suit filed and continued by appellants/plaintiffs for perpetual
injunction notwithstanding the denial of title by respondents may
not proper. The dismissal of the suit by the Trial Court and
confirmation of the judgment and decree by Appellate Court do not
call for any interference by this Hon’ble Court under Sec 100 CPC.
17.    After dismissal of the suit by the trial Court, the plaintiffs
filed appeal, wherein they filed I.A.No.264 of 2014 under Order 41
Rule 27 of CPC to receive the copy of FMB; I.A.No.265 of 2014 was
filed to receive Photostat copies of pattadar pass books issued in
favour of appellant Nos.1, 4 and 3, original notice issued by the
Mandal Revenue Officer, Palasa and office copy of letter addressed
to Mandal Revenue Officer, Palasa; I.A.No.126 of 2015 was filed
under Rule 128 of Civil Rules of Practice to send Exs.B-42 to B-47
in O.S.No.14 of 2014 on the file of VI Additional District Judge,
Sompeta; I.A.No.263 of 2014 was filed under Rule 129 of Civil
Rules of Practice to send for certain documents. In support of the
said interlocutory applications, the appellants relied on the order
passed in C.R.P.No.4177 of 2001. A perusal of the order passed in
C.R.P.No.4177 of 2001 manifest that it was filed questioning the
order of amendment of plaint schedule, but it has nothing to do
with the documents.            The first appellate Court considered the
scope of Order XLI Rule 27 CPC all the aspects and dismissed the
appeal vide judgment dated 07.11.2019.
18.      The Court below considered both oral and documentary
evidence came to conclusion that the suit for injunction simplicitor
in the facts of the case is not maintainable without seeking for
declaration of title. Apart from the same, in fact, trial court also
recorded finding about possession. The findings recorded by the
Courts below are based on evidence available on record. This Court
do not find question of law much less substantial questions of law
involved in the present second appeal under Sec 100 CPC. Hence
the appeal fails and is liable to dismissed, however, without costs.
19.      Accordingly, the second appeal is dismissed. No order as to
As a sequel, all the pending miscellaneous applications shall
stand closed.