Present:    Mr. PKS Phoolka, Advocate for the applicant.
None for the respondent.
The applicant wife Simranjit Kaur @ Simarn Kaur has
invoked jurisdiction of this Court under Section 24 of CPC against
respondent husband Bhinder Pal Singh seeking transfer of divorce
petition under Section 13 of Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 bearing
No.HMA/426/2020 titled as ‘Bhinder Pal Singh vs. Simranjit Kaur’
(Annexure P2) pending in the Court of learned District & Sessions
Judge, Sangrur to any other Court of competent jurisdiction at Mansa.
The only ground which is the main stake is the distance
between the two places which is around 55 kms and it is difficult for
the applicant wife to travel to attend the hearing and hence the relief in
Notice was given to the respondent who did not put in
Heard Mr. PKS Phoolka, Advocate for the applicant and
perused the records.
The sole ground for this plea of transfer is that the wife has
to traverse distance between the two places to attend the hearings. It
needs to be kept in mind that as is pleaded in the application and which
has remained unrebutted the respondent husband along with his
relatives have earlier attacked the relatives of the wife and due to the
injuries suffered Baljeet Singh uncle of the wife died regarding which
an FIR was got registered with Police Station Moonak and in which the
husband stands convicted and further that the husband is also facing
criminal charges of kidnapping for ransom pertaining to which FIR was
registered at Police Station City Tohana, District Fatehabad. Thus from
this, it is well elucidated that husband appears to be desperado and
certainly it would be a grave threat to the wife if she attends the hearing
at Sangrur especially when she has a small minor child to look after.
In view of these circumstances, it is evident that it is
certainly a case of undue hardship of exceptional nature necessitating
intervention by this Court in allowing the present application.
Accordingly, the petition bearing No.HMA/426/2020 titled as ‘Bhinder
Pal Singh vs. Simranjit Kaur’ (Annexure P2) under Section 13 of
Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 pending in the Court of learned District &
TA No.549 of 2020                                                  3
Sessions Judge, Sangrur is ordered to be transferred to the District
Judge, Mansa who may deal with the same himself or entrust it to a
Court of competent jurisdiction at Mansa.
Whether speaking/reasoned                Yes/No
Whether reportable                       Yes/No