Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 21859 of 2021
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Prakhar Saran Srivastava,Sr. Advocate
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Anurag Pathak,Harshit Pathak
The present application has been preferred with prayer to allow
this application and quash the orders dated 29.09.2021 and 11.10.2021
passed by Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Room No.1, Bareilly
in Case No.1091 of 2021 (State Vs. Sukhbir & another) arising out of
Case Crime No.463 of 2017, under Sections 201 and 306 I.P.C.,
Police Station Bhojipura, District Bareilly with further prayer to stay
the entire proceeding of aforesaid case.
2.     Brief facts of the case are that F.I.R. under Section 306 I.P.C. in
Case Crime No.463 of 2017, Police Station Bhojipura, District
Bareilly was lodged by the informant. As per the F.I.R. it is narrated
that deceased came to Shri Ram Murti Smarak Medical College on
03.09.2017 but she died in mysterious condition on 06.09.2017 in the
hostel. In the F.I.R. it has been further mentioned that out of result of
ragging she died in the hostel.
3.     The case was investigated and during investigation name of the
applicant came into light on the statement of room-mate of the
deceased, namely, Nupur and Harshita who were friends of deceased
Ananya and charge sheet was filed and summons were issued on
4.     On the request of informant, CBCID enquiry was carried and
closure report was filed on 11.02.2020 by which the applicant was
5.     The Magistrate issued notice to informant upon closure report
6.     The applicant applied for anticipatory bail by filing Criminal
Misc. Anticipatory Bail Application U/S 438 Cr.P.C. No.7616 of 2020
which was allowed vide order dated 23.11.2020 and while granting
anticipatory bail the Court directed the trial court to pass an order
upon the contradictory reports filed by two investigating agencies
within two months from the date of resumption of the regular
functioning of the Court.
7.     In the meantime, the informant filed protest petition against the
closure report on 25.11.2020 against which reply was filed by the
applicant. Since, the applicant was granted anticipatory bail, he
preferred discharge application before the Magistrate on 15.12.2020.
The applicant filed application for withdrawal of the application for
discharge on 18.01.2021 on the ground that discharge application
would not be maintainable before the Session Court for the offence
under Section 306 I.P.C. and he further requested in the said
application that the case may be committed under Section 209 Cr.P.C.
since the case was exclusively triable by Session Court.
8.     The Magistrate dismissed the closure report and proceeded on
the discharge application on merit and pass the impugned order by
rejecting the application for discharge.
9.     In the meantime, non-bailable warrant was issued against the
applicant on 11.10.2021, therefore, both orders i.e. rejecting the
discharge application dated 29.09.2021 and the order for non-bailable
warrant had been challenged by the applicant by filing the present
10.    Heard Sri Prakhar Saran Srivastava, learned counsel for the
applicant, Sri Anurag Pathak, learned counsel for opposite party no.2
and learned A.G.A. for the State as well as perused the record.
11.    Learned counsel for the applicant has made following
Learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that the present
controversy involves offence under Section 306 I.P.C. which is
exclusively triable by Session Court. In view of the aforesaid fact, it is
legally not sustainable to take decision on the discharge application by
the Magistrate, rather the orders will have been passed by the Session
Learned counsel for the applicant has invited attention of this
Court towards the decisions of Vinay Tyagi Vs. Irshad Ali alias
Deepak and others, (2013) 5 SCC 762, Prateek Gupta Vs. State of U.P.
and others passed in Application U/S 482 No.24770 of 2019 and
Umesh Yadav Vs. State of U.P. and another, 2016 ADJ Online 0012.
Learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that as per the
dictum of Vinay Tyagi (supra), it has been observed that on two
contradictory reports by the same Investigating Agencies, the trial
court has three options, firstly, it may accept the application of
accused for discharge; secondly, it may direct that the trial court may
proceed further in accordance with law; and thirdly, if it is dissatisfied
on any important aspect of investigation already conducted and in its
considered opinion, it is just, proper and necessary in the interest of
justice to direct “further investigation” it may do so.
It has been further argued by learned counsel for the applicant
that the discharge application should be entertained by trial court thus,
trial court is Session Court in the present matter, whereas, the
impugned order has been passed by the Magistrate who has no
It has been further submitted by learned counsel for the
applicant that after analysing the judgment of Umesh Yadav, Prateek
Gupta (supra), it is worth to be mentioned that the Magistrate was
obliged to commit the matter to Court of Session. Since, the
Magistrate had no jurisdiction to pass the order, the order is not
sustainable because the Magistrate exceeded his jurisdiction while
passing this order.
Learned counsel for the applicant has further submitted that the
Magistrate should have commit the case to the Court of Session so
that the discharge application could have been considered by the
competent court i.e. Session Court.
12.    Sri Anurag Pathak, learned counsel for opposite party no.2 has
opposed the submissions advanced by learned counsel for the
applicant and has submitted that the impugned order dated 29.09.2021
has been passed for the reason that the direction was given by the
High Court to pass appropriate order on the closure report as well as
the charge sheet. He has further submitted that there is no infirmity or
illegality in the order passed by the court below.
13.    Learned A.G.A. has also supported the argument advanced by
learned counsel for opposite party no.2.
14.    Before entering into the present controversy, the provision of
Section 209 Cr.P.C. is relevant to be looked into, which is reads as
“209. Commitment of case to Court of Session when offence
is triable exclusively by it.-- When in a case instituted on a
police report or otherwise, the accused appears or is brought
before the Magistrate and it appears to the Magistrate that the
offence is triable exclusively by the Court of Session, he
[(a) commit, after complying with the provisions of section
207 or section 208, as the case may be, the case to the Court
of Session, and subject to the provisions of this Code relating
to bail, remand the accused to custody until such commitment
(b) subject to the provisions of this Code relating to bail,
remand the accused to custody during, and until the
conclusion of, the trial;
(c)     send to that Court the record of the case and the
documents and articles, if any, which are to be produced in
(d) notify the Public Prosecutor of the commitment of the
case to the Court of Session.”
15.    The said provision of Section 209 Cr.P.C. is worth to be seen
wherein it is provided that offence triable by Court of Session should
be committed by the Magistrate before whom the accused appears or
brought before.
16.    The issue in question cropped up before Hon’ble the Supreme
Court in the case of Vinay Tyagi (supra). Paragraph nos.42 and 61 of
the said judgment are quoted below:-
“42. Both these reports have to be read conjointly and it
is the cumulative effect of the reports and the documents
annexed thereto to which the Court would be expected to
apply its mind to determine whether there exist grounds
to presume that the accused has committed the offence. If
the answer is in the negative, on the basis of these
reports, the Court shall discharge an accused in
compliance with the provisions of Section 227 of the
61. In our considered view, the trial court has to consider
the entire record, including both the Delhi Police report
filed under Section 173(2) of the Code as well as the
Closure Report filed by the CBI and the documents filed
along with these reports. It appears, the trial court may
have three options, firstly, it may accept the application
of accused for discharge; secondly, it may direct that the
trial may proceed further in accordance with law; and
thirdly, if it is dissatisfied on any important aspect of
investigation already conducted and in its considered
opinion, it is just, proper and necessary in the interest of
justice to direct ‘further investigation’, it may do so.”
17.     In view of the ratio decided in paragraph no.61, it is apparently
clear that court has observed that the trial court has got three options:
firstly, it may accept the application of accused for discharge;
secondly, it may direct that the trial court may proceed further in
accordance with law; and thirdly, if it is dissatisfied on any important
aspect of investigation already conducted and in its considered
opinion, it is just, proper and necessary in the interest of justice to
direct “further investigation” it may do so.
18.     The case of Prateek Gupta (supra) is also relevant to be looked
into, which is mere process in the present controversy, wherein, it is
provided that an offence cognizable by Session Court, the Magistrate
cannot prove the matter and cannot discharge the accused. Paragraph
No.22 of the said judgment is quoted below:-
“22. The principle of law laid down by the Apex Court in
case of Sanjay Gandhi Vs. Union of India (supra) was
further followed with approval in case of Ajay Kumar
Parmar (supra), in which Apex Court held that when an
offence is cognizable by the Sessions Court, the
Magistrate cannot probe into the matter and discharge the
accused. It was further held that it is not permissible for
Magistrate to do so, even after considering the evidence
on record, as he has no jurisdiction to probe or look into
the matter at all. His concern should be to see what
provisions of the penal statute have been mentioned and
in case an offence triable by the Court of Session has
been mentioned, the Magistrate must commit the case to
the Court of Session and do nothing else.”
19.     In the case of Umesh Yadav (supra), the court has observed that
if the case is exclusively triable by Session, the Magistrate has no
option but to commit the case to Court of Session and the Court of
Session will proceed in accordance with law. Paragraph No.17 of the
said judgment is quoted below:-
“17. On the basis of above discussion and the provisions
of Code of Criminal Procedure it is clear that if the
Magistrate receives a charge-sheet and take cognizance
of offence, and thereafter he receives any such report
under section 173(8) CrPC, in that case he has to study
such report and other documents and then proceed in
accordance with provisions of section 227 and 228 CrPC.
In case when offence in charge-sheet appears to be one
triable exclusively by the court of sessions, in such case
Magistrate had no option but to commit the case to court
of sessions, which will have to proceed in accordance
with provisions of section 227 or 228 CrPC.”
20.     In view of Section 209 Cr.P.C., there is no ambiguity that who
is trial court. In the present case, since the offence is triable by Session
Court, the trial court is Session Court. While, hearing the application
of discharge, the Magistrate committed error by assuming the
jurisdiction of Session Court. The Session Court has to apply its mind
whether the applicant is liable to be discharged or whether application
is liable to be rejected. The Magisterial Court committed error by
deciding the case itself.
21.    The High Court while granting anticipatory bail vide order
dated 23.11.2020, made observation that the trial court is expected to
pass appropriate order on the closure report within two months as per
the judgment of Apex Court in the case of Vinay Tyagi (supra). The
Magistrate overlooked the observation made by the High Court and
resumed the jurisdiction of Session Court while taking decision on the
application for discharge. It was incumbent upon the Magistrate to
commit the case to the Court of Session but in spite of doing so he
heard the application for discharge which was not in his domain. The
objection taken by the applicant was not considered by the Magistrate
and he passed the order ignoring the statutory provision of judgment
of Supreme Court without applying its mind.
22.    In view of the aforesaid factual and legal backdrop, I am of the
opinion that the impugned orders dated 29.09.2021 and 11.10.2021
passed by Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Room No.1, Bareilly
in Case No.1091 of 2021 (State Vs. Sukhbir & another) arising out of
Case Crime No.463 of 2017, under Sections 201 and 306 I.P.C.,
Police Station Bhojipura, District Bareilly are not sustainable in the
eyes of law, therefore, I set aside the order with following directions:-
will commit the case within one and half month from today to the
Court of Session.
(ii)   The Court of Session will pass appropriate order on application
for discharge of the applicant within two months from date of
committal order accordance with law after affording opportunity of
hearing to the parties.
23.   The present application is allowed with the above directions.
24.   It is, however, made clear that the finding recorded by this
Court will not influence the court below while taking decision in the
case.