This is an application for condonation of delay of 28 days in re-
filing the present appeal. The application is supported by an affidavit of
Heard. For the reasons, mentioned in the application, the same
is allowed and the delay of 28 days in re-filing the appeal is condoned.
This is an application for placing on record the Civil Writ
Petition, written statement, annexures and other documents and for
exemption from filing the certified copies of the said documents. The
application is supported by an affidavit of applicant-appellant No.1.
Heard. For the reasons, mentioned in the application, the same
is allowed and the documents mentioned therein are taken on record.
The present Letters Patent Appeal assails the judgment dated
20.04.2022, passed by the learned Single Judge vide which the writ petition
filed by the parents was dismissed.
The appellants are under-graduate students of Rajiv Gandhi
National University of Law, Patiala-respondent No.2 (some of them have
graduated during the pendency of the present litigation). Regular classes
were suspended w.e.f. 14.03.2020 on account of the COVID-19 Pandemic.
The students were asked to vacate the hostel premises and online classes
commenced. Since the hostel premises had been vacated and academic
activities were going on in a restricted manner and that too in the online
mode, the students submitted a representation on 18.05.2020 for
reduction/waiver of fee under various heads. A subsequent representation
dated 25.05.2020 with a similar request was also submitted to the Dean
Students Welfare of the University. The matter was taken up by the Finance
Committee. In its meeting held on 20.06.2020, the Finance Committee took
a decision that the annual increase of Rs.5,000/- in the tuition fee for the
academic year 2020-21 would be waived off and that mess charges would
not be taken till the operations of the mess resumed.
Vide notice dated 27.06.2020, the students were called upon to
deposit the fee for the next semester in accordance with the aforesaid
Against the said notice, the students preferred another
representation dated 03.07.2020 and also preferred a complaint to the
National Human Rights Commission. Legal remedies by way of a legal
notice dated 05.07.2020 were also initiated but having failed to get any
relief, the present appellants preferred a writ petition.
Respondent No.2 opposed the writ petition by way of a detailed
written statement whereas respondent No.1-State of Punjab preferred a short
Respondent No.2 took up several grounds including the writ
petition having been filed only by a handful of students, and, therefore,
lacking sufficient representative character; the University being a creation
of statute was bound to function in accordance with its provisions; the fee
structure having been approved by the relevant statutory bodies etc. The
amount being spent by the University on various facilities being provided to
the students was also detailed. It was also stated that the students had
locked their rooms while leaving the hostel and, therefore, the possession
remained with them as a result of which the students were bound to pay the
hostel rent.     Respondent No.2-University defended the decision dated
20.06.2020 taken by the Finance Committee which, according to respondent
No.2 was the best possible relief that could have been granted to the
students. The proposed facilities for the students were also detailed in the
written statement. It was also averred that the appellants have not placed on
record any proof that their parents were undergoing any financial hardship
and, therefore, the demand for additional fee reduction was unreasonable.
In the rejoinder, the averments made in the written statement
were denied and those made in the writ petition were reiterated.
Vide the impugned judgment dated 20.04.2022, the learned
Single Bench dismissed the writ petition while holding that the decision
taken by the Finance Committee in the notice dated 27.06.2020 was not
perverse, unreasonable or arbitrary. The learned Single Bench, however,
observed that respondent No.2 would sympathetically consider the
individual cases for waiver of late fee charges on the basis of material
produced before it.       Respondent No.1 was also directed to objectively
consider the release of arrears pertaining to the year 2019-20.
Aggrieved by the said judgment, the present Letters Patent
Appeal has been preferred.
On 29.08.2022, the following order was passed:-
“Learned senior counsel for the appellants
has produced a copy of the communication dated 2nd
August, 2022, issued by the University Grants
Commission to the Vice-Chancellors and Principals of
various Universities/colleges/institution, wherein it has
been mentioned that several references have been
received from students that they have not been given the
benefit of non-use of hostel and mess services during
the Covid-19 pandemic period.
we are only inclined to interfere on the limited aspect of
payment of deduction for charging of rent as far as the
hostels are concerned for the academic sessions 2020-
21. The reasoning which has been assigned by the
Senior Counsel for the appellants for asserting that the
amount of rent which has been charged from the
students cannot be more than what has been charged
from the commercial establishment tenants/lessee. Even
if taking the stand of the respondent-University to be
correct that the appellants were in possession of their
respective rooms during this period so were the
contractors running their establishments in the
University. The contractor was only to supply the food
etc. to the students. He has gone to the extent of saying
that the appellants would be satisfied if 50% of the rent
which is being charged on them be charged instead of
counsel for the appellants to be just and reasonable.
Counsel for the respondent-University to
seeks instructions from the authorities of the University
and to file an affidavit in this regard.
the parties to workout the details as there is some
differences on this aspect.”
In pursuance of the aforesaid order, respondent No.2 filed an
affidavit again giving the details with regard to the fee structure and the
decision taken by respondent No.2 and the Finance Committee.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused
the record.
Learned Senior Counsel representing the appellants has stated
that in pursuance to the undertaking given by learned counsel for
respondent No.2 on 29.08.2022, a lengthy affidavit has been filed by
respondent No.2 again giving all the intricate details with regard to the
expenses, fee schedule etc. whereas, the affidavit should have been filed in
terms of the order dated 29.08.2022.           Learned Senior counsel for the
appellant has further submitted that it is highly unfair that only 25% charges
have been charged from the Contractors of mess, shops and canteens
whereas full rent has been charged from the students on the flimsy ground
that the possession of the rooms was with the students whereas in the
meeting held on 19.06.2020, under Item No.7, it was observed that the
shops etc. had been retained by such contractors. Learned counsel has
submitted that the students were in possession of the rooms not out of
choice but out of compulsion as it was difficult for anyone to return to the
premises on account of the pandemic. Learned counsel has reiterated that if
50% of the hostel charges are waived off, it would be a big relief for the
students. Learned counsel has further submitted that the learned Single
Bench has wrongly observed that the University has already given a
reduction of 17.8% whereas 15% of Rs.20,06,000/- would come to
Rs.30,000/-. Learned counsel has also referred to the judgment of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Indian School, Jodhpur and Anr. vs. State of Rajasthan
On the other hand, learned counsel representing respondent
No.2 has submitted that the hostel rent is being charged by the University as
a part of the composite fee and, therefore, it would not be possible to
segregate the fee under different heads. He has further contended that out
of Rs.20,06,000/-, Rs.20,000/- is refundable security and, therefore, the
effective fee would be Rs.1,86,000/- out of which a rebate of Rs.14,782/-
has already been given. Further Rs.5,000/- increase has not been charged
and in addition thereto to Rs.3600/- per student has also been refunded. It
has been contended that the total amount would, therefore, come to
Rs.23,382/- per student which comes to 12.83% of Rs.1,86,000/-. Learned
counsel has further submitted that though the classes had been suspended
and the students had left the hostel, the University incurred huge
expenditure in maintaining the hostel and other areas of the campus, the
details of which have been given in the pleadings before the learned Single
Bench and before this Court as also in the affidavit filed now. Learned
counsel for respondent No.2 has also contended that the appellants cannot
equate the issue of hostel rent with that of canteens, shops etc. because the
possession of the canteens, shops etc. was with the University, as all of them
were lying closed when the pandemic was going on but the possession of
the hostel rooms was with the students. Learned counsel has submitted that
on account of the possession of the hostel rooms having remained with the
students, they could not be maintained and their condition deteriorated on
account of dampness etc. Learned counsel has submitted that respondent
No.2 had to incur considerable expenditure on getting the hostel rooms and
hostel buildings repaired. It has also been argued that the administration
wanted to set up a COVID-19 isolation centre in the hostel but the same
could not be done as the possession of the rooms was with the students.
Learned counsel for respondent No.2 has contended that there is no error in
the judgment passed by the learned Single Bench and the same, therefore,
deserves to be upheld.
We have considered the arguments advanced by learned
counsel for the parties and have gone through the judgment of the learned
Single Bench. The other documents on record including the pleadings of
the parties and the affidavit now filed by respondent No.2 have also been
perused and considered.
It is true that this Court could not be in a position to determine
intricate issues with regard to the fee charged by respondent No.2 under
various heads or the fee which should have been or could have been charged
from the students including the appellants.          It was rightly held by the
learned Single Bench that such disputes would be decided by the relevant
Regulatory Authority on the basis of the material produced before it. Infact
learned Senior counsel representing the appellants had restricted his claim
to hostel rent only while arguing the case on 29.08.2022 and, therefore, the
other issues need not be gone into. It is also not in dispute that the annual
increase of Rs.5,000/- has been waived off by respondent No.2 and an
additional amount of Rs.14,782/- has been refunded to every student. It has
rightly been observed by the learned Single Bench that there is no denial to
these facts by the appellants. However, the only thing which is weighing in
the mind of this Court is that respondent No.2 charged only 25% of the rent
from the contractors of mess, canteens, shops etc., and there is absolutely no
justification in charging the entire hostel rent from the students. Those were
tough times for everyone. The students were out of the hostel rooms not out
of choice but out of compulsion. Their belongings were left in the rooms.
There was panic and fear all around. Those who did not have secure jobs
were suddenly faced with loss of income.          While people were trying to
make their two ends meet, the burden of fee etc. was putting them under
additional pressure. The institutions also suffered because they had to
maintain huge buildings, staff etc. If one weighs all these facts, there does
not appear to be any justification for charging the entire hostel rent from the
students especially when only 25% of the rent had been charged from the
contractors of mess, shops, canteens etc. The argument that respondent
No.2 could not offer the hostel for COVID isolation center is devoid of
merit because during the course of arguments on 09.11.2022, a question was
put to learned counsel for respondent No.2 as to whether respondent No.2
would have had some financial benefit if COVID isolation centre had been
set up in the hostel and learned counsel for respondent No.2 conceded that
there would be no financial benefit as the Government would not have paid
anything for the same. That being so, the non-opening of COVID isolation
centre in the hostel would not affect the merits of the issue in hand. We are,
therefore, of the considered opinion that respondent No.2 is not justified in
charging the full hostel rent from the students for the period in question.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, it is directed that in
addition to the benefit that has already been given to the students,
respondent No.2 would charge only 50% of the hostel rent from the students
for the period in question and would refund the remaining amount to the
students (if so deposited) within a period of four weeks from today. Since
respondent No.2 would still be left with 50% of the hostel rent, the same, in
our considered opinion, would be sufficient for the expenses which
respondent No.2 may have incurred on the repair and maintenance of the
hostel rooms, post the pandemic. This direction would be in consonance
with the directions issued by the Hon'ble Apex Court in para No.117 (i) &
(iii) of the Indian School, Jodhpur's case (supra).
The appeal is accordingly disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
Whether speaking/reasoned                 Yes/No