Dated this the 9th day of December, 2022
This is an appeal filed under Section 14A of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act, (hereinafter referred to as “the SC/ST (POA)
Act, for convenience”) by the appellant, who is the accused
in crime No.596 of 2022 of Valappad Police Station,
registered alleging commission offence punishable under
Sections 3(1)(s) of the SC/ST (POA) Act, challenging order
dated 23.09.2022 in Crl.M.P.No.2881/2022 passed by the
Special Judge under the SC/ST (POA) Act, Thrissur.
2.   Adv.R.Rohith       appeared     for   the   defacto
complainant, when the defacto complainant was served with
notice as mandated under Section 15A(3) of the SC/ST
3.   Heard the learned counsel for the appellant, the
learned counsel for the defacto complainant, and the
4.   The precise allegation of the prosecution, as could
be read out from the FIS given by the defacto complainant
before the Police, is that, on 30.08.2022, at about 10.00 am,
when the defacto complainant herein reached Valappad
Kothakulam to remit the interest towards the gold loan
availed by him, the accused herein, who does not belong to
the Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes community
and an employee of the Bank, called the caste name of the
defacto complainant, who belongs to the Scheduled Castes
community, and thereby abused him by calling his caste
name within the public view. This is the base on which the
prosecution alleges the commission of offence under
Section 3(1)(s) of the SC/ST (POA) Act by the appellant.
5.  While challenging the order of the Special Judge,
disallowing pre-arrest bail, the learned counsel for the
appellant argued at length to convince this Court regarding
filing of sexual harassment complaint by the accused
against one V.R.Babu, who is the Secretary of the Valappad
Co-operative Bank, which led to registration of crime
No.350/2022, alleging that the above said V.R.Babu
committed offences under Section 354A(1)(i) and 354A(1)
and (2) of IPC. Annexure II is the copy of FIR and
Annexure I is the copy of FIS dated 14.05.2022 in the above
crime. It is submitted by the learned counsel for the
appellant that in the said crime, offence under Section
376(C)a also was subsequently incorporated. It is argued by
the learned counsel for the appellant further that since
V.R.Babu continuously demanded sexual favour from the
appellant herein and he made so many attempts in this
regard, the appellant herein was forced to lodge complaint
as Annexure II, which led to the registration of Annexure I
FIR. It was thereafter, the Secretary of the Bank, who is
having control over the entire affairs of the Bank with the
assistance and connivance of the other employees,
repeatedly compelling the appellant to withdraw the case
and the present case is one foisted with an ulterior motives
to achieve the said goal. He had read out the complaint filed
by the accused before the Secretary as well as the Police,
which are produced as Annexure VIII and Annexure IX on
the date of alleged occurrence of this crime itself positing
these facts.
6.    The learned counsel for the appellant also
submitted that as per Annexure III, the Local Complaints
Committee, Thrissur, on the application of the appellant with
regard to the incident narrated in Annexure II FIS, conducted
enquiry and finally recommended removal of V.R.Babu from
the post of Secretary till the culmination of the criminal case.
Further, it was found by the Committee that the Secretary
treated the appellant cruelly, mentally and in connection with
her employment. Further, the Secretary made serious false
and unwarranted allegations of financial scams against the
appellant. He also pointed out that the defacto complainant
herein is none other than the husband of Smt.Remadevi, an
employee of the said Society and the same would go to
show the falsity of the present complaint.
7.   Whereas, the learned counsel for the defacto
complainant confined his argument to the allegation in the
FIS. He urged that the allegation in the FIS would constitute,
prima facie, abuse against the defacto complainant by
calling his caste name within public view and thereby an
offence punishable under Section 3(1)(s) of the SC/ST
(POA) Act. According to the learned counsel for the defacto
complainant, in a case involving offence/offences under the
SC/ST (POA) Act, when         there is prima facie case, the
statutory bar in granting anticipatory bail under Section
Section 18 and 18A of the SC/ST (POA) Act would apply.
But he did not go into the previous incidents narrated by the
learned counsel for the appellant. He also not denied the
stature of the defacto complainant as the husband of
Smt.Remadevi, an employee of the Bank.
8.   The learned counsel for the defacto complainant
also argued that as far as Annexure III report is concerned,
V.R.Babu had filed a writ petition before this Court and as
per the judgment in the writ petition, after setting aside the
report, another internal committee was directed to enquire
into the complaint.
9.   The learned Public Prosecutor also supported the
order of the Special Judge pointing out the fact that the
allegations in the FIS would make a prima facie case.
10. Although there is bar under Section 18 and 18A of
the SC/ST (POA) Act to grant anticipatory bail, it has been
settled by the Apex Court in the decision reported in
727) Prathvi Raj Chauhan v. Union of India (UOI) and
Ors that even after incorporation of S.18A of the SC/ST
(POA) Act, in cases where there is no prima facie case,
grant of anticipatory bail is not specifically barred. It is the
settled law that when there is prima facie case, grant of
anticipatory bail is specifically barred.
11. Before analysing the question as to whether, a
prima facie case is made out in this matter, it is necessary to
address the tendency of false implication of innocent
persons, who do not belong to Scheduled Caste or
Scheduled Tribe community, by misusing the provisions of
the SC/ST (POA) Act. There is no quarrel that stringent
provisions are incorporated in the SC/ST (POA) Act to arrest
the menace of atrocities against members of the Scheduled
Caste and Scheduled Tribes community by exploiting their
backwardness. Since         the Parliament     found that the
provisions of earlier SC/ST (POA) Act were not sufficient to
meet the ends of justice, the Act was amended. After the
amendment of the SC/ST (POA) Act, more stringent
provisions have been incorporated in SC/ST (POA) Act with
mandatory right of hearing to the defacto complainant at
every stages of the court proceedings, as provided under
Section 15A(3) of the SCT/ST (POA) Act. Thus, atrocities
against Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe community, in
fact, is intended to be curtailed by the stringent provisions of
SC/ST        (POA)     Act.    Therefore,     when      genuine
complaint/complaints at the instance of the Schedule Caste
or   Scheduled     Tribe    members,    which    would    attract
offence/offences incorporated under the SC/ST (POA) Act, if
made, the same shall be viewed seriously and appropriate
legal action shall go on, to attend the grievances of the
complaint/complaints. At the same time, the courts should
have a duty to rule out the possibilities of false implication of
innocent persons as accused, with a view to achieve ulterior
motives of the complaints, with threat of arrest and detention
of the accused in custody, because of the stringent
provisions in the SC/ST (POA) Act in the matter of grant of
anticipatory bail. It is shocking, rather a mind blowing fact
that many innocent persons are victims of false implication
under the SC/ST (POA) Act. Therefore, it is the need of the
hour for the courts to segregate the grain from the chaff by
analysing the genesis of the case, the antecedents prior to
registration of the crime, with reference to existence of
animosity between the complainant and the accused, with
particular  attention,    vis-a-vis previous     disputes/cases/
complaints, etc. while considering the question of prima
facie case, when considering plea for pre-arrest bail. In
cases, where there are materials to show that the accused
and the complainant are in inimical terms, and there are
previous    litigation  between     them     or their men    or
representatives and in retaliation or as a sequel to the same,
the allegations in the complaint constituting offence/offences
under the SC/ST (POA) Act are made, the same may be
the reasons to doubt the case prima facie. The instances
are not exhaustive. Therefore, evaluation of the above facts
would help the court while addressing the question of prima
facie case, at the pre-arrest bail stage. On evaluation of the
genesis of the case within the ambit of the above pari
materia, if the court finds something to see the possibility of
false implication, in such cases, the court could very well
hold that prima facie, the prosecution allegations could not
be believed for the purpose of denying anticipatory bail, after
leaving the question as to commission of offence/offences
for a detailed and fair investigation by the Investigating
Officer. Indubitably, such a course of action is necessary to
rule out the possibility of false implication.
12. Coming to the facts of the case, prima facie, it
could be seen that the defacto complainant, in this case, is
none other than the husband of Smt.Remadevi, an
employee     of   the   Co-operative   Bank,    wherein   the
appellant/accused also has been working. Against the
Secretary of the Co-operative Bank, alleging sexual assault,
the appellant filed a criminal case as Annexure I and II and
the same are on investigation. Further, though Annexure III
has been set aside by this Court, as submitted by the
learned counsel for the defacto complainant (no such order
placed before this Court) then also, there was direction as
per the submission of the learned counsel for the defacto
complainant to have an internal enquiry in this regard. Thus,
it appears that the present crime was registered during the
currency of the ‘internal inquiry’ at the instance of the
husband of an employee of the Bank. It is to be noted that
appellant herein is a person, who lodged complaint against
the Secretary of the Bank, raising serious allegations of
sexual    harassment.   Further,    she   also   made   many
complaints in this regard to various authorities as could be
discernible from Annexure IV to Annexure XII. In such a
case, the contention raised by the appellant to the effect
that, the present complaint at the instance of the husband of
an employee of the Bank is with intention to falsely implicate
the appellant in serious offence under the SC/ST (POA) Act
could not be ruled out. In such a case, the case advanced
by the defacto complainant is prima facie doubtful.
However, investigation can go on in a fair manner to unearth
the truth of the allegations and I leave the same to the
domain of Investigating Officer, in tact and the observations
made in this judgment are confined, for the purpose of
considering pre-arrest bail plea.
13. In view of the foregoing decisions, I am of the
view that the order impugned is liable to be set aside and
pre-arrest bail is liable to be granted to the appellant on
In the result, the order impugned stands set aside and
the appeal stands allowed. The appellant is granted pre-
arrest bail on the following conditions:
1.   The     appellant/accused      shall   surrender
before the Investigating Officer within ten
days from today and on such surrender, the
Investigating    Officer    can   question   the
accused/appellant. In the event of her arrest,
the Investigating Officer shall produce the
accused/appellant before the Special Court
on the date of surrender itself.
2.   On such production, Special Court shall
release the appellant/accused on bail, on
executing bond for Rs.30,000/- (Rupees
Thirty thousand) each, by himself and by two
sureties, each for the like sum to the
satisfaction of the Special Judge.
3.   The appellant/accused shall co-operate with
investigation and shall be made available for
interrogation    and    for   the   purpose    of
investigation, as and when the Investigating
Officer is directs so.
4.  The appellant / accused, shall not, intimidate
the   witnesses      or  interfere   with  the
investigation in any manner.