Present:     Mr. Ankur Bansal, Advocate for the petitioner.
Prayer in this petition filed under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure is for quashing of FIR No.98, dated 25.07.2020,
registered under Section 13-A of the Public Gambling Act, 1867
(hereinafter referred as 'the Act'), registered at Police Station Division No.2,
Jalandhar, Annexure P-1, charge-sheet dated 06.08.2020, Annexure P-3,
order dated 18.04.2022, Annexure P-5 passed by the trial Court dismissing
an application filed for discharge, framing of charge dated 18.04.2022,
Annexure P-6 and charge-sheet dated 18.04.2022, Annexure P-7.
Pithily put, the prosecution version is that during a private
vehicle patrolling to check bad elements, the ASI who was present at the
workshop chowk received a secret information that the petitioner, a resident
of BSF Colony, Jalandhar, has been doing betting on cricket matches from
the last few years and has kept heavy amount earned from the same. On that
day also he was doing betting on the cricket test match between West Indies
and England while sitting at his house, who can be nabbed with laptop,
mobile phone and with heavy amount of Indian currency. The said ASI with
police officials raided the house of the petitioner at 9.40 pm on 25.7.2020
and recovered an amount of Rs.1,23,50,000/- alleged to be gambling money
from his possession alongwith laptop and mobile phone. The amount
recovered was deposited with the Income Tax Department. Final report in
the case was presented on 30.7.2020.
Learned counsel submitted that the application for discharge
was dismissed by the trial Court vide order dated 18.04.2022 on the ground
that at the time of framing of the charges only prima facie case is to be seen.
Thereafter, the charges against the petitioner were framed vide order dated
18.4.2022, Annexure P-7, under Section 13-A of The Public Gambling Act
(hereinafter referred to as “The Act”).
Learned counsel for the petitioner opened up his arguments by
making a reference to Schedule 2 of the Cr.P.C. wherein the classification
of the offences against other laws in the Cr.P.C., are mentioned, as per
which the offences punishable with imprisonment for less than 3 years are
non-cognizable, bailable and triable by Magistrate.
Learned counsel in order to further substantiate his stance of
challenge drew the attention of this Court to Sub Section 2 of Section 155
Cr.P.C. which reads thus:-
“155. Information as to non- cognizable cases and
investigation of such cases.
(1)When information is given to an officer in charge of a
police station of the commission within the limits of such
station of a non- cognizable offence, he shall enter or
cause to be entered the substance of the information in a
book to be kept by such officer in such form as the State
Government may prescribe in this behalf, and refer the
informant to the Magistrate.
(2)No police officer shall investigate a non- cognizable
case without the order of a Magistrate having power to
try such case or commit the case for trial.”
Learned counsel for the petitioner next contended that the
offence punishable under Section 13-A of the Act under which the FIR was
lodged and charges had been framed is non-cognizable as the prescribed
imprisonment for it is upto one month or fine of Rs.50/-. Reference to the
Section was made, which reads thus:-
“13. Gaming and setting birds and animals to fight in
public streets.—A police officer may apprehend without
warrant— any person found playing for money or other
valuable thing, with cards, dice, counters or other
instruments of gaming, used in playing any game not
being a game of mere skill, in any public street, place or
thoroughfare situated within the limits aforesaid, or any
person setting any birds or animals to fight in any public
street, place or thoroughfare situated within the limits
aforesaid, or any person there present aiding and abetting
such public fighting of birds and animals. Such person
when apprehended shall be brought without delay before
a Magistrate, and shall be liable to a fine not exceeding
fifty rupees, or to imprisonment, either simple or
rigorous, for any term not exceeding one calendar month;
Destruction of instruments of gaming found in public
streets.—Any such police officer may seize all
instruments of gaming found in such public place or on
the person of those whom he shall so arrest, and the
Magistrate may, on conviction of the offender, order
such instruments to be forthwith destroyed.
STATE AMENDMENTS (Assam)—In section 13, for
the words “fifty rupees”, substitute the words “one
hundred rupees”. [Assam Act 18 of 1970, sec. 6 (w.e.f.
19-12-1970)]. Himachal Pradesh.—In section 13, same
as that of Punjab. [Himachal Pradesh Act 30 of 1976,
sec. 7 (w.e.f. 5-8-1976)]. Madhya Pradesh.—In section
13—(i)for the first three paragraphs, substitute the
following, namely:— “A Police Officer may apprehend
and search without warrant—(a)any person found
gaming or reasonably suspected to be gaming in any
public street, or thoroughfare, or in any place to which
the public have or are permitted to have access;(b)any
person setting any birds or animals to fight in any public
street, thoroughfare, or in any place to which the public
have or are permitted to have access:(c)any person there
present aiding and abetting such public fighting of birds
and animals.”
It was thus the submission of learned counsel that the offences
which are non-cognizable are not permitted to be investigated without the
order of the Magistrate, who was having the power to try such cases or
commit the case for trial.
Learned counsel for the petitioner in order to substantiate that
the ASI was not competent to conduct the raid at the house of the petitioner,
referred to Section 5 of the Act, which reads thus:-
“Powers to enter and authorise police to enter and search.
If the Magistrate of a district or other officer invested
with the full powers of a Magistrate, or the District
Superintendent of Police, upon credible information, and
after such enquiry as he may think necessary, has reason
to believe that any house, walled enclosure, room or
place, is used as a common gaming-house, he may either
himself enter, or by his warrant authorize any officer of
police, not below such rank as the State Government
shall appoint in this behalf to enter with such assistance
as may be found necessary, by night or by day, and by
force if necessary, any such house, walled enclosure,
room or place, and may either himself take into custody,
or authorize such officer to take into custody, all persons
whom he or such officer finds therein, whether or not
then actually gaming; and may seize or authorize such
officer to seize all instruments of gaming, and all moneys
and securities for money, and articles of value,
reasonably suspected to have been used or intended to be
used for the purpose of gaming which are found therein.
and may search or authorize such officer to search all
parts of the house, walled enclosure, room or place
which he or such officer shall have so entered when he
or such officer has reason to believe that any instruments
of gaming are concealed therein, and also the persons of
those whom he or such officer so takes into custody: and
may seize or authorize such officer to seize and take
possession of all instruments of gaming found upon such
search.”
While referring to the aforesaid provision, the learned counsel
submitted that as per the said Act it is only the Magistrate of a District or
other officer or DSP who upon credible information and after such inquiry
where he has reason to believe that the place is used as a common gaming
house may either himself or by his warrant authorize any officer of police.
He said that in the present case, the procedure as envisaged had not been
followed inasmuch as no warrants were obtained by the aforesaid ASI
before conducting the raid at the house of the petitioner.
The learned Counsel referred to the definition of common
gaming house to submit that the requirement for an offence is that either of
the instruments of gaming are found, which is not the case of the
prosecution. Mere recovery of Rs.1,23,50,000/- was not sufficient to term it
as having been gain or profit from wagering or betting in terms of the
aforesaid definition. He submitted that the said amount was the legally
earned income of the petitioner, a reference was made to copies of the
Income Tax Returns for the years 2020-21 and 2021-22 along with
cashbook, balance sheet and tax audit report by registered Chartered
Accountant, Annexures P-9 to P-11, as per which as on 25.7.2020, an
amount of Rs.1,23,54,000/- was shown as cash in hand of the petitioner.
The Section-1 of The Public Gambling Act, 1867 in the interpretation
clause defines the term common gaming-house, which reads thus:-
“1. Interpretation-clause.—In this Act— “Common
gaming-house”.—“Common gaming-house” means any
house, walled enclosure, room or place in which cards,
dice, tables or other instruments of gaming are kept or
used for the profit or gain of the person owning,
occupying, using or keeping such house, enclosure,
room or place, whether by way of charge for the use of
the instruments of gaming, or of the house, enclosure,
room or place, or otherwise howsoever.”
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the offence
alleged being non-cognizable, the FIR could not have been lodged against
the petitioner; consequently no investigation could have taken place, unless
there was a complaint submitted under Section 152 Cr.P.C. before the Illaqa
Magistrate by a DSP concerned in terms of Section 5 of the Act, only
whereafter, the investigation could have ensued that too after conduct of
inquiry. Learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon judgments in the
cases of Narayan Prasad vs. State of Rajasthan reported as 2017(2) WLC
(Raj) (UC) 544, Aatma Ram vs. State of Bihar, CRM No.44568 of 2017
(Patna), Mallu @ Mallappa vs. State of Karnataka Crl.P. No.101935 of
2021 dated 10.1.2022 (Karnataka), Gurmail Singh vs State of Punjab and
another, reported as 2022(2) R.C.R. (Criminal) 61.
Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that in the reply
filed by the State, there is no response to the grounds raised by the
petitioner in particular regarding the legal issues that in case of non-
cognizable offence, FIR and consequent proceedings could not have been
carried out and even the raid itself from the very inception was without
Opposing the petition, learned State counsel made a reference
to para Nos.4 and 5 of the reply to submit that the betting was going on
when the petitioner was apprehended. The said paras read thus:
“4. That thereafter ASI checked the laptop mark ACCER
and Z account application was having admin password.
The said laptop was put in a cloth parcel and was sealed
with seal BS and mobile phone VIVO 1606 Black and
VIVO 1820 Black was also put in the cloth parcel and
was sealed with seal BS. Sample seal was prepared
separately. Seal was handed over after use to ASI Ranjit
Pal Singh 2184. Both the parcels were taken into
possession vide separate recovery memo and witnesses
5. That during interrogation accused Saurabh Verma @
Noni made a confessional statement before the ASI that
the amount which has earned from betting on the cricket
match, he has kept the said amount in the wooden
almirah lying in his bed room in a yellow bag beneath
the cloths. He knows about the same and can get the
same recovered. Accused Saurabh verma got recovered a
yellow bag from his almirah lying in the bed room and
produced it before the ASI. ASI in the presence of the
police officials recovered Rs. 1 crore 23 lakh 50
thousand was recovered. The said recovered amount was
putin the same yellow bag and was taken into possession
vide separate recovery memo and witnesses put their
witness on it. Spot was inspected in the presence of the
police officials and site plan was prepared. Accused
Saurabh Verma @ Noni was arrested in the case on
Heard the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the
It is considered necessary to recapitulate the law as enunciated
by Hon'ble The Supreme Court of India in case of Keshav Lal Thakur vs.
State of Bihar, 1997 SCC (Cri) 298, wherein it was held as under:
“We need not go into the question whether in the facts of
the instant case the above view of the High Court is
proper or not for the impugned proceeding has got to be
quashed as neither the police was entitled to investigate
into the offence in question nor the Chief Judicial
Magistrate to take cognizance upon the report submitted
on completion of such investigation. On the own
showing of the police, the offence under Section 31 of
the Act is non cognizable and therefore the police could
not have registered a case for such an offence
under Section 154 Dr. P.C. of course, the police is
entitled to investigate into a non-cognizable offence
pursuant to an order of a competent Magistrate
under Section 155 (2) Dr. P.C. but, admittedly, no such
order was passed in the instant case. That necessarily
means, that neither the police could investigate into the
offence in question nor submit a report on which the
question of taking cognizance could have arisen. While
on this point, it may be mentioned that in view of the
proviso to Section 2 (d) Dr. P.C., which defines
'complaint', the police is entitled to submit, after
investigation, a report a relating to a non-cognizable
offence in which case such a report is to be treated as a
'complaint' of the police officer concerned, but that
explanation will not be available to the prosecution here
as that related to a case where the police initiates
investigation into a cognizable offence - unlike the
present one - but ultimately finds that only a non-
cognizable offence has been made out.”
In the case of Naryana Parsad (supra), the Rajasthan High
Court relating to the Gambling Act has held thus:-
“7. After hearing counsel for the parties, this Court
finds that the Cr.P.C. categorically mentions
classification of offences against other laws and
definition. The offences punishable with more than
7 years broadly as cognizable offences and to be
tried by session whereas the offences having
imprisonment 3 years to up to 7 years are also
cognizable triable by Magistrate first class and the
offences punishable with imprisonment for less
than three years or with fine are non- cognizable
offences triable by any magistrate. The offence for
non- cognizable offences show that the arrest shall
not be made in the cognizable offence without a
warrant. Thus, the bifurcation between the
cognizable and non-cognizable as per the Cr.P.C.
is that the lessor offence as scheduled in the
classification of the Cr.P.C. shall require more
stronger scrutiny by the Judicial Magistrate and
therefore, in the definition itself, the need of
warrant for arrest has been prescribed. It is further
noted that Section 155 of Sub-section 2 of the
Cr.P.C. also clearly reads that in case of non-
cognizable cases, the investigation cannot be done
by the police without the order of the Magistrate
having power to try such cases or committed the
case for trial.
8. Thus, the Court has also carefully perused the
Section 13 of the Rajasthan Public Gambling
Ordinance 1949, which stipulates the fine of
Rs.100 and imprisonment up to one month. Thus,
the offence alleged falls under the category of
minimum gravity offence and as per schedule of
the Cr.P.C. shall be in the category of non-
cognizable offence as Section 13 itself does not
prescribe as to whether the offence is cognizable
or non-cognizable. Once, this Court is of the
opinion that the offence is non-cognizable then
this Court deems it appropriate to allow the
present misc. petition by quashing the present
proceedings in FIR No.277/2015 registered at
Police Station, Kotwali Sriganganagar for the
offence 13 of the Rajasthan Public Gambling
Ordinance, 1949 as admittedly the respondents did
not make a point that a proper order was obtained
from      the     Magistrate   before    making any
9. In view of the above, the proceedings initiated
in pursuance of the impugned FIR cannot be
sustained and are liable to be set aside.
Consequently, the present petition is accepted and
the impugned FIR is quashed along with all
subsequent proceedings. However, liberty is
granted to the competent authorised Officer to file
a complaint in accordance with the provisions of
law, if it is not barred by limitation.”
As is apparent from the perusal of the afore referred provisions
and the judgments that the investigation in a non-cognizable offence at the
hands of the police without permission of the competent Magistrate is
Adverting to the facts of the case in hand, indubitably it has not
been brought out by the State that the police officer concerned was
authorised to enter by way of issuance of a warrant and search the house of
the petitioner, which is mandated as per Section 5 of the Act, a pre-requisite
for which is that, upon receipt of credible information, the officer invested
with power of Magistrate or District Superintendent of Police after
conducting enquiry may either himself or by warrant authorise any other
police officer to enter and search the place. The reply of the State does not
disclose that there was an order passed by the Magistrate to investigate the
non-cognizable offence as required under Sub Section 2 of Section 155
Cr.P.C. The procedural infirmity in this case goes to the root of the matter,
vitiating the proceedings thus initiated. Furthermore, there is no specific
reply by the State justifying the competence of the police officer, who
conducted the raid based on secret information, wherein even no
independent witness had been joined. The paras of the present petition
particularly 5A to 5M wherein grounds have been raised to substantiate that
the FIR was a clear abuse of process of law have not been specifically
responded to except for stating “that the position has already been explained
in the forgoing paragraphs”, which have been reproduced hereinabove in
this judgment, which also merely make a reference to the alleged recovery,
investigation and confessional statement but nothing justifying either the
competence of the officer or the registration of FIR in a non-cognizable
offence or that the raid was conducted in pursuance of an order of the
concerned Magistrate, passed after due enquiry on having received credible
information. The classification between cognizable and non-cognizable
offences as per Schedule 2 of Cr.P.C. is provided as the lesser offence
requires stronger scrutiny by the Magistrate, thus is the requirement of
warrants for arrest prescribed in the definition itself, which reads thus:-
“2. Definitions.—In this Code, unless the context
otherwise requires,—(l) “non-cognizable offence”
means an offence for which, and “non-cognizable
case” means a case in which, a police officer has
no authority to arrest without warrant;”
Hon’ble The Supreme Court of India in the case of Jugesh
Sehgal vs. Shamsher Singh Gogi, reported as (2009)14 SCC 683, had held
that to prevent abuse of process of law and to secure ends of justice, the
power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. can be involved, the paras as relevant read
“16. The next question for consideration is whether or
not in the light of the afore-mentioned factual position,
as projected in the complaint itself, it was a fit case
where the High Court should have exercised its
jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code?
17. The scope and ambit of powers of the High Court
under Section 482 of the Code has been enunciated and
reiterated by this Court in a series of decisions and
several circumstances under which the High Court can
exercise jurisdiction in quashing proceedings have been
enumerated. Therefore, it is unnecessary to burden the
judgment by making reference to all the decisions on the
point. It would suffice to state that though the powers
possessed by the High Courts under the said provision
are very wide, but these should be exercised in
appropriate cases, ex debito justitiae to do real and
substantial justice for the administration of which alone
the courts exist.
18. The inherent powers do not confer an arbitrary
jurisdiction on the High Court to act according to whim
or caprice. The powers have to be exercised sparingly,
with circumspection and in the rarest of rare cases,
where the court is convinced, on the basis of material on
record, that allowing the proceedings to continue would
be an abuse of the process of the court or that the ends of
justice require that the proceedings ought to be quashed.
19. Although in Bhajan Lal's case (supra), the court by
way of illustration, formulated as many as seven
categories of cases, wherein the extra-ordinary power
under the afore-stated provisions could be exercised by
the High Court to prevent abuse of process of the court
yet it was clarified that it was not possible to lay down
precise and inflexible guidelines or any rigid formula or
to give an exhaustive list of the circumstances in which
such power could be exercised.”
The trial Court has committed grave error in proceeding to
frame charges based on final report in this case wherein the investigation
could have been done only after complying with the provisions of law, as
contemplated. In view of the caveat illustrated in the afore cited decisions,
the proceedings initiated against the petitioner are untenable, especially
when the raid leading to lodging of FIR itself was from the threshold
marred by procedural irregularity. Thus same is a ground sufficient to quash
the FIR and consequent proceedings in order to prevent abuse of process of
law and secure of ends of justice.
As sequel thereto, the present petition is allowed. FIR No. 98
dated 25.7.2020, Annexure P-1 and the consequent proceedings arising
therefrom are hereby quashed.