The petitioner/wife of the 1st respondent is before this Court
seeking a direction to dispose of applications dated 15.10.2018 filed
by her in C.Misc.No.170 of 2018 before the II Metropolitan
Magistrate Traffic Court at Bangalore under Sections 12, 19(1)(E) &
(F), 20 & 22, 20 & 23(2) and 23(2) of the Protection of Women
from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (‘the Act’ for short) within the
time frame.
2. Brief facts that lead the petitioner to this court in the
subject petition, as borne out from the pleadings, are as follows:-
The marriage between the petitioner and 1st respondent takes
place on 16-11-2016. From the wedlock a child is born on
24-08-2017. The relationship between the petitioner and the 1st
respondent appears to have turned sore and the petitioner/wife
institutes proceedings under the Act invoking Section 12 of the Act
and also files several other applications under Section 23 of the Act
seeking non-alienation, encumbrance of schedule property, seeking
alternative accommodation, monetary relief, ex-parte maintenance
and return of valuable articles. In all, there were five applications
filed by the petitioner on 15-10-2018. The learned Magistrate in
terms of his order dated 29-10-2018 rejected the application for
non-alienation or encumbering the schedule property. Except that
order, the learned Magistrate did not pass any order on any other
applications. The 1st respondent appeared on 03-05-2019 and filed
objections to the applications. On 04-08-2021 the petitioner filed
an affidavit of assets and liability statement. For filing of assets and
liabilities statement of the 1st respondent seven dates were granted
to    the    1st  respondent/husband      between    04-08-2021      and
18-04-2022. The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that
assets and liabilities statement is not filed by the 1st respondent
even as on date. Being aggrieved by non-passing of orders on
several applications that are pending consideration for close to 5
years, the petitioner is before this Court seeking an early disposal
of those applications filed along with the claim on 15-10-2018.
3. Heard Sri Nitin Ramesh, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner, Sri H.Shanthi Bhushan, learned Deputy Solicitor General
of India appearing for respondent No.4 and Smt. K.P. Yashodha,
learned High Court Government Pleader for respondent No.5.
4. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner would
contend with vehemence that the concerned Court is refusing to
pass orders on all the applications on the plea that ex-parte orders
cannot be passed on certain applications as procedure under the
CrPC   has   to  be  followed   in  terms   of  law. Since   the 1st
respondent/husband has not filed his objections, no order has been
passed. The act stipulates that any application filed has to be
decided within 60 days, and 60 days was long over and, therefore,
there should be a direction to the concerned Court to conclude the
proceedings within a particular time frame. The learned counsel
would seek to place reliance upon several judgments rendered by
co-ordinate Benches of this Court to contend that ex-parte orders
can be passed under the Act and the procedure under the CrPC
should not hinder the Court, as the Act itself empowers the Court to
regulate its own procedure.
5. The learned High Court Government Pleader and the
learned Deputy Solicitor General of India who was asked to come
into these proceedings as it involved interpretation of provisions of
the Act, a Central enactment would also submit that speedy
disposal    of the application is    imperative as     the  benevolent
legislation that is promulgated is for the purpose of extending
benefits to women who face domestic violence and would submit
that any timeline that would be stipulated by this Court would
become a welcome measure.
6. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions
made by the respective learned counsel and have perused the
material on record.
7. The afore-narrated facts and the link in the chain of events
are not in dispute and they lie in a narrow compass. What is
required to be decided is –
“Whether a direction should be issued to the concerned
Court to dispose of the applications filed under the Act within
8. To consider the aforesaid issue it is germane to do a
clinical dissection of the legal frame work i.e., Protection of Women
from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 beginning from the genesis of the
Act itself. The Act was promulgated in furtherance of the Vienna
accord of 1994 after several platform recognized domestic violence
to be a human rights issue. The United Nations Committee on
Convention on elimination of all forms of discrimination against
women recommended that State parties to act to protect women
against any violence of any kind especially that occurring within the
family. Pursuant to the aforesaid proceedings, the Act was
promulgated with certain objects and reasons on the score that
women’s right on the issue had remained largely invisible in the
public domain.
9. The objects and reasons for the legal frame work reads as
“Statement of Objects and Reasons:-
Domestic violence is undoubtedly a human right
issue and serious deterrent to development. The Vienna
Accord of 1994 and the Beijing Declaration and the
Platform for Action (1995) have acknowledged this. The
United Nations Committee on Convention on Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW)
in its General Recommendation No. XII (1989) has
recommended that State parties should act to protect
women against violence of any kind especially that
occurring within the family.
2. The phenomenon of domestic violence is widely
prevalent but has remained largely invisible in the public
domain. Presently, where a woman is subjected to cruelty
by her husband or his relatives, it is an offence under
Section 498-A of the Indian Penal Code. The civil law
does not however address this phenomenon in its
3. It is, therefore, proposed to enact a law keeping
in view the rights guaranteed under Articles 14, 15 and
21 of the Constitution to provide for a remedy under the
civil law which is intended to protect the women from
being victims of domestic violence and to prevent the
occurrence of domestic violence in the society.
4. The Bill, inter alia, seeks to provide for the following:—
(i)    It covers those women who are or have been in a
relationship with the abuser where both parties have lived
together in a shared household and are related by
consanguinity, marriage or through a relationship in the
nature of marriage or adoption. In addition, relationships
with family members living together as a joint family are
also included. Even those women who are sisters,
widows, mothers, single women, or living with the abuser
are entitled to legal protection under the proposed
legislation. However, whereas the Bill enables the wife or
the female living in a relationship in the nature of
marriage to file a complaint under the proposed
enactment against any relative of the husband or the
male partner, it does not enable any female relative of
the husband or the male partner to file a complaint
against the wife or the female partner.
(ii)   It defines the expression “domestic violence” to include
actual abuse or threat or abuse that is physical, sexual,
verbal, emotional or economic. Harassment by way of
unlawful dowry demands to the woman or her relatives
would also be covered under this definition.
(iii)  It provides for the rights of women to secure housing. It
also provides for the right of a woman to reside in her
matrimonial home or shared household, whether or not
she has any title or rights in such home or household.
This right is secured by a residence order, which is passed
by the Magistrate.
(iv)   It empowers the Magistrate to pass protection orders in
favour of the aggrieved person to prevent the respondent
from aiding or committing an act of domestic violence or
any other specified act, entering a workplace or any other
place frequented by the aggrieved person, attempting to
communicate with her, isolating any assets used by both
the parties and causing violence to the aggrieved person,
her relatives or others who provide her assistance from
the domestic violence.
(v)    It provides for appointment of Protection Officers and
registration of non-governmental organisations as service
providers for providing assistance to the aggrieved person
with respect to her medical examination, obtaining legal
aid, safe shelter, etc.
5. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects. The notes
on clauses explain the various provisions contained in the Bill.”
The objects and reasons themselves indicate that it is for the rights
of women in securing them various benefits mentioned therein and
also protect them from domestic violence, the Magistrate has to
pass appropriate orders in favour of aggrieved person. Certain
provisions of the Act are germane to be noticed. Section 2 deals
with definitions. Sub-sections (a), (e), (f), (g), (n), (o) and (p) of
Section 2 read as follows:
“(a) “aggrieved person” means any woman who is, or
has been, in a domestic relationship with the
respondent and who alleges to have been subjected
to any act of domestic violence by the respondent;
(e)  “domestic incident report” means a report made in the
prescribed form on receipt of a complaint of domestic
violence from an aggrieved person;
(f)  “domestic relationship” means a relationship between two
persons who live or have, at any point of time, lived
together in a shared household, when they are related by
consanguinity, marriage or through a relationship in the
nature of marriage, adoption or are family members living
together as a joint family;
(g)  “domestic violence” has the same meaning as
assigned to it in Section 3;
(n)  “Protection Officer” means an officer appointed by the
State Government under sub-section (1) of Section 8;
(o)  “protection order” means an order made in terms of
(p)  “residence order” means an order granted in terms of
sub-section (1) of Section 19;
(s)  “shared household” means a household where the person
aggrieved lives or at any stage has lived in a domestic
relationship either singly or along with the respondent
and includes such a household whether owned or
tenanted either jointly by the aggrieved person and the
respondent, or owned or tenanted by either of them in
respect of which either the aggrieved person or the
respondent or both jointly or singly have any right, title,
interest or equity and includes such a household which
may belong to the joint family of which the respondent is
a member, irrespective of whether the respondent or the
aggrieved person has any right, title or interest in the
shared household;
Section 2(a) defines an ‘aggrieved person’ to be a woman who is or
has been, in a domestic relationship with the respondent and who
alleges to have been subjected to any act of domestic violence.
Section 2(e) defines that ‘domestic incident report’ means a report
made in the prescribed form on receipt of a complaint of domestic
violence from an aggrieved person. Section 2(f) defines that a
‘domestic relationship’ means a relationship between two persons
who live or have lived at any point of time together in a shared
household and related by consanguinity, marriage or through a
relationship in the nature of marriage. Section 2(g) defines what is
‘domestic violence’ giving the same meaning as assigned to it in
Section 3. Section 2(n) defines a ‘protection officer’ to be an officer
of the State Government under sub-section (1) of Section 8.
Section 2(o) defines ‘protection order’ to be made by the learned
Magistrate under Section 18.      Section 2(p) defines a ‘residence
order’, an order granted in terms of sub-section (1) of Section 19.
Section 2(s) defines that a ‘shared household’ means where a
person aggrieved lives or at any stage has lived in a domestic
relationship. Chapter-II deals with domestic violence. Section 3
defines what is a ‘domestic violence’ and reads as follows:
“3. Definition of domestic violence.—For the
purposes of this Act, any act, omission or commission or
conduct of the respondent shall constitute domestic
violence in case it—
(a)   harms or injures or endangers the health, safety,
life, limb or well-being, whether mental or physical,
of the aggrieved person or tends to do so and
includes causing physical abuse, sexual abuse,
verbal and emotional abuse and economic abuse; or
(b)   harasses, harms, injures or endangers the
aggrieved person with a view to coerce her or any
other person related to her to meet any unlawful
demand for any dowry or other property or valuable
(c)   has the effect of threatening the aggrieved person
or any person related to her by any conduct
mentioned in clause (a) or clause (b); or
(d)   otherwise injures or causes harm, whether physical
or mental, to the aggrieved person.
Explanation I.—For the purposes of this section,—
(i)   “physical abuse” means any act or conduct which is of
such a nature as to cause bodily pain, harm, or danger to
life, limb, or health or impair the health or development
of the aggrieved person and includes assault, criminal
intimidation and criminal force;
(ii)  “sexual abuse” includes any conduct of a sexual
nature that abuses, humiliates, degrades or
otherwise violates the dignity of woman;
(iii) “verbal and emotional abuse” includes—
(a)     insults, ridicule, humiliation, name calling and
insults or ridicule specially with regard to not
having a child or a male child; and
(b)   repeated threats to cause physical pain to any
person in whom the aggrieved person is
interested.
(a)   deprivation of all or any economic or financial
resources to which the aggrieved person is
entitled under any law or custom whether
payable under an order of a court or
otherwise or which the aggrieved person
requires out of necessity including, but not
limited to, household necessities for the
aggrieved person and her children, if any,
stridhan, property, jointly or separately
owned by the aggrieved person, payment of
rental related to the shared household and
(b)   disposal of household effects, any alienation of
assets whether movable or immovable, valuables,
shares, securities, bonds and the like or other
property in which the aggrieved person has an
interest or is entitled to use by virtue of the
domestic relationship or which may be reasonably
required by the aggrieved person or her children or
her stridhan or any other property jointly or
separately held by the aggrieved person; and
(c)   prohibition or restriction to continued access to
resources or facilities which the aggrieved person is
entitled to use or enjoy by virtue of the domestic
relationship including access to the shared
household.
Explanation II.—For the purpose of determining
whether any act, omission, commission or conduct of the
respondent constitutes “domestic violence” under this
section, the overall facts and circumstances of the case
shall be taken into consideration.”
Section 3 defines any person who harms or injures or endangers
the health, safety, life, limb or even well being and several treats to
form a domestic violence.         Explanations to those ingredients are
also rendered under the Act. Chapter III deals with powers and
duties of protection officers, service providers and others.
10. Chapter-IV deals with procedure for obtaining orders of
reliefs. Section 12 empowers an aggrieved person or a Protection
Officer or any other person on behalf of the aggrieved person to
present an application. Section 12 reads as follows:
“12. Application to Magistrate.—(1) An aggrieved
person or a Protection Officer or any other person on
behalf of the aggrieved person may present an
application to the Magistrate seeking one or more reliefs
Provided that before passing any order on such
application, the Magistrate shall take into consideration any
domestic incident report received by him from the Protection
Officer or the service provider.
(2) The relief sought for under sub-section (1) may
include a relief for issuance of an order for payment of
compensation or damages without prejudice to the right of such
person to institute a suit for compensation or damages for the
injuries caused by the acts of domestic violence committed by
Provided that where a decree for any amount as
compensation or damages has been passed by any court in
favour of the aggrieved person, the amount, if any, paid or
payable in pursuance of the order made by the Magistrate under
this Act shall be set off against the amount payable under such
decree and the decree shall, notwithstanding anything contained
in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or any other
law for the time being in force, be executable for the balance
amount, if any, left after such set off.
(3) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be in
such form and contain such particulars as may be prescribed or
as nearly as possible thereto.
(4) The Magistrate shall fix the first date of hearing,
which shall not ordinarily be beyond three days from the date of
receipt of the application by the court.
(5) The Magistrate shall endeavour to dispose of
every application made under sub-section (1) within a
period of sixty days from the date of its first hearing.”
(Emphasis supplied)
Sub-sections (2), (3), (4) and (5) of Section 12 permit an aggrieved
person to seek relief or compensation or damages for injuries
caused by the acts of domestic violence committed by the
respondent. Sub-section (5) thereof mandates that the Magistrate
shall endeavour to dispose of every application made under sub-
section (1) within 60 days of its first hearing which would mean
that when an aggrieved person approaches the learned Magistrate
seeking one or more reliefs under the Act, it is mandatory that the
Magistrate shall dispose of every, application made under sub-
section (1) within 60 days from the date of its first hearing.
11. Section 23 deals with power to grant interim and ex parte
orders. It reads as follows:
“23. Power to grant interim and ex parte orders.—
(1) In any proceeding before him under this Act, the Magistrate
may pass such interim order as he deems just and proper.
(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied that an application
prima facie discloses that the respondent is committing,
or has committed an act of domestic violence or that
there is a likelihood that the respondent may commit an
act of domestic violence, he may grant an ex parte order
on the basis of the affidavit in such form, as may be
prescribed, of the aggrieved person under Section 18,
Section 19, Section 20, Section 21 or, as the case may be,
Section 22 against the respondent.”
Section 23 of the Act empowers the learned Magistrate in any
proceeding before him under the Act to grant interim and ex-parte
orders.   On any application filed by the aggrieved person under
Sections 18, 19, 21 and 22 against the respondent, if the learned
Magistrate is satisfied that the application prima facie discloses that
domestic violence has happened in the case before him, he is
empowered to grant such ex-parte order on the basis of the
affidavit. Section 18 of the Act deals with ‘protection orders’ which
the learned Magistrate is empowered to grant in a case where he is
prima facie satisfied that there has been acts by the respondent
committed which attract ingredients of Section 18.         Section 18
“18. Protection orders.—The Magistrate may, after
giving the aggrieved person and the respondent an
opportunity of being heard and on being prima facie
satisfied that domestic violence has taken place or is
likely to take place, pass a protection order in favour of
the aggrieved person and prohibit the respondent from—
(a)    committing any act of domestic violence;
(b)    aiding or abetting in the commission of acts of
domestic violence;
(c)    entering the place of employment of the aggrieved
person or, if the person aggrieved is a child, its
school or any other place frequented by the
aggrieved person;
(d)    attempting     to   communicate      in   any    form,
whatsoever, with the aggrieved person, including
personal, oral or written or electronic or telephonic
(e)    alienating any assets, operating bank lockers or
bank accounts used or held or enjoyed by both the
parties, jointly by the aggrieved person and the
respondent or singly by the respondent, including
her stridhan or any other property held either
jointly by the parties or separately by them without
the leave of the Magistrate;
(f)    causing violence to the dependants, other relatives
or any person who give the aggrieved person
assistance from domestic violence;
(g)    committing any other       act   as specified  in  the
protection order.”
Section 19 deals with ‘residence orders’ and reads as follows:
“19. Residence orders.—(1) While disposing of an
application under sub-section (1) of Section 12, the
Magistrate may, on being satisfied that domestic violence
has taken place, pass a residence order—
(a)   restraining the respondent from dispossessing or in
any other manner disturbing the possession of the
aggrieved person from the shared household,
whether or not the respondent has a legal or
equitable interest in the shared household;
(b)   directing the respondent to remove himself from
the shared household;
(c)   restraining the respondent or any of his relatives
from entering any portion of the shared household
in which the aggrieved person resides;
(d)   restraining the respondent from alienating or
disposing off the shared household or encumbering
(e)   restraining the respondent from renouncing his
rights in the shared household except with the
leave of the Magistrate; or
(f)   directing the respondent to secure same level of
alternate accommodation for the aggrieved person
as enjoyed by her in the shared household or to pay
rent for the same, if the circumstances so require:
Provided that no order under clause (b) shall be passed
against any person who is a woman.
(2) The Magistrate may impose any additional conditions
or pass any other direction which he may deem reasonably
necessary to protect or to provide for the safety of the
aggrieved person or any child of such aggrieved person.
(3) The Magistrate may require from the respondent to
execute a bond, with or without sureties, for preventing the
commission of domestic violence.
(4) An order under sub-section (3) shall be deemed to be
an order under Chapter VIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (2 of 1974) and shall be dealt with accordingly.
(5) While passing an order under sub-section (1), sub-
section (2) or sub-section (3), the court may also pass an order
directing the officer in-charge of the nearest police station to
give protection to the aggrieved person or to assist her or the
person making an application on her behalf in the
implementation of the order.
(6) While making an order under sub-section (1), the
Magistrate may impose on the respondent obligations relating to
the discharge of rent and other payments, having regard to the
financial needs and resources of the parties.
(7) The Magistrate may direct the officer in-charge of the
police station in whose jurisdiction the Magistrate has been
approached to assist in the implementation of the protection
order.
(8) The Magistrate may direct the respondent to return to
the possession of the aggrieved person her stridhan or any
other property or valuable security to which she is entitled to.”
(Emphasis supplied)
While disposing of application under sub-section (1) of Section 12, a
Magistrate may, on being satisfied that domestic violence has taken
place, pass a residence order. The manner and tenor of the said
residence order is also depicted under sub-clauses (a) to (f) of
sub-section (1) of Section 19.           Section 20 deals with monetary
relief and reads as follows:
“20. Monetary reliefs.—(1) While disposing of an
application under sub-section (1) of Section 12, the
Magistrate may direct the respondent to pay monetary
relief to meet the expenses incurred and losses suffered
by the aggrieved person and any child of the aggrieved
person as a result of the domestic violence and such
relief may include, but is not limited to,—
(a) the loss of earnings;
(c) the loss caused due to the destruction, damage or
removal of any property from the control of the aggrieved
(d) the maintenance for the aggrieved person as well as
her children, if any, including an order under or in addition to an
order of maintenance under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time being
in force.
(2) The monetary relief granted under this section
shall be adequate, fair and reasonable and consistent
with the standard of living to which the aggrieved person
is accustomed.
(3) The Magistrate shall have the power to order an
appropriate lump sum payment or monthly payments of
maintenance, as the nature and circumstances of the
case may require.
(4) The Magistrate shall send a copy of the order for
monetary relief made under sub-section (1) to the parties to the
application and to the in-charge of the police station within the
local limits of whose jurisdiction the respondent resides.
(5) The respondent shall pay the monetary relief
granted to the aggrieved person within the period
specified in the order under sub-section (1).
(6) Upon the failure on the part of the respondent
to make payment in terms of the order under sub-section
(1), the Magistrate may direct the employer or a debtor
of the respondent, to directly pay to the aggrieved person
or to deposit with the court a portion of the wages or
salaries or debt due to or accrued to the credit of the
respondent, which amount may be adjusted towards the
monetary relief payable by the respondent.”
(Emphasis supplied)
Section 20 empowers the Magistrate to direct payment of monitory
relief to meet expenses. The monitory relief to be granted under
the section should be adequate, fair and reasonable consistent with
the standard of living to which the aggrieved person is accustomed;
the Magistrate also has power to order appropriate lumpsum
payment or monthly payment of maintenance and such payment is
to be directed by the Magistrate to be paid within a specified period
and upon failure on the part of the respondent to make payment,
the Magistrate has power to direct the employer or a debtor of the
respondent to directly pay to the aggrieved person.       These are
various powers under Section 20 conferred upon the Magistrate to
pass in every case where application is filed under sub-section (1)
of Section 12. Having scanned the anatomy of the Act, a dip into
the facts of the case, on the strength of the mandate of the statute,
now becomes germane. They lie in a narrow compass.
12. The petitioner, on 15-10-2018, files an application under
Section 12 (supra) and along with it files five applications under
different provisions of the Act. The petitioner while preferring an
application under Section 12 prefers application under Section
19(1)(e) and (f) which deals with restraining the respondent from
renouncing his rights in the shared household except with the leave
of the Magistrate or directing the respondent to secure same level
of alternate accommodation for the aggrieved person as enjoyed by
her in the shared household or pay rent for the same.        Another
application was filed under Section 20 seeking monetary relief. The
application seeking non-alienation and encumbering of the schedule
property was rejected by the learned Magistrate. Therefore,
applications seeking alternative accommodation, monetary relief
and ex-parte interim maintenance were all pending consideration
and they are pending consideration even as on date, despite the
passage of 52 months after their filing.
13. A perusal at the afore-quoted provisions i.e., Sections 19
and 20 which permit the aggrieved person to seek interim
protection by way of residence order or monetary relief as the case
would be, and even the custody orders under Section 21, all point
out to one provision i.e., Section 12. If an application is filed by the
aggrieved   person    under  sub-section   (1)  of   Section    12  and
applications are filed under Sections 18, 19 and 20 they have to be
decided within the time frame stipulated under sub-section (5) of
Section 12 of the Act, as sub-section (5) of Section 12 mandates
that any application filed before the learned Magistrate while filing
an application under Section 12 should be decided by the
Magistrate within 60 days from the date of its filing. Therefore, any
interim protection that is sought by filing an application under
Sections 19 and 20 ought to be decided by the learned Magistrate
within 60 days from the date of its filing as they form a part of the
mandate of the statute i.e., Section 12. Section 12 therefore
becomes the heart and soul of the entire Act and applications under
Sections 19 & 20 are clearly maintainable along with an application
under Section 12. Therefore, those applications would also be
bound by the time limit stipulated under Section 12.        Section 28
deals with procedure to be adopted by the concerned Court for
disposal of applications and it reads as follows:
“28. Procedure.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this
Act, all proceedings under Sections 12, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 and
23 and offences under Section 31 shall be governed by the
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall prevent the court
from laying down its own procedure for disposal of an
application under Section 12 or under sub-section (2) of Section
Sub-section (1) of Section 28 directs that save as otherwise
provided in this Act, all proceedings under Sections 12, 18 to 23
and offences under Section 31 shall be governed by the provisions
of the CrPC, 1973. Sub-section (2) mandates that nothing in sub-
section (1) shall prevent the Court from laying down its own
procedure for disposal of an application under Section 12 or under
sub-section (2) of Section 23. What would unmistakably emerge is,
notwithstanding the proceedings governed by the CrPC, the Court
considering the application under Section 12 is empowered to lay
down its own procedure both under Section 12 and under Section
23 of the Act. It thus becomes its inherent power. If the purpose
for which the Act was brought into force and the soul of Section 12
is noticed, notwithstanding the fact that the procedure stipulated
under the CrPC is to be followed and since sub-section (2) of
Section 28 directs that nothing in sub-section (1) shall prevent the
Court from laying down its own procedure for disposal of the
application, the concerned Court i.e., the learned Magistrate shall
have the liberty to lay down his own procedure for disposal of
applications under Section 12 and sub-section (2) of Section 23 of
14. In the aforesaid circumstances, reference being made to
the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of KUNAPAREDDY v.
KUNAPAREDDY SWARNA KUMARI1 is apposite, wherein the
Apex Court has held as follows:
“11. We have already mentioned the prayers which were
made by Respondent 1 in the original petition and Prayer A
thereof relates to Section 9. However, in Prayer B, Respondent
1 also sought relief of grant of monthly maintenance to her as
well as her children. This prayer falls within the ambit of Section
20 of the DV Act. In fact, Prayer A is covered by Section 18
which empowers the Magistrate to grant such a protection which
is claimed by Respondent 1. Therefore, the petition is essentially
under Sections 18 and 20 of the DV Act, though in the heading
these provisions are not mentioned. However, that may not
make any difference and, therefore, no issue was raised by the
appellant on this count. In respect of the petition filed under
Sections 18 and 20 of the DV Act, the proceedings are to be
governed by the Code, as provided under Section 28 of the DV
Act. At the same time, it cannot be disputed that these
proceedings are predominantly of civil nature.
12. In fact, the very purpose of enacting the DV Act was
to provide for a remedy which is an amalgamation of civil rights
of the complainant i.e. aggrieved person. Intention was to
protect women against violence of any kind, especially that
occurring within the family as the civil law does not address this
phenomenon in its entirety. It is treated as an offence under
Section 498-A of the Penal Code, 1860. The purpose of enacting
the law was to provide a remedy in the civil law for the
protection of women from being victims of domestic violence
and to prevent the occurrence of domestic violence in the
society. It is for this reason, that the scheme of the Act provides
that in the first instance, the order that would be passed by the
Magistrate, on a complaint by the aggrieved person, would be of
a civil nature and if the said order is violated, it assumes the
character of criminality. In order to demonstrate it, we may
reproduce the introduction as well as relevant portions of the
Statement of Objects and Reasons of the said Act, as follows:
The Vienna Accord of 1994 and the Beijing
Declaration and the Platform for Action (1995) have
acknowledged that domestic violence is undoubtedly a
human rights issue. The United Nations Committee on
Convention on Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women in its General Recommendations has
recommended that State parties should act to protect
women against violence of any kind, especially that
occurring within the family. The phenomenon of domestic
violence in India is widely prevalent but has remained
invisible in the public domain. The civil law does not
address this phenomenon in its entirety. Presently, where
a woman is subjected to cruelty by her husband or his
relatives, it is an offence under Section 498-A of the
Penal Code, 1860. In order to provide a remedy in the
civil law for the protection of women from being victims of
domestic violence and to prevent the occurrence of
domestic violence in the society the Protection of Women
from Domestic Violence Bill was introduced in Parliament.
Statement of Objects and Reasons
1. Domestic violence is undoubtedly a human
rights issue and serious deterrent to development. The
Vienna Accord of 1994 and the Beijing Declaration and
the Platform for Action (1995) have acknowledged this.
The United Nations Committee on Convention on
Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women
(CEDAW) in its General Recommendation No. XII (1989)
has recommended that State parties should act to protect
women against violence of any kind especially that
occurring within the family.
3. It is, therefore, proposed to enact a law keeping
in view the rights guaranteed under Articles 14, 15 and
21 of the Constitution to provide for a remedy under the
civil law which is intended to protect the women from
being victims of domestic violence and to prevent the
occurrence of domestic violence in the society.
4. The Bill, inter alia, seeks to provide for the
(ii) It defines the expression “domestic violence” to
include actual abuse or threat or abuse that is physical,
sexual, verbal, emotional or economic. Harassment by
way of unlawful dowry demands to the woman or her
relatives would also be covered under this definition.
(iii) It provides for the rights of women to secure
housing. It also provides for the right of a woman to
reside in her matrimonial home or shared household,
whether or not she has any title or rights in such home or
household. This right is secured by a residence order,
which is passed by the Magistrate.
(iv) It empowers the Magistrate to pass protection
orders in favour of the aggrieved person to prevent the
respondent from aiding or committing an act of domestic
violence or any other specified act, entering a workplace
or any other place frequented by the aggrieved person,
attempting to communicate with her, isolating any assets
used by both the parties and causing violence to the
aggrieved person, her relatives or others who provide her
assistance from the domestic violence.”
18. In this context, provisions of sub-section (2) of
Section 28 of the DV Act gain significance. Whereas
proceedings under certain sections of the DV Act as
specified in sub-section (1) of Section 28 are to be
governed by the Code, the legislature at the same time
incorporated the provisions like sub-section (2) as well
which empowers the court to lay down its own procedure
for disposal of the application under Section 12 or Section
23(2) of the DV Act. This provision has been incorporated
by the legislature keeping a definite purpose in mind.
Under Section 12, an application can be made to a
Magistrate by an aggrieved person or a Protection Officer
or any other person on behalf of the aggrieved person to
claim one or more reliefs under the said Act. Section 23
deals with the power of the Magistrate to grant interim
and ex parte orders and sub-section (2) of Section 23 is a
special provision carved out in this behalf which is as
“23.(2) If the Magistrate is satisfied that an
application    prima    facie    discloses     that   the
respondent is committing, or has committed an act
of domestic violence or that there is a likelihood
that the respondent may commit an act of domestic
violence, he may grant an ex parte order on the
basis of the affidavit in such form, as may be
prescribed, of the aggrieved person under Section
18, Section 19, Section 20, Section 21 or, as the
case may be, Section 22 against the respondent.”
(Emphasis supplied)
The Apex Court, in the aforesaid judgment, while considering the
purport of promulgation of the Act and its provisions clearly holds
that sub-section (2) of Section 28 is significant. The concerned
Court is well within its powers to lay down its procedure for disposal
of the application under Section 12 or Section 23(2) of the Act. The
Apex Court also recognizes that this provision is incorporated by the
Legislature keeping a definite purpose for which it is enacted. This
Court also recognizes the power of the Magistrate under Section 23
to grant an interim order ex-parte owing to the specific power
under sub-section (2) of Section 23 of the Act which is carved out in
that behalf. In the light of the judgment of the Apex Court, any
other law that is laid down by the co-ordinate Benches of this Court
will have to be placed into the oblivion on two counts, as the heart
and soul of the Act is found in Section 12 and its beat in Section 23.
The reliance placed by the respondent/State upon the judgment of
the     co-ordinate     Bench  in the   case   of KRISHNA    MURTHY
NOOKULA v. Y SAVITHA2 is in clear contradiction with what the
Apex       Court    has  held.  The   said  judgment  has  also  been
distinguished in the case of one K.MANJUNATH REDDY v. SMT.
A.C. LATHA3. The co-ordinate Bench in the case of K.MANJUNATH
REDDY has held as follows:
“3. Having regard to the object and the scope of the
legislation, the prescription of such enabling provision is
obviou9sly not to cramp the style of the court which requires to
address issues with some expedition. Therefore, the section
providing that the court can form its own procedure, would also
over-ride sub-section (1) of Section 28 to Rule 6(5) of the Rules
as well.
4. There is no illegality, as the court in exercise of
its inherent power while prescribing the procedure for
disposal of the application, would even permit evidence
by way of an affidavit in such cases. And where the
deponent would be available for cross-examination to
test the veracity of the evidence, there is no miscarriage
of justice or other illegality in such a procedure being
adopted.
5. The decision which ws cited at the Bar namely
the order in W.P.No.53683 of 2014 dated 27-02-2015 in
the case of Shridhar Das v. Smt. Nalinakshi rendered, is
without reference to Section 28(2) of the Domestic
Violence Act and therefore, would stand distinguished.”
(Emphasis supplied)
The co-ordinate Bench recognizes that the section itself provided
that the Court can form its own procedure and it would override
sub-section (1) of Section 28 and any Rules framed thereunder.
The co-ordinate Bench then holds that there was no illegality
committed by the Court in exercise of its inherent power for
Crl.P.No.1726 of 2016 decided on 1-08-2016
disposal of the application without an inquiry and by way of an
affidavit filed by the parties before the concerned Court.
15. On a coalesce of the aforesaid analysis of the provisions
of the Act and the law laid down by the Apex Court and that of the
co-ordinate Bench of this Court, what would unmistakably emerge
is that applications concerning protection orders under Section 18,
residence orders under Section 19 and monetary relief under
Section 20, all of which direct that if the learned Magistrate is prima
facie finds justification he could grant those reliefs. Section 23 of
the Act empowers the learned Magistrate to grant of interim and
ex-parte orders in any application under Sections 18, 19, 20 and 21
or even 22 against the respondent, granting interim relief in terms
of the application/s so filed cannot be after an eon, it has to be
granted anon. Therefore, there is no warrant for any Magistrate to
await for the procedure as stipulated under the CrPC to get
concluded, and then grant the relief that is sought in the
application. It defeats the very life blood of the Act. If Section 12 is
the one under which applications are filed before the concerned
Court, sub-section (5) of Section 12 mandates disposal within 60
16. It is quite appalling that an application filed by the
petitioner under Section 12 of the Act for the relief as available
under Sections 19, 20 and 22 of the Act has been kept pending for
close to 52 months after its filing, notwithstanding the fact that the
mandate of the Act is disposal of those applications within 60 days.
The applications being kept pending would display apathy towards
the litigants. The reason for the applications being kept pending is
free fall for adjournments being granted by the concerned Court. In
the case at hand, close to two years have passed by and the Court
has gone on granting time to the husband for filing assets and
liabilities statement to determine the payment of maintenance to
the wife under the provisions of the Act while the wife/aggrieved
person suffers. An application that has to be disposed of within 60
days, has taken 52 months, and is yet to be disposed of.
17. The law Courts which exist to remedy the wrong when it
is brought to its notice has to act swiftly, as it is trite that, actus
curiae neminem gravabit that the act of Court should prejudice
no person. If an act of the Court should not prejudice any person;
the Court should not permit any procrastination of the proceedings
before it. A woman, who is a victim of domestic violence, knocking
at the doors of the Magistrate, under the Act seeking maintenance
or   shelter such     grievance, will   have to   be addressed    with
immediacy.      It is for this reason that the statute mandates that
such applications have to be disposed of within 60 days in terms of
sub-section (5) of Section 12 of the Act. The mandate is
unequivocal as sub-section (5) mandates that the Magistrate shall
endeavour to dispose every application; every application would
mean each and every, not a few or more. If the delay takes away
the very soul of the enactment, such delay would definitely deny
justice. It is, therefore, often said that “justice delayed is justice
denied”.     If the facts of the case at hand are taken note of, it
would display that the petitioner has been denied maintenance and
other benefits available under the Act for close to five years now,
after she has been out of the matrimonial house.
18. In the aforesaid circumstances, it becomes necessary for
this Court to direct the Magistrates, to henceforth decide the
applications filed by the aggrieved persons within the time frame.
The applications could be for the benefit of Sections 19 and 20 of
the Act which are filed along with the application under Section 12
of the Act. Any delay beyond 60 days to consider the application
should be only for reasons to be recorded in writing. For a
maintenance application, the concerned Court shall direct the
husband, after receipt of notice, to file his assets and liabilities
statement within four weeks from the date of appearance and in the
event, he would dodge appearance before Court, the Court is
empowered to grant interim maintenance, on what is filed by the
aggrieved person as assets and liabilities statement and as sought
in the application, failing which, such cases, like the one that is
brought before this Court, would mushroom and defeat the very
purport of the promulgation of the Act.
19. In view of the preceding analysis, I deem it appropriate to
issue the following directions:
(a) Applications filed along with the application under
Section 12 be it under Section 18, 19 or 20 of the Act,
the concerned Court shall decide those applications filed
along with the petition under Section 12 within 60 days
from the date of its filing;
(b) The husband shall be granted 4 weeks time to file his
assets and liabilities statement for a decision on an
application filed under Section 20 of the Act. If it is not
filed within the time frame, the concerned Court shall
accept the application filed by the wife/aggrieved
person and pass appropriate orders in accordance with
(c) Objections if any, to the application/s filed by the
aggrieved person under Sections 18 and 19 by the
opposite party, shall be filed within 4 weeks from the
date of receipt of notice, failing which, the Court
concerned will be at liberty to pass appropriate orders
in accordance with law;
(d)   To achieve the said timeline, the concerned Court shall
draw up and regulate its procedure in terms of its
inherent power under Section 28(2) of the Act.
The concerned Court shall strictly adhere to what is indicated
hereinabove and its deviation can only be for reasons to be
recorded in writing while passing orders on the applications.
20.  Adherence     to   the  aforesaid timeline  would  be  of
paramount importance, as         remedy   under Section    12 to an
aggrieved person is imperative. Therefore, timely disposal of such
applications are also imperative as Section 12 is the salt of the
statute; if by delay the salt would lose its savour; the statute
would lose its flavour.
21. For the aforesaid reasons, I pass the following:
(i)   Writ Petition is allowed.
(ii)   The concerned Court is directed to dispose of the
applications as sought for in the prayer within four
weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order, if
not earlier.
(iii) It is needless to observe that the parties to the lis shall
co-operate with the Court to pass appropriate orders on
the applications, failing which, the Court should be at
liberty to pass ex-parte orders in terms of Section 23 of
the Act.
(iv)  The Registry is directed to circulate this order to all the
concerned Courts handling cases arising out of the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005.
I.A.No.2 of 2022 also stands disposed, as a consequence.