Counsel for Appellant :- Rana Mritunjay Singh, Rajendra Prasad Mishra,
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A,R. N.S.Chauhan
Respondent :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Appellant :- Rana Mritunjay Singh,Rajendra Prasad
1.     Under challenge in the present appeals is the judgment and order
dated 22.08.2007 passed by learned Additional District and Session
Judge in Sessions Trial No.216 of 1999 arising out of case crime no. 50
of 1999 under Sections 148, 302, 149, 404 IPC at Police Station
Bangarmau District Unnao and Sessions Trial No. 217 of 1999 arising
out of case crime no.51 of 1999 under Section 3 r/w 25 Arms Act at
Police Station Bangarmau district Unnao whereby the appellants were
convicted under Section 302 read with Section 34 Indian Penal Code,
1860 and were sentenced to imprisonment for life and fine of Rs.5000/-
only with default stipulation of additional imprisonment of six months.
Appellant Ashwani Kumar was further convicted under Section 404 IPC
and was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a term of one
year and fine of Rs.1000/- with default stipulation of additional
imprisonment of three months. Moreover, he was convicted under
Section 3 r/w Section 25 of Arms Act and sentenced to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for a term of two years and fine of Rs.1000/- with default
stipulation of additional imprisonment of three months.
2.     The case of the prosecution, as unfolds from the FIR dated
17.02.1999 arising out of Case Crime No. 50/99 under Sections 302,
307, 396 IPC, P.S. Bangarmau District Unnao, is that the informant
Anand Mohan son of Ram Shanker Gaur gave an application in the
Police Station Bangarmau on 17.02.1999 that his uncle Ram Naresh
Gaur son of Sri Pal and uncle's son Anil Kumar son of Ram Naresh
were killed by the appellants and Sanad Kumar son of Ram Swaroop,
Avnish Kumar son of Ram Avatar and Parsu son of Pohkar Pasi. On
16.02.1999 appellant Ashwani Kumar and his brothers had intentionally
taken their tractor full of potatoes through the fields of informant
breaking its Khahee in consequence of which a verbal exchange had
taken place between them. On 17.02.1999, while the informant, his
father, his uncle Ram Naresh, uncle's son Anil Kumar and daughter
Vasundhara Devi were digging potatoes in the field of Ram Naresh, the
armed accused tried to repeat the act to which he objected. Ashwini
Kumar fired a shot at Ram Naresh which he missed. Ram Naresh also
made an air shot with his licensee gun in exercise of right of private
defense. The second shot by Ashwani hit Ram Naresh and he fell. Anil
Kumar who tried to pick the gun of his father was immediately shot by
Rajesh Kumar, Mithlesh Kumar and Atul Kumar. He died on the spot.
The accused then attacked the informant and his other family members
present, but they fled to save their lives. Ashwani Kumar took away the
licensee gun of Ram Naresh with him.
Injured Ram Naresh, informant and Vasundhrara Devi went to police
station to lodge an FIR. Ram Naresh died on the way to hospital from
ante-mortem injuries.
3.     On 18.02.1999 the police arrested the accused persons from
Hanuman Mandir before village Vasiyat Kheda. Upon search, a single
barrel gun, factory made, gun no.6382 and four live cartridges( 12 bore
red colour), out of which three were of No.1 and one was of No.2, in the
leash kept on shoulder were recovered from the possession of appellant
Ashwani Kumar. In furtherance of this recovery, the FIR dated
18.02.1999 arising out of Case Crime No. 51/99 under Section 25 Arms
Act, P.S. Bangarmau, District Unnao was registered.
4.     The Charge-sheet was filed against the accused under Sections
302,307 and 396 IPC and Section 3/25 Arms Act, 1959. The case was
committed to the Session Court, Unnao for trial. The trial court framed
charges under Sections 148 and 302/149 against all the 8 accused
namely Ram Lakhan, Ashwani Kumar, Mithlesh Kumar, Atul kumar,
Sanad Kumar, Awanish Kumar, Rajesh Kumar and Parshuram and under
Section 404 IPC against Ashwani Kumar in Sessions Trial No. 216/99
and also under Section 25 Arms Act, 1959 in Sessions Trial No. 217/99.
5.     In order to prove its case the prosecution had testified P.W.-1 the
informant, P.W-2 Vasundhara Devi, daughter of deceased Ram Naresh
and eye witness of the incident, P.W-3 Aakil Husain, Head Constable
who prepared the chik and proved Ext.2 FIR, Ext. 3 general diary Ext.4
G.D report no.31, injury report/medical report/majroobi chitthi as Ext.5
and Ext.6 i.e. special report, P.W-4 Jai Singh constable who was posted
at police station Bangarmau on the relevant date and took the body of
the deceased Anil Kumar for postmortem,P.W-5 S.I Shiv Narain
Upadhyaya who proved Ext.7 i.e. panchnama of deceased Anil Kumar,
Ext.8 and 11 i.e. cover letter to CMO and letter R.I photographs of dead
body, Ext.12 i.e. inspection report of site Ext. 13 i.e. soil samples-plain
and blood stained, Ext.14 i.e. blood stained tehmat and Ext.15 i.e.
recovered shrapnels(chharre), P.W.6 Dr. Dinesh Kumar who proved the
postmortem report of deceased Ram Naresh and Anil Kumar i.e. Ext.16
and 18 respectively, P.W-7 S.I. Chandra Bhan Singh who proved the
site plan of case crime no.51 of 1999 i.e. Ext.19, prosecution sanction
i.e Ext.20 and charge-sheet under Section 3 r/w 25 of Arms Act i.e. Ext
21, P.W-8 Vishwanath Sonkar, Head Moharrir who proved the recovery
of licensee gun and the cartridges i.e. Ext.22 and 1 to 5, the FIR and
G.D report of case crime no.51 of 1999 as Ext.23 and 24 respectively,
P.W.9 Awadhesh Kumar who proved on oath that he took seal bound
dead body of Ram Naresh Gaur for postmortem, P.W.10 Avinash Kumar
Dixit who is the first Investigating Officer of the case and proved the
panchnama of deceased Ram Naresh and documents relating thereto as
Ext. Nos.25 to 29 and P.W.11 Inspector Omraj Singh who is the chief
Investigating Officer of the case and proved Ext.22 as above, Ext 30 i.e.
charge-sheet dated 30.04.1999 against accused persons and the Exts 31
and 32 i.e. forensic reports of the recoveries.
6.     In his examination under Section 313 Cr.P.C, the appellant
Ashwani Kumar had denied the charges against him and alleged that he
is being falsely implicated due to political animosity. Other appellants
Rajesh Kumar, Atul Kumar, Mithlesh Kumar and co-accused
Parshuram, Ram Lakhan and Sanad Kumar took the same instance. Co-
accused Avnish Kumar,in his examination under Section 313 Cr.P.C,
took a plea of alibi that he was, at the time of incident, studying at
Subhash Inter College Bangarmau where he was admitted in Class XI as
7.     Informant Anand Mohan who was examined as P.W.1 reiterated
the version of FIR in the Examination- in-Chief. He further stated that
his father Ram Shanker, sister (cousin) Vasundhara, Shrawan Kumar,
Mashook Ali and others were eyewitnesses to the incident. After the
incident he came running to his village and took a tractor to take Ram
Naresh to Bangarmau. He identified the Ext.1 as the application written
by him on the way upon which the FIR was registered when he reached
the police station at 15.00/ 15.15 hrs. He missed the name of Ram
Lakhan in haste and anxiety. Injured Ram Naresh was sent to hospital
from police stationa. Later, he got to know that his uncle died on the way
to Unnao hospital. He also admitted that accused Ashwani Kumar had,
about 8 years ago, prosecuted him, his father Ram Shanker and witness
Shrawan Kumar (not examined) for an offence under Section 307 IPC, in
which accused Ashwani Kumar and Parshuram had given evidence against
In the cross examination, P.W.1 denied having any political animosity with
the appellants. However he changed his statement to the extent that the
appellants had taken their tractor through the orchard (Bagh) of Ram
Naresh and not potato field, a day before and the incident also took place
in the said orchard and not potato field. He clarified that he had mistakenly
understood the orchard as a potato field. On the date of incident , the
deceased Ram Naresh and Anil Kumar left for the field after taking their
meals. After 10 to 15 minutes, the informant, his father Ram Shanker and
P.W.2 left for the fields and reached around 10.15 hrs. About a sack of
potatoes were dug out and not collected before the incident took place.
Upon first sight, the tractor was 10-15 steps away from the south Khahee
of the orchard. Ram Naresh protested against the tractor being driven
through the orchard, having a gun in his hand then. Departing from his
examination in chief, he admitted that when appellants did not pay any
heed to his protest, fire was first made by the deceased Ram Naresh in the
air towards west, while Ashwani was on his tractor. After this Ashwani
Kumar fired at Ram Naresh, but it did not hit him. At this, he moved 8-10
steps ahead and not towards the field out of fear. Ram Naresh fell after
getting injured by Ashwani’s second shot. He was 2-3 arms away from the
place Potatoes were being dug out. He fell after moving a little west. His
gun fell as well. Rajesh, Atul and Mithlesh who were standing three steps
apart from each other, fired from north of the orchard, aiming at Anil
Kumar who was trying to pick the gun of Ram Naresh. The accused took
the gun and left, leaving their tractor behind. Shrawan Kumar whose field
is in towards the west of the place of occurrence had witnessed the
incident himself and came running from his field thereafter. The witness
admitted that the tractor through which he went to the police station was
being driven by the son of Har Govind Mishra (Ex. Pradhan), Pramod and
he was hence accompanied by Pramod, Ram Naresh, Vasundhara and
Ramesh Kumar who also belong to the family of Har Govind Mishra. He
did not accompany Ram Naresh to hospital and came back to the village
with police. According to him, the body of Anil Kumar which they left at
the orchard was found by him in-front of Mashook Ali's home and was
covered with a tehmat (Mashook Ali is a batai-gir who accompanied the
informant at the field). The dugout potatoes which they left in the field
were not present when they reached back. His statement was recorded by
the police at the place where Anil Kumar's body was found around 17.30
hrs., the same day.
8.      P.W-2 Vasundhara Devi is the daughter of deceased Ram Naresh
and claims to be eye-witness of the incident. In her examination-in-chief,
she affirmed that her father Ram Naresh and brother Anil Kumar were
killed by Ashwani Kumar and other accused on 17.02.1999. She stated that
the first fire was made by Ashwani Kumar aiming at Ram Naresh which
he missed. Ram Naresh had a licensee gun from which he air-fired in the
exercise of right of private defense. Ashwani Kumar, then fired again at
Ram Naresh and he fell. Ashwani Kumar then dared other accused to
kill others and fulfill the purpose they were brought for. Thereafter,
Rajesh, Atul and Mithlesh fired at Anil with their gun and addhis
respectively. Other accused had addhis as well. All four accused fired at
them but they saved their lives by running away. She supported the
version of P.W.1 in the later part as well, adding that she came back
from the police station by the same tractor they went there. Ram
Shanker, brother of Ram Naresh accompanied him to the hospital by
Jeep after the first aid at Bangarmau.
Upon being cross examined by the defense counsel, the witness had
refuted the plea of alibi taken by accused Avanish Kumar. Moreover, the
description of the place of occurrence given by P.W-2 is identical to the
one given by P.W.1 to a large extent. She deposed that accused Ashwani
Kumar did not make the first fire from the tractor, but came down for it.
At this point, Ram Naresh had his gun in his hand but not loaded. He
loaded his gun thereafter and made an air fire in the exercise of right of
private defense, facing east. The second fire made by Ashwani hit Ram
Naresh, when he had stepped 2-3 steps ahead from his position.
Differing from her examination by police under Section 161 Cr.P.C, she
stated that when Ram Naresh fell, Anil was standing near him and not
on the 'Medha' near her. She added, when Anil picked the gun of Ram
Naresh, it was not loaded. After the incident, she reached the police
station at 15.20 hrs., her statement was not recorded there. According to
her, Ram Naresh was sent to hospital within 10-15 minutes. She left for
the village around 17.30 hrs. Anand Mohan had already gone to the
village with police. She reached the village at 18.00 hrs. Her maternal
uncle Sripal and maternal cousins Kamlesh and Rakesh reached by
19.00 hrs. Police remained at the place of occurrence till 18.45 hrs.
Body of Anil (deceased) was sent for examination at 18.45 hrs.
9.     In his examination, PW3., who was posted as head Moharir at the
P.S. Bangarmau on the said date, has certified the chik FIR prepared by
him at 15.20 hrs. [Exhibit 2], the Majrubi Chitthi with which injured
Ram Naresh was sent to community health centre, Bangarmau with
constable Avadhesh Kumar Singh (CP525) and attached thereto, the
referral letter of Doctor to Sadar Hospital, Unnao (Exhibit 5) and the
special report prepared by him (Exhibit 6) which was sent to authority
In the cross-examination, the witness admitted that the copy of the chik
FIR with special Report was sent to C.O. Safipur on 18.02.99.
10.    CP 571, Jai Singh, who was also posted as constable at P.S.
Bangarmau and was testified as PW 4, affirmed on oath that he
accompanied the investigating officer to the spot at village Belkheda,
Majra Ranipur on the date of occurrence and that he took the body of
Anil Kumar, after Panchnama, and documentation to the Mortuary and
presented it before doctor on 18.02.99 duly sealed and accompanied
with all documents, for postmortem.
11.    PW 5, Shiv Narayan Singh was then posted as SSI at PS
Bangarmau. He certified before the trial court his signature on FIR,
Panchayatnama and the letter to Chief Medical Officer, letter R.I.
photograph of dead body, and the challan of the dead body. He admits to
have recorded the statement of P.W. 1 and thereafter he proceeded to the
spot with a police party. He carried out the panchayatnama of deceased
Anil Kumar. At the instance of the informant, he inspected the spot and
prepared the site plan, which is in accordance with the revenue map. He
also affirmed to have recorded the soil samples, blood stained tahmat
and 11 cartridges, 1 bullet, 3 tiklis and two corks and prepared memo
thereof in his writing and signature. Further, he recorded the statement
of P.W. 2 the same day. The investigation was then taken up by SHO
Omraj Singh on the same day at 22.00 hrs.
In the cross examination, the witness affirmed to have left for the spot at
15.30 hrs. with the informant on his bike. Regarding the Sections
mentioned and then crossed in panchnama, he clarified that he wrote
Sections 147/148/149 on the basis of the number of accused involved
but crossed them after tallying with the F.I.R. But the witness
vehemently denied the F.I.R. and other documents being ante timed. He
admitted that the body of the deceased Anil Kumar was recovered about
half a k.m. away from the said place of occurrence, while the tahmat
was recovered from spot E indicated in the site plan.
12.    Dr. Dinesh Kumar examined as P.W. 6 had conducted the
postmortem of deceased Ram Naresh and deceased Anil Kumar and had
proved the report before the trial court. In respect of the postmortem of
Ram Naresh he stated that the body had four injuries of the description
given. In the internal examination, two metal shrapnels were recovered.
In his opinion, the death might have occurred between 16.00-17.00 hrs a
day before examination due to antemortem firearm injuries. In respect
of the deceased Anil Kumar's medical examination, he stated that the
deceased died of blood loss and shock around 13.00 hrs. on 17.2.1999.
In the cross examination he further stated that Ram Naresh had suffered
three firearm shots. The third injury was caused from behind. The injury
which had blackness and burns (injury-1) was caused from one hand
13.    P.W. 7 Chandra Bhan Singh deposed that he investigated the case
crime no. 51/1999 under Section 3/25 Arms Act on 19.2.1999. He
deposed to have recorded the statement of informant Omraj Singh,
scribe of the F.I.R. Vishwanath Sonkar and accused Ashwani Kumar.
The witness certified the site plan (exhibit 19) prosecution sanction
obtained dated 12.5.1999 (exhibit 20) and the charge-sheet prepared
after completion of the investigation(exhibit 21) by him.
The cross examination of the witness revealed that the case diary
prepared by him did not mention the time of beginning of the
investigation on 19.2.1999 but reiterated that the site plan and the
investigation were not fabricated.
14.    P.W. 8 Vishwanath Sonkar the scribe of the F.I.R. in case crime
no. 51/99 dated 18.2.1999 deposed in his examination-in-chief that he
accompanied investigating officer P.W. 11 to the spot on 18.2.1999. He
affirmed the recovery of a single barrel gun and four live cartridges
from accused Ashwani Kumar and others at 20.00 hrs. near Hanuman
temple. He identified exhibit 1, 2 3, 4 and 5 (the recovered gun and
cartridges), exhibit 23 (F.I.R. written in his handwriting and signature
and exhibit 22 (the recovery memo).
The cross examination of the witness revealed several gaps in the
prosecution story. The witness failed to tell the time he reached the spot,
whether P.w. 1 was present there or not, whether the police team visited
any other house in the village, the dimensions of the platform of the
temple on which the accused were sitting at the time of arrest, the
distance from which accused were spotted first, or whether any warning
was given by the police team to the accused. He deposed that the police
team was divided into three parts. His team consisted of constable
Mahesh Pratap Verma and Inspector S.N. Upadhyaya but he could not
recollect the composition of other teams or their position/direction.
There is no witness of the arrest on record other than the police party
and five accused themselves. No lantern or any other thing was called
for to prepare the memo of recovery. The police party was stated to have
been carrying the torch.
15.     P.W. 9 525 CP Awadhesh Kumar Singh deposed on oath that he
received the body of the deceased Ram Naresh Gaur for postmortem
and kept it untouched until the postmortem took place.
16.     P.w. 10 Avinash Kumar Dixit stated in his examination in chief
that he carried out the inquest of the death of Ram Naresh Gaur after
receiving information from P.W. 9 and reported as report no. 31. He
proved the exhibit 25-panchayatnama of Ram Naresh Gaur, exhibit 26-
photograph of dead body, exhibit 27 dead body challan, exhibit 28 R.I.
letter and exhibit 29 letter to C.M.O.
In the cross examination the witness affirmed that the deceased was sent
to PHC and then hospital by same tractor and after he died it was
brought back and sent for postmortem after panchanama by the same
17.     Om Raj Singh, who was then posted as Officer in charge at
police station Bangaurmau and was the Chief Investigating officer of
the matter was examined as P.W. 11. He affirmed the statement of P.W.
5 that the investigation of case crime no. 50/1999 was taken up by him
in the intervening night of 17.2.1999/18.2.1999 and duly received all
documents and the recovery memos prepared so far. He also registered
the F.I.R. under Section 3/25 of Arms Act in case crime no. 51/1999 at
22.15 hrs. 18.2.1999 recorded the statements of witnesses Ram Shankar,
Ram dulari and inquest witnesses and submitted a charge sheet(exhibit
30) prepared in his handwriting under his signature.
Further in the cross examination it was revealed by the witness that he
went to the village of Judai Khera for investigation with P.W. 5 at 21.00
hours and remained there till 03.30 hrs. (18.2.1999). They also made
searches at the residence and other probable stations of the accused but
they were not present there. The witness reiterated that all the witnesses
were arrested together about 100 yards towards east from abadi of
village pasiyan khera. The villagers refused to give evidence of the
arrest out of fear.
18.    On behalf of the defence, two witnesses were examined in
support of their case.
19.    D.W. 1 Baijnath Tiwari supported the plea of alibi taken by
accused Avanish Kumar. D.W. 1 was posted as Lecturer and class
teacher of class 11 (science) at Subhash Inter College Bangarmau at the
relevant time.
20.    D.W. 2 Ram Bahadur Singh who was Principal of Gram Awasiya
Vidyalaya, Takiya produced the attendance register of teachers of school
and deposed that Shrawan Kumar Gaur whom P.W. 1 and P.W. 2
claimed to have witnessed the incident of 17.2.1999, was present in
school between 09:45 to 16.00 hrs. The distance between the school and
village Ashayas is 10-11 km. The witness remained consistent in his
cross examination.
21.    After the completion of the evidence from both the sides the trial
court, taking into consideration the oral and documentary evidence and
considering the arguments of prosecution as well as defence and duly
examining all the papers convicted the appellant as above. Accused
Sanad Kumar, Awanish Kumar and Ram Lakhan were given Benefit of
doubt and acquitted. Accused Parshuram died during the trial.
C. The case framed by prosecution and defence:
22.    The appellants have been convicted and sentenced to life
imprisonment. There is no appeal of the State against the acquittal of
co-accused viz. Awanish Kumar, Sanad Kumar and Ram Lakhan.
Parshuram yet another co-accused died during the course of trial.
23.    The sum and substance of the case framed by the prosecution is
that on 16.2.1999 the appellants took their tractor through the
land/orchard belonging to the deceased while they were digging out
potatoes in their field and some altercation took place. Next day on
17.2.1999 the appellants again made an attempt to repeat the same and
on the protest of Ram Naresh, they opened fire and caused the death of
Anil Kumar and Ram Naresh both by using lethal weapons i.e. fire arms
and the occurrence was witnessed by as many as five eye witnesses viz.
Shankar, Mashook Ali and Shrawan Kumar. Out of five eye witnesses
the prosecution produced Anand Mohan (PW-1) who was the nephew of
Ram Naresh (deceased) and the cousin of Anil Kumar (deceased)
whereas the other witness Vasundhara (PW-2) was the daughter of Ram
Naresh (deceased) and the real sister of Anil Kumar (deceased).
24.    The post mortem reports support the case of prosecution which
were proved. The cause of death is the loss blood on account of fire arm
injuries insofar as Anil Kumar is concerned, whereas Ram Naresh died
of ante mortem injuries received from a fire arm. Site plan was also
prepared by the investigation officer as per revenue map and the inquest
reports were also drawn in respect of both the persons who succumbed
to the fire arm injuries. Initially Shiv Narain PW-5 stepped into the
investigation which was later taken over by Chandra Bhan Singh PW-7.
The recovery of the licenced fire arm belonging to Ram Naresh looted
in the occurrence was also made by the investigating officer. No one
except the two deceased persons received any injury.
25.    The appellants were charged of committing the offences under
Section 148, 302/149, 404 IPC. Ashwini Kumar was also charged of
the offence under Section 25 of the Arms Act. At the stage of Section
313 Cr.P.C. the appellants denied of being guilty and it was submitted
that they have falsely been implicated in the occurrence. For non-
compliance of the procedure under Section 313 Cr.P.C. there is no
grievance except that the applicants stated that they have been
implicated falsely. The trial court went through the evidence in detail
and conclusions were accordingly drawn against the appellants for
holding them guilty. The plea of lack of intention and sudden
provocation attracting Section 300 Exception IV IPC was not raised
during the course of trial.
26.     The most significant contradiction in the ocular testimony of PW-
1 noticeable in the case is that the said witness in the cross examination
has clearly stated that the first fire on the date of occurrence was shot in
the air towards west by Ram Naresh using his licenced gun whereas the
PW-2 in her oral testimony being an eye witness has said that the first
fire was made by Ashwani Kumar. According to PW-2 the first fire was
shot by Ashwini Kumar on which the deceased Ram Naresh objected
the assailants from entering into the orchard/potato field belonging to
the deceased who in private defence fired in the air.. It was the second
shot fired by Ashwini Kumar that hit Ram Naresh and he fell down and
his licenced gun fell too. The other victim Anil Kumar who bent for
picking up the gun was then fired at by other assailants and having
received fire arm injuries died on the spot. This inconsistency between
the ocular evidence of PW-1 and PW-2 according to the appellants is a
material contradiction that goes to belie the case of the prosecution, as
such, they are entitled to the benefit of doubt at par with the other co-
accused who have been acquitted.
27.     The second contradiction in the oral testimony of eye witness
PW-2 is noticed when her version that Ram Naresh after reaching to
the police station was taken to the hospital by Jeep is compared to the
version of PW-10 (Awinash Kumar Dixit) who in his cross examination
has deposed that Ram Naresh (deceased) was taken to the hospital by
the same tractor he was brought to the police station. The
contradictions certainly shake the credibility of evidence.
28.    Apart from the contradictions mentioned above, the appellants
have pointed out the ambiguity in the site plan that it was prepared as
per the guidance of complainant which the investigating officer has
acknowledged in his cross examination, therefore, the evidence of PW-
1 being the informant is the genesis of the case. The dead body of the
deceased Anil Kumar was recovered at a distance of half a kilometer
from the alleged fields i.e. in front of the home of Mashook Ali. It was
argued that the tractor of the appellants as per site plan had not entered
into potato field of the deceased Ram Naresh at all, yet in the first
instance he fired in the air so as to intimidate the appellants of causing
grievous injury. It is argued on behalf of appellants that reaching out to
their potato field on 17.2.1999 through any objectionable route is not
evident from the statement of any witness or FIR, therefore, the
protection of private defence asserted by PW-2 on behalf of Ram
Naresh was clearly pointless. The first fire made by the deceased (Ram
Naresh) rather gave rise to the right of self defence to the appellants
who were intimidated excessively and threatened of life to use the chak
road passing through the field of deceased. The site plan does not show
Mashook Ali or dug out potatoes lying on the field besides the alleged
tractor full of potatoes which the accused left behind. The position of
other witnesses is also not shown in the site plan.
29.     The evidence on record also reflects some overwriting on the
inquest report of Anil Kumar (deceased) but same was explained by the
investigating officer to the satisfaction of trial court.
30.     This Court has taken note of the contradictions mentioned above
but all these lapses on the part of investigating officer according to the
trial court, would not discredit the ocular testimony of PW-1 and PW-2
who are eye witnesses and their testimony merely on the basis of being
close relatives to the deceased, cannot be discredited.
31.     The plea of innocence notwithstanding the contradictions and
the discrepancies pointed out failed, however, the appellants without
formally taking the ground, at this stage, have taken the plea that it was
a case of culpable homicide within the scope of Section 300 Exception
IV IPC for which the sentence of life imprisonment being maximum is
disproportionate. It is submitted that the evidence available on record
sufficiently discloses it to be a case of culpable homicide not
amounting to murder. Section 300 Exception IV IPC for ready
“300- Murder : Except in the cases hereinafter excepted,
culpable homicide is murder, if the act by which the death is
caused is done with the intention of causing death, or—
2ndly.—If it is done with the intention of causing such bodily
injury as the offender knows to be likely to cause the death of
3rdly.—If it is done with the intention of causing bodily injury
to any person and the bodily injury intended to be inflicted is
sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death, or
4thly.—If the person committing the act knows that it is so
imminently dangerous that it must, in all probability, cause
death, or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death, and
commits such act without any excuse for incurring the risk of
causing death or such injury as aforesaid.
(a) A shoots Z with the intention of killing him. Z dies in
consequence. A commits murder.
(b) A, knowing that Z is labouring under such a disease that a
blow is likely to cause his death, strikes him with the
intention of causing bodily injury. Z dies in consequence of
the blow. A is guilty of murder, although the blow might not
have been sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause
the death of a person in a sound state of health. But if A, not
knowing that Z is labouring under any disease, gives him
such a blow as would not in the ordinary course of nature kill
a person in a sound state of health, here A, although he may
intend to cause bodily injury, is not guilty of murder, if he did
not intend to cause death, or such bodily injury as in the
ordinary course of nature would cause death.
(c) A intentionally gives Z a sword-cut or club-wound
sufficient to cause the death of a man in the ordinary course
of nature. Z dies in consequence. Here A is guilty of murder,
although he may not have intended to cause Z's death.
(d) A without any excuse fires a loaded cannon into a crowd
of persons and kills one of them. A is guilty of murder,
although he may not have had a premeditated design to kill
any particular individual.
Exception 1.—When culpable homicide is not murder.
Culpable homicide is not murder if          the offender, whilst
deprived of the power of self-control      by grave and sudden
provocation, causes the death of the       person who gave the
provocation or causes the death of         any other person by
mistake or accident.
The above exception is subject to the following provisos:—
First.—That the provocation is not sought or voluntarily
provoked by the offender as an excuse for killing or doing
harm to any person.
Secondly.—That the provocation is not given by anything
done in obedience to the law, or by a public servant in the
lawful exercise of the powers of such public servant.
Thirdly.—That the provocation is not given by anything done
in the lawful exercise of the right of private defence.
Explanation.—Whether the provocation was grave and
sudden enough to prevent the offence from amounting to
murder is a question of fact.
(a) A, under the influence of passion excited by a provocation
given by Z, intentionally kills Y, Z's child. This is murder,
inasmuch as the provocation was not given by the child, and
the death of the child was not caused by accident or
misfortune in doing an act caused by the provocation.
(b) Y gives grave and sudden provocation to A. A, on this
provocation, fires a pistol at Y, neither intending nor knowing
himself to be likely to kill Z, who is near him, but out of sight.
A kills Z. Here A has not committed murder, but merely
culpable homicide.
(c) A is lawfully arrested by Z, a bailiff. A is excited to sudden
and violent passion by the arrest, and kills Z. This is murder,
inasmuch as the provocation was given by a thing done by a
public servant in the exercise of his powers.
(d) A appears as a witness before Z, a Magistrate. Z says that
he does not believe a word of A's deposition, and that A has
perjured himself. A is moved to sudden passion by these
words, and kills Z. This is murder.
(e) A attempts to pull Z's nose. Z, in the exercise of the right
of private defence, lays hold of A to prevent him from doing
so. A is moved to sudden and violent passion in consequence,
and kills Z.
This is murder, inasmuch as the provocation was giving by a
thing done in the exercise of the right of private defence.
(f) Z strikes B. B is by this provocation excited to violent
rage. A, a bystander, intending to take advantage of B's rage,
and to cause him to kill Z, puts a knife into B's hand for that
purpose. B kills Z with the knife. Here B may have committed
only culpable homicide, but A is guilty of murder.
Exception 2.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the offender
in the exercise in good faith of the right of private defence of
person or property, exceeds the power given to him by law
and causes the death of the person against whom he is
exercising such right of defence without premeditation, and
without any intention of doing more harm than is necessary
for the purpose of such defence.
Z attempts to horsewhip A, not in such a manner as to cause
grievous hurt to A. A draws out a pistol. Z persists in the
assault. A believing in good faith that he can by no other
means prevent himself from being horsewhipped, shoots Z
dead. A has not committed murder, but only culpable
Exception 3.—Culpable homicide is not murder if the
offender, being a public servant or aiding a public servant
acting for the advancement of public justice, exceeds the
powers given to him by law, and causes death by doing an
act which he, in good faith, believes to be lawful and
necessary for the due discharge of his duty as such public
servant and without ill-will towards the person whose death is
Exception 4.—Culpable homicide is not murder if it is
committed without premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat
of passion upon a sudden quarrel and without the offender's
having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual
manner.
Explanation.—It is immaterial in such cases which party offers
the provocation or commits the first assault.
Exception 5.—Culpable homicide is not murder when the
person whose death is caused, being above the age of
eighteen years, suffers death or takes the risk of death with
his own consent.
A, by instigation, voluntarily causes Z, a person under
eighteen years of age to commit suicide. Here, on account of
Z's youth, he was incapable of giving consent to his own
death; A has therefore abetted murder.”
32.     The question as to whether the plea of self defence or an
exception, when it was not asserted during the course of trial, remains
open or not. In this regard reference may be made to a decision of the
apex court reported in   1970 SCC (Crl) 541 (Aher Raja Ladha v. The
State of Gujarat)     wherein the plea though advanced at the stage of
committal was not pursued in trial, yet the apex court held that the trial
court and the High Court were wrong in refusing to examine the plea of
self defence taken. This Court may observe that the plea of self defence
on an exception appended to Section-300 IPC on the strength of
evidence available on record is open to be raised at the appellate stage
for it is the duty of the trial court and the appellate court both not to
ignore any relevant aspect of the case that has a bearing upon his being
held guilty.
33.     The     Court   would    thus proceed to examine the plea of
exception-IV appended to Section 300 IPC for which the evidence of
PW-1 is more reliable than PW-2. The distinction is drawn looking to
the fact that PW-2 has made mismatched statement more than once as
noticed above. Therefore, the credibility of her evidence does not lead
to the discovery of truth. The overriding evidence of PW-1 who helped
the investigating officer draw the site place, therefore, becomes highly
relevant. According to the ocular evidence of PW-1 it is clear that the
first fire was opened by Ram Naresh (deceased) which, by no stretch of
imagination, could be viewed less than life threatening by the
appellants, who in retaliation resorted to use the fire arms and caused a
fatal injury to him. The threat to life was equally imminent to the
appellants, when Anil Kumar bent to pick up the gun which fell down
from the hands of Ram Naresh on receiving injury. The provocation for
sudden fight and quarrel was triggerd by the deceased who protested by
advancing towards the accused and the heat of passion multiplied on his
opening the first fire and this position is well established on a prudent
reading of the testimony of PW-1 (Anand Mohan).
34.      It would not be prudent to import the element of common
intention in a situation of sudden fight or quarrel saddled by provocation
or aggression as in the case at hand, therefore, the evidence on record
clearly brings the case within the field of Exception-IV appended to
Section 300 IPC and the benefit of Section 304 Part-I becomes
applicable. The view taken by the trial court that there existed a
common intention for murder in the total act of accused persons, in our
humble consideration, is overreaching the essence of evidence of which
the material contradictions were wrongly ignored and attached no
35.      This Court may observe that the element of common intention in
the commission of an offence is more a rule of procedure lack of which
may not severe the culpability but it mitigates the punishment. This
Court may note that the distinction drawn between culpable homicide
and murder in the case of Reg. vs. Govinda reported in (1877) ILR 1 Bombay
342  and  Virsa Singh v. State of Punjab reported in AIR 1958 SC 465 does not
lead us to any doubt that in the present case the appellants did have
knowledge of the fatality of the fire arm injury but the sudden
provocation and aggression suppressed the element of intention much
less than common intention, therefore, benefit of Section 304 Part-II or
at least lesser punishment by advancing the benefit under Part-I of
Section 304 ought to have been accorded by the trial court.
36.      The appellants have already served the sentence for more than 17
years which the State has not disputed besides the fact that one of the
appellants (Parshuram Pasi) has died during the pendency of appellate
proceedings while incarceration. The Court would equally note that the
evidence of the site plan is completely silent on the objectionable
course/route that was adopted by the appellants one day before nor has
it been shown on the day of occurrence that would give any reason to
the deceased to approach towards appellants to hurl abuses or opening
first fire which gave rise to sudden provocation.
37.      The investigation, evidence or site plan offers no explanation of
the tractor loaded with potatoes that was attempted to be brought and
driven through the land of deceased and the independent witnesses were
neither produced nor their position shown in the site plan unlike
appellants. The absence of Shrawan Kumar despite defence evidence
having been led to prove his absence was wrongly disbelieved. Above
all the body of Anil Kumar (deceased) was recovered half a kilometer
away from the place of occurrence and as per medical opinion he died
of loss of blood (hemorrhage). For want of adequate justification, the
State has not argued that there was any pre-meditation or the appellants
had acted in any cruel or unusual manner.
38.    The Court may note that the prosecution as a matter of routine
does not lay emphasis on the production of independent witnesses
during the course of trial or fails to record their statements during
investigation. Such a lapse on the part of investigating agency must be
viewed seriously by the courts of law and time is not far when the
courts may have to invoke the suo motu powers to summon such
witnesses for which there ought to exist a witness protection law.
39.    For the reasons recorded above, the conviction of the appellants
under Section 302 IPC is modified as conviction under Section 304
Part-I IPC and the substantive sentence of life imprisonment is reduced
to the period of sentence already undergone by them and the two
appeals preferred by the appellants separately as noted above, are partly
allowed. Let a copy of the judgement be kept on the record of Criminal
Appeal no. 2078 of 2007 as well.
40.    All the accused-appellants be set at liberty forthwith if not
wanted in any other case.