1)      The petitioner has challenged FIR No.191/2018 for offence under
Sections 153, 353 and 13 ULA(P) Act registered with Police Station,
2)      It is averred in the petition that the petitioner is working as Assistant
Professor, Geography, at Government Degree College, Kulgam, and he
has undergone Ph. D course in Geography in Aligarh Muslim University.
It is further averred that the petitioner is an RTI activist and has filed many
RTI applications for advancing the interests of the society so that public
funds are utilized in a better manner. It is averred that at the time of
appointment of the petitioner as an Assistant Professor, a verification
report was furnished by the police stating therein that there is nothing
adverse against the petitioner. He goes on to submit that in January, 2017,
he had filed a writ petition before this Court calling into question the
illegal extraction of minerals wherein an interim direction was passed by
this Court and as a consequence of this, District Magistrate, Kulgam,
asked Principal, Government Degree College, Kulgam, to enquire into the
activities of the petitioner. A report was submitted by the Committee of
Professors vide communication No.DMK/Verification/2017-2018/367
dated 08.09.2017, wherein it was reported that nothing adverse has been
found against the petitioner. It is averred that the petitioner was thereafter
transferred to Government Degree College, Ganderbal, and the said order
was challenged by him by way of a writ petition before this Court and an
interim order came to be passed in his favour in the said writ petition. It is
further averred in the petition that the petitioner filed an RTI application
seeking information regarding recruitment of Rahbar-e-Khel in the year
2018. According to the petitioner, all the aforesaid activities irked the
respondents, as a consequence whereof, the impugned FIR came to be
lodged against him.
3)     The petitioner has challenged the impugned FIR on the grounds that
the contents of the same are false and that no offence is made out against
him even if the same are accepted at their face value. It has been further
contended that the action of the respondents in registering the impugned
FIR smacks of malafides and vengeance.
4)     The respondents have resisted the petition by filing a reply thereto.
In their reply, the respondents have submitted that the petitioner is
indulging in criminal activities and he is misusing and abusing the
freedom of expression by taking aid of social media. According to
respondents, the activities of the petitioner have the effect of motivating
the students of the college to disrupt peace and tranquility in the area as
he is provoking them to indulge in violence against the State
Administration. It has been submitted that the petitioner, in order to gain
cheap popularity within the area, is using illegal means to prevent the
district administration from discharging their lawful activities. It is
submitted that the impugned FIR has been registered on the basis of
credible reports in respect of the petitioner which clearly disclose
commission of cognizable offences against him. It has been contended
that the petitioner is motivating the public with the ideology of extremist
groups and he is indulging in a vilifying campaign against the district
administration and the security forces. According to the respondents, the
petitioner has committed activities which attract the provisions contained
in Sections 153 and 353 of RPC and Section 13 of ULA(P) Act.
5)     I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record
including the Case Diary.
6)     Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that the contents
of the impugned FIR do not make out any offence against the petitioner.
It has been submitted that even if the contents of the impugned FIR are
accepted at their face value, still then at best it may amount to violation of
Civil Service Rules on the part of the petitioner and in no case, it would
amount to disclosure of a criminal offence against the petitioner. Learned
counsel has contended that the petitioner is alleged to have uploaded
certain video clips on social media and these video clips pertain to
criticism of functioning of the district administration and the same, in no
way, constitute offences under Section 153 of RPC or under Section 13 of
7)      Upon perusal of the Case Diary, it is revealed that after registration
of the impugned FIR, the respondents have recorded statements of the
witnesses under Section 161 of the Cr. P. C and they have also seized the
video clips which are alleged to have been uploaded by the petitioner on
YouTube. As per the investigation conducted by the investigating agency,
the petitioner is trying to motivate the common people towards separatism
and he is provoking them against the police and security forces as also
against district administration. As per the investigation conducted by the
investigating agency, the petitioner is shown to be sympathetic towards
the people who are involved in unlawful and terrorist activities and he is
provoking common people against the establishment of army camps.
8)      To support the aforesaid conclusions arrived at during the
investigation of the case, the respondents have recorded the statements of
witnesses under Section 161 of the Cr. P. C and they have also seized the
video clips which are alleged to have been uploaded by the petitioner on
the social media. Upon watching the video clips seized during the
investigation of the case, it appears that the petitioner is conveying to the
audience that Kashmiri students are being lynched and brutally tortured in
other parts of the country. In one of the video clips, the petitioner is seen
conveying to his audience that the children of Kashmir are being
oppressed by the security forces and the army. In yet another video clip,
the petitioner is conveying that the army is hampering the movement of
the people and it is obstructing the children from going to schools which
has led to closure of schools. In yet another video clip, the petitioner is
seen pleading cause relating to release of a person who was in custody for
indulging in stone pelting and terrorist activities.
9)     There are certain other video clips allegedly uploaded by the
petitioner but in those video clips, the petitioner is seen only criticizing
the functioning of the District Administration, the Police Department and
10)    The material collected by the investigating agency during the
investigation of the case clearly suggests that the petitioner is provoking
or at least intending to provoke his audience to use force or violence
against the institutions like the army, the police and the civil
administration. The video clips also, prima facie, show that the petitioner
is trying to promote enmity between the people living in Kashmir and
those living in other parts of the country. Thus, it cannot be stated that the
material on record does not disclose commission of any cognizable
offence against the petitioner. As to what offences are exactly established
or made out against the petitioner would be known only after the
investigation is completed by the respondents and final report is laid
before the competent court but at this stage of the investigation, it can
safely be stated that the material collected by the investigating agency so
far, does disclose commission of cognizable offences against the
11)     The Supreme Court in the case of Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd.
vs. State of Maharashtra and others, 2021 SCC Online SC 315, has clearly
laid down that the High Court should exercise its powers under Section
482 of the Cr. P. C to quash the investigation in an FIR in exceptional
circumstances because it is the statutory duty of an investigating agency
to take the investigation into an FIR to its logical conclusion.
12)     Having regard to the nature of material supporting the allegations
contained in the impugned FIR, the prosecution against the petitioner
appears to be genuine. Thus, the instant case does not fall into the category
of cases in which this Court would exercise its powers under Section 482
of the Cr. P. C to quash the proceedings in the impugned FIR. Quashing
the proceedings in the instant case would amount to stifling a genuine
prosecution which is impermissible in law.
13)     For the forgoing reasons, there is no merit in this petition. The same
is, accordingly, dismissed.
14)     Case Diary be returned to the learned counsel for the respondents.
Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No