Heard Mr. Ravi Teja Padiri, learned
counsel     for    the    Petitioner    and   Mr.
Subrahmanyam Sriram, learned Advocate
General     along    with    Mr.   N.    Aswartha
Narayana,      learned    Government      Pleader,
Services-I, for the Respondents No.1 to 3.
2. The petitioner has moved the Court
for the following relief:
“It is therefore prayed that this
Hon'ble Court may be pleased to
issue a writ, order or direction
more particularly one in the
nature of Writ of Mandamus
declaring the G.O.Ms. No.1 of
Government of Andhra Pradesh
dated 17.01.2022, published in
Notifications by Government vide
January,       2022      as    illegal,
arbitrary      and     against     the
principles of natural justice being
contrary to the provisions of the
Act, 2014 and Constitution of
India and consequently direct the
respondents       to   notify fresh
revised scales of Pay, 2022 by
taking into consideration of our
representation and by providing
salary protection by continuing
emoluments such as HRA and etc
and pass such other order or
orders as this Hon‟ble Court may
deem fit and proper in the
circumstances of the case.”
3. The matter was heard for some time
and due to paucity of time it was directed to
be taken up again after the lunch recess.
Further, in view of certain developments
brought     to   our     notice   by   the   learned
Advocate     General,      relating   to   grievance
towards pay-scales, under challenge in the
instant proceedings, the employees’ union
had also sought, and was granted, an
appointment        with    the   Chief    Secretary,
Government of Andhra Pradesh at 3pm
today, for serving the agitation schedule
including notice of strike, the Court had
requested      the    employees’    representatives
concerned to join the proceedings virtually.
4.   The     learned    Advocate     General
submitted that when this Court had already
been called upon, by way of this writ
petition, albeit by a government employee in
his individual capacity, as the lis was before
this Court, it was not proper for the
employees to give a call for, or proceed on
strike,    which      could    bring    the   State’s
administrative machinery to a grinding halt.
Trite   it  is   that    Article   19(1)(a)   of  the
Constitution      of   India   guarantees      to  all
citizens the right to freedom of speech and
expression. Equally well-settled it is that
such right is not absolute.
5. In T K Rangarajan v Government
of Tamil Nadu, (2003) 6 SCC 581, cited by
the learned Advocate General, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court held thus:
‘11. Now coming to the question of right
to strike — whether fundamental,
statutory or equitable/moral right — in
our view, no such right exists with the
government employees.
(A) There is no fundamental right to go
12. Law on this subject is well settled
and it has been repeatedly held by this
Court that the employees have no
fundamental right to resort to strike.
In Kameshwar        Prasad v. State      of
(3) SCR 369] this Court (Constitution
Bench) held that the rule insofar as it
prohibited strikes was valid since there
is no fundamental right to resort to
13. In Radhey Shyam Sharma v. Post
(1964) 7 SCR 403] the employees of
Post and Telegraph Department of the
Government went on strike from the
midnight of 11-7-1960 throughout India
and the petitioner was on duty on that
day. As he went on strike, in the
departmental enquiry, penalty was
imposed       upon   him.    That     was
challenged before this Court. In that
context, it was contended that Sections
3, 4 and 5 of the Essential Services
Maintenance Ordinance 1 of 1960 were
violative     of   fundamental      rights
guaranteed by clauses (a) and (b) of
Article 19(1) of the Constitution. The
Court (Constitution Bench) considered
the Ordinance and held that Sections 3,
4 and 5 of the said Ordinance did not
violate     the    fundamental      rights
enshrined in Articles 19(1)(a) and (b) of
the Constitution. The Court further held
that a perusal of Article 19(1)(a) shows
that there is no fundamental right to
strike and all that the Ordinance
provided was with respect to any illegal
strike. For this purpose, the Court relied
upon the earlier decision in All India
Bank      Employees'    Assn. v. National
(1962) 3 SCR 269] wherein the Court
(Constitution Bench) specifically held
that even a very liberal interpretation of
sub-clause (c) of clause (1) of Article 19
cannot lead to the conclusion that trade
unions have a guaranteed right to an
effective collective bargaining or to
strike either as part of collective
bargaining or otherwise.
14. In Ex-Capt. Harish Uppal v. Union
of India [(2003) 2 SCC 45] the Court
(Constitution Bench) held that lawyers
have no right to go on strike or give a
call for boycott and they cannot even go
on a token strike. The Court has
specifically observed that for just or
unjust cause, strike cannot be justified
in the present-day situation. Take strike
in any field, it can be easily realised
that the weapon does more harm than
any justice. Sufferer is the society —
the public at large.
15. In Communist      Party     of  India
(M) v. Bharat Kumar [(1998) 1 SCC 201]
a three-Judge Bench of this Court
approved the Full Bench decision of the
Palicha v. State of Kerala, AIR 1997 Ker
(FB) [full judgment reproduced in SCC
at (1998) 1 SCC p. 202]] by holding
thus: (SCC p. 202, para 3)
“There cannot be any doubt that the
fundamental rights of the people as a
whole cannot be subservient to the
claim of fundamental right of an
individual or only a section of the
people. It is on the basis of this
distinction that the High Court has
rightly concluded that there cannot be
any right to call or enforce a „bandh‟
which interferes with the exercise of the
fundamental freedoms of other citizens,
in addition to causing national loss in
many ways. We may also add that the
reasoning given by the High Court,
particularly those in paragraphs 12, 13
and 17 for the ultimate conclusion and
directions in paragraph 18 is correct
with which we are in agreement.”
16. The relevant paragraph 17 of the
Kerala High Court judgment reads as
under [ Id. in SCC at p. 207] :
“17. No political party or organisation
can claim that it is entitled to paralyse
the industry and commerce in the entire
State or nation and is entitled to
prevent the citizens not in sympathy
with its viewpoint, from exercising their
fundamental rights or from performing
their duties for their own benefit or for
the benefit of the State or the nation.
Such a claim would be unreasonable
and could not be accepted as a
legitimate exercise of a fundamental
right by a political party or those
comprising it.”
18. Further, there is prohibition to go on
strike      under     the    Tamil   Nadu
1973 (hereinafter referred to as “the
Conduct Rules”). Rule 22 provides that
“no government servant shall engage
himself in strike or in incitements
thereto or in similar activities”.
Explanation to the said provision
explains the term “similar activities”. It
states that “for the purpose of this rule
the expression „similar activities‟ shall
be deemed to include the absence from
work or neglect of duties without
permission and with the object of
compelling something to be done by his
superior officers or the Government or
any demonstrative fast usually called
„hunger strike‟ for similar purposes”.
“no government servant shall conduct
any procession or hold or address any
meeting in any part of any open ground
adjoining any government office or
inside any office premises — (a) during
office hours on any working day; and
(b) outside office hours or on holidays,
save with the prior permission of the
head of the department or head of
office, as the case may be”.
(B) There is no moral or equitable
justification to go on strike
19. Apart       from     statutory  rights,
government employees cannot claim
that they can take the society at
ransom by going on strike. Even if there
is injustice to some extent, as presumed
by such employees, in a democratic
welfare State, they have to resort to the
machinery provided under different
statutory provisions for redressal of
their grievances. Strike as a weapon is
mostly misused which results in chaos
and total maladministration. Strike
affects the society as a whole and
particularly when two lakh employees
go on strike en masse, the entire
administration comes to a grinding halt.
In the case of strike by a teacher, the
entire educational system suffers;
many students are prevented from
appearing in their exams which
ultimately affects their whole career. In
case of strike by doctors, innocent
patients suffer; in case of strike by
employees of transport services, entire
movement of the society comes to a
standstill:     business     is    adversely
affected and number of persons find it
difficult to attend to their work, to move
from one place to another or one city to
another. On occasions, public properties
are destroyed or damaged and finally
this creates bitterness among the public
against those who are on strike.
20. Further, Mr K.K. Venugopal, learned
Senior Counsel appearing for the State
of Tamil Nadu also submitted that there
are about 12 lakh government
employees in the State. Out of the total
income from direct tax, approximately
90% of the amount is spent on the
salary of the employees. Therefore, he
rightly submits that in a society where
there is large scale unemployment and
number of qualified persons are eagerly
waiting for employment in government
departments or in public sector
undertakings,       strikes     cannot    be
justified on any equitable ground.
21. We agree with the said submission.
In the prevailing situation, apart from
being conscious of rights, we have to be
fully      aware      of      our    duties,
responsibilities and effective methods
for    discharging      the     same.    For
redressing their grievances, instead of
going on strike, if employees do some
more work honestly, diligently and
efficiently, such gesture would not only
be appreciated by the authority but also
by people at large. The reason being, in
a democracy even though they are
government employees, they are part
and parcel of the governing body and
owe duty to the society.’
6. However, in regard to protests,
SCC 1, it was noted, inter alia, that ‘As
difficult as it is to anticipate the right to any
freedom or liberty without any reasonable
restriction, equally difficult it is to imagine the
existence of a right not coupled with a duty.
The duty may be a direct or an indirect
consequence of a fair assertion of the right.
Part III of the Constitution, although confers
rights, duties, regulations and restrictions are
inherent thereunder. It can be stated with
certainty that the freedom of speech is the
bulwark of       democratic Government.       This
freedom is essential for the appropriate
functioning of the democratic process. The
freedom of speech and expression is regarded
as the first condition of liberty in the hierarchy
of liberties granted under our constitutional
Sangathan v Union of India, (2018) 17
SCC 324, it was exposited as below:
‘48. We may state at the outset that
none of the parties have joined issue
insofar as law on the subject is
concerned.       Undoubtedly,       holding
peaceful     demonstrations       by     the
citizenry in order to air its grievances
and to ensure that these grievances are
heard in the relevant quarters, is its
fundamental right. This right is
specifically enshrined under Articles
19(1)(a) and 19(1)(b) of the Constitution
of India. Article 19(1)(a) confers a very
valuable right on the citizens, namely,
right of free speech. Likewise, Article
19(1)(b) gives the right to assemble
peacefully and without arms. Together,
both these rights ensure that the people
of this country have the right to
assemble      peacefully     and     protest
against any of the actions or the
decisions taken by the Government or
other governmental authorities which
are not to the liking. Legitimate dissent
is a distinguishable feature of any
democracy. Question is not as to
whether the issue raised by the
protestors is right or wrong or it is
justified     or      unjustified.      The
fundamental aspect is the right which
is conferred upon the affected people in
a democracy to voice their grievances.
Dissenters may be in minority. They
have a right to express their views. A
particular cause which, in the first
instance, may appear to be insignificant
or irrelevant may gain momentum and
acceptability when it is duly voiced and
debated. That is the reason that this
Court has always protected the
valuable right of peaceful and orderly
demonstrations and protests.
54. The right to protest is, thus,
recognised as a fundamental right
under the Constitution. This right is
crucial in a democracy which rests on
participation of an informed citizenry in
governance. This right is also crucial
since it strengthens representative
democracy         by    enabling     direct
participation in public affairs where
individuals and groups are able to
express dissent and grievances, expose
the flaws in governance and demand
accountability from the State authorities
as well as powerful entities. This right
is crucial in a vibrant democracy like
India but more so in the Indian context
to aid in the assertion of the rights of
the      marginalised       and      poorly
represented minorities.’
8.   Pertinently,    in  Amit   Sahni     v
Commissioner of Police, 2020 SCC OnLine
SC   853,    the     Hon’ble   Supreme     Court
‘…We have put to her that law has been
enacted by the Parliament and the law
is facing constitutional challenge before
this Court but that by itself will not take
away the right to protest of the persons
who       feel     aggrieved    by      the
9. The same has also been noted in the
eventual judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court viz. Amit Sahni v Commissioner of
10. Thus, approaching a constitutional
court for redressal of grievances ipso facto
would not disentitle a citizen from protesting
in relation to the same subject-matter. We
say so for the reason that when the Court
would be looking at the dispute, it would
examine the matter only from a legal lens,
based      upon       settled    parameters     of
adjudication; whereas, the purpose of protest
is to draw attention of the government to an
issue. Of course, the government is at liberty
to examine factors, which, in the usual
course, the Court could not look at, given the
scope of permissible judicial review. We also
indicate   that    while    Rangarajan     (supra)
pertained       to     protest/strike    vis-à-vis
government       employees,    the   other   cases
mentioned hereinabove relate to protests by
11. In the afore-referred matrix, in our
opinion, if any rule akin to Rule 22 of the
Rules, 1973, as referred to in Rangarajan
(supra) is applicable to the employees of the
Government        of    Andhra     Pradesh,    the
situation would we different. However, we
cannot be at one with the general proposition
that approaching a Court would prohibit the
person in question from protesting in a
legally permissible manner, subject to the
caveat being the extant rules and regulations
guiding the person concerned, inclusive of
his status, if so, as a government employee.
12. The learned Advocate General
submitted that, in fact, such a rule did exist,
referring to Rule 4 of the Andhra Pradesh
Civil Services (Conduct) Rules, 1964, which
‘4. No Government employee shall
participate in any strike or similar
activities or incitement thereto.
Explanation:- The expression “Similar
activities” shall be deemed to include-
(i) absence from duty or work without
permission.
(ii) neglect of duty with the object of
compelling any superior officer or
Government to take or omit to take any
(iii) any demonstrative fast, like Hunger
Strike with the object mentioned in item
(iv) concerted or organized refusal on
the part of Government employees to
13. Be that as it may, with a view to
engage in a dialogic conversation with all
concerned stake-holders, to see if a mutually
acceptable way ahead could be found, we
had requested, as recorded hereinabove, the
government employees’ representatives to
join the hearing via virtual mode at 2.15pm.
14. However, after the Court had risen
for lunch recess, there was a doubt in our
mind with regard to the matter having been
placed before this Bench, in the background
of learned counsel for the petitioner on the
one hand taking a categorical stand that he
was espousing the cause of only one person
i.e., the petitioner, whereas, on the other
hand the relief sought being in general terms
against      the  pay-scales  notified   by  the
Government which, if ultimately interfered
with by this Court, would translate into all
the government employees being affected and
thus the petition, for all practical purposes,
would become a class action litigation, or in
Indian      jurisprudential  terms,     be  akin
possibly to a Public Interest Litigation. Either
way, in terms of the present roster notified
under orders of Hon’ble the Chief Justice,
the same would not come under the roster of
15. Though the Court is informed by
the State that the request for joining the
proceedings was conveyed to the concerned
employees/employees’ representatives, but it
appears that on account of short notice, they
have    been   unable   to    join  this  virtual
16. The Registry has informed us that
due to a misconception as there was a
reference     to   the      Andhra       Pradesh
referred to as the ‘Act’) in this writ petition,
as disputes relating to the same were part of
the subject-matters allocated to this Bench,
the   matter   has  been     listed  before   us.
However, the Registry has further confirmed
that in view of there being no dispute(s)
under the Act, the matter was erroneously
posted before this Bench.
17. The discussions made hereinabove
are for the reason that detailed arguments
were advanced by both the sides in the pre-
lunch session which, in our considered
opinion, were required to be dealt with.
However, we would hasten to clarify that the
same are only in the nature of obiter, in view
of the order we propose to pass.
18. Accordingly, let the instant petition
be listed before the appropriate Bench, after
obtaining permission of Hon’ble the Chief
Justice. The Registry will take follow-up
action forthwith.
19. We grant liberty to the parties to
mention the matter before Hon’ble the Chief
Justice/concerned Bench, as nominated by
Hon’ble the Chief Justice, for out-of-turn
listing and   priority  hearing,   given  the
urgency claimed.