Present :     Mr. Gopal Sharma, Advocate, for the petitioner.
Mr. S.K.Yadav, Advocate, for the respondents.
The present revision petition under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India has been filed impugning order dated 05.0l.2016 passed
by the Rant Controller whereby the application for directing the respondents
to produce relevant documents in their possession has been dismissed.
Brief facts relevant to the present lis are that the landlord-
respondents filed an ejectment petition seeking eviction of the tenant-
petitioner from the shop in question on the ground of bonafide personal
necessity of the husband of landlord-respondent No.1 namely, Harish Kumar,
who is stated to be unemployed.
The tenant-petitioner filed a reply stating therein that the said
Harish Kumar, husband of landlord-respondent No.1, and his family members
are infact members and owners in possession of many shops and commercial
I attest to the accuracy and
properties and that they are engaged in the business of property dealing. The
husband of landlord-respondent No.1 - Harish Kumar - appeared as PW-1 as
General Power of Attorney holder (hereinafter referred to as ‘GPA’) of the
landlord-respondents and filed his affidavit in Court as Ex.PW-1/A. The GPA
Harish Kumar was cross-examined. In the cross-examination suggestions
were put to the GPA as to whether he was filing income tax returns. Various
other suggestions were also given to the said GPA. Thereafter, an application
was filed by the tenant-petitioner for directing the GPA to produce certain
documents as mentioned in para 7 of the application which reads as under :
“7.   That in view of the aforesaid facts the following
documents are very material for the complete and just
decision of the present case as they go to the root of the
present case which are as follows:-
(a) Permanent Account Number Card of PW-1
(b) Matriculation Examination Certificate of PW-1
(c) Income Tax returns along with statements of accounts
of PW-1 pertaining to the last 10 years
(d) Income Tax returns along with statement of accounts
of petitioner No.1
(e) Income Tax returns along with statements of accounts
of petitioner No.2 pertaining to the last 10 years
(f)  Income Tax returns along with statements of accounts
of husband of petitioner No.2 pertaining to the last 10
I attest to the accuracy and
(g) Income Tax returns along with statements of accounts
of son and daughter in law of PW-1 pertaining to the last
(h) Original registered sale deeds along with annexed
site plans bearing respective Nos.7098 dated 28.11.2011,
No.4214 dated 02.01.2015, No.8526 dated 06.02.20212,
No.7099 dated 28.11.2011, No.3151 dated 11.02.2010,
No.3812 dated 18.01.2008.”
Reply was filed to the said application and vide the impugned
order the said application was dismissed. The Rent Controller while
dismissing the application held that the Court cannot assist the party in
collecting evidence. It has further observed that the GPA, Harish Kumar, had
already admitted the documents put to him during his cross-examination and
that the tenant-petitioner was at liberty to collect the certified copies of the
sale deed and other documents from the concerned departments and produce
the same in his evidence. Aggrieved by the said order the present revision
petition has been filed.
Learned counsel for the tenant-petitioner has contended that as
per the provisions of the Order 11 Rule 14 CPC, it is incumbent on the
respondent to produce the documents as demanded. The learned counsel for
the tenant-petitioner has relied upon Sharvan Kumar Vs. Sumeet Kumar
Co. Ltd. Vs. Sumer Chand [2005(2) Civil Court Cases 183] and Desa
I attest to the accuracy and
Singh through LR. Vs. Sukhraj Kaur [2019(2) PLR 715] in support of his
arguments.
Per contra, the learned counsel for the landlord-respondents has
argued that the documents that the tenant-petitioner wants to be got produced
all pertain to the GPA and being a GPA holder he cannot be asked to produce
the documents. It is further the contention of the learned counsel for the
landlord-respondents that since the said documents were not necessary and
relevant to the present lis, the application was rightly dismissed by the Rent
Controller. Learned counsel for the landlord-respondents has relied upon
Ramesh Rani Gulati Vs. Narinder Kumar Gulati [2010(2) PLR 14] and
The controversy in the present case revolves around the fact that
in an ejectment petition filed by the landlord-respondents on the ground of
personal bonafide necessity of her husband, an application was moved by the
tenant-petitioner for production of certain documents primarily income tax
returns of the GPA holder. The relevance of the income tax returns in the
present case, as argued by the counsel for the tenant-petitioner, are that since
it has been stated in the ejectment petition that the husband of the landlord-
respondent No.1 was unemployed hence it was necessary to produce the
income tax returns. The tenant-petitioner has confronted the GPA holder
when he stepped into the witness box with all the documents which are now
sought to be produced. The Rent Controller has given liberty to the tenant-
I attest to the accuracy and
petitioner to obtain certified copies of the sale deeds that he seeks to rely upon
and produce the same in his evidence. Qua the income tax returns the Rent
Controller has rightly rejected the prayer. What the tenant-petitioner in the
present case is wanting is the production of the income tax returns which
pertain to the GPA holder. The present case is for ejectment of the tenant-
petitioner on grounds of personal bonafide necessity. Whether the GPA holder
i.e the husband of landlord-respondent No.1 is employed or unemployed and
whether he is filing income tax returns or not would be of no significance.
Under the Rent Act the Authorities are concerned with whether the premises
are bonafidely required by the landlord for his personal bonafide need or for
that of his family. The relevance of the documents especially the income tax
returns eludes this Court. It is trite that what is required in law is that the
Court below should record its satisfaction as to whether the documents are
necessary or not.
In the present case a categoric observation has been made that the
tenant-petitioner is trying to collect evidence through the process of the Court
which cannot be allowed. Further, it has been observed that the documents put
to the witness have already been admitted by him in his cross-examination
and therefore the Rent Controller had given the liberty to the tenant-petitioner
to collect the certified copies of the sale deeds and other documents from the
concerned department and to produce them in his evidence. Still further, the
documents being sought are not pertaining to the landlord-respondents in the
present case but rather the said documents all pertain to the GPA holder who
has appeared on behalf of the landlord-respondents. A Court would not
I attest to the accuracy and
embark on a roving and fishing enquiry in order to assist a party to collect
evidence. The present petition is nothing but an endeavour to embark on an
endeavour not relevant to the matter in dispute.
The judgments relied upon by the learned counsel for the tenant-
petitioner would be of no avail to him inasmuch as in the said judgments also
it has clearly been observed that the documents can be asked to be produced
only if they relate to any fact in issue or relevant facts. However, if they are
found not be relating to the question raised in the suit the application would be
declined.
In view of the above, I do not find any merit in the present
revision petition which is dismissed. Pending applications, if any, also stand
disposed off.
NOTE : Whether speaking/non-speaking : Speaking
Whether reportable : YES/NO