(Order of the Court was made by T.RAJA, J.)
This Writ Petition has been filed seeking for issuance of a Writ of
Mandamus, directing the respondents to consider the petitioner's
representation dated 05.08.2022 and grant permission and protection
for conducting rekla race scheduled to be held on 14.08.2022 at about
9.00 a.m. to 12.00 p.m. between Bhavani and Appukudal Road in
connection with the 75th Year Independence Day Celebration and Aadi
Temple Festival at Bhavani Town, Erode District.
2.    Learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner would submit
that the petitioner is a resident of Bhavani Town, Erode District. While
so, the petitioner and his friends have decided to celebrate the 75 th
Year Independence Day and Aadi Festival on 14.08.2022 and
15.08.2022 respectively and as a part of the said celebration, the local
people decided to conduct a rekla race on 14.08.2022 from Bhavani to
Appukodal Road for which they have approached the respondents
seeking permission to conduct a rekla race. Though, the respondents
also have received the invitation of the festival, but kept it pending.
Therefore, a representation dated 05.08.2022 has been sent by the
petitioner to the respondents and the same is also pending without any
decision thereof. Hence, the petitioner has been advised to come to
this Court since the day for celebrating the 75th Year Independence day
is fast approaching.
3. Learned Counsel for the petitioner would further submit
that when the India is celebrating its 75th Year Independence Day, as a
part of the Independence Day Celebration, the Indians are entitled to
hold functions. Therefore, they have also moved the application which
has been completely ignored. In view thereof, the petitioner may be
granted permission with any conditions to be complied with. He would
also submit that the petitioner is also in paragraph 4 of his affidavit
filed in support of the writ petition has given an assurance on behalf of
the festival committee that the rekla race will be conducted without
indulging in any unlawful activities like gambling. It is also further
submitted that moreover, on 14.08.2022, all colleges and schools
would be closed in view of the Sunday Weekly Off. Therefore, there
will not be any traffic jam between Bhavani and Appukodal Road. He
would also submit that the Festival Committee has also made
elaborate arrangement for holding emergency health check-ups for
both men and animals before they enter into the rekla race.
Therefore, a direction may be issued to the respondents for granting
permission to conduct the rekla race on 14.08.2022 between 9.00
a.m. to 12.00 p.m. from Bhavani to Appukudal Road as a part of 75 th
Year Independence Day Celebration, he pleaded.
4. Mr.K.V.Sajeev Kumar, learned Special Government Pleader
taking notice for the respondents strongly objected to grant the relief
sought for by the petitioner herein.     He would submit that when a
similar request was already accepted and permission was also granted
to conduct a rekla race on 31.07.2022 to celebrate the Aadi Festival,
once again, the petitioner has given an application on 05.08.2022 to
hold a rekla race on 14.08.2022 from Bhavani to Appukudal Road.
Since they are unnecessarily intoxicating the horses and also indulging
in gambling and betting activities, considering the larger public
interest, no permission is granted to conduct the rekla race, however,
if a direction is given to consider the petitioner's application dated
05.08.2022, it would be considered and appropriate orders would be
passed.
5. Independence Day is being celebrated by all of us on every
15th August to celebrate the freedom from the foreign yoke.             That
celebration would be marked by dancing, singing and distributing
sweets and holding different cultural entertainments.      Rekla Race is
one of the cultural programmes which has been in vogue from time
immemorial in India like Jallikattu.        Similarly, the youngsters and
youths in both village and urban sides are also organising different
cultural       programmes     and  various  games    like Kapadi,     Cricket,
Silambam,         cycle  race   and  motor   race   to   mark   the    India's
Independence and also to remember the supreme sacrifices made by
the people to get free from the foreign ruling. Therefore, the objection
raised by the respondents that the bulls participating in the rekla race
could be intoxicated is only based on frivolous assumption. When the
petitioner came forward to conduct the rekla race as part of the 75 th
Year Independence Day, we are afraid that refusing their prayer would
send a message that Indians are refused to celebrate even the
Independence Day. Therefore, any cultural programme organised has
to be viewed on par with competition being organized by schools and
colleges and other organisations.          Hence, we find merits on the
submissions made by the learned Counsel for the petitioner for
granting the relief as prayed for.
6.   Further, the 14th August also falls on Sunday and on
Sunday, since all the colleges and schools would be closed, there is no
possibility of any traffic jam between       Bhavani and Appukudal Road.
Secondly, it also appears that the Festival Committee has also made
some arrangements to conduct the rekla race like holding emergency
health check ups both to the men and animals, taking part in the rekla
race.       Thirdly, the petitioner has also given an assurance in the
affidavit filed in support of the writ petition that they would conduct
the rekla race without indulging in any unlawful activities like gambling
and betting. Therefore, when the Nation is also gearing towards the
celebration of Our 75th Year Independence Day in a grand manner, the
objections raised by the learned Special Government Pleader that they
have already granted permission to another party to hold a similar
rekla race on 31.07.2022 cannot be a reasonable objection.           Hence,
rejecting his objection, at the same time, accepting the undertaking
given by the petitioner, we are of the view that the permission has to
be granted to the petitioner and his people to take part in the 75 th Year
7. Accordingly, the Writ Petition is disposed of with the following
(a) The rekla race in connection with the 75th Year Independence
Day and Aadi Festival by considering the petitioner's representation
dated 05.08.2022 be held on 14.08.2022 between 9.00 a.m. to
12.00 p.m. from Bhavani to Appukudal Road;
(b) There shall not be any betting or intoxication of bulls;
(c) If there is any violation of any one of the conditions imposed
above, the concerned Police Officer is at liberty to take necessary
action, as per law and stop the rekla race forthwith.
(d) The 3rd respondent is directed to issue necessary permission
incorporating the above conditions.