Writ Petition (MD) Nos. 23410 and 23671 of 2022
WP (MD) No. 23410 of 2022
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department
Ministry of Electronics and information Technology
8.         The Additional Director General of Police
9.         The Additional Chief Secretary to the Government
Home, Prohibition and Excise Department
WP (MD) No. 23410 of 2022: Petition filed under Article 226 of The
Constitution of India praying to issue a Writ of Mandamus directing the
respondents to consider the representation dated 14.09.2022 of the petitioner and
consequently direct the respondents to take all due and necessary steps to secure
and protect the interest of Sri Thirukadaiyur Amirthakadeshwarar temple and its
properties.
WP (MD) No. 23671 of 2022: Petition filed under Article 226 of The
Constitution of India praying to issue a Writ of Mandamus directing the first
respondent to consider the petitioner's representations dated 19.08.2022 and
30.09.2022 and consequently direct the respondents to take action against the
bogus illegal websites which have been opened in the name of the temples /
deities under the control of HR&CE Department and Mutts and take necessary
criminal action against the owners/ admins of these websites and take steps to
recover the money collected by them from the devotees illegally in the name of
the temple.
Temples are the abodes of the Almighty. Devotees gather together as a
result of their steadfast belief and faith in the highest power and visit these holy
grounds, seeking blessings, serenity, guidance and to elevate their spiritual
experience. Though the experience that each devotee undergoes or his purpose
of visit is distinct, but the common factor called "faith" unites them. Their
devotion takes various forms. Some offer daily greetings to the Lord, some sing
praises and chant the Holy Scriptures while others offer money in the form of
donations, special prayers and rituals. Unfortunately, where there is go(o)d, there
is also evil. Some people take advantage of the religious faith of the devotees',
fraudulently monetize it by creating illegal websites in the name of the deities /
temple(s). Through such websites, they collect huge amount for special
darshans, rituals and other services from the devotees, but pay only a paltry sum
to the administration of the temples, thereby deriving unlawful gain. This type of
scam, regrettably, is a common occurrence in today’s time. The authorities who
are bound to take stern action against those perpetrators, so as to prevent
innocent devotees from falling prey to such dirty tricks, have failed to act
accordingly. Such is the issue involved in the present writ petitions.
2. The petitioners herein have come up with these writ petitions in the
nature of public interest litigation, seeking a direction to the respondent
authorities to take action against the illegal / bogus websites opened in the name
of deities / temples coming under the Hindu Religious and Charitable
Endowments Department and recover the proceeds generated thereof.
Particularly, WP (MD) No. 23410 of 2022 is filed for a direction to shut down /
close the fake websites opened in the name of Arulmighu Amirthakadeswarar
Temple, Thirukadaiyur, Mayiladuthurai District and take necessary criminal and
disciplinary action against the priests / gurukkals / archakars for diverting and
usurping money from the devotees for conduct of various ceremonies in the
name of the temple and for distorting history by making the devotees to visit Sri
3.1.  For the sake of convenience, we shall first take the case of the
petitioner in WP (MD) No.23671 of 2022. According to the petitioner, the
temples are being maintained and administered by the Hindu Religious and
Charitable Endowments Department (in short, “the HR&CE Department”) along
with trustees / Fit persons. For the purpose of performing poojas and various
other religious activities, the devotees pay the prescribed fee in the offices
established in the temples, for which receipts will be issued and the amount will
be accounted for. The temples also get funds by way of donations / offerings
made by the devotees in the Hundial kept therein. That apart, there are numerous
foreign donors, who are contributing and donating huge sums to the temples.
Thus, the devotees give utmost importance and reverence to the donations. The
petitioner further stated that for the purpose of accounting the amounts received
by the temples in various forms from the devotees, the Installation, Safeguarding
and Accounting of Hundials Rules, 1975 was enacted. Similarly, the amounts
received for the performance of various religious rites, such as, pooja,
abhishegam, annadhanam, etc., are also accounted for and the same                  are
periodically subjected to audit and a report will be submitted to the concerned
authorities. Thus, there are procedures under Chapter VIII (Budgets, Accounts
and Audits) and Chapter IX (Finance) of the Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and
Charitable Endowments Act, 1959 (in short, “the HR&CE Act”), for receipt of
amounts for various religious activities performed in the temples.
3.2.  The grievance of the petitioner is that there are instances where
third parties are collecting funds through fake and illegal websites by opening
accounts in the name of deities /temples across the State, for providing various
services, pooja, etc., to the devotees. The so-called third parties are not
authorised to collect the funds for and on behalf of the temples. The amount in
any form to the temples has to be received/collected only by the authorised and
appropriate officer, such as Trustee, Fit Person or the Executive Officer of the
temples and it cannot be permitted to be received by third parties for any reason.
Even though technology has assisted the temple administration to a great extent
to offer various services at the click of a button, it has it's own grey area as it is
misused by third parties for unlawful gain. By using the name of the temples, the
third parties created fake and unauthorised websites, which look similar to the
one opened by the temples. Such fake websites have mushroomed and
proliferated in the cyber space and if it is permitted to continue, it will not only
result in huge financial loss to the temples, but also amount to cheating the
public under the garb of faith. Apart from the temples coming under the HR&CE
Department, some illegal and bogus websites have been opened in the name of
the temples under the control of the Mutts. The petitioner in paragraph Nos.18
and 23 of the affidavit filed in support of the writ petition bearing no.23671 of
2022 has also furnished the details of the bogus websites, such as,
https://thirukadaiyurtemple.online/index.html,      https://thirukadaiyurtemple.in
/ about/, https://www.thirukadaiyurmarriagetemple.com/, http://srirangam.com/,
http://www.srirangam.ramanujartemples.net/, etc. and the contact numbers of the
persons relating to such websites. According to the petitioner, such persons, who
had opened fake websites, claim to have link with the officers and archakars of
the temples and to have rendered all the services, poojas, etc., to the devotees
and they generate huge money illegally, but pay only a paltry sum to the temples.
3.3.  Referring to section 23 of the HR&CE Act, under which, the
Commissioner of HR&CE Department is empowered to exercise general
superintendence and control over all the temples and ensure that the properties
of the temples are properly administered and accounted for, the petitioner stated
that the illegal websites opened in the name of the temples across the State have
to be shut down / closed and/ or controlled by the first respondent, as they are
causing great confusion among the devotees, who are being misled by these
spurious websites; and that, the first respondent has to take appropriate criminal
action against the owners / admins of those illegal websites and recover the
monies collected by them from the devotees unauthorisedly. Stating so, the
petitioner sent representations dated 19.08.2022 and 30.09.2022 to the
respondents. Since no action has been taken on the said representations, he has
preferred this writ petition viz., WP (MD) No. 23671 of 2022.
4.1.  The case projected by the petitioner in WP (MD) No. 23410 of 2022
is that Arulmighu Amirthakadeswarar Temple, Thirukadaiyur, Mayiladuthurai is
one of the well known temples in the State, which is under the control and
administration of Dharmapuram Adheenam. It is renowned for performing
Shashti Apda Poorthi (on completing 60 years) Beemaradha Shanthi (on
completion of 70 years) and Sathabhishekam (upon completing 80 years). For
the purpose of performing the said rituals, devotees from all corners of the
Country visit the said temple. Even the foreigners are visiting the temple and
experiencing various services offered in the temple. The payment for these
religious activities is collected by the temple administration, receipts are issued
and the amount is properly accounted for. For easy accessibility, such services
are also rendered to the devotees on-line. The Temple Administration has
created exclusive website in the name of the temple through which the devotees
can book and/or reserve for a particular service on any given date. The website
has been created mainly keeping in view the convenience of devotees, who come
from a long distance. The on-line facilities introduced by the temple, provide
hassle free service, but the same has been misused and abused by disgruntled
elements for personal gain.
4.2.  According to the petitioner in WP(MD)No.23410 of 2022, various
websites depicting the name of the subject temple and deity, have been opened
by unauthorised persons to earn money illegally. Such unauthorised persons
collect amount for conducting poojas and ceremonies to be performed in the
temple. They also receive donations and contributions in the name of the
temple / deity. They make advertisement as if the websites created by them are
the official websites of the temple. Such illegal websites are akin to the one
created by the temple administration. In such event, the devotees, believing the
bogus websites as official, pay whatever charges demanded by them, and fall
prey to the fraudsters. In this process, if a devotee intends to make donation or
book an on-line ticket for a specific ritual, there is every chance that such a
devotee is misled by the bogus website, which claims to provide similar service
as that of the temple. Further, the websites host the name of persons who are in
actual position of the temple as gurukkals/archakars, without any authority or
authorisation from such persons. Thus, the innocent devotees are easily cheated
by the gullible website owners. Apart from these websites, the gurukkals /
archakars have setup touts inside the temple and they provide details of packages
for conduct of sashti aptha purthi, Ukra Radha Shanti, Beema Radha Shanti,
Sathabishekam. These packages are not part of the temple donations but rather
they have been made by these touts of the gurukkals / archakars to collect money
from the devotees. They charge exorbitant amount from the devotees in the name
of the temple to carry out these poojas and ceremonies.
4.3.  The petitioner also stated that without the approval, cooperation or
consent of the temple administration, these illegal / bogus websites cannot exist
at all. Moreover, these websites demand payment illegally for providing quick
and hassle-free services in the temple. They even offer packages which include
catering, accommodation, pooja expenses, etc. and thereby sway the devotees.
The devotees are made to believe that the donation reaches the temple
administration, but it is swindled by the middlemen and such illegal act is
perpetrated       wholly    with    the   connivance    and    cooperation     of     the
Priests/Gurukkals/Archakars in the temple, which is evident from the name and
contact number of Priests / Gurukkals / Archakars prominently mentioned in the
bogus websites. Though they claim to represent the interest of the temple, in
reality, they work for their own narrow and personal interest and enrich
themselves at the costs of the temple administration. The performance of poojas,
marriage ceremonies, abhishekam etc., is thriving like a coveted business. The
petitioner also recounted that on an average, the priests / gurukkals/archakars get
close to Rs.2 to 4 lakhs for performing the religious ceremonies, but only a sum
of Rs.2,000/- or Rs.3,000/- is offered to the temple administration; and that, they
perform nearly 1000 to 2000 marriages every year and hence, the gravity of the
amount swindled by these persons cannot be determined. Thus, according to the
petitioner, the respondent authorities have to take necessary steps to control such
middlemen, unruly priests / gurukkals/archakars, besides taking action against
illegal and bogus websites in the name of the subject temple.
4.4.  The petitioner also pointed out in the affidavit filed in support of
this writ petition viz., WP (MD) No.23410 of 2022 that the priests / gurukkals/
archakars in the subject temple have set up a separate temple on their own called
as Sri Markandeya Temple by diluting the history and origin of Arulmighu
Amirtha Kadeswarar Temple. It is stated that Sri Markendeya Temple is the
place where Markandeyar had meditated, but it is far from truth. There is no
single Thevaram hymn nor is there any history of Nayanmar having visited this
temple. It is in existence only for 20 years, but the gurukkals / archakars claim
this temple as old that of Thirukadaiyur Temple. According to the petitioner, this
temple was established by the priests / gurukkals/archakars themselves with a
sole intention to misrepresent the history and overshadow the Thirukkadaiyur
temple so as to divert the devotees to make them to visit this temple as well. The
priests / gurukkals / archakars are also receiving donations from the devotees
who visit Sri Markandeya Temple which goes largely unaccounted. Even the
details of this temple are promptly mentioned in the fake websites created by
third parties. In the home page of the website “trvramalingam.in” it is
mentioned that "TRV. Ramalinga Gurukkal" is the Chief Temple Priest of
Thirukadaiyur temple, which is utterly false. The photos of the priests /
gurukkals/ archakars with various dignitaries, such as, former Governor of Tamil
Nadu are also portrayed in the website to sway the devotees.
4.5.  The petitioner further  stated   that   in  the   same     website
“trvramalingam.in”, it is mentioned that the so-called Sri Markandeya Temple
was established and looked after by Dr.T.R. Viswanatha Gurukkal and his son,
T.R.V.Ramalinga Gurukkal. It was further claimed that Mr. Ramalinga Gurukkal
is the Chief Priest of Thirukadaiyur temple. In the website, it is also mentioned
that all the poojas performed in Thirukadaiyur Temple, are being done in Sri
Markandeya Temple. Thus, it is sought to be projected that poojas and religious
activities performed in Thirukadaiyur Temple can also be performed in Sri
Markandeya Temple to get the divine grace of the deity. That apart, it is claimed
in the said website that "Those who have come with, wish to get the blessings of
Lord Amirthakadeshwarar and Lordess Abhirami for their prosperous life at
Thirukadaiyur must also visit this Markandeyar's temple for a full prosperous
life and for the welfare of their family". This, according to the petitioner, is a
false propaganda unleashed by fake website owners to flock the devotees to Sri
Markandeya Temple and to sway them under the guise of performing various
religious acts. The intention behind setting up Sri Markandeya Temple by the
priests / gurukkals/ archakars of Thirukadaiyur Temple is to distort history,
undermine the importance of Thirukadaiyur Temple, divert the devotees to the
new temple and get donations from them. Therefore, the petitioner would state
that the priests of the Thirukadaiyur Temple need to be restrained from making
any       false  propaganda  about   Sri  Markandeya      Temple.    Further,      the
misrepresentation projected in the bogus websites, has to be removed and that,
civil and criminal actions have to be taken against the gurukkals / archakars who
associate themselves with the promoters of fake websites. The petitioner has
brought the same to the notice of the respondent authorities for appropriate
action. He has also made representations, lastly on 14.09.2022 to the respondents
seeking to shut down/close the bogus websites opened in the name of Sri
Thirukadaiyur Amirthakadeshwarar Temple and recover the money collected
from the devotees, besides taking action against the priests / gurukkals /
archakars of the temple, who illegally demand money for conduct of
poojas/ceremonies and illegally spreading false information about Sri
Markandeya Temple. However, all his attempts including the representation
dated 14.09.2022 ended in vain. Therefore, this writ petition, viz., WP(MD) No.
23410 of 2022.
5.1.  The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner in both these writ
petitions, in unison, submitted that the fake websites created in the name of the
deities / temples have to be removed / closed and the proceeds generated
thereunder have to be recovered by the first respondent, by virtue of the power
conferred under section 23 of the HR&CE Act. According to the learned
counsel, the purity and sanctity have to be maintained in the temples and that,
the poojas, archanais, abhishekams and other rituals performed in the temples
should not be exploited and commercially exposed for private gain by the third
parties. It is further submitted that the fake websites have been created to sway
the devotees for a long time. However the department did not take any action
thereof. Rather, the unauthorised creators of the websites have been allowed to
enrich themselves at the costs of the temple administration. Pointing out the
same, the petitioners made representations and requested the respondent
authorities to take appropriate action, but the same have not been considered till
date.
5.2.  Adding further, the learned counsel for the petitioner in WP (MD)
No.23410 of 2022 submitted that among the several fake websites, primarily, 7
websites are swaying the devotees and engaged in collecting money for all types
of pujas, archanais, abhishegam, homam, prasadam besides collecting donation.
For a normal puja of Rs.50/-, they are collecting Rs.1,051/-. For a prasadam
offered by the temple at a cost of Rs.225/-, a sum of Rs.1,000/- is charged.
Similarly, for performing Pooja in all Navagraha temples, a sum of Rs.1,001/- is
being charged for a single pooja. For performing homam, amount ranging from
Rs.5,000/- to Rs.12,500/- is being charged. That apart, many special live
Archanai, abhishegam and other rituals are performed for a minimum cost of Rs.
3,000/- per pooja. By such acts, the individuals earn not less than Rs.15 lakhs to
Rs.3 crores per month. Above all, these websites so far raised funds from private
investors/Angel investors/Venture Capitalists to the tune of Rs.100 crores. On
the other hand, the temples, where these rituals are being performed, receive
only a meagre amount. Thus, according to the learned counsel, such unlawful
collection of money from the devotees in the name of the temple cannot be
permitted to be sustained and stringent action has to be taken against such
perpetrators. The learned counsel further submitted that a new temple called Sri
Markandeya Temple, which has no historical reference or archaeological
heritage, is being promoted by the priests / gurukkals / archakars of
Thirukadaiyur temple. It is also submitted that though the petitioner has enclosed
the necessary proof for all these unlawful acts along with his representations to
the HR&CE Department, but no action is forthcoming and the bogus websites
continue to proliferate unabated. Therefore, the learned counsel prayed this court
for issuing appropriate direction to the official respondents.
6.1.  Per contra, Mr. Veerakathiravan, learned Additional Advocate
General appearing for the respondent authorities submitted that Arulmighu
Amirthakadeswarar        Temple,  Thirukadaiyur,      Mayiladuthurai   District,     is
administered by Sri-la-sri Dharmapuram Adheenakarthar in the capacity of
Hereditary Trustee under the control of the HR&CE Department. This temple is
renowned for performing parihara homams such as Sashtiaptha Poorthi, Bhima
Ratha Shanti and Sathabhishekam. This temple is thronged by people from the
length and breadth of the country to perform spiritual activities. Taking
advantage of the staunch belief of the worshipers to perform the religious
ceremonies in the temple, several spurious websites were created by unknown
persons depicting themselves as part of the temple administration and they
collected money from the devotees for various services to be rendered, without
the knowledge of the temple administration. After coming to know about the
same, the Commissioner of HR&CE Department, in his Circular bearing R.C.
No.57136/2021 P1 dated 12.04.2022 has instructed all the temples under the
control of the Department, to close down such spurious websites and create an
authorised and dedicated website for the temple through National Informatics
Centre (NIC) to avoid hacking and deception. Such a circular was issued as per
section 116(2) (x) of the HR & CE Act and Rule 5(A) of the Collection of
Income and Incurring of Expenditure Rules made thereunder. Thus, according to
the learned counsel, all necessary steps have been taken for prevention of
improper collection and to retrieve the amount collected unauthorisedly by the
private individuals using the name of the temples.
6.2.  The learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the
respondent        authorities also submitted   that  an   official   website      viz.,
Thirukadaiyurabiramitemple.org       is   being    maintained    by    the    temple
administration and wide publicity has been given to the devotees and the general
public at large. It is also submitted that on the basis of the complaint given by
the petitioner against TRV. Ramalinga Gurukkal / fifth respondent in WP (MD)
No. 23410 of 2022, a notice bearing R.C. No.8448/2022 C.1 dated 11.10.2022
came to be issued to the hereditary trustee of the temple calling upon him to
submit action taken report. In response, it was submitted that the administration
of Arulmighu Amirthakadeswarar Temple has given a complaint to the
Superintendent of Police (Cyber Crime) Mayiladuthurai on 16.09.2022
requesting to take appropriate action against those who have unauthorisedly
created fake websites and to retrieve the amount so far generated by them,
besides lodging a complaint on 22.09.2022 to the Inspector of Police, Poraiyur
Police Station, Mayiladuthurai in this regard. Thus, according to the learned
Additional Advocate General, appropriate action has already been taken by the
official respondents and the allegation of the petitioners that the official
respondents remained as a mute spectator is baseless.
6.3.  It is further submitted by the learned Additional Advocate General
appearing for the respondent authorities that the HR&CE Department has
appointed a Fit Person for Sri Markandeya Temple, who is taking care of the
administration of the temple. The temple administration is taking all necessary
steps to curb illegalities in the matter of performance of poojas and other
ceremonies in the temple inter alia to ensure hassle free facilities for the
devotees. A specific provision has been made in the official Website where the
devotees can book for marriage ceremonies on a particular date and time slot
will be fixed. Bookings made by the devotees through physical mode will be
gradually stopped. Therefore, the learned Additional Advocate General
submitted that the official respondents are taking all steps that are necessary to
curb the middlemen from swaying the devotees through bogus websites; and
that, they are also periodically monitoring the nature of duties performed by the
Priests / Gurukkals / Archakars in the temple.
7. The learned counsel appearing for the fourth respondent in
WP(MD)No.23671 of 2022 submitted that the temple administration has already
created an official website through HR&CE Department, in the name of the
temple viz., https://srirangamranganathar.hrce.tn.gov.in/ for the convenience of
the devotees / public, who offer contributions / donations to the temple; and that,
they have displayed the history of the temple, archaeological importance,
darshan          timings,  festival    details,   etc.,   through   their     website
“www.srirangam.org”. It is further submitted that based on the representation
submitted          by  the petitioner,   the    Executive   Officer of    Arulmighu
Aranganathaswamy Temple, Srirangam, made a complaint dated 20.10.2022 to
the Assistant Commissioner of Police, Cyber Crime Wing, Tiruchirapalli,
requesting to close the unauthorised websites opened in the name of the temple
forthwith and to recover the proceeds received thereunder.
8. Mr.Rajesh Kanna, learned counsel for the fifth respondent in WP(MD)
No.23410         of  2022  submitted    that  Sri   Amirthakadeshwarar       Temple,
Thirukadiyur, comes under the control of the Dharmapuram Adheenam headed
by His Holiness Sri Masilamani Desiga Gnanasambandha Swamigal; and that,
Arulmigu Markandeswaraswamy Temple at T.Manalmedu Village is a private
temple managed by the ancestors of the fifth respondent and now, by the fifth
respondent and his family as its Hereditary Trustee. The learned counsel further
submitted that the petitioner has made out false allegations in the writ petition
and that, based on his representation dated 14.09.2022, the fourth respondent has
passed an order appointing a Fit Person (Thakkar) to Sri Arulmigu
Markandeswaraswamy          Temple,    vide   proceedings     in  Se.Mu.Na.Ka.No.
8448/2022/E1 dated 18.10.2022. According to the learned counsel, the fifth
respondent family is the hereditary trustee of the temple and that, the fifth
respondent made an application to the fourth respondent to appoint him as the
Hereditary Trustee of the temple as he is the next in line to his deceased father
Sri T.R.Viswanatha Gurukkal. Stating so, the learned counsel prayed for a
direction to the fourth respondent to dispose of the said representation.
9. We have heard the learned counsel appearing for all the parties and also
perused the materials available on record, including the photographs depicting
the websites created by third parties in the name (s) of various temple (s) and
also services offered therein.
10. Both these writ petitions have been filed complaining that some third
parties, who are in no way connected with the administration of the temples,
have created spurious websites depicting the same as official websites and are
collecting money from the devotees for offering various services / religious
activities in the temples without knowledge of the temple administration. The
petitioners' grievance is that by doing so, the third parties garner huge money,
but what they pay to the temples, is a pittance. Thus, through such unauthorised
and fake websites, the impersonator interferes with the administration of the
temples indirectly, thereby causing huge loss to the revenue of the temples
across the State. In order to buttress the same, the petitioners have furnished the
particulars of bogus websites, phone numbers of contact persons relating to such
websites, probable income generated by providing services, such as,
accommodation, catering, darshan, poojas/ceremonies in the temples, etc. at a
hefty price, in the form of typed set of papers. It is also stated by the petitioners
that the persons, who create such unauthorised and fake websites would
definitely have a link with the archakars and officers of the temples, without
whose assistance, they cannot render any service to the customers. He also
submitted that some of the archakars, who have not been authorized by the
administration, are entering the temple to perform poojas. Therefore, the
petitioners in unison prayed for appropriate direction to the respondent
authorities to close all the unauthorised and fake websites of third parties created
in the name of the temple(s) across the State, so that the entire religious activities
such as pooja, abhishegam, religious ceremonies etc., must be offered, controlled
and administered only by the administration of the temple(s) concerned and to
recover the proceeds received thereunder. In WP(MD) No.23410 of 2022, the
petitioner specifically pleaded that the Priests / Gurukkals / Archakars of
Arulmighu Amirthakadeswarar Temple have swayed the devotees visiting the
Amirthakadeswarar        temple    to also  visit  Sri   Markandeya       temple      by
misrepresenting the history of the same. Though the petitioners made
representations to the respondent authorities to take appropriate action against
those illegal and fake websites run by the third parties in the name of the
temple(s) / deities, nothing moved. Hence, the present public interest litigations.
11. Undoubtedly, creating bogus / fake websites is an offence and the
same is punishable under section 66D of the Information Technology Act, 2000.
As per Section 23 of the HR&CE Act, the Commissioner of HR&CE
Department is empowered to exercise general superintendence and control over
the administration of temples and religious endowments. Therefore, in pursuance
of the powers to make Rules for proper collection of income by the religious
institutions conferred in section 116(2)(x), he can issue instructions to all the
temples under the control of the department to create authorised and
authenticated websites for temples through National Informatics Centre, which
will provide authenticity to the websites run by the temples and help in curbing
the bogus ones. But, no effective steps have been taken by the respondent
authortities. Taking note of the same and considering the importance of the issue
involved herein, this court earlier directed the learned counsel appearing for the
respondent authorities to verify the allegations raised by the petitioners and file a
detailed report in the next date of hearing.
12. The learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the
respondent authorities filed a status report of the third respondent in WP(MD)
No.23410 of 2022, wherein, it is inter alia stated that steps are being taken to
revamp the existing websites in the name of the temple and adequate publicity is
given regarding the existence of official websites of the temple to ensure that the
devotees directly contact the temple administration, offer donations, make
bookings for various kinds of homams, poojas, abhishegams etc. that the website
will be made fully functional within a period of three months. The status report
further proceeds to state that illegal websites opened by the third parties will be
shut down with the assistance of the Cyber Crime authorities. After closure of
the bogus websites, the cyber space will be periodically monitored to ensure the
continuance of existence of the website of the temple alone. Referring to the
steps taken by the temple administration, it is stated that complaints dated
01.03.2020 and 16.09.2020 have been lodged before the Superintendent of
Police, (Cyber Crime), Nagapattinam and Mayiladuthurai with a specific request
to take necessary action against the persons running the illegal websites in the
name of the temple and to shutdown the same. It is also stated in the status report
that the presence of touts will be stopped in the temple and the Temple
administration will install boards with relevant information at all vantage points
inside and outside the temple premises so that the devotees can be made aware
of the actual fee to be paid. The devotees are also asked to make police
complaint, if touts continue to harass them. The devotees are also requested to
make their offerings only in the temple hundials and also in the payment
gateway provided in the official website. Further, the service of the Archakars
will be regularised and the 12 Archakars who are engaged for the services in the
temple will be made to submit bio-metric attendance to effectively regularise and
monitor their functioning. That apart, a Fit Person has been appointed to Sri
Markandeya Temple, Mayiladuthurai and he is looking after the administration
of the said temple.
13. Furthermore, it is seen from the circular issued by the Commissioner
of HR&CE Department, that instructions have been given to close all the private
websites within a period of one week and to furnish all the information relating
to the temples to the devotees / public through ITMS portal by NIC, in order to
avoid the issue of hacking, failing which, appropriate action will be initiated
against the official(s) concerned departmentally. Thus, it is brought to the
knowledge of this court that the respondents are taking steps to stop the
illegalities and properly account the money and donations collected from the
devotees, besides initiate appropriate proceedings against the third parties as
well as the officials / archakars of the temples, who are responsible for creation
of such illegal websites.
14. The archakars in every temple render a very important service by
performing rituals. Even a staunch devotee cannot enter the sanctorum, but only
an archakar is permitted to go into the sanctorum, touch and perform the
sanctum. A devotee, completely trusts the archakars when special rituals are
performed and leave the temple with a sense of satisfaction of having had the
spiritual benefit, that his prayer has reached the deity. It is not out of place to
mention here that a person cannot become an archakar unless he is qualified in
all the agamas and Thirumurais. The Apex Court in Seshammal v. State of
Tamil Nadu [(1972) 2 SCC 11], has summarised the importance of archakars,
and the belief of the devotees. Therefore, the role of archakars or priest cannot
be undermined and they occupy a very significant position in worship. The
archakars, by their role serve not only the temples, but also the deities by serving
the devotees. Every ritual performed by them in the temple is as an employee of
the temple alone and not in their independent capacity. Even if it is in their
independent capacity, it is only the temple authorities, who would have the right
to fix the charges to be paid to such archakars of the temple, if the rituals are to
be performed within the temple premises. The Trust imposed by them is
immense that a devotee performing a regular or a special ritual, does not ask any
questions. Every special functions like marriage, sashti aptha purthi, Ukra Radha
Shanti, Beema Radha Shanti, Sathabishekam within the precints of the temple
are based on the belief that the performance of such functions there would bring
in the blessings of the deity. Such being the case, the archakars, as employees of
the temples, are bound to perform the same at the rates fixed by the temple
management. They have no right to capitalize the faith of the devotees by
diverting the income of the temple, by creation of websites, as if they are
propounded by the temple itself. Apart from that, it is evident that these websites
are not the official websites of the temples and the amount collected towards the
festivals is not directly remitted to the temples. Rather, it is the touts, who collect
the money and remit paltry sums to the temples or the math. Such practices are
feeding the atheists to criticize the rituals and in-turn the deity.
15. It is needless to say that the property of the temples or the mutts not
only tangible but also intangible property. The word "endowment" in Section
6(17) includes all the property belonging to the temple and also includes the
temple. The very name of the temple and its websites are intangible assets. The
devotees visit the website of the temples to know about the various services
offered by them, the cost, timings, etc. While so, by impersonation, various
websites are created in the name of the temples or by impliedly projecting to be
created under the authorization without the permission of the HR&CE
department or the mutts’ to attract the devotees for performance of different
poojas in the temples at the rates and cost fixed by archakars in collusion with
the touts. The Courts, in general have been dealing with the menace of fake or
illegal websites, by which various conning activities and piracy are committed.
The prohibitory orders or in other words, the orders of injunction, in many cases
do not resolve the issue as the perpetrators would continue to operate with mirror
websites or from different IP address or URLs. Hence, it is necessary to follow a
mechanism, not only to prevent the creation and utilization of such illegal
websites, but also to permanently and continuously prevent such websites from
popping up.
16. At this juncture, it will be relevant to refer to the twin concepts of quia
timet and dynamic injunction, which can act as an effective tool to block such
websites. Quia timet, in latin means “because he fears”. The doctrine is used
when there is a real danger of some right being violated and the Courts,
considering the right of the other person, who is likely to suffer and equity, grant
the relief of injunction or in other words, a preventive order. The doctrine is
predominantly used in matters relating to intellectual property rights.
17. The evolving legal jurisprudence in the protection of intellectual
property rights has resulted in the evolution of the doctrine of Dynamic
Injunction order, by which, the necessity to approach the Court time and again
for preventive measures is thwarted by issuance of such an order, which meets
all the contingencies in future. The concept of dynamic injunction, with regard to
the piracy rights application by the Courts of various countries have been
discussed in detail in the judgment in UTV Software Communication Ltd and
others v. 1337X.To and others [2019 SCC OnLine Del 8002 : (2019) 78 PTC
375]. Applying the same to the present case, this Court is of the view that a
dynamic preventive order is necessitated because of the sheer involvement of the
number of temples, touts and illegal websites that either provide links to
webpages or URLs created by third parties, impersonating as that of the official
temple sites.
18. As already stated above, temples are places for worship visited by a
host of citizens of varied cultures to get the eternal peace and harmony and it
cannot be permitted to be turned as a platform for generating profit. The temples
offer certain services to devotees for a nominal fee, which will be utilised for
maintenance of the temples, including salary to the staff. Therefore, it is high
time that the websites opened in the name of the temples by the third parties
unauthorisedly to garner huge money, be closed and thereafter, it must be
ensured that other than the official website of the temples, there shall not be any
other website in existence to render any sort of service to the devotees. The
services rendered by the administration of the temples to the devotees shall not
be permitted to be done by any third party to secure unlawful gain. Though it
was stated by the respondent authorities that they have taken all necessary steps
to stop such illegalities, the status report was filed only in WP(MD) No.23410 of
2022 relating to Arulmighu Amirthakadeswarar Temple, Thirukadaiyur,
Mayiladuthurai District. There is no whisper about the steps taken against the
illegal websites created in respect of other temples across the State. In such
circumstances, this Court finds it necessary to issue certain directions in order to
put an end to such illegalities and to protect the rights of the temples.
19. Accordingly, the following directions are issued to the respondent
(i) To shut down / close all the illegal / unauthorised and fake websites
opened by the third parties, in the name of the temples / deities across the State
forthwith, if not done earlier, with the help of the officials of the Cyber Crime
Wing and recover the income received thereunder and file a report before this
court to that effect.
(ii) To provide the Department of Telecommunication and Ministry of
Electronics & Information Technology with a list of official website of the
temples with domain names and to inform them to give appropriate instructions
to the Internet Service Providers to continuously block all other illegal websites
with fake domain names, IP addresses, URLs, created by third parties in the
names of the temples or in the name of any third party, in whatsoever name and
style, impersonating and (or) infringing the rights of the temples or temple
(iii) To revamp the existing / create official websites in the name of the
temples for rendering on-line services to the devotees, with respect to poojas,
rituals, etc. The said website shall contain booking mechanism for all poojas,
ceremonies and other religious activities to be performed in the temples, make
donations, etc.
(iv) Adequate publicity regarding the existence of the temple websites
needs to be made by the temple administration as per the guidelines of the
HR&CE Department. The official/authentic websites should carry a disclaimer
in the homepage warning the public about fake websites. Adequate publicity
must be given by the temple administration about the menace of fake/bogus
websites. A separate dedicated contact phone number of an officer must be given
in the websites of the temples so as to enable the devotees to inform about the
existence of bogus websites, if any, when they come across or get duped by such
websites. If any such complaint (s) is received, the Department shall swiftly act
upon the same and take necessary civil and criminal action thereof.
(v) The officials of the Cyber Crime Wing shall take immediate action on
the complaints received from the public / devotees / temple administration about
the unauthorized and fake websites in the name of the temples. They shall also
conduct periodical inspection of websites and report the same to the respondent
authorities for taking appropriate action. The Cyber Crime Wing must also
communicate to the DoT and MEITY periodically about the existence of any
illegal websites, domains, IP addresses and URLs and to block them, so as to
effectively implement this order.
(vi) The temple administration across the State must take all efforts to
prevent touts from providing any sort of service to the devotees and collecting
monies / donations / contributions, in the name of the temple(s). If any complaint
is received in this regard, action must be taken swiftly.
(vii) To place adequate boards at all vantage points inside and outside the
temple premises, furnishing information about the temples, fees to be paid, etc.
and that, touts are banned from offering any service, so that the devotees can
directly approach the temple authorities for booking, etc.
(viii) To place hundials throughout the temples so that the devotees can
make their offerings. The boards must carry the information that the devotees are
required to offer their contributions / donations, if any, only in the hundials or in
the payment gateway provided in the official websites.
(ix) For all the services rendered in the temples across the State, such as
poojas, marriage ceremonies, abhishegam, etc., amount will be collected only by
the administration of the temples and due receipt will be given to the devotees.
In the absence of tickets/receipts issued by temple / Aadheenam authorities, no
one should be permitted to perform any religious activities in the temples. The
amounts collected shall be properly accounted and audited by the authorities
concerned. Only the archakars, photographers and guides authorized by the
Aadheenam / officials shall be permitted inside the temple upon registering them
with proper identity cards and that, the third parties and touts must be prevented.
Necessary civil and criminal action must be initiated against them forthwith for
any violation in this regard.
(x) The procedures preceding the religious ceremonies in all the temples
across the State have to be streamlined. The Commissioner of HR & CE
Department shall monitor the religious activities performed in the temples and
take immediate action, if there is any illegality in the temple administration. A
systematic, transparent and smooth functioning of the religious activities of the
temples, have to be devised similar to that of Thirumala Devasthanam,
(xi) The Fit Person appointed for Sri Markandeya Temple, shall ensure
that all the receipts and expenditures of the said Temple is duly accounted for
and that the services of the temple have to be offered only through an authorised
website or in any other manner as may be prescribed by the Commissioner of
(xii) The status report be filed by the officials of the HR&CE Department
and Aadheenam authorities before this court within a period of three months.
20. Both these writ petitions stand disposed of, with the aforesaid
directions. It is open to the 5th respondent in W.P(MD) No.23410/2022 to work
out his remedy with regard to the claim of hereditary trustee, as per law. No
costs.
Post the matters before this Bench after three months “for reporting
compliance”.
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Department
Ministry of Electronics and information Technology
12.        The Additional Director General of Police
13.        The Additional Chief Secretary to the Government
Home, Prohibition and Excise Department