CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                         Page 1 of 18
1.     By these three appeals, the appellants impugn the judgment dated 16th
October, 2020 whereby they have been convicted for offences punishable
under Sections 376(2) (g), 377, 302 and 201 IPC and the order on sentence
dated 21st January, 2021 awarded by the learned Special Judge, POCSO
directing them to undergo imprisonment for the rest of their lives for
offences punishable under Sections 302 and 376(2) (g) IPC, simple
imprisonment for 10 years for offence punishable under Section 377 IPC,
simple imprisonment for 5 years for offence punishable under Section 201
IPC and accused Jamahir has been awarded sentence of imprisonment for 5
years for offence punishable under Section 363 IPC.
2.     Assailing the conviction, learned counsel for the appellant Jamahir
contends that there is delay in registration of FIR. Despite the fact that the
case of the parents of the victim was that she went missing in the evening of
5th January, 2012 no missing report was lodged and the FIR was lodged only
on 7th January, 2012 after the post-mortem report was received by the
Police. It is further contended that the so-called eye-witness Ramjanam is a
planted witness and not reliable. There are material contradictions in his
testimony including contradictions in the time stated by him as to when he
went to the Police Station, which is contradicted by the father of the
deceased/PW-2. Learned counsel further states that no rough site plan of the
place of incident was prepared; though one rough site plan of Nala was
prepared and in the absence of rough site plan of the place of occurrence, the
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                   Page 2 of 18
FSL report claiming that the soil from the place of occurrence matched with
the soil found from the body of the deceased is meaningless. She further
states that no independent witness has also seen the place of occurrence.
Besides challenging the manner in which based on the DNA analysis the
appellants Jamahir has been convicted, learned counsel for the appellant
further challenges the quantum of sentence awarded to the appellant
claiming that the learned Trial Court could not have awarded sentence of
imprisonment for the remainder of the life as held by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in the decision reported as (2021) 3 SCC 380 Gauri Shankar Vs. State
3.     Learned counsel appearing on behalf of appellant Raj Kumar states
that the conduct of the appellant was unbecoming of an accused as he was
arrested on the disclosure statement of Jamahir outside the Police Station.
He further contends that the MLC of all the appellants was conducted twice
and the DNA analysis which could have been conducted based on the blood
samples and would have proved the prosecution case without any ambiguity,
was not adhered to; rather the Police collected semen samples of all the three
appellants thus creating a doubt of planting the semen on the vaginal swabs
collected as the samples were in the custody of the Police. He states that the
tampering of the samples cannot be ruled out and thus the appellants are
entitled to the benefit of doubt.
4.     Learned counsel for the appellant Birbal adopts the arguments
addressed by learned counsels for Jamahir and Raj Kumar.
5.     The prosecution case commences from an information received at the
Police Station Kirti Nagar at 7.45 AM on 6th January, 2012 recorded vide
DD No. 11A informing that a dead body of girl aged about 3-4 years was
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                  Page 3 of 18
found in front of house No.03/17, Ramesh Nagar. The body was identified
to be of one ‘R’ aged 3 years by her father who appeared in the witness box
as PW-2. The said dead body was found by Suresh (PW-10) who was the
sweeper of MCD cleaning the Nala and who with the help of Shamsher
Singh (PW-11) took out the body from the Nala and informed the Police.
6.     The post-mortem of the dead body was conducted at 1.15 PM on 6 th
January, 2012 itself and the following injuries were found:
1. Abraded bruise of size 1.5cm x 0.5cm present on the left side
of forehead with reddish brown in colour.
2. Abraded bruise of size 2.5cm x 2cm present on the right side
of face just medial to right ear with reddish brown in colour.
3. Inner aspect of both upper and lower lip found bruised at
middle part with associated abrasions on outer aspect and
having colour of reddish brown.
4. 3 to 4 crescentric shaped abrasions of size 5mm
(circumferential length) appearing like nail marks present on
the left side of face and neck with reddish brown in colour.
5. Abraded bruise of size 20cm x 8cm present on the lower half
part of back with scattered peeling of skin on the injured part
(could be caused by rubbing of back on hard and rough surface
during act of sexual assault).
6. Apartly placed pressure abrasion placed on semi circular
manner with 6-7 in numbers present on the anterior aspect on
mid of left thigh. Each of pressure marks presented with
variable in dimension (2mm x 1mm to 3mm x 2mm) appearing
like human bite / love bite during act of sexual assault.
7. The inner aspect of labia majora, whole part of labia minora,
vaginal introitus severely bruised along with relatively directed
vaginal opening, lacerated hymen and vaginal mucosa with
collection of clotted blood into vaginal canal.
8. Perianal area bruised with dilated and lacerated anal
mucosa up to anal sphincter along with collection of clotted
blood into anal canal with dark red in colour.”
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                    Page 4 of 18
Tracheal Rings & Mucosa / Any Foreign Body in Trachea: All
cartilages and hyoid bone of neck found intact. The tracheal
mucosa found highly congested with collection of frothy
secretion into lumen of it.”
“1. The cause of death is due to asphyxia caused by manual
smothering.
2. All Injuries are ante mortem in nature and of same duration.
3. The manner of death is homicide.
4. The possibility of sexual assault (vaginal and anal coitus) can
not be ruled out.
5. Time since death of deceased is approx 16 - 18 hours prior,
to post-mortem examination.”
8.     The post-mortem thus clearly showed that an offence of rape with
murder of the minor child aged 3 years was committed. The post-mortem
Doctors preserved the vaginal swabs, anal swabs, few hair strands recovered
from the body and clothes of the deceased for DNA profile as also the soil
on the body for establishing the place of occurrence. All these exhibits were
duly sealed and preserved with the seal of DFMT, DDU Hospital and
handed-over to the Police.
9.     Subsequently, the prosecution recorded the statement of Ramjanam.
The Trial Court examined two witnesses including Ramjanam as PW-4 and
thus for the sake of convenience we will note Ramjanam as PW-4A.
According to Ramjanam on 5th January, 2012 he had gone to the market
Veer Bazar, Ramesh Nagar to purchase household articles. At about 8.00
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                    Page 5 of 18
PM he reached near Gol Chakkar in front of Pakora Corner and saw one girl
aged 3–5 years weeping and the said girl was accompanied by a boy aged
25–30 years having a small beard, who was holding her hand. The girl was
wearing an orange colour and white colour T-Shirt (jacket type). When he
enquired from the said boy as to why the said girl was weeping, he said that
he was searching for the parents of the girl as she has been missing from her
parents. Thereafter, he went home and later when he came to know that
dead body of a girl was found, he went to the Police Station Ramesh Nagar
on 7th January, 2012 and requested to show the photo of the girl. He
identified the girl to be the same which he had seen with the boy in Veer
Bazar. He gave the height of the boy as 5/ 5 ½ feet and stated that he could
identify the boy if he was shown to him.
10.    As per the investigation thereafter accused Jamahir was apprehended
who was then identified by Ramjanam at DDU Hospital after Jamahir
refused his TIP. It is on the disclosure of Jamahir that the two other accused
Raj Kumar and Birbal were also apprehended. On the arrest of these three
accused, their blood samples and semen samples were collected and sent to
the FSL for DNA examination. The FSL result qua DNA examination was
1. The alleles from the source of exhibit 'll' (Blood sample of
accused Jawahar @ Jamahir), exhibit '20' (Blood sample of
accused Birbal), exhibit '23'(Blood sample of accused Raj
Kumar), exhibit '25'(Blood sample of accused Raj Kumar),
exhibit '26'(Blood sample of accused Jawahar @ Jamahir) &
exhibit '27'(Blood. sample of accused Birbal) are accounted in
the mixed alleles from the source of exhibit '2a' (top), exhibit
'2b' (T- shirt), exhibit „3a‟(cotton wool swab), exhibit '3b'
(cotton wool swab), exhibit '4a' (cotton wool swab), exhibit '4b'
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                    Page 6 of 18
(cotton wool swab),.and exhibit '15' (Underwear of deceased).
However Alleles from the source of exhibit "23" and "25"
(Blood sample of accused Rajkumar) is accounted in the alleles
from the source of exhibit "17" (Cloth piece).The alleles from
the source of exhibit '11' (Blood sample of accused Jawahar @
Jamahir) & exhibit '26' (Blood sample of accused Jawahar @
Jamahir) are accounted in the alleles from the source of exhibit
„10‟ (Hair recovered from the body and clothes of deceased)
1. The DNA profiling (STR analysis) performed on the exhibits
are sufficient to conclude that the mixed DNA Profile from the
source of exhibit '2a'- (top), exhibit '2b' (T- shirt), exhibit '3a'
(cotton wool swab), exhibit '3b' (cotton wool swab), exhibit '4a'
(cotton wool swab), exhibit '4b' (cotton wool swab), , exhibit
'15' (Underwear of deceased) are matching with DNA Profile
from the source of exhibit '11' (Blood sample of accused
Jawahar @ Jathahir), exhibit '20' (Blood sample of accused
Birbal), exhibit '23'('Blood sample of accused Raj Kumar),
exhibit '25'(Blood sample of accused Raj Kumar), exhibit
'26'(Blood sample of accused .Jawahar @ Jamahir) & exhibit
'27'(Blood sample of accused Birbal).
2. The DNA profile of the source of exhibits "23" and "25"
(Blood sample of accused Rajkumar) is matching with the
source of exhibit "17" (Cloth piece).
3. The DNA profile of the source of exhibit '11' (Blood sample
of accused Ja\yahar @ Jamahir) 85 exhibit '26' (Blood sample
of accused Jawahar @ jamahir) is matching with the source of
exhibit '10' (Hair recovered from the body and clothes of
deceased).”
11.    Contention of learned counsel for the appellant Jamahir that there is
delay in registration of FIR does not affect the case of the prosecution for
the reason according to the mother of the deceased she went to lodge the
missing report in the evening of 5th January, 2012, however no missing
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                     Page 7 of 18
report was lodged. Be that as it may, the dead body was found at around
7.00 AM on 6th January, 2012 and the body along with the inquest papers
was received for post-mortem at around 1.00 PM on 6th January, 2012. Till
then neither the statements of eye-witnesses were recorded nor were the
appellants arrested. The FIR does not name the assailants but only gives the
description as to when the victim went missing and as to how her dead body
was found.
12.    Further contention that Ramjanam is a planted witness and not
reliable also deserves to be rejected as Ramjanam gave the description of
appellant Jamahir and it is on his description that Jamahir was arrested and
when Jamahir failed to participate in the Test Identification Parade he was
duly identified by Ramjanam. Version of Ramjanam is further corroborated
by the fact that from the vaginal and anal swabs of the deceased collected,
preserved and sealed at around 1.00 PM on 6th January, 2012, the alleles
matched with the DNA samples of Jamahir, as also the two other accused.
Further, there was no eye-witness to the place of incident and hence no
rough site plan thereof was prepared. While conducting the post-mortem the
soil on the body was collected and the FSL report in this regard shows that
the soil on the body matches to the constitution of the soil from the place of
occurrence which was pointed out by the accused.
13.    Merely because Raj Kumar did not run away and was arrested outside
Police Station at the pointing out of Jamahir cannot be a ground to come to
the conclusion that Raj Kumar is innocent, particularly in view of the FSL
report showing his semen in the body of the minor child. The vaginal swabs
and anal swabs from the deceased were collected, preserved and sealed on
the afternoon of 6th January, 2012 and the accused were arrested much later
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                   Page 8 of 18
i.e. Jamahir on 11th January 2012 and Raj Kumar and Birbal on 15th January
2012 and when the samples reached the FSL they were found to be sealed
with the seal of Hospital with no tampering therein, ruling out the possibility
of any manipulation or planting of the semen of the appellants on the
samples collected.
14.     The post-mortem examination of the victim aged 3 years shows the
diabolic and brutal manner in which she was ravished causing tear and
laceration in the hymen and vagina as also perianal area followed by killing
her by smothering. It is in the light of these facts that the learned Trial Court
awarded the sentence of life imprisonment for the remainder of the natural
life to the three appellants.
15.     In the decision reported as (2016) 7 SCC 1 Union of India Vs. V.
Sriharan @ Murugan & Ors. Constitution Bench of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court held that the power to impose a modified punishment providing for
any specific term of incarceration or till the end of the convict’s life as an
alternate to death penalty can be exercised only by the High Court and the
Supreme Court and not by any other inferior Court. Even in Gauri Shankar
(supra), Hon’ble Supreme Court took the same view following the
Constitution Bench decision in V.Sriharan (supra).
16.     In view of the law laid down by the Constitution Bench in V.Sriharan
(supra), the impugned order on sentence to the extent it awards sentence for
imprisonment of the remainder of the life to the appellants herein for
offences punishable under Sections 376(2) and 302/34 IPC cannot be
17.     Thus the issue that arises before this Court is whether only in a case
where the Trial Court awards death sentence and instead of confirming the
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                      Page 9 of 18
death sentence can the High Court modify the sentence to life imprisonment
to the remainder of life or a definite term or even in a case where life
imprisonment has been awarded by the Trial Court, the High Court in
exercise of its appellate jurisdiction can direct that the life imprisonment
would be for the remainder of the life or a definite term.
18.     Section 45 of the Indian Penal Code defines ‘life’ as ‘the life of a
human being, unless the contrary appears from the context’. Therefore,
imprisonment for life means the natural life of a human being. The power of
the appropriate government to remit a sentence of imprisonment of life as
conferred by clause (b) of Section 433 read with Section 433-A CrPC,
cannot mean that the life imprisonment awarded by a Court of competent
jurisdiction is not the natural life. (See also 2018 SCC Online Del 9304
Sanjay Kumar Valmimi Vs. State, para 88).
19.     Constitution Bench in V.Sriharan (supra) upholding the views
expressed in (2008) 13 SCC 767 Swamy Shraddananda (2) Vs. State of
Karnataka held that by the Court prescribing a definite term of 20 years, 25
years, 30 years or the remainder of life as an alternate to life imprisonment,
it cannot be held that the Court has carved out a new punishment. What the
Court seeks is to declare by stating that within the prescribed limit of
punishment of life imprisonment, having regard to the nature of offence
committed, life imprisonment for a specific period is imposed, which is
proportionate to the crime as well as the interest of the victim. Hon’ble
“76. Keeping the above hard reality in mind, when we
examine the issue, the question is “whether as held
in Shraddananda (2) [Swamy Shraddananda (2) v. State of
Karnataka, (2008) 13 SCC 767 : (2009) 3 SCC (Cri) 113] , a
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                    Page 10 of 18
special category of sentence; instead of death; for a term
exceeding 14 years and putting that category beyond application
of remission is good in law? When we analyse the issue in the
light of the principles laid down in very many judgments starting
from Godse [Gopal Vinayak Godse v. State of Maharashtra, AIR
Ram [Maru Ram v. Union of India, (1981) 1 SCC 107 : 1981
Ji [Sambha Ji Krishan Ji v. State of Maharashtra, (1974) 1 SCC
Singh [State of M.P. v. Ratan Singh, (1976) 3 SCC 470 : 1976
SCC (Cri) 428] , it has now come to stay that when in
exceptional cases, death penalty is altered as life sentence, that
would only mean rest of one's lifespan.
78. Though we are not attempting to belittle the scope and
ambit of executive action of the State in exercise of its power of
statutory remission, when it comes to the question of equation
with a judicial pronouncement, it must be held that such
executive action should give due weight and respect to the latter
in order to achieve the goals set in the Constitution. It is not to be
said that such distinctive role to be played by the Executive of the
State would be in the nature of a subordinate role to the
judiciary. In this context, it can be said without any scope of
controversy that when by way of a judicial decision, after a
detailed analysis, having regard to the proportionality of the
crime committed, it is decided that the offender deserves to be
punished with the sentence of life imprisonment i.e. for the end of
his life or for a specific period of 20 years, or 30 years or 40
years, such a conclusion should survive without any interruption.
Therefore, in order to ensure that such punishment imposed,
which is legally provided for in the Penal Code, 1860 read along
with the Criminal Procedure Code to operate without any
interruption, the inherent power of the court concerned should
empower the court in public interest as well as in the interest of
the society at large to make it certain that such punishment
imposed will operate as imposed by stating that no remission or
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                      Page 11 of 18
other such liberal approach should not come into effect to nullify
such imposition.
83. Keeping the above principles in mind, when we make a
study of the vexed question, we find that the lawmakers have
restricted the power to impose death sentence to only 12 sections
in the Penal Code, namely, Sections 120-B(1), 121, 132, 194,
195-A, 302, 305, 307 (Second Part), 376-A, 376-E, 396 and 364-
A. Apart from the Penal Code such punishments of death are
provided in certain other draconian laws like TADA, Mcoca, etc.
Therefore, it was held by this Court in umpteen numbers of
judgments that death sentence is an exception rather than a rule.
That apart, even after applying such great precautionary
prescription when the trial courts reach a conclusion to impose
the maximum punishment of death, further safeguards are
provided under the Criminal Procedure Code and the special
Acts to make a still more concretised effort by the higher courts
to ensure that no stone is left unturned for the imposition of such
capital punishments.
85. Again keeping in mind the above statutory prescriptions
relating to imposition of capital punishment or the alternate
punishment of life imprisonment, meaning thereby till the end of
the convict's life, we wish to analyse the scope and extent to
which such alternate punishment can be directed to be imposed.
In the first place, it must be noted that the lawmakers themselves
have bestowed great care and caution when they decided to
prescribe the capital punishment of death and its alternate to life
imprisonment, restricted the scope for such imposition to the
least minimum of 12 instances alone. As has been noted by us
earlier, by way of interpretation process, this Court has laid
down that such imposition of capital punishment can only be in
the rarest of rare cases. In the later decisions, as the law
developed, this Court laid down and quoted very many
circumstances which can be said to be coming within the four
corners of the said rarest of rare principle, though such instances
are not exhaustive.
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                    Page 12 of 18
“90. In such context when we consider the views expressed
in Shraddananda (2) in paras 91 and 92, the same are fully
justified and need to be upheld. By stating so, we do not find any
violation of the statutory provisions prescribing the extent of
punishment provided in the Penal Code. It cannot also be said
that by stating so, the Court has carved out a new punishment.
What all it seeks to declare by stating so was that within the
prescribed limit of the punishment of life imprisonment, having
regard to the nature of offence committed by imposing the life
imprisonment for a specified period would be proportionate to
the crime as well as the interest of the victim, whose interest is
also to be taken care of by the Court, when considering the
nature of punishment to be imposed.
98. While that be so, it cannot also be lost sight of that it will
be next to impossible for even the lawmakers to think of or
prescribe in exactitude all kinds of such criminal conduct to fit
into any appropriate pigeonhole for structured punishments to
run in between the minimum and maximum period of
imprisonment. Therefore, the lawmakers thought it fit to
prescribe the minimum and the maximum sentence to be imposed
for such diabolic nature of crimes and leave it for the
adjudication authorities, namely, the Institution of Judiciary
which is fully and appropriately equipped with the necessary
knowledge of law, experience, talent and infrastructure to study
the detailed parts of each such case based on the legally
acceptable material evidence, apply the legal principles and the
law on the subject, apart from the guidance it gets from the
jurists and judicial pronouncements revealed earlier, to
determine from the nature of such grave offences found proved
and depending upon the facts noted, what kind of punishment
within the prescribed limits under the relevant provision would
appropriately fit in. In other words, while the maximum extent of
punishment of either death or life imprisonment is provided for
under the relevant provisions noted above, it will be for the
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                       Page 13 of 18
courts to decide if in its conclusion, the imposition of death may
not be warranted, what should be the number of years of
imprisonment that would be judiciously and judicially more
appropriate to keep the person under incarceration, by taking
into account, apart from the crime itself, from the angle of the
commission of such crime or crimes, the interest of the society at
large or all other relevant factors which cannot be put in any
straitjacket formulae.
100. That apart, as has been noted by us earlier, while the
description of the offences and the prescription of punishments
are provided for in the Penal Code which can be imposed only
through the courts of law, under Chapter XXVIII of the Criminal
Procedure Code, at least in regard to the confirmation of the
capital punishment of death penalty, the whole procedure has
been mandatorily prescribed to ensure that such punishment gets
the consideration by a Division Bench consisting of two Hon'ble
Judges of the High Court for its approval. As noted earlier, the
said Chapter XXVIII can be said to be a separate Code by itself
providing for a detailed consideration to be made by the Division
Bench of the High Court, which can do and undo the whole trial
held or even order for retrial on the same set of charges or of
different charges and also impose appropriate punishment
befitting the nature of offence found proved.
101. Such prescription contained in the Criminal Procedure
Code, though procedural, the substantive part rests in the Penal
Code for the ultimate confirmation or modification or alteration
or amendment or amendment of the punishment. Therefore, what
is apparent is that the imposition of death penalty or life
imprisonment is substantively provided for in the Penal Code,
procedural part of it is prescribed in the Criminal Procedure
Code and significantly one does not conflict with the other.
Having regard to such a dichotomy being set out in the Penal
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                   Page 14 of 18
Code and the Criminal Procedure Code, which in many respects
to be operated upon in the adjudication of a criminal case, the
result of such thoroughly defined distinctive features have to be
clearly understood while operating the definite provisions, in
particular, the provisions in the Penal Code providing for capital
punishment and in the alternate the life imprisonment.
104. That apart, in most of such cases where death penalty or
life imprisonment is the punishment imposed by the trial court
and confirmed by the Division Bench of the High Court, the
convict concerned will get an opportunity to get such verdict
tested by filing further appeal by way of special leave to this
Court. By way of abundant caution and as per the prescribed law
of the Code and the criminal jurisprudence, we can assert that
after the initial finding of guilt of such specified grave offences
and the imposition of penalty either death or life imprisonment,
when comes under the scrutiny of the Division Bench of the High
Court, it is only the High Court which derives the power under
the Penal Code, which prescribes the capital and alternate
punishment, to alter the said punishment with one either for the
entirety of the convict's life or for any specific period of more
than 14 years, say 20, 30 or so on depending upon the gravity of
the crime committed and the exercise of judicial conscience
befitting such offence found proved to have been committed.
105. We, therefore, reiterate that the power derived from the
Penal Code for any modified punishment within the punishment
provided for in the Penal Code for such specified offences can
only be exercised by the High Court and in the event of further
appeal only by the Supreme Court and not by any other court in
this country. To put it differently, the power to impose a modified
punishment providing for any specific term of incarceration or
till the end of the convict's life as an alternate to death penalty,
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                    Page 15 of 18
can be exercised only by the High Court and the Supreme Court
and not by any other inferior court”.
20.     In Swamy Shraddananda (2), Hon’ble Supreme Court further held
that it is equally well settled that Section 57 of the IPC does not, in any way,
limit the punishment of imprisonment for life to a term of twenty years.
Section 57 of the IPC is only for calculating fractions of term of
imprisonment and provides that imprisonment for life shall be reckoned as
equivalent to imprisonment for 20 years. It was further held on the facts of a
case, a death sentence awarded by Trial Court may be excessive and unduly
harsh whereas a life imprisonment which subject to remission normally
works out to be a term of 14 years, would be grossly disproportionate and
inadequate. Thus, it is within these two categories that a specific category
has been carved out wherein the Courts can award a particular period of the
natural life as the sentence. Hon’ble Supreme Court held:
“92. The matter may be looked at from a slightly different
angle. The issue of sentencing has two aspects. A sentence may
be excessive and unduly harsh or it may be highly
disproportionately inadequate. When an appellant comes to this
Court carrying a death sentence awarded by the trial court and
confirmed by the High Court, this Court may find, as in the
present appeal, that the case just falls short of the rarest of the
rare category and may feel somewhat reluctant in endorsing the
death sentence. But at the same time, having regard to the nature
of the crime, the Court may strongly feel that a sentence of life
imprisonment subject to remission normally works out to a term
of 14 years would be grossly disproportionate and inadequate.
What then should the Court do? If the Court's option is limited
only to two punishments, one a sentence of imprisonment, for all
intents and purposes, of not more than 14 years and the other
death, the Court may feel tempted and find itself nudged into
endorsing the death penalty. Such a course would indeed be
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                      Page 16 of 18
disastrous. A far more just, reasonable and proper course would
be to expand the options and to take over what, as a matter of
fact, lawfully belongs to the Court i.e. the vast hiatus between 14
years' imprisonment and death. It needs to be emphasised that
the Court would take recourse to the expanded option primarily
because in the facts of the case, the sentence of 14 years'
imprisonment would amount to no punishment at all.
93. Further, the formalisation of a special category of
sentence, though for an extremely few number of cases, shall
have the great advantage of having the death penalty on the
statute book but to actually use it as little as possible, really in
the rarest of rare cases. This would only be a reassertion of the
Constitution Bench decision in Bachan Singh [(1980) 2 SCC
684: 1980 SCC (Cri) 580: AIR 1980 SC 898] besides being in
accord with the modern trends in penology.”
21.    As noted above, though the learned Trial Court could not have
qualified the imprisonment of life awarded by it to the remainder of the
natural life of the appellants as held by the Constitution Bench in V.Sriharan
(supra) as also in Gauri Shankar (supra), this Court though setting aside the
said order in exercise of its appellate jurisdiction, can award the same
sentence on consideration of the facts of the case. In the present case, the
three appellants have been convicted for the gang rape and murder of a
minor aged 3 years, thereby brutally mutilating her private parts and
smothering her. In the present case death sentence has not been awarded by
the learned Trial Court.           However, the sentence of life which would
ordinarily be upto fourteen years after remissions would be highly
inadequate, unjust and unfair to the victim. Further sentence of life being a
sentence for the natural life reserving the right of the executive to grant
remissions, this Court in view of the law laid down in V.Sriharan (supra)
and Swamy Shraddananda (2) (supra) would be competent to award the
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                    Page 17 of 18
sentence for remainder of the life to the appellants. Hence, imprisonment of
life for the remainder of life to the appellants would be an appropriate
sentence in the facts of the case.
22.    Consequently, upholding the conviction of the appellants for the
offences punishable under Sections 376(2)(g) IPC, 302 IPC, 377 IPC and
201 IPC, and of appellant Jamahir for offence punishable under Section 363
IPC, though the order on sentence to the extent it directs the appellants to
undergo imprisonment for the remainder of life as passed by the learned
Trial Court is set aside for offences punishable under Sections 376(2) and
302 IPC, however, in exercise of its appellate jurisdiction and in view of
diabolic and brutal manner in which rape with murder of a three year old
child was committed, this Court deems it fit to award the same sentence i.e.
remainder of the life for offences punishable under Sections 376(2) and 302
IPC. The sentence of simple imprisonment for 10 years for offence
punishable under Section 377 IPC to all the appellants and imprisonment for
5 years to the appellant Jamahir for offence punishable under Section 363
IPC along with the fine imposed and the default sentences is upheld.
23.    Appeals are accordingly disposed of.
24.    Copy of the order be uploaded on the website of this Court, as also
communicated to the Superintendent Tihar Jail for updation of records and
for intimation to the appellants.
CRL.A. 135/2022, CRL.A.183/2021 & CRL.A.228/2021                  Page 18 of 18