There is an Office objection in this case to the
effect that a Criminal Appeal will not be maintainable and
instead, it should be a Criminal Revision. Before dealing with
the   Office  objection,   it would    be  necessary   to  brief ly
appreciate the facts of this ca se.
2.   The petitioner has preferred the present Criminal Appeal in a
case which is pending before the Court of Special Judge,
Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities)
Act, 1989, (for short ‘SC/ST Act’ ), which case also includes the
offences punishable under the provisions of the SC/ST Act.
The charges were framed against the appellants herein under
Sections 307, 302 read with Section 34 of the I.P.C. as also
under Section 3(2)(v) of the SC/ST Act. The appellants wanted
to challenge the order framing charges against them and
therefore, they filed the present Criminal Appeal in light of
Section 14A of the SC/ST Act . Section 14A (1) of the SC/ST
Act being relevant for the controversy involved in this ca se is
“14A.   Appeals    –  (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of
1974), an appeal shall lie, from any judgment, sentence
or order, not being an interlocutory order, of a Special
Court or an Exclusive Special Court, to the High Court
both on facts and on law. ”
Thus, Section 14A(1) of the SC/ST Act starts with a non
obstante clause to the effect that notwithstanding anything
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, an appeal shall lie
from   the  judgment,    sentence,  or  order,   not being   an
interlocutory order of a Special Court.
3. In another case, where the accused were similarly situated,
they preferred a Criminal Revision instead of an appeal
U/s.14A of the SC/ST Act, parties bei ng Salman Mansuri Vs.
The State of M.P. , reported in Criminal Revision No.349/2021 .
In that case, the Office had taken an objection that it would a
Criminal Appeal U/s.14A of the SC/ST Act which should have
been filed and not a Criminal Revision. The said objection was
examined    by  a  co-ordinate   Bench   of this  Court, which
examined Section 14A and thereafter concluded that framing
of a charge is an interlocutory order and therefore, a revision
would lie. Thereafter, the objection so raised by t he Office
was ignored and the case was proceeded with . Relying upon
the said order dated 03.03.2021 passed in Criminal Revision
No.349/21, the Office had taken an objection in the present
case that as the appellants herein have preferred this appeal
against the order framing charges passed by the Special
Judge, SC/ST Act, a Criminal Revision would lie, in light of
the   order passed   by  the   co -ordinate   Bench    in  Cri.Rev.
No.349/2021 dated 03.03.2021.
4. Section 397 of the Cr.P.C. empowers the High Court and the
Sessions Court to call for the record of the trial court to
exercise power of revision U/s.397(1) . It would be apt to
reproduce Section 397 of the Cr.P.C., which reads as under: -
“397. Calling for records to exercise powers of revision:
(1) The High Court or any Sessions Judge may call for and
examine the record of any proceeding before any inferior
Criminal Court situate within its or his local jurisdiction for
the purpose of satisfying itself or himself as to the
correctness, legality or propriety of any finding, sentence
or order,- recorded or passed, and as to the regularity of
any proceedings of such inferior Court, and may, when
calling for such record, direct that the execution of any
sentence or order be suspended, and if the accused is in
confinement, that he be released on bail or on his own
bond pending the examination of the record .
Explanation.- All Magistrates whether Executive or Judicial,
and whether exercising original or appellate jurisdiction,
shall be deemed to be inferior to the Sessions Judge for the
purposes of this sub- section and of section 398.
(2) The powers of revision conferred by sub - section (1)
shall not be exercised in relation to any interlocutory order
passed in any appeal, inquiry, trial or other proceeding.
(3) If an application under this section has been made by
any person either to the High Court or to the Sessions
Judge, no further application by the same person shall be
entertained by the other of them .”
5. Sub-Section   (2)  of Section 397     of  the   Cr. P.C.  clearly
prohibits the power of revision being exercised in relation
to any interlocutory order passed in any appeal, inquiry,
trial, or other proceeding. Therefore, if the framing of
charge is an interlocutory order, then the powers o f High
Court or the Sessions in exercising revisional power would
be barred in view of Section 397(2) of Cr.P.C.
6.       As    to     what    constitutes    an   interlocutory   order   has
consistently      attracted   the   attention   of  the  courts.  In
Amarnath        and    others    Vs.   State    of   Haryana 1,  the
Supreme Court was examining if an order summoning an
accused to stand trial was an interlocutory order , not
amenable to a revision? In a complaint case, the Magistrate
had directed the police to investigate in to the allegations in
the     complaint.     Police   filed   a   report   absol ving  the
prospective      accused    perso ns.    Magistrate   acce pted  the
report and dismissed the complaint. On revision t o the
Court     of  Sessions    by   the   co mplainant,   the  case   was
remanded       to   the  Magistrate     for  further  enquiry.   The
Magistrate st raight away issued summo ns to the accused
who approached the High Court in revision against the
summons issued against them. The High C ourt dismissed
the    revision    in limine holding that the         order   of the
summoning was an interlocutory order and therefore not
amenable to revision in the light of s. 397(2) Cr.P .C. The
supreme court held in paragraph 6 “It seems to us that
the term “interlocutory order” in Section 397(2) of
the 1973 Code has been used in a restricted sense
and not in any broad or artistic sense . It merely
denotes orders of a purely interim or temporary
nature which do not decide or touch the important
rights or liabilities of the parties . Any order which
substantially affects the right        of the accused       or
decides certa in rights of the parties cannot be said to
be an interlocutory order so as to bar a revision to
the    High Court    against   that  order,   because    that
would be against the very object which formed the
basis for insertion of this particular provision in
Section 397 of the 1973 Code . Thus, for instance,
orders    summoning      witnesses,     adjourning    cases,
passing orders for bail, calling for reports and such
other steps in aid of the pending proceeding, may no
doubt amount to interlocutory orders against which,
no revisio n would lie under Section 397(2) of the
1973 Code. But orders which are matters of moment
and which affect or adjudicate the rights of the
accused or a particular aspect of the trial cannot be
said to be interlocutory order so as to be outside the
purview of the revisional jurisdiction of the High
7.       In   Madhu    Limaye    Vs. State   of   Maharashtra 2,    the
Supreme Court while examining the true import of the
phrase “interlocutory order” in s. 397 (2) Cr.P.C held that
the same cannot be restrictive in the sense , it cannot be
construed that all order that are       not final order are
interlocutory for if such an interpretation is resorted to , it
would negate the legislative intent in giving power of
revision to the High Court and the Sessions Court. The
Supreme Court placed order s that are not final orders but
still amenable to the re visional jurisdiction u /s. 397 Cr.P.C ,
in the category of “intermediate orders ”.
8.  Thus, any order that affects the rights of the parties cannot
be deemed to be an in terlocutory order , but the same
would be an intermediate order . An order framing charges
affects the right of an accused, where it compels an
accused to stand trial in a case where he can show that the
material in the chargesheet do not even reveal a prima
facie               case         against him and   that  he deserve s to be
discharged. Therefore, an order framing charges is not an
interlocutory order and so, u/s. 14A of the S C/ST Act, an
appeal would lie .
9.  The objections raised by the office is rejected. List on