Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 1612 of 2022
Counsel for Applicant :- Ishan Baghel
1.    Heard Sri I.B. Singh, learned Senior Counsel assisted by Sri
Ishan Baghel and Avinash Singh Vishen, learned counsel for the
applicant, Sri Vinod Kumar Shahi, learned Additional Advocate
General assisted by Sri Shivnath Tilahari, learned A.G.A. and perused
the material available on record.
2.    Applicant seeks bail in Crime No.199 of 2020, under Sections
153-A, 295-A, 120B I.P.C., Sections 17, 18 of U.A.P. Act and
Sections 65 and 72 of I.T. Act, Police Station Mant, District Mathura,
during the pendency of trial.
3.    As per prosecution story, the applicant alongwith three co-
accused persons, namely, Athikurrehman, Alam and Masood, were
lodged at the Police Station Mant vide G.D. No.41/20:52 hours on
05.10.2020 and six smart phones, one laptop and pamphlets were
recovered from them. After an inquiry, it came out that the applicant
and other co-accused persons were travelling to disturb the harmony
of the area. It is alleged in the F.I.R. that the applicant and other co-
accused persons were heading to Hathras where the ill-fated incident
of rape and murder had been committed with an intention to create
caste struggle and to incite riots. The said persons are said to have
been collecting funds and running a website 'Carrd.com'. It was also
revealed that the said collected funds were used to break the social
harmony and incite violence. The pamphlets read as 'AM I NOT
INDIAS DAUGHTER MADE WITH Carrd' etc. It was also found
that the incident of mob lynching, exodus of labourers and the
Kashmir issues were also highlighted through the same website. The
website also imparts training pertaining to concealing one's identity
during demonstrations and to ways to incite violence. The website was
found to be full of misinformation thereby distorting true facts. There
was another website operated by the laptop which had the heading
'Justice For Hathras'. The matter was registered under various sections
of I.P.C., U.A.P. Act and I.T. Act.
4. Learned Senior Counsel for the applicant has stated that the
applicant is innocent and has been falsely implicated in the case. No
pamphlets or printing papers were being carried out by the applicant
or other co-accused persons in the car. The applicant is unaware of
any website with the name of 'Carrd.com' and 'Justice For Hathras'.
The applicant was going to Hathras to discharge his duty as a
professional journalist and was illegally detained by Mant Police,
District Mathura in violation of his fundamental rights. The applicant
is not a member of P.F.I. and was not acting at the behest any of their
office bearers. Learned Senior Counsel has further stated that the
applicant was not going to Hathras on the directions of P.F.I. and
furthermore that P.F.I. is not banned organization altogether. The
applicant has never used any platforms to spread disharmony or
further class/communal conflict. The applicant only used to post his
journalistic writings and links pertaining to his job of mass
5.     Learned Senior Counsel has further stated that the applicant has
never ever participated in any secret workshop with an aim of
furthering caste conflict in India. So, no question arises of applicant
being involved with any other persons to commit violence under the
guise of class/communal conflict across the State. The applicant had
himself conducted a workshop on wikipedia editing which were open
to all and related to journalistic and non-political activities. The
applicant is an honest and law abiding journalist and has not received
any funds from abroad. The applicant had himself interviewed
including Ansad Badruddin, the State President of B.J.P. Kerala,
Central Minister from Kerala and the Members of Muslim League and
B.J.P. etc. Learned Senior Counsel has further stated that the
acquaintance of the applicant with Ansad Badruddin does not make
him a criminal. There is no iota of evidence available on record to
suggest that he was involved in illegal activities taken up by Ansad
Badruddin or any other person. There is nothing on record to suggest
that the applicant had ever written an article on social media
promoting terrorist Gulzar Ahmed Wani. He had not made any video
whatsoever of Hathras incident.
6.     Learned Senior Counsel has also stated that a friend of the
applicant was writing a book on Ex-SIMI leaders and sent a draft of
his book to the applicant. The said friend had also requested the
applicant to conduct interviews of Ex-SIMI leaders who were now
MP's from Trinamool Congress. This is an open secret. The applicant
is an honest journalist and does not post any biased reports on the
basis of his political leanings. He has never been directed by any P.F.I.
leader to report in a biased manner. The applicant has no acquaintance
with any terrorist named Professor Jilani. Learned Senior Counsel has
further stated that the applicant was a former employee of Tejas
Weekly Newspaper which is associated with P.F.I., as such, he was in
touch with many P.F.I. activists, but has nothing to do with the
organization. The money transferred to his account is his hard earned
money and has nothing to do with any offence whatsoever. Some
allegations were levelled against the applicant by one website 'Indus
Scroll' whereby the applicant had sent a legal notice to the website for
their defamatory and false averments. The applicant has written
several journalistic reports on the plights of dalits and minorities, but
none of them promotes any sort of rivalry between the communities.
The applicant had no prior association with co-accused Alam, who
happens to be the driver of the car.
7.     Learned Senior Counsel for the applicant has also stated that the
provisions of U.A.P.A. Act are not applicable to the applicant as the
amended sanction under the Act has been taken by the Department on
08.06.2021. The said sanction is ipso facto illegal at the outset and has
been challenged by the applicant by filing a petition under Section
482 Cr.P.C. in the High Court which is still sub-judice. The applicant
was first of all produced before the S.D.M. Mant, Mathura and was
sent for judicial custody till 19.10.2020. Learned Senior Counsel has
vehemently argued that the Kerala Union of Working Journalist filed a
Habeas Corpus Petition on 05.10.2020 in the Supreme Court, which
was to be taken up on 07.10.2020 and the same day, F.I.R. No.199 of
2020 was registered against the applicant and other co-accused
persons under Sections 153-A, 295-A, 124A, 120B I.P.C., Sections
17, 18 of U.A.P. Act and Sections 65 and 72 of I.T. Act. Learned
Senior Counsel has stated that at the time of filing of charge-sheet,
sanction was not produced alongwith it rather it was produced later
on. The sanction for prosecution was taken by the A.T.S. on
31.03.2021 and was filed on 09.04.2021, which had come on record
on 12.04.2021 after an application moved by the prosecution. Learned
Senior Counsel has further stated that later, on 24.08.2021, the State
notified for creation of a Competent Authority to grant sanction under
U.A.P. Act, thus sanction granted earlier to that is illegal. The case
was transferred to the Special Court Lucknow in December, 2021.
Learned Senior Counsel has further stated that there is no criminal
history of the applicant.
8.     Per contra, Sri Vinod Kumar Shahi, learned Additional
Advocate General assisted by Sri Shivnath Tilhari, learned A.G.A. for
the State has vehemently opposed the bail application on the ground
that the applicant is a resident of Kerala and has nothing to do with the
incident of Hathras and had deliberately with malafide intent come
with the co-accused persons and was arrested at Mathura.
9.     Sri Shivnath Tilhari, learned A.G.A. for the State has
categorically stated that the applicant was found carrying pamphlets
'How To Escape' while inciting riots and he and other co-accused
persons were received financial assistance through illegal means to go
to Hathras alongwith other terrorist persons with a plan to spread
social disharmony and incite class war. The applicant had conducted a
secret workshop with other persons with an aim to furthering the caste
conflict across the country.
10. Learned A.G.A. has further stated that the co-accused persons
had collected funds from foreign national mediums which was utilized
by co-accused persons for illegal activities. The applicant was in
regular touch with co-accused persons, namely, Rauf Sharif and
Athikurrehman, and there are call detail records (CDRs) to
corroborate the same, which has been filed in the counter affidavit as
annexure SCA-3. Learned A.G.A. has further stated that on the
analysis of the mobile recovered from the applicant, there is an F.S.L.
report which suggests that there are WhatsApp chats wherein the
applicant was a member of hit squad of Ansad Badruddin, which have
also been filed by the State. It is also pertinent to note that the co-
accused persons, namely, Ansad Badruddin and Firoz, were arrested
by the police in F.I.R. No.4 of 2021, under Sections 121A, 120B
I.P.C., 13, 16, 18 and 20 of U.A.P. Act, Sections 3, 4 and 5 of
Explosive Substances Act and 3/5 Arms Act by the A.T.S. Lucknow
and a heavy amount of explosives were recovered from them. There
are number of WhatsApp chats of the applicant with the General
Secretary of P.F.I. Kamal K.P., which also revealed about the alleged
workshop having been conducted by the applicant and other co-
accused persons. The said workshop is stated to have been conducted
to incite riots across the country, by raking up issues of C.A.A. and
Babri Masjid demolition. In all, 45 papers pertaining to banned
organization 'SIMI' have been recovered from the laptop of the
applicant. He has also received tainted money which is on record.
11. Learned A.G.A. has further stated that during the search of the
house of the applicant at New Delhi on 11.11.2020, 47 papers in
Malyalam language were recovered pertaining to SIMI. Two AK-47
guns were also shown in the said documents, which also contains the
popular slogan of SIMI 'Welcome Mohammad Gajni'. Learned A.G.A.
has further stated that the present offence is covered by Section 43(D)
(5) of U.A.P. Act. Learned A.G.A. has fairly conceded the fact that he
does not press the arguments pertaining to Section 124A owing to the
latest judgment of the Apex Court. Learned A.G.A. has further stated
that no proper cause has been shown by the applicant pertaining to his
presence near Hathras at such crucial time when State was going
social unrest, rather he has used journalism as a cover to fulfill his
ulterior motives.
12. It has come up in the investigation that the applicant had no
work at Hathras. The State machinery was at tenterhooks owing to the
tension prevailing due to various types of information being viral
across all forums of media including the internet. The said sojourn of
the applicant with co-accused persons who do not belong to media
fraternity is a crucial circumstance going against him.
13. The defence taken by the applicant that he is a journalist and
only owing to his professional duty, he wanted to visit the place of
Hathras incident stands nullified by the averments in the charge-sheet
and the persons, he was arrested with, while travelling in a car. The
tainted money being used by the applicant and his colleagues cannot
be ruled out.
14. The legislature has framed the U.A.P. Act to control such
instances. The Courts interpret the laws enacted by the legislature
which becomes functus officio after the framing of the statute.
15. In the matter of National Investigation Agency vs. Zahoor
Ahmad Shah Watali1, the Apex Court, while overturning the High
Courts order of granting bail to the accused, has stated that Section
43(D)(5) prohibits a Court from granting bail to accused if on a
perusal of a final report filed under Section 173 Cr.P.C., the Court is
of the opinion that there are reasonable grounds to believe that the
accusations against such person are prima facie true. The Apex Court
has also observed that the High Court had applied an altogether wrong
approach by examining and evaluating the evidence in detail. The
Court is not supposed to delve into the admissibility and
inadmissibility of documentary and oral evidence at the stage of bail.
16. A perusal of the charge-sheet and documents adduced, prima
facie reveal that the applicant has committed the offence.
17. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case,
submissions advanced by learned counsel for the parties, nature of
offence, evidence on record, considering the complicity of accused,
severity of punishment and the settled law propounded by the Apex
Court in the case of Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali (supra), at this stage,
without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, this Court is
not inclined to release the applicant on bail.
18. The bail application is found devoid of merits and is,
accordingly, dismissed.
19. It is clarified that the observations made herein are limited to
the facts brought in by the parties pertaining to the disposal of bail
application and the said observations shall have no bearing on the
merits of the case during trial.