1.     The instant petition has been filed for issuance of a writ of certiorari
for quashing the order dated 27.07.2022 by the GNCTD rejecting the
application of the petitioner and to issue a Writ of Mandamus or any other
Writ, directing the respondent to release the petitioner on parole for a period
of two (02) months to settle partition of undivided property of joint Hindu
Family, to maintain social ties and family relations and to curb inner stress.
The petitioner, who is a convict serving life imprisonment in case FIR No.
592/2007 registered under Section 302/201/404 IPC, Police Station
Mehrauli, Delhi has sought parole on the ground that has to complete the
partition of undivided ancestral property of Joint Hindu Family due to the
death of mother of the petitioner and to arrange funds for his family needs as
there is no one in the family to arrange the said funds since wife of the
petitioner is a housewife and unable to arrange for the same.
2.     It is also stated that the petitioner has applied for grant of parole for a
period of 02 months with the office of Deputy Secretary, Home,
Government        of   Delhi    which     was    dismissed    vide    letter  No.
F.18/12/2016/HG/2096 dated 27.07.2022 on the ground that he was not
entitled to parole in view of Rule 1210 Sub Rule (II) and (V) of Delhi
Prisoners Rules 20182018, which stated that:-
1. Rule 1210 Sub Rule (Il):- "The Conduct of the prisoner who has
been awarded major punishment for any prison offence should
have been uniformly good for last two years from the date of the
application and the conduct of the prisoner who has been
awarded minor punishment or no punishment for any prison
offence in prison should have been uniformly good for last one
year from the date of the application". In this case as per
nominal roll said convict has been awarded punishment dated
31.12.2012, 03.01.2022 & 05.01.2022, which are major
punishments in view of Rule 1271 of Delhi Prison Rules, 2018.
2. Rule 1201 Sub Rule (V)· - "A minimum of six months ought to
have elapsed from the date of surrender on the conclusion of the
previous parole availed. In emergency, parole may be
considered even if' minimum period of six months has not been
elapsed .from the termination of the previous parole. The
emergency may include delivery of child by the wife of the
convict, death of a family member, marriage of children,
terminal illness of family members and natural calamities". in
this case, the convict has last availed 30 days parole w.ef.
24.11.202 to 25.12.2021 granted by the Hon 'ble High Court of
Further, as per nominal roll, overall jail conduct and last one
year jail conduct of the said convict is reported to be
unsatisfactory. The Superintendent, Central Jail No. 8/9 has not
recommended grant of parole to the above said convict in view
of his conduct in jail during last one year.
3. Further. as per report received from the office of D. G.
(Prisons), grant of parole IO the above said convicted is not
recommended.
3.     It is argued that the grounds on which parole has been denied are
erroneous.
4.     Learned counsel for the petitioner has argued that the reasons
mentioned by the respondent for rejecting the application for the petitioner
was that he had not completed two years since his last punishment was
awarded on 05.01.2022. It is argued that this matter is pending inquiry
before learned District & Sessions Judge concerned, and he has already been
punished for the same by the jail authorities. It is also pointed out that the
petitioner has been granted parole 07 times in the past including emergency
parole which was granted on 23.04.2022 to 02.05.2022 on account of his
mother’s barsi.
5.     Learned APP for the State on the other hand states that as per the
Rules, parole could not have been granted to the petitioner and was declined
by the concerned authority since his jail conduct was unsatisfactory and
multiple punishments were awarded to him for breach of Prison Rules. In
this regard, a reference was made to the nominal roll dated 21.08.2022. It is
pointed out that it is clear from the nominal roll that the petitioner has been
awarded punishments for prison offences on 17 occasions between 2013 and
6.     Status report dated 01.11.2022 has been handed over to the Court
today which shall also be filed through the Registry by the State. Status
report verifies the contents and grounds of parole mentioned in the present
petition.
7.     After hearing learned counsel for the petitioner as well as learned
APP for the State, this Court is of the view that in the last two (02) years, the
petitioner has not been involved in any offence involving violence, last two
punishments in any case are still a matter of inquiry before the learned
District & Sessions Judge, therefore, it is yet not clear whether they will be
found to be liable for major punishment or not. It is also clear from the
nominal roll that the petitioner was awarded punishment as was deemed
appropriate by the jail authorities for the breach of Prison Rules which are
clearly mentioned in the nominal roll. It is not disputed that the petitioner
was granted parole on 07 occasions including one emergency parole and he
had not misused the liberty of parole granted to him. The petitioner has been
in custody for more than 14 years. It is also not disputed that it will be 06
months since he was granted emergency parole on 02.11.2022. While
considering grant of parole, the court also has to remain conscious of the
fact that the petitioner has been awarded life imprisonment and
circumstances have arisen in the last 14 years which he needs to attend to
family exigencies. Sensitivity and compassion balanced with rules,
regulations and law needs to be maintained by any Court as one is dealing
with humans and not mere files and orders. Considering that the petitioner
has spent 14 long years in jail, has been granted parole on 07 occasions, has
lost his mother while he was in judicial custody and now after death of his
mother such exigencies have arisen which he needs to attend to, this Court is
inclined to grant him parole for a period of 45 days from the date of his
release on the following conditions:-
(i)   The petitioner shall furnish a personal bond in the sum of
Rs.25,000/- to the satisfaction of the Jail Superintendent.
Considering that the petitioner does not have a base nor any
relatives in Delhi, the requirement of furnishing a surety is
dispensed with at this stage.
(ii)  The petitioner shall not leave District Nainital, Uttarakhand
except to travel to and from Central Jail, Mandoli, Delhi,
without permission of the court and shall ordinarily reside at the
address mentioned in this application;
(iii) The petitioner will report on every Wednesday to the SHO PS :
Kathgodam, District Nainital, Uttarakhand between 11 am and
11:30 am for marking his appearance. However the petitioner
will not be kept waiting for longer than one hour at the police
station during such visits;
(iv)  The petitioner shall furnish to the SHO a cell phone number on
which the petitioner may be contacted at any time and shall
ensure that the number is kept active and switched-on at all
(v)   If the petitioner has a passport, he shall also surrender the same
to the Jail Superintendent
(vi)  The petitioner shall not contact nor visit nor offer any
inducement, threat or promise to the first informant/
complainant or to any of the prosecution witnesses in the other
pending matter viz. FIR No. 725/2016. The petitioner shall not
tamper with evidence nor otherwise indulge in any act or
omission that is unlawful or that would prejudice the
(vii) Upon expiry of the period of interim bail, the petitioner shall
surrender before the concerned Jail Superintendent.
8.  In above terms, the present writ petition stands disposed of.
9.  A copy of this order be sent to the Jail Superintendent.