The plaintiff is the appellant herein. For the sake of convenience,
the parties are referred to, as per their ranking before the trial Court.
2.The plaintiff filed the above Civil Miscellaneous Appeal against
the order, dated 24.03.2021, made in I.A.No.29 of 2020 in O.S.No.2 of
2020, on the file of the Fast Track Mahila Court, Sivagangai.
3.The factual matrix of the case is as under:-
The appellant/plaintiff filed a suit for declaration of her title and
for injunction. Pending the suit, she also filed an application for
temporary injunction in I.A.No.29 of 2020 against the defendants 1 to 4.
As per the pleadings in the suit, the suit property was originally belonged
to one Chellaiah, under an assignment order Ex.P.1, issued on
12.01.1982. The said Chellaiah sold the suit schedule property on
10.11.1993, under Ex.P.2, an unregistered sale deed in favour of
Moolaiyan, who is the father of the plaintiff. The said Moolaiyan
obtained patta transfer in his name under Ex.P.3. Subsequently, the said
Moolaiyan died and after his death, the plaintiff has become the absolute
owner of the suit property and she has paid kist to the Government and
hence she prayed for interim injunction.
4.The first defendant/first respondent filed a counter statement in
I.A.No.29 of 2020, stating that Ex.P.2 is not true, genuine, not valid and
inadmissible in law. The plaintiff has not averred as to how the husband
of the first defendant has got possession of the assignment order.
5.During the trial, the plaintiff side, Ex.P1 to Ex.P10 were marked
and on the side of the respondents, Ex.R1 to Ex.R28 were marked. The
learned trial Judge has dismissed the application and hence, this Civil
6.Mr.A.Arumugam,        learned      counsel   appearing    for     the
appellant/plaintiff would contend that the original assessment order is in
possession of the plaintiff, by virtue of Ex.P.2, unregistered sale deed and
hence she is entitled for declaration of title, on the plea of adverse
possession and relied upon the decision reported in 2005 (1) CTC 494.
According to the learned counsel appearing for the appellant /plaintiff,
declaration and title on adverse possession is an alternate plea and it is
not a mutual inconsistent plea for the plaintiff. He relied upon the
judgment of this Court in S.A.1289 of 2002, dated 23.08.2016.
7.Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents
would contend that Ex.P.1/Assessment order is in favour of one
Chellaiah, who is the husband of the first respondent and the father of the
other respondents. Though the plaintiff claimed that by an unregistered
sale deed, the said Chellaiah has sold the property to one Moolaiyan (the
father of the plaintiff) on 10.11.1993 and till December 2000, the said
Moolaiyan has not obtained any patta in his favour. Only after the death
of the said Moolaiyan, the patta was manipulated and obtained in the
name of the plaintiff. Ex.P.5 is a manipulated patta and Ex.R3, dated
20.04.2017 is an online patta print out for patta No.1224, stands in the
name of Chellaiah, (the husband of the first respondent and the father of
the other respondents). In short, the contention of the learned counsel for
the respondent is that as per Ex.R1, dated 12.01.1982 Assessment order
was issued in favour of Chellaiah and as per Ex.R2, dated 21.09.1987, 'A'
Register Extract for Survey Numbers: 765/4 and 766/1 in Patta no.1224,
was issued only to Chellaiah, by the Special Tahsildar, Tiruppattur and
even in the year 2017, under Ex.R3, online patta print out for Patta No.
1224, is also in favour of Chellaiah and therefore would contend that
Ex.P.5, online patta print out for Patta No.6344 stands in the name of
Chellaiah is a manipulated record and also relied upon Ex.R.28, Reply
with answers received from Zonal Deputy Tahsildar of South
Singampunari, under RTI Act as to mutation of name in the revenue
records in the name of the father of the plaintiff and no records have been
available in the Tahsildar Office and further contended that as a plaintiff,
she cannot raise a plea of adverse possession and the plea of adverse
possession can only be a defence of a defendant's for declaration of title
and it cannot be a plea of the plaintiff to sue as a suit for declaration of
title on the plea of adverse possession.
8.I have heard both sides and perused the materials placed on
9(a). By relying on the Honourable Supreme Court, the case in
Ravinder Kaur Grewal and others Vs Manjit Kaur and others,
reported in 2019 (8) SCC 729, wherein, Honourable Supreme Court has
“...Whether a person claiming the title by virtue of
adverse possession can maintain a suit Under Article 65
of Limitation Act, 1963 (for short, “the Act”) for
declaration of title and for a permanent injunction
seeking    the  protection   of   his possession   thereby
restraining the Defendant from interfering in the
possession or for restoration of possession in case of
illegal dispossession by a Defendant whose title has been
extinguished by virtue of the plaintiff remaining in the
adverse possession or in case of dispossession by some
other person?”
“Plea of acquisition of title by adverse possession can be
taken by Plaintiff under Article 65 of the Limitation Act
and there is no bar under the Limitation Act, 1963 to sue
on aforesaid basis in the case of infringement of any
rights of a Plaintiff.”
9(b). Following the above decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in
Civil Appeal Nos.1701-1702 of 2022, dated 28.02.2022, it is held that
the suit is maintainable.
10.Accordingly, I find that as a plaintiff, she can raise a plea of
adverse possession in a suit, seeking declaration of title and for
permanent injunction and hence in view of the decisions of the
Honourable Apex Court, I have no hesitation to hold so. Hence, I have no
hesitation to hold that the age-old axiomotic of law that the plaintiff
cannot raise a plea of adverse possession and the plea of adverse
possession can only be a defence of the defendant in a suit for
declaration of title and for recovery of possession and it cannot be a plea
of the plaintiff to sue as a suit for declaration of title on the plea of
adverse possession is no longer holds the field and as a plaintiff, she can
raise the plea of adverse possession by raising the plea of acquisition of
title by adverse possession can be taken by the plaintiff subject to Article
65 of the Limitation Act and there is no bar to sue on the above said basis
in the case of infringement of any right of the plaintiff and hence the
plaintiff can also raise the plea of adverse possession subject to prove
and let in any evidence of the above scope. Accordingly, the suit in
O.S.No.2 of 2020 is held to be maintainable. The contra submissions
made by the learned counsel for the defendant cannot be countenanced.
11(a). Insofar as the relief of interim injunction is concerned, the
appellant /plaintiff has come forward with a specific plea that the
husband of the first defendant has sold the property under Ex.P.2,
unregistered sale deed. Admissibility of the said document is in question
and the same is matter for trial.
11(b). It is the further case of the plaintiff that pursuant to Ex.P.2,
unregistered sale deed, dated 10.11.1993, the father of the plaintiff was in
possession of the suit property and she relied upon Ex.P.5. Ex.P.5 is an
online patta print out for patta No.6344, stands in the name of Chellaiah,
dated 25.10.2019. Ex.P.3 is Patta transfer proceedings of Singampunari
Zonal Deputy Tahsildar, in the name of Moolaiyan during December
2000. However, I find as per Ex.R3 and Ex.R8, patta stands in the name
of Chellaiah. So also Ex.R8, online patta, dated 29.06.2020 stands in the
name of the respondents 1 to 4. As per Ex.R28, information given by the
Zonal Deputy Tahsildar of South Singampunari reveals that mutation of
name in the revenue records in the name of the father of the plaintiff and
no records have been available in the Tahsildar Office, which creates
serious doubt as to the evidentiary value of Ex.P3 and Ex.P.5. Though the
plaintiff relied upon Ex.P3, dated December 2000, Ex.P.10, dated,
03.12.2016 and Ex.P.5, dated 25.10.2019, but, Ex.R3 and Ex.R8 are
online patta stand in the name of Chellaiah and in the name of legal
representative of the respondents 1 to 4.
11(c). It remains to be stated that even assuming without admitting
the plea of the plaintiff that the unregistered sale deed entered between
the said Moolaiyan and Chellaiah in the year 1993, till the date of death
of Chellaiah, no document, evidencing the possession has been produced
assumes greater significance. It appears only after the death of Chellaiah,
there was a patta transfer. There was no positive explanation as to why
transfer of patta proceedings in the name of Chellaiah was not effected
for seven long years, till the date of death of the original assignee
11(d). Hence, I find that the plaintiff has not made out any prima
facie case of her alleged possession and documents relied upon also
appears to be under cloud and hence the finding of the learned trial
Judge that the petitioner/plaintiff has not proved the prima facie case,
balance of convenience, in the event of non granting of interim
injunction appears to be just and fair and does not suffer from any
irregularity or illegality warranting interference at this Appellate stage.
12.Hence, in this view of the matter, the order passed by the
learned Judge, Fast Track Mahila Court, Sivagangai in I.A.No.29 of 2020
in O.S.No.2 of 2020, 24.03.2021 is hereby confirmed. It is made clear
that the observations made in this appeal regarding some of the
documents filed by the plaintiff and the defendants are only limited for
determination in this case. The Trial Court shall not be influenced by the
observations made by this Court regarding those documents, while
discussing and dealing with the main suit.
13.With these observations, this Civil Miscellaneous Appeal is
dismissed. No costs. Consequently, connected Miscellaneous Petition is