Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL U/S 372 CR.P.C. No. - 4858 of 2014
Counsel for Appellant :- V.K. Gupta, Santosh Kumar Tiwari
(Delivered by Hon'ble Subhash Vidyarthi, J.)
1.    Heard Sri Santosh Kumar Tiwari, learned Amicus Curiae, for
the appellant and Shri Ratan Singh, learned A.G.A. for the
2.    By means of the instant appeal under Section 372 of the
Criminal Procedure Code (herein after referred to as “Cr.P.C.”) the
informant-appellant has challenged the judgement and order dated
01.10.2014 passed by learned Additional Sessions Judge, Court No.
1/Special Judge, Dacoity Affected Area, Mahoba in Special Case No.
47 of 2004 (State Vs. Hari Ram Prajapati and another) arising out of
Case Crime No. 196 of 2004 under Sections 387, 307/34, 452,
323/34 and 427 IPC, Police Station Kabrai, District Mahoba,
whereby both the accused have been acquitted giving them the
benefit of doubt.
3.    Briefly stated, facts of the case are that the informant-
appellant gave a report in the concerned Police Station on
11.05.2004 at 20:45 hours stating that when on the same day at
about 4:00 p.m., he was coming to Kabrai from his home, the
accused-respondent No. 3 (Dhirendra Singh) blocked the passage by
parking his motorcycle in front of Jagdish's house, where the
passage is narrow. The informant was going on his motorcycle and
he stopped there. Dhanni, Rajju, Hariram Prajapati (the accused-
respondent No. 2 and Dhirendra Singh (the accused-respondent No.
3) caught hold of the informant and made him sit there and they
assaulted the informant by but of a gun, kicks and fists and said that
they will set him free only when he pays Rs. 10,000/-. They
threatened to kill him with a gun and country made pistols. Upon
finding an opportunity, the informant ran towards his home and
Dhanni fired towards the informant with a 315 bore country made
pistol with the intention to kill him. However, the shot missed the
informant's temple and he had a narrow escape. The informant ran
and entered the house of Prakash and the aforesaid people attempted
to get the door of the house opened. Thereafter, they entered the
informant's house and assaulted the informant's mother Achchhi
Devi and sister Sudha with kicks, fists and shoes and destroyed the
house-hold goods namely deg (a utensil), CD, TV, Battery and other
goods of his shop, which resulted in a loss of about Rs. 5,000/-. The
accused threatened that if the informant makes a report of it, it will
not be good for him. The incident was witnessed by Shaukilal,
Bhawanideen and Deshraj Pradhan and they saved him.
4.     On the aforesaid allegation, a Case Crime No. 196 of 2004
under Sections 387, 452, 323, 504 and 506 IPC was registered
against the accused-respondents. A case under Section 10/12 of
Dacoity Affected Area Act was registered against Dhanni. After
investigation, a charge sheet for commission of the offences under
Sections 387, 307/37, 452, 323/34, 427 IPC was submitted in the
Court against the accused-respondents.
5.     PW-1,    informant-appellant    Nokhe    Lal,   reiterated   the
allegations made in the FIR and he further stated that the Sub
Inspector visited his home on the following day and saw the broken
goods. He prepared a list and gave the goods in the custody of his
father. He produced the broken goods, namely, a stabilizer, a CD
player and a table fan, a tin box, picture tube of a TV etc. before the
Court and said that those were the goods which had been broken by
the accused-persons. He and his mother has been medically
examined in the Government Hospital at Mahoba.
6.     In his cross-examination, PW-1 stated that he had stopped his
motorcycle about 3 meters before the platform where the accused
persons made him sit. The accused-persons had hit him with sticks,
buts and kicks. They had hit him 10-15 times with sticks and 10-12
times with buts. They had hit him on his back and below the
shoulder but not on his head and face. However, the assault did not
cause any injury mark or bleeding. They did not hit him hard but hit
him slowly. He reached the house of Prakash Vishwakarma at about
4:15 p.m. During the entire period, he kept on shouting but nobody
came there. The witnesses Shauki Lal and Bhawani Deen came after
the incident. The place of incident is surrounded by residential area.
After about 1/2 to 1 minute since arrival of the witnesses, the
informant got free from the accused persons and ran away.
7.     PW-2 Smt. Achchhi Devi is mother of the informant Nokhe
Lal, she stated that on the date of the incident at about 4:00 p.m., the
accused-persons entered her house, assaulted and injured her and
broken the goods kept in the shop. In her cross-examination, PW-2
stated that the house of Saukhi Lal Prajapati and Kamtu Dhobi are
adjacent to her house and there are several residences near her house.
The distance between her house and Prakash Vishwakarma's house is
the same distance as the distance between the court room and the
road and the Court made a noting that the distance between the Court
and the road is about 200-250 yards.
8.     PW-4 Smt. Sudha is the informant's sister, she stated that the
accused-persons came to the shop, they hit her mother Achchhi Devi
with buts of a country made pistol. They slapped her and broken
down the T.V., Fan, C.D. and other goods of the shop. Afterwards,
she came to know that they have fired at her brother. The accused-
persons took away the jewellery of her and of her sister-in-law.
9.     PW-5 Prakash Vishwakarma has denied the incident having
been taken place. He said that he has no knowledge of the incident
and he did not either see or hear about it. He was declared to be
hostile and in his cross-examination he denied having made any
statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
10.    PW-3 Dr. Mahendra Singh Katiyar has conducted the medical
examination of Smt. Achhchhi Devi who has proved that the
appellant Nokhe Lal was not found to have been suffered any injury.
His mother Smt. Achchi Devi wife of Nanhu had reported that there
was some swelling and bluishness on her hip.
11.    The defence has produced two witnesses who have denied the
incident and have made statements regarding animosity between the
informant and the accused.
12.    The learned Court below has rightly noted that PW-1, 2 and 4
are informant, his mother and sister respectively which belong to the
same family and are interested witnesses and, therefore,         their
evidence is to be scrutinized very carefully. The informant-appellant
has alleged in the report (Ex.A-1) that the accused-respondents
threatened him against lodging a report but in his evidence PW-1
has stated that he went alone immediately afterwards to lodge the
report. The conduct of PW-1 in going alone to lodge FIR
immediately after having been threatened by the accused persons
appears to be unnatural. PW-1 has alleged that the accused persons
had hit him with but of a gun, stick and kicks but the same did not
leave marks or cause bleeding. The accused had not hit him hard but
had hit him slowly. PW-3 who conducted medical examination of
PW-1 did not found any injury on the person of PW-1, which makes
the prosecution case as well as veracity of the evidence of PW-1 and
PW-2 doubtful.
13.    PW-1 has stated that the medical examination of his sister was
also conducted on the same day whereas the sister PW-4 Smt. Sudha
has stated that she was not medically examined. No report of PW-4
is available on record and no statement in this regard has been made
by PW-3. From this prosecution witnesses appear not to be
14.    PW-1 has stated that he had gone to the Police Station alone,
however PW-2 stated that her daughter had also gone to the Police
Station with her. GD (Ex.A-5) mentions that the informant (PW-1)
came with (Smt. Achchhi Devi-PW-2). Thus the version of PW-1,
PW-2 and the narration in the GD, all contradict each other which
indicates entries in the GD have been concocted.
15.    PW-1 has alleged that Dhanni (co-accused) fired with a 315
bore country made pistol. Neither there is any witness of this
incident nor was any empty cartridge recovered from the spot which
could prove the informant's averment. The statement of PW-4
(informant's sister) that the accused persons hit her mother Smt.
Achchhi Devi with but of country made pistol and thrown away the
goods of the shop and take away the jewellery and other articles of
marriage of PW-4 and her sister-in-law is not corroborated by the
statements of PW-1 and PW-2 and appears to be false and unnatural.
16.    PW-2 Smt. Achchhi Devi had stated that the accused broke
down the goods when the informant had gone to the Police Station
for lodging a report. The mention of breakage of goods done by the
accused persons in the report Ex.A-1 indicates that the entire
prosecution story is planned, concocted and fabricated else this fact
could not have been mentioned report (Ex.A-1). From this analysis
of the aforesaid facts, learned Court below passed the judgment and
order dated 01.10.2011 acquitted the accused persons from all the
charges. The appellant-informant has challenged the aforesaid order
on the ground that PW-1, PW-2, PW-3, PW-4 and PW-7 have proved
the prosecution        story but the evidence adduced from the
complainant/informant's side was not considered by the Court below.
The grounds of challenge to the judgement and order dated
01.10.2014 taken by the informant/appellant are reproduced herein
“1.      Because, the court below has not considered the evidence
on record.
2.       Because, the prosecution has successfully proved the case.
3.       Because, the P.W.1, P.W.2, P.W. 3, P.W. 4 and P.W.7 have
proved the prosecution story but the court below has not
considered.
complainant/informant side was not considered by the court below.
5.       Because, the prosecution has fully proved that the Opp.
Parties have committed alleged crime. But the court below has
ignored and overlooked the evidence against the Opp.
Parties/respondents which is unfair and improper.
6.       Because, the eye witnesses in First Information Report
namely Saukhi Lal, Bhawanideen and Deshraj have not been
examined before the court below.
7.       Because, without considering the fact and circumstances
of the case and evidence produced by the prosecution, the trial
court has acquitted the accused person illegally.”
17.     Shri Santosh Kumar Tiwari, learned Amicus Curiae has placed
reliance on a decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Sunil
Kumar Vs. State (Govt. of NCT Delhi), (2003) 11 SCC 367 in
which relying upon earlier decision in Vadivelu Thevar v. State of
Madras, AIR 1957 SC 614, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held
“8. In Vadivelu Thevar v. State of Madras this Court had gone into
this controversy and divided the nature of witnesses in three
categories, namely, wholly reliable, wholly unreliable and lastly,
neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable. In the case of the first
two categories this Court said that they pose little difficulty but in the
case of the third category of witnesses, corroboration would be
required. The relevant portion is quoted as under: (AIR p. 619, paras
“Hence, in our opinion, it is a sound and well-established rule of law
that the court is concerned with the quality and not with the quantity
of the evidence necessary for proving or disproving a fact. General-
ly speaking, oral testimony in this context may be classified into three
(1) Wholly reliable.
(3) Neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable.
In the first category of proof, the court should have no difficulty in
coming to its conclusion either way — it may convict or may acquit
on the testimony of a single witness, if it is found to be above
reproach or suspicion of interestedness, incompetence or
subornation. In the second category, the court equally has no
difficulty in coming to its conclusion. It is in the third category of
cases, that the court has to be circumspect and has to look for
corroboration in material particulars by reliable testimony, direct or
circumstantial. There is another danger in insisting on plurality of
witnesses. Irrespective of the quality of the oral evidence of a single
witness, if courts were to insist on plurality of witnesses in proof of
any fact, they will be indirectly encouraging subornation of
witnesses.”
18.    He has also relied on a judgement of Hon'ble Supreme Court
in the case of Amar Singh Vs. Balwinder Singh, (2003) SCC 518,
wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that in cases of
defective investigation the court has to be circumspect in evaluating
the evidence but it would not be right in acquitting an accused
person solely on account of the defect and to do so would
tantamount to playing into the hands of the investigating officer if
the investigation is designedly defective. There can be no dispute to
the aforesaid proposition of law but the same does not apply to the
facts and circumstances of the present case where the prosecution
witnesses themselves have made contradictory statements regarding
material facts relating to the incident and where PW-5 in whose
house the PW-1 is said to have taken shelter has categorically denied
the incident.
19.    A perusal of the judgement and order dated 01.10.2014
indicates that the learned Court below has thoroughly examined the
statements of all the prosecution witnesses. It is settled law that
when witnesses are related persons, although their testimony is
admissible and form basis of conviction of the accused-persons, the
testimony of interested witness has to be examined with extra care
and caution.
20.    Upon scrutiny of the statements of the PW-1, PW-2 and PW-4,
serious discrepancies have come to light. PW-1 has stated that he
had gone to the Police Station alone, however PW-2 stated that her
daughter had also gone to the Police Station. GD (Ex.A-5) mentions
that the informant (PW-1) came with (Smt. Achchhi Devi-PW-2).
Thus the version of PW-1, PW-2 and the narration in the GD, all
contradict each other which indicates entries in the GD have been
21.     This finding of the learned Court below is based on a thorough
and proper analysis of the prosecution evidence. The finding arrived
at after a thorough analysis of the entire admissible evidence placed
on record cannot at all be termed as perverse.
22.     In Jayamma v. State of Karnataka, (2021) 6 SCC 213, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court has reiterated the manner in which the High
Court should exercise its power of scrutiny in an appeal filed against
an order of acquittal, in the following words: -
“the power of scrutiny exercisable by the High Court under Section
378 Cr.P.C. should not be routinely invoked where the view formed by
the trial court was a “possible view”. The judgment of the trial court
cannot be set aside merely because the High Court finds its own view
more probable, save where the judgment of the trial court suffers
from perversity or the conclusions drawn by it were impossible if
there was a correct reading and analysis of the evidence on record.
To say it differently, unless the High Court finds that there is complete
misreading of the material evidence which has led to miscarriage of
justice, the view taken by the trial court which can also possibly be a
correct view, need not be interfered with. This self-restraint doctrine,
of course, does not denude the High Court of its powers to
reappreciate the evidence, including in an appeal against acquittal
and arrive at a different firm finding of fact.”
23.     A perusal of the grounds taken in the memo of appeal
indicates that the order of the learned Court below has not been
assailed on the ground that it is perverse. During the submission also,
learned Amicus Curiae could not demonstrate that the findings of the
learned Court below are perverse.
24.     In these circumstances, in view of the law laid down by
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Jayamma (supra), we find
that the appellant has failed to make out any ground for admission of
the appeal. The appeal is accordingly dismissed at the stage of
admission itself.