1.         By reference to FIR no. 02/2022 of the Police Station, Anti-Corruption
Bureau, Rajouri (camp Jammu), the petitioner has come to be arrested on
14.11.2022 after being allegedly caught red handed in the course of an alleged
trap laid by the trap team of the Anti Corruption Bureau, while accepting bribe
amounting to Rs. 50,000/- from one Sominder Singh @ Sourav S/o Late. Sh.
2.         The petitioner was posted as Tehsildar Bahu, Jammu at the time of the
alleged trap. The alleged background for the alleged transaction of bribe demand
and giving is related to issuance of fard from the petitioner sought by the
complainant, namely, Sominder Singh @ Sourav. The petitioner has come to be
arrested for the alleged commission of offence under section 7 of the Prevention
3.          The trap laying team was headed by Dy. SP-Sunny Gupta of Police
Station, ACB Rajouri (camp Jammu) and it is the same very Officer who has
came to be entrusted with and seized of the investigation of the FIR in question
which in itself is a contradiction of some nature.
4.          Be that as it may be, the petitioner has suffered police custody tenure
and is now in judicial custody. The investigation with respect to the trap led
incident is very specific to the occasion in which the petitioner came to be
allegedly found demanding and accepting the alleged bribe amount. The custody
of an accused before the trial of the case is not meant to be of and for punitive
purpose but only for the purpose of serving the investigation of the case, which
in the present case as per the fresh objections filed on behalf of the respondent
by the recall of the objections first filed in the case, is over. This Court sees no
justification for further custody of the petitioner which is not going to serve in
any manner whatsoever the investigation official of the case by the Investigating
Authority of the Police Station, Anti-Corruption Bureau, Rajouri (Camp
Jammu). The petitioner is a public servant and, as such, there is no question of
his escaping from the reach of law or tempering with the evidence in the case.
5.          It seems that even the Anti-Corruption Bureau, Rajouri (Camp Jammu)
is conscious of the fact that the custody of the petitioner in reference to FIR
under investigation might not enjoy any further extension from the court of law
and, as such in order to lend a more serious note to the case, the respondent in its
fresh objections have come forward with the plea that the petitioner is also under
enquiry for disproportionate assets. It is not understandable as to how in the FIR
relating to trap case the fact of enquiry against the petitioner for alleged
disproportionate assets has any bearing except as an attempt to put off the
indulgence of the Court in considering the grant of bail in favour of the
6.         The petitioner has come to seek the bail after his bail application filed
before the Court of Special Judge, Anti Corruption, Jammu came to be rejected
vide an order dated 21.11.2022 passed on file no. 1611/2022. From reading of
the said order, the Special Judge, Anti Corruption, Jammu seems to have been
weighed down by the fact that by reference to FIR no. 02/2022 which has been
registered only for the incident of demand of bribe from the complainant by the
petitioner, the Investigation Officer is stretching the investigation to case of
alleged disproportionate assets against the petitioner. The Special Judge, Anti
Corruption, Jammu deemed the stage of the investigation warranting no bail to
the petitioner without attending the case from the perspective as to whether with
respect to the commission of offence alleged in the FIR no. 02/2022, there was
any purpose for the continuing custody of the petitioner by the arresting
7.         Be that as it may be, a successful prosecution of a criminal case in a
court of law is based upon quality of police investigation with respect to the facts
and circumstances of the case attending the commission of offences and not by
length of continuing custody of a suspect or an accused during the course of
investigation. An investigation authority is bound to show and demonstrate on
factual basis as to how if an accused is admitted to bail in a case before
finalization of police investigation and consequent presentation of police report
under section 173 Cr. P.C, 1973, the investigation work is likely to suffer
hurdles/obstacles to the prejudice of taking the investigation to the truth of the
matter. Just by sound effects of expressions that the bail granted will
jeopardize/undermine investigation may not suffice to deny bail to an accused
under custody at the hands of the Police.
8.              In the background of the aforesaid case is made for admission of the
petitioner to bail and as such, the petitioner is admitted to bail subject to the
following terms and conditions:
a)   That the petitioner shall make himself available for the
investigation purpose as and when required, by the
b)   That the petitioner shall furnish personal bond to the
amount of Rs. 1,00,000/- with one surety of the like amount
before the Investigating Officer.
c)   That the petitioner shall not directly or indirectly make any
attempt to interfere and intermeddle in many manner
whatsoever in the cause of investigation in the case and
shall not attempt to temper with witnesses in the case.
d)   That the petitioners shall not leave the UT of J&K without
the prior written permission of the Investigating Officer.
9.              Bail application stands disposed of, accordingly.
I attest to the accuracy and