The Criminal Original Petition has been filed to quash the
proceedings in C.C.No.2962 of 2020 pending on the file of the IX
2. Brief facts of the case are under:-
(a) Seeking justice for the suicide committed by a first year girl
student by hanging herself in a ceiling fan in            her hostel room in the
campus of Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Madras and insisting for
arrest of Faculty Members alleged to be responsible for the suicide, the
petitioners, belonging to an organization called "Campus Friends of India"
had attempted to surrounded the IIT campus on 9.11.2019 and when the
respondent Police, on his routine rounds, had advised them to disperse
without forming any illegal assembly, the petitioners alongwith their
associates had continued their protest by raising slogans against the
management of IIT and prevented the free flow of movement and
thereby, the respondent had initiated a suo motu proceedings against the
petitioners and registered FIR in Crime No.445 of 2019 for the offence
under section 143, 145 and 341 of IPC on 12.12.2019. Subsquently, on
completion of investigation, the respondent had filed the final report
before the learned            IX Metropolitan Magistrate Court, Saidapet, Chennai
and the case was taken up in C.C.No.2962 of 2020.
3. The submissions of the learned counsel appearing for the
petitioners are as under:-
(i) The petitioners are law abiding persons and they had
gathered           only to ventilate their grievance and they had not made any
disturbance to the public, however, have been roped into the present case
(ii) The petitioners are social activists, who have been raising
voice for public cause and public welfare whenever any injustice occurred.
It is the duty of the Government to protect right of freedom of speech and
assemble which is essential in democracy. The petitioners had not
involved in any crime in the assemble and there is no material to show
that the petitioners restrained anybody and nothing on record to show
that on the date of occurrence, any prohibitory order was there in force.
(iii) The FIR and charge sheet do not reveal any specific role of
these petitioners and they do not attract any offences under Sections 143,
145 and 341 IPC and therefore, the FIR is not only an illegal one but also
against the fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 14, 19, 20(1)
and 21 of Constitution of India and the proceedings against the petitioners
based on the impugned charge sheet is nothing but, an abuse of process
of law.
(iv) The de facto complainant and the investigating officer being
one and the same, is against the concept of fair investigation and
fundamental principle of criminal law.
(v) The case filed against the petitioners is with an intention to
prohibit the fundamental right of freedom to assemble peacefully and
without arms and therefore, it is in violation of the fundamental rights
guaranteed             under  Articles 14,  19(1)(a)   19(1)(b)   and  21   of  the
Constitution of India.
(vi) Except the witnesses to rough sketch and observation
mahazar, who are also the stock witnesses of the respondent police, no
independent witness has been brought by the prosecution though they
had cited eight witnesses and that no individual from common public has
come to lodge a complaint before the respondent police as against the
petitioners.
(vii) Even as per the FIR, it is stated that the petitioners made
protest by raising slogans against the Management of Indian Institute of
Technology (IIT) Madras and later, they dispersed themselves and no
untoward incident had occurred.
4. The learned counsel for the petitioner would submit that in a
similar circumstance, this court in Crl.O.P.(MD)No.11785 of 2021
dated 21.09.2021, taking into consideration the right of citizens to
protest, had quashed the proceedings.
5. Learned Additional Public Prosecutor would submit that one of
the accused/A84 in this case has pleaded guilty and the name of A2 is
found in the FIR, however, he would fairly submit that no investigation
has been done with regard to the identity of the other accused.
6. Heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and
perused the materials available on record.
7. Admittedly, a pathetic incident had occurred inside the
campus of an educational institution.               A First Year girl student had
committed suicide by hanging herself in a ceiling fan in her hostel room
leaving a suicide note implicating certain names of the Faculty.               The
petitioners, belonging to a social activist group called Campus Friends of
India, had demonstrated a protest in front of the Institution seeking
justice for the victim by arrest of the Faculty.       In the final report, it has
been mentioned that Members of the above organization numbering about
100 persons made a protest without getting prior permission from the
authority and they had also raised slogans against the           Management of
the Institution.
8. Though, the Members of the said organisation had assembled
and protested against the Management of Indian Institute of Technology
and thereby prevented the free flow of general public and traffic,              no
person from the general public had given any complaint and that the
protest and demonstration was made only in respect of suspicious death
of a girl in hostel room.
9. Having perused the materials available on record, this court
finds that in the FIR, four named and 96 unknown persons have been
mentioned and it is also stated that as a preventive step, the petitioners
were arrested and they were taken to the Kotturpuram Police Station and
as revealed by the final report, they had been let out in station bail,
however, at the time of filing final report, the respondent had implicated
the petitioners. A perusal of the FIR, shows that the petitioners had
protested seeking arrest of the Faculty, who are alleged to be responsible
for the death of the victim girl and as a preventive measure, the
petitioners were arrested by the respondent. However, the statement of
witnesses recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C shows that there is no
proper investigation with regard to identity of the persons. Other than the
two persons, who were office bearers of the said organisation, no
investigation has been done with regard to identity of other accused.
10.   In   a  similar  circumstances,   this  court  has held in
Crl.O.P.No.4609 of 2021 dated 25.3.2021 as under:-
"4. It is to be pointed out that no untoward incident
had taken place. The petitioner has organized the
protest and the First Information Report has not
disclosed    any   act   of  violence.  It   must   be
unequivocally emphasized that the Constitution of
India gives its Citizens the right to freedom of
speech and expression, assemble peacefully and
without arms, to form Associations and Unions and
to move freely throughout the Territory of India
under Article 19 (1) (a), (b), (c) and (d) of the
Constitution of India. But of course these rights
come with terms and conditions. In the instant
case, the protest was peaceful and as already
observed no untoward incident took place."
11. In the case of Ananthasamy @ Anandasamy, Sneka @
Snega Vs. The State in Crl.O.P.(MD).No.11785 of 2021, dated
21.09.2021, the Madurai Bench of Hon'ble Madras High Court has held as
''8. It is a common knowledge that against the
Amendment        of   CAA   (Citizenship  Amendment  Act),
several protests, demonstrations and agitations took
throughout of India and in abroad also. So, right to
protest is well recognised. So, the only qualification is
that it should not end in any violation.
9. A reading of the First Information Report
shows that they made a protest by shouting slogans
against the amendment Act and the Government. But,
later, they dispersed themselves. So, it is seen that no
untoward or criminal act was occurred. No doubt,
conduct protest, without getting any proper permission,
is not proper. They also created nuisance in that place.
But, entire reading of 161 statement, recording during
the course of investigation, shows that the identification
of person, who are involved in the occurrence, was not
properly investigated. None of the statement recording
during the course of investigation, did not speak about
the identification of the person, who involved in the
demonstration or protest. Then, how the petitioners
roped in the above said offence, is not understandable.
10. Moreover, this Court, passed the order in
Crl.OP(MD)No.10774 of 2020, dated 05.10.2020, dealing
with a similar situation for quash the First Information
Report    in   Crime    No.54   of  2020,  which was  also
registered, on the basis of the protest, made by the
political    party,   against   the   Amendment   of  CAA
(Citizenship Amendment Act). The relevant paragraph of
''5.Though, there are prima facie materials
to justify the registration of the First
Information Report, I am of the view that
its continuance is not warranted. This is
because no untoward incident had taken
place. The country had witnessed protests
all over by different sections of people
against    the   said   amendments.     The
petitioner is a member of political party.
Therefore,    he  had    also organised    a
protest. Since the protest was peaceful
and even the First Information Report
does not disclose any act of violence or
happening of untoward incident, I am of
the view that the continued prosecution is
11. In the light of the above discussion, I am of
the considered view that there is no prima facie materials
are available against the petitioners. It is nothing, but,
clear abuse of process of the Court and law. So, this
petition is liable to be quashed.''
12. As stated above, admittedly, no violation is reported in this
case and the protest has also not ended in any violence. Therefore, this
Court, is of the considered view that further proceedings against the
petitioners in C.C.No.2962 of 2020 pending on the file of the learned IX
Metropolitan Magistrate Court, Saidapet, Chennai is liable to be quashed.
13. In the result, the Criminal Original Petition is allowed
quashing the case in C.C.No.2962 of 2020 pending on the file of the
learned           IX  Metropolitan  Magistrate  Court,   Saidapet,   Chennai.
Consequently, the connected miscellaneous petitions are closed.
ham/rgi/ssk.