Sana Rashid @ Pammi, aged about 26 years, D/o Late Harun Rashid,
R/o first lane, Bihta, front of Safa Public School, Chandani Chowk,
1.   The State of Jharkhand through its Home Secretary, Department of
Home, Jail and Disaster Management, Govt. of Jharkhand, Project
2.   Director General of Police, Jharkhand, Police Headquarter, P.O. & P.S.
3.   Inspector General of Police, Jharkhand, Police Headquarter, P.O. & P.S.
4.   Senior Superintendent of Police, Ranchi Police Department, P.O.
5.   The Officer in-charge, Gonda Police Station, Kanke Road, P.O. Kanke,
6.   Farzana Rashid, W/o Md. Riazuddin, R/o first lane, Bihta, front of Safa
7.   Gulzar Alam, Father's name not known to the petitioner, R/o first lane,
Bihta, front of Safa Public School, Chandani Chowk, Kanke Road, P.O.
For the Petitioner         : Mr. Navin Kumar, Advocate
For the State              : Mrs. Shweta Singh, Sr. S.C.-III
Ms. Neha Pandey, A.C. to Sr. S.C.-III
07/27.09.2022.     Mr. Navin Kumar, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits
that he will remove the surviving defects, in course of the day.
2.     Let him do so.
3.     This petition has been filed for direction upon the respondent
authorities to provide adequate security to the petitioner from her family
members and other co-religious persons as they are forcibly planning to
marry the petitioner with a person double of her age.
4.     It has been disclosed in the petition that the petitioner is in friendship
with a boy, who is of another religion. The petitioner is major and she is
2                    W.P. (Cr.) No. 482 of 2022
residing along with her elder sister and brother-in-law and they are trying to
get her married with a person aged about 52 years and she is not willing to
marry with that person. It has been disclosed in paragraph 13 of the
petition that she apprehends that the said boy and his family members may
be targeted by others. The petitioner has represented before the Hon'ble
Governor and Hon'ble Chief Minister of the State and Senior Superintendent
of Police, Ranchi on 22.09.2022 and brought all these facts before them.
5.      Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that there is serious threat
of life to the petitioner.
6.      Seeing the averments made in the petition as well as representations
sent to the higher authorities, prima facie it appears that the petitioner is in
7.      Nowadays, educated younger boys and girls are choosing their life
partners which, in turn is a departure from the earlier norms of society
where caste and community play a major role. There is every likelihood that
this is the way forward where caste and community tensions will reduce by
such inter-marriage, however these youngsters face threats by the elders of
their own family. The right to marry a person of choice was held to be
integral to Article 21 of the Constitution of India where the autonomy of an
individual inter alia in relation to family and marriage were held to be
integral to the dignity of the individual.
8.      Seeing the urgency in the matter, without calling upon the counter
affidavit on behalf of the respondent-State, this writ petition is being
disposed of directing the petitioner to appear before the Senior
Superintendent of Police, Ranchi (respondent no.4) by tomorrow. In the
event of her appearance, the Senior Superintendent of Police, Ranchi shall
3                 W.P. (Cr.) No. 482 of 2022
hear the petitioner and will pass appropriate order so that her dignity and
life be protected. He may do so by way of directing the concerned police
station to record her statement and proceed, in accordance with law.
9.     Accordingly, this petition stands disposed of.
10.    Let a copy of this order be communicated to the Senior
Superintendent of Police, Ranchi.