1.      Heard Sri M.S. Pandey, learned counsel for petitioner and learned
Standing Counsel for State-Respondents.
2.      Petitioner has claimed himself to be an Advocate practicing at District
Court, Allahabad and has applied for a firearm licence for Revolver under
Section 13 of the Arms Act, 1959 read with the Arms Rules, 2016 for his
personal and professional safety on the ground that there was an attempt to
murder on him and some local persons tried to molest his female family
members by entering in his house. In this regard two First Information
Reports were registered being Case Crime No. 286 of 2017, under Section
147, 323, 504, 506 IPC and 3(2)(Va) SC/ST Act, Police Station Bara,
District Allahabad and Case Crime No. 108 of 2017, under Sections 323,
354, 504, 506 IPC and 3(1)(10) SC/ST Act, Police Station Bara, District
Allahabad. It was further disclosed that in first case no charge sheet has been
filed till date, however, in second case charge sheet has been filed and matter
is pending for trial. Petitioner has also filed an affidavit before Licensing
Authority in this regard.
3.      Sri M.S. Pandey, learned counsel for petitioner, submits that petitioner
has to travel for the purpose of his profession and for his personal and
professional safety a firearm licence is required. The accused persons in
above referred criminal cases have threatened him and pressurizing to
compromise the criminal cases. He also submits that the grounds for
rejection of firearm licence that petitioner has no case under victims of crime
or having genuine need of weapon, is not correct because petitioner has
sought firearm licence on the ground of personal safety and not as a victim
of crime, therefore, the orders passed by Licensing Authority as well as
Appellate Authority are bad in law and liable to be set aside.
4.     The above submissions are vehemently opposed by learned Standing
Counsel appearing for State-Respondents. He submits that Licensing
Authority on the basis of material available and taking note of the police
report as well as status of aforesaid criminal cases, come to the conclusion
that petitioner has no ground for grant of firearm licence. The subjective
satisfaction of Licensing Authority was based on material available. It is
specifically stated in the impugned order that there is no material on record
that petitioner is a victim of crime or has genuine need to grant firearm
licence. It is well settled that subjective satisfaction of Licensing Authority
cannot be interfered in writ jurisdiction in absence of any reasonable ground.
5.     Petitioner has claimed himself to be an active Advocate. However,
there is no documentary evidence on record. Neither the registration of
petitioner as an Advocate nor any membership with District Bar Association
nor any document to show that he is active in profession, are on record.
Petitioner has not placed any record about the present status of aforesaid
criminal cases except that in one case trial is pending without disclosing the
present status of trial. The contention that the accused persons are extending
continuous threat to petitioner to enter into compromise in aforesaid criminal
cases, is not supported by any evidence or document. Even no complaint has
been filed by petitioner in this regard. He has not even approached the
concerned authority to take protection under Witness Protection Scheme
6.     The subjective satisfaction of Licensing Authority cannot be interfered
by this Court under the writ jurisdiction in absence of any material, that
there was no basis for such satisfaction or the basis of satisfaction is based
on surmises and conjectures. Even the contention of petitioner that there was
an attempt to murder is not supported by the offences under which the
aforesaid criminal cases are registered.
7.     Rule 12 of Arms Rules, 2016 provides certain factors which have to
be taken into consideration by the Licensing Authority while granting a
firearm licence. It includes legitimate and genuine reasons and also that the
very nature of his business, profession, job or otherwise has genuine
requirement to protect his life and property.
8.      In the present case the Licensing Authority has taken into
consideration the above factors also and on the basis of material available
found that petitioner’s case does not fall under the aforesaid category and
rejected the application for grant of firearm licence.
9.      In this case the petitioner has claimed himself to be an active
Advocate, who desires to have arm licence for his personal and professional
safety. If an Advocate requires a firearm licence for his personal and
professional safety, it would be a very dangerous practice. The profession of
Advocate is a noble profession. An Advocate always appears fearlessly
before the Court to protect the rights of his clients. In case there is a threat in
the mind of Advocate, the entire basis of nobleness of the profession would
fall. If such applications are allowed without any concrete basis, a day will
come that every Advocate will carry an arm inside the Court premises. Every
Advocate has a weapon of his legal arguments with bullets of judgments
passed by High Courts and Supreme Court in support of his submission,
which are enough to provide safety to his profession and client and are
sufficient to demand justice from the Courts. Normally they do not need
firearm for their professional safety. It is made clear that there is no bar for
the Advocate to apply for firearm licence and their application can be
considered in accordance with law under the provisions of Arms Act, 1959
read with Arms Rules, 2016. However, a general trend to have a firearm
licence by an Advocate without any good reason is not appreciable and it is
not in the interest of noble profession of Advocate.
10.     In view of above, the writ petition lacks merit and is accordingly
11.     However, it is clarified that in case petitioner has genuine threat from
the accused persons, he is always at liberty to approach the police authorities
to seek protection under Witness Protection Scheme, 2018.