Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 38523 of 2019
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Syed Mohd. Fazal,Sri .S.G.
1. Heard Sri S.G. Hasnain, learned Senior Advocate, assisted by
S/Sri Syed Mohd. Fazal and Ajay Kumar Kashyap, learned
counsel for the petitioner as well as Sri Ratnendu Kumar Singh,
learned AGA and perused the record.
2. The present application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been
filed seeking quashing the charge-sheet dated 06.08.2019 as
well as the cognizance/summoning order dated 03.09.2019 and
the proceeding of Sessions Trial No.01 of 2019 (State vs.
Salman Khurshid), arising out of Case Crime No. 353 of 2019,
under Sections 153 A, 171-G IPC and Section 125 of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951, Police Station
Farrukhabad Kotwali, District Fatehgarh, pending in the court
3. During the electioneering for Lok Sabha Election 2019, the
petitioner made the statement in response to question being put
by the journalists in respect of the statement of Sri Yogi
Adityanath, the Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh, in which Sri
Yogi Adityanath allegedly said that the petitioner was
sympathizer of Batla House accused/terrorists. The said
incident was an encounter which took place in the year 2008 in
which some terrorists were killed as well as one police
inspector was also shot dead by the terrorists.
4. It is said that the present petitioner made an indecent remark
against the Chief Minister, Sri Yogi Adityanath, which would
“Rishte me ham unke Baap Lagte hai"
5. Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that this
statement was made in a lighter vein which is a famous
dialogue of movie "Shahanshah" without any intention to be
disrespectful to the Chief Minister, Sri Yogi Adityanath. The
petitioner has no intention to hurt and insult feelings and
sentiments of any one, including, Sri Yogi Adityanath. It is
further submitted that the petitioner is a veteran Politician,
Senior Advocate, Ex-Member of Parliament as well as Ex-
Union Cabinet Minister and enjoys a good image in society.
6. The applicant has filed a personal affidavit today in the Court
and he has expressed regret on the said comment/statement.
Paragraph 2 of the affidavit rendered in the Court reads as
"2. That it is relevant to submit herein that the statement of the
deponent 'Rishte me ham unke Baap Lagte hai' is a popular
dialogue of Shahenshah movie delivered by reputed actor Mr.
Amitabh Bachchan, which had no real malafide meaning
attached to it when repeated by the deponent which in totality
and circumstances was on a lighter side with no intention
whatsoever to have hurt anyone's sentiment. However if any
person feels hurt the deponent solemnly expresses regret.”
7. Once the petitioner has regretted his comments/statement and
has made it clear that he never intended to hurt the feelings and
sentiments of anyone or Sri Yogi Adityanath and he made the
said statement only in the lighter vein while responding to some
questions put up by journalists, I am of the view that the
impugned proceedings should be quashed. Sometimes, in a spur
of moment, a person utters something with no intention to hurt
feelings and sentiments of others, and if such person regrets for
making such a statement, the Court should take a larger view of
the matter and quash the proceedings. “Regret is tough but fair
teacher. To live without regret is to believe you have nothing to
learn, no amends to make, and no opportunity to be braver with
your life.”
8. The petitioner has regretted his offending comment which
means that he still has apetite to learn and be brave in life.
9. In view of the affidavit submitted by Sri Salman Khurshid
and considering overall facts and circumstances of the case, the
context in which he uttered the offending sentence, and his
regret for his comment, I am of the view that the continuation
of the impugned proceedings against Sri Salman Khurshid
would not be justified.
10. Thus, the present petition is allowed and the entire
proceedings of Sessions Trial No.01 of 2019 (State vs. Salman
Khurshid), arising out of Case Crime No.353 of 2019, under
Sections 153 A, 171-G IPC and Section 125 of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951, Police Station
Farrukhabad Kotwali, District Fatehgarh, pending in the court
of Special Judge (SC/ST Act), Farrukhabad, are hereby
quashed.