1                 The present Appeal is filed by the appellant, being
aggrieved by an order dated 5/3/2022, passed on a draft Notice of
Motion filed in L.C. Suit No.499/2022, seeking a declaration
that the inspection report and the seizure action, purportedly
issued by the Mumbai Municipal Corporation u/s.394 of the
referred to as MMC Act) as nullity and bad-in-law. In the said
Suit, the plaintiff has sought a permanent injunction against the
defendants from enforcing and implementing the impugned
inspection report and the seizure action notice.
2                 Heard Advocate Anuj Narula for the applicant and
Advocate Dhruti Kapadia along with Advocate Om Suryavanshi
for the MCGM.
The dispute revolves around bungalow no.6, Asha
Colony, Juhu Tara Road, Vile Parle (W), Mumbai, comprising of
five rooms on the ground floor and six rooms on the upper floor
(hereinafter referred to as ‘suit premises’) undisputedly, owned by
the plaintiff.            The plaintiff is carrying on business as a
Restaurateur and hotelier in the western suburbs of Mumbai and
plead that he runs various food joints which include “Bed and
Breakfast establishment” (for short B & B establishment) on the
suit premises which the plaintiff acquired under a registered gift
deed in the year 2014 from his mother. It is the case of the
plaintiff that prior thereto, in the year 2010, his late father was
using the ground floor of the bungalow for the purpose of
running a Bed and Breakfast establishment under the Then
Scheme in an Incredible India Bed and Breakfast Scheme and
then the property was styled as U-Turn Residency. In 2013, the
ITDC licence was renewed and the plaintiff acquired a licence
under a similar scheme floated by Maharashtra Tourism
Development Corporation (MTDC) and he continued the
business activity from the suit premises under the name and style
3                 The respondent no.1 is the statutory corporation
established under the Mumbai Municipal Corporation Act, 1888
(for short “MMC Act”, and the defendant nos.2 and 3 to the Suit
are it’s Officers, being the Sanitary Inspector of the concerned
ward as well as the Medical Officer, who are entrusted with the
task of performing duties, functions and exercise powers vested in
4                 The cause of action for the Suit instituted by the
plaintiff is an Inspection of his premises at the instance of the
Officers of the Corporation on 13/1/2022 and the plaintiff plead
that the defendant no.2 issued the warning to the plaintiff to
discontinue the trade within 7 days of the receipt of the letter and
the defendant no.3 issued a seizure action notice, on the very next
day, i.e. 14/1/2022, threatening the plaintiff that all the articles,
machinery, devices in the suit premises shall be seized.
Pertinent to note that being aggrieved by the aforesaid
notices, the plaintiff instituted a suit earlier but noticing that there
were some inherent defect, withdrew the said Suit and filed the
present suit in which the draft Notice of Motion is taken out.
I need not delve deep into the pleadings of the
plaintiff attributing malafides to his neighbor Ms.Anita Ghai, at
whose instance, he allege that the corporation authorities had
carried out the inspection, and he blamed the said complainant
for the entire exercise, resulting into the inspection reporot and
seizure action notice, so that the plaintiff accede to the
complainants extortionist demands.
In the Suit seeking aforesaid relief, the plaintiff filed a
draft Notice of Motion, praying for a protection in favour of his
establishment by way of an ad-interim order, in absence of which
the Suit would be rendered infructuous, and he prayed for an
injunction against the defendants, their Officers, servants or
agents for taking any steps in furtherance and/or enforcement, in
any manner, implementing the impugned inspection report and
seizure action notice and creating any obstruction in running of
the establishment of the suit premises.
5                 The learned counsel Mr.Narula for the appellant
would submit that the defendants have failed to consider a very
significant aspect, being though the B&B establishment partakes
the character of a hotel or lodging, as tourist/guest are
accommodated in the rooms and served by the plaintiff, but the
same is a home stay establishment, as conceived and permitted
under incredible India Bed and Breakfast Scheme of Government
of Maharashtra/India and therefore, it is not classified as “Trade
establishment”. He would submit that the impugned reports and
the notice ignore the fact that plaintiff is admittedly residing on
the upper floor with his family and only the rooms on the ground
floor are rented out/provided to the guest, subject to all
compliance of all the conditions imposed by the MTDC with
whom the establishment is registered. Mr.Narula would submit
that the inspection report is contrary to the factual scenario as it
indicate that 11 rooms are used as guest rooms along with 12
connected toilets which is an incorrect factual position. In any
case, the submission of Mr.Narula is when his establishment has
already received registration by the MTDC and the said authority
is ensuring compliance as well as supervising the said facilities,
the insistence of the Corporation to obtain a licence u/s.394 of
the MMC Act is unjustified, as it would amount to two
authorities controlling the same establishment.
6                 Per contra, Ms.Kapadia representing the Corporation
would submit that factually when the inspection was carried out
by the defendant no.3 of the Suit premises, it was noticed that the
appellant was operating without the licence u/s.394 i.e. without
permission of the Municipal corporation of Greater Mumbai and
he was directed to stop trade activity forthwith. Further, she
would submit that the inspection report clearly noticed that the
activity/trade of lodging house was being carried out in 11 rooms
of the first floor along with 11 rooms on the ground floor, the
details of which were provided in the inspection note, which was
without permission of the authority and therefore, the appellant
was noticed to discontinue the trade/ activity within a period of 7
days from the date of receipt of the inspection report.
The learned counsel would submit that since the suit
premises are situated within the limits of the Municipal
Corporation, it is covered by the provisions of the MMC Act, and
in terms of Section 394 of the Act, no person shall carry on or
allow or suffer to be carried out, in or upon any premises any of
the trades specified in para-IV of Schedule-M, or any process or
operation connected with such trade. According to Ms.Kapadia,
the Schedule cover the activity of “keeping of a lodging house”.
She would submit that it is quite possible in a situation that to
carry out a particular industry/establishment, licence/ permission
from multiple authorities is required and by way of example, she
would submit that for a hotel/lodge/eating house, the permission
from the local health department of the Corporation, the building
department, the fire safety department, etc, are required to be
obtained apart from the licence from the Food Safety and
Standards Authority of India, registration under the Shops and
Establishment Act, 1948, a licence for operating a bar, if liquor is
being served as well as in case of a hotel offering entertainment,
the licence of PPL (Phonographic Performance Ltd) and PRS
(Performing Right Society Licence) may be mandatory for the
operation. She would submit that in any case, there is a breach of
condition by the appellant even of those terms and conditions
under which the MTDC has granted registration and permitted
him to carry on the business.
7                 With the assistance of the respective counsel, I have
perused the documents accompanying the Appeal, including the
inspection report dated 31/1/2021 and the seizure action notice
There is no dispute that the Regional Director of
India Tourism had granted authority in favour of the predecessor
of the appellant to operate the Bread and Breakfast Establishment
(Gold category) and the said facility continued in favour of the
appellant from 12/2/2013 to 11/2/2015 under Silver category.
Development              Corporation     (MTDC)      has     registered         the
establishment of the appellant as ‘B&B Establishment’ at the suit
premises with the cap of five rooms i.e. 10 beds for a period of
five years i.e. from 17/2/2016 to 16/2/2021 and the same has
been further extended upto 16/2/2026. Pertinent to note that the
appellant is permitted to operate as the facility in five rooms with
10 beds in the residential premises, owned by him.
It is, therefore, necessary to ascertain what is the exact
scheme and from the documents placed on record, it can be seen
that in order to encourage Tourism in the State and to cater to the
need of the tourist, who are desirous of visiting various religious
and historical places, beaches, mountains and forest in the State,
but are unable to find resorts, the MTDC has permitted the
residents at the local level to provide accommodation to tourist,
when the inflow is only for certain season, which would include
the accommodation and food facilities. The MTDC, in turn, seek
to achieve two objects i.e. encourage tourism in the State and also
provide employment to the local citizens, owning premises at
various pilgrimage centers, tribal areas or such unique places
which would also encourage the domestic and international
tourists, to learn about the local culture, life styles, traditions and
8                 The MTDC assure marketing of these facilities by
mentioning their names in the print material and website free of
charge and provide registration to such rooms which can be
displayed as ‘MTDC Approved’ on their banners and the
information centres of the MTDC will provide information to the
tourist about such centre facility.
In short, the MTDC has permitted registration of
certain properties with them and it is nothing but grant of
franchisee by the MTDC to encourage tourism. This registration
is also subject to adherence of certain conditions, and is to be
granted subject to filing of an application and on producing
necessary permissions/no objections. The minimum beds which
could be arranged for, in the said establishment ranges from 4 to
10, with the specification of the rooms. On an application being
so preferred, highlighting the facilities in form of breakfast and
the specification of the rooms, the registration is provided, subject
to an undertaking by the operator to provide safe drinking water,
clean surroundings, ensuring safety and security of the guest and
their belongings etc.
Department of State of Maharashtra had taken certain initiatives
one of which being exemption from payment of luxury tax. The
Government Resolution dated 31/3/2012 issued by the Tourism
and Cultural Affairs Department, acknowledge the registration of
B&B facility at the instance of the MTDC, permitting the owner
of the premises to rent out 2 to 6 rooms to the tourist and the said
resolution refer to a Government Resolution issued by the Urban
Development Department on 3/2/1997, where certain benefits
were conferred upon such establishments, like no increase in the
rateable value of the said property where B & B facility is made
available, no hike in the property tax more than 20% and
exemption from compliance of terms and conditions and taxes,
otherwise applicable to the hotels and restaurants operating
within the limits of the Municipal Corporation/ municipal limits.
10                Section 394 of the MMC Act impose a restriction
upon certain activities to be carried out within its limits of the
Corporation except on the licence granted by the Commissioner
and this include carrying of any trade upon any premises which is
specified in part IV of Schedule M or any process or operation
connected with any such trade and Part IV of Schedule ‘M’ cover
an activity of ‘lodging’.
Breakfast establishment under the MTDC scheme is not covered
u/s.394, at the first blush may appear to be attractive but on
closer scrutiny of the rules and regulations of the MTDC, do not
appear to be so.
11                No doubt, Bread and Breakfast establishment has
been granted registration under the MTDC, but it is no licence by
the MTDC to carry on such an activity. Since the MTDC is a
body of Government of Maharashtra responsible for development
of tourism in the State, and is engaged in systematic development
of tourism on commercial lines, in order to achieve it’s initiative
and encourage tourism in the State, it owns and maintains several
resorts at key tourist centres. However, realizing that it may not
be possible to have their resorts at some obscure basis which do
not have a regular inflow of the tourist or it being seasonal
innature, the MTDC has encouraged the B&B scheme, keeping
in tune their primary object of encouraging tourism.
However, this registration/permission to operate an
establishment of B&B facility in a residential house is not a purely
commercial venture as what is expected is, some of the rooms of
the residential house, are permitted to offer B&B facility. This,
however, prima facie will not absolve the establishment to obtain
necessary other permission/licences which are required for it’s
operation. The property is not exempted completely from the
tax, but certain concession is granted. In order to operate the
facility as a lodging, it would necessarily require compliance of
condition like health, licence since the Corporation is responsible
for the cleanliness and ensuring that requisite facilities being
made available to the customers, who are taking benefit of the
lodging. It would also require compliance of the building permit
and it cannot be said that on the MTDC granting the permission,
the changes in the residential premises will not have to be ratified/
authorized by the Building department of the Corporation. Such
an establishment will necessarily have to obtain the fire safety
permit as well as the permission from the FSSAI, since food is
being offered to the tourist at such an establishment. Prima facie,
the licence which is required to be obtained u/s.394 in order to
operate a trading or activity upon the premises cannot be said to
be exempted, merely on registration of the facility with MTDC.
12                In any case, what the appellant is expected is to obtain
licence from the Corporation authority u/s.394 while he is
operating the B&B facility as the MTDC has only given an
authorization to him to operate the said facility within the limits
of the Municipal Corporation. The MTDC prima facie has not
intended to do away with the statutory requirements or denude
the Corporation of it’s power to control the activities including
any trade activity being undertaken within its jurisdiction.
The impugned order, refusing ad-interim relief in
favour of the plaintiff by recording that the licence is not obtained
by the plaintiff and further recording that prima facie it appears
that when the Officers of the defendant visited the premises, the
plaintiff was using more rooms and beds in the suit premises than
actually permitted to him by MTDC itself, reflect that the
plaintiff himself was carrying an activity beyond the permission
granted by the MTDC. If such an activity de hors the permission
is being carried out within the jurisdiction of the Municipal
Corporation, it cannot be said that the authority is not
empowered to take any action. The ad-interim relief has rightly
been refused under the impugned order dated 5/3/2022.
In view of dismissal of AO, Interim Application
No.1973 do not survive and is disposed off.
13                At this stage, the learned counsel for the appellant
seek extension of the protection granted by way of ad-interim
order, in the wake of the fact that the Appeal is decided on merits
and when it is specifically held that the licence by the
Corporation u/s.394 is imperative, despite registration with the
MTDC, the prayer made by Mr.Narula is rejected.