1)     The petitioner has challenged FIR No.187/2018 for offence
under Section 13 ULA(P) Act registered with Police Station, Kulgam
2)     It is averred in the petition that the petitioner is an advocate
practicing in District Court, Kulgam, for last about 10 years. On
21.10.2018, six civilians were killed and more than sixty injured
including men, women and children in a blast at a gunfight site at Laroo
Village in Kulgam triggering outrage across Kashmir. It is further
averred that even Union Home Minister of India condemned these
unfortunate killings and expressed his heartfelt condolence to the
families of the deceased and announced relief of Rs.5.00 lacs to each
family of the deceased. It is also contended that the Governor of Jammu
and Kashmir also termed the killing of six civilians as unfortunate.
Similar views were published and expressed by several local and
national newspapers. It is averred that the petitioner, being a resident of
the village in which the tragedy had happened, made certain comments
regarding the incident on the Facebook. According to the petitioner, the
theme of these posts was that there has been negligence which led to
the killing of these civilians and that District Police, Kulgam, and the
local administration were principally responsible for the same. The
petitioner is stated to have expressed his outrage and shock on similar
other incidents in his Facebook posts and has also made comment that
India has lost opportunity to resolve the issue with Pakistan by not
responding to the offer of the Prime Minister of Pakistan.
3)     According to the petitioner, there is nothing illegal in the posts
which were uploaded by him on his Facebook but still then on the basis
of letter dated 13.11.2018, issued by respondent No.2 to respondent
No.3, the impugned FIR has been registered by branding him as an anti-
national element. It is contended that the action of the petitioner does
not come within the definition of ‘unlawful activity’ as contained in
Section 2(o) of ULA(P) Act. Thus, according to the petitioner, on the
face of it, the allegations made in the FIR do not constitute an offence
against the petitioner and, as such, the same is liable to be quashed.
4)     The respondents have resisted the petition by filing a reply
thereto. In their reply, respondents have submitted that Police Station,
Kulgam received a letter dated 13.11.2018 from District Police,
Kulgam, along with extracts of Facebook posts pertaining to the
petitioner and other advocates. It was found that the petitioner and other
advocates are uploading /spreading seditions, pro-separatist contents
through Social Medial especially on Facebook, as such, there was an
apprehension of disruption of peaceful atmosphere in South Kashmir,
particularly in District Kulgam. On receiving this letter, the impugned
FIR came to be registered but due to the stay of investigation ordered
by this Court, the investigation could not proceed further
5)     I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
record including the Case Diary.
6)     Learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently argued that the
posts which were uploaded by the petitioner on his Facebook were not
intended to create any disaffection or encourage any anti-national
activities but he had only expressed his outrage at the happenings which
had taken place in his native village. Learned counsel has submitted
that even the responsible functionaries of the Government of India
including Home Minister and the Governor of Jammu and Kashmir had
expressed shock and outrage at the incident and most of the local and
national daily newspapers had expressed similar views in the matter.
Learned counsel, while buttressing his arguments, has referred to the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Vinod Dua v. Union of
India and others, AIR 2021 SC 3239, in which it has been laid down
that a citizen has a right to criticize or comment upon the measures
undertaken by the Government and its functionaries, so long as he does
not incite people to violence against the Government established by law
or with the intention of creating public disorder. According to the
learned counsel, the posts on the basis of which the petitioner has been
booked for offence under Section 13 of ULA(P) Act do not in any
manner incite public to violence against the Government nor do they
create an apprehension of public disorder. Therefore, no offence is
made out against the petitioner.
7)     Before testing the merits of the contention raised by learned
counsel for the petitioner, it would be apt to refer to the provisions
contained in Section 13 of ULA(P) Act. It reads as under:
“13. Punishment for unlawful activities.—(1) Whoever—
(a) takes part in or commits, or
(b) advocates, abets, advises or incites the
any unlawful activity, shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven
years and shall also be liable to fine.
(2) Whoever, in any way, assists any unlawful activity
of any association, declared unlawful under section 3,
after the notification by which it has been so declared
has become effective under sub-section (3) of that
section, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to five years, or with fine, or
with both.
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to any treaty,
agreement or convention entered into between the
Government of India and the Government of any other
country or to any negotiations therefor carried on by
any person authorised in this behalf by the Government
of India.”
8)     From a perusal of the aforesaid provision, it is clear that a person
can be punished for unlawful activities if he takes part in or commits,
advocates, abets, advises or incites the commission of any unlawful
activity. Even if a person assists any unlawful activity of any
association declared as unlawful, he can be subjected to punishment
under the aforesaid provision
9)     ‘Unlawful activity’ has been defined in Section 2(0) of the
ULA(P) Act. It reads as under:
“unlawful activity”, in relation to an individual or
association, means any action taken by such individual or
association (whether by committing an act or by words,
either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible
representation or otherwise),—
(i)    which is intended, or supports any claim, to bring
about, on any ground whatsoever, the cession of a
part of the territory of India or the secession of a
part of the territory of India from the Union, or
which incites any individual or group of individuals
to bring about such cession or secession; or
(ii)   which disclaims, questions, disrupts or is intended
to disrupt the sovereignty and territorial integrity of
(iii) which causes or is intended to cause disaffection
10)    From a perusal of the aforesaid provision, it is clear that
‘unlawful activity’ means any action taken by an individual, whether
by committing an act or by words, either spoken or written or otherwise,
which is intended or supports any claim, to bring about, on any ground
whatsoever, the cession of a part of the territory of India from the Union
or which incites any individual or group of individuals to bring about
such cession or session. ‘Unlawful activity’ also includes any action
which disclaims, questions, disrupts or is intended to disrupt the
sovereignty and territorial integrity of India or if it is intended to cause
disaffection against India.
11)    “Cession” has been defined in Section 2(1)(b) to include
admission of the claim of any foreign country to any such part of
territory of India whereas ‘secession’ has been defined in Section
2(1)(i) to include the assertion of any claim to determine whether such
part will remain a part of the territory of India.
12)    In the light of the aforesaid provisions of law, let us now consider
as to whether the Facebook posts of the petitioner, on the basis of which
the impugned FIR has been registered, make out a case of ‘unlawful
activity’ which is punishable under Section 13 of the Act. In this regard,
it would be apt to refer to the contents of the posts allegedly uploaded
by the petitioner on the basis of which the impugned FIR has been
lodged. The Case Diary contains print out of a number of posts
allegedly uploaded by the petitioner on his Facebook account but some
of these posts are not being reproduced here as in those posts the
petitioner has only expressed outrage and condemnation of certain
incidents which comes within the ambit of his legitimate right to
freedom of expression as guaranteed under Article 19 of the
Constitution. The two posts which require to be considered for the
purpose of determining the issue at hand are reproduced as under:
(i) “Karbala in Laroo.
Genocide and mayhem in my native hamlet Laroo. One
of the most intense gunfights in my village culminated
into mass massacre, bloodshed, cries, wailings, and
brutal carnage.
A military operation culminated into an organised state
negligence which led to killings of 8teenagers and
injuring 60 others.
The military establishment and district police Kulgam,
including local administration is principally and directly
responsible for the murder of eight sweethearts in my
No combing and non-sanitization of the encounter site
sprinkled hot blood of my fellow brothers in every
corner of the damaged house and the roads of village
One cannot even imagine the nature of horror and
misery the poor and broken inhabitants of my village
were confronted with and broken inhabitants of my
village were confronted with and the senses were so
scary and heart wrenching that we were not in a
position to carry the coffins of these budding brothers
to the graveyards.
I could witness people of my village from 8 to 80 tearing
their clothes and stroking their faces hard for hours
The hot blood clots and soaked jeans of talib and rest
brothers will haunt me for decades together.
For the first time in my life, I felt broken and weak and
I could acknowledge that were are slaves and slaves
have no life of their own.
Talib was my next door neighbour and distinction
holder who used to do labour during the day and study
during night.
Father of Talib Dr. Maqbool laway died when talib was
a baby and since then talib and his mom contained the
quagmire and hardships of life together.
Every passing hour I can hear the cries of talibs Mom
who lost her only hope in life.
I feel so shattered for the best friends of Talib, mugeem
and rest other martyrs.
I could see one of their common friends dying with
Shrieks at their graves.
I feel so broken for that toddler that went I left the
grave that friend of talib and his shrieks created and
an indelible mark in my mind and I could remember few
verse for that surviving friends and buddy
Ghar ho Khushi se Bhara
My village is not that busy hustle bustle hamlet
anymore now the blood soaked roads are testament to
a genocide perpetuated and organized by colonial
establishment.
The highest that I could sum up from his disaster is the
quote of Dr. Manan Wani
Occupation is like a cancer which will consume
everyone of us.”
(ii)“Manan’s finger on trigger is more than the
mechanism that sets off the firing action of a gun. It is
not an isolated incident. If reflects the culmination of
systemic failure. If reflects on those heartless
structures that celebrate occupation of military
bonhomie in cozy champagne circuits and page
three parties of gupkar. He may be a looser in the
natural lottery called life, but his death reflects a
writing on the wall. With his death, may God answer
our silent prayers ad change the frigid ad uncaring
hearts of those who perpetuate this war and enjoy its
franchise.”
13)     The highlighted portions of the first post quoted above indicate
that the petitioner advocates that the people of Kashmir are slaves and
it is under occupation which is like a cancer. The highlighted portions
of the other post quoted above indicate that the petitioner is advocating
that this part of the Country is under the occupation of Indian military.
14)     In my opinion, the freedom of speech and expression guaranteed
under the Constitution cannot be stretched to such a limit as to allow a
person to question the status of a part of the Country or its people. It is
one thing to criticize the Government for its negligence and express
outrage on the violation of human rights of the people but it is quite
another to advocate that the people of a particular part of the Country
are slaves of the Government of India or that they are under occupation
of armed forces of the Country. While the former i.e., expression of
outrage at the negligence and inhuman attitude of the security forces,
police and establishment would come within the ambit of freedom of
expression of an individual which includes freedom to criticize the
Government of the day which is permissible under law but the same
may not be the position if an individual questions the fact of a State
being a part of the Country by using the expression ‘occupation of
military or the people being slaves etc.’. The petitioner, who happens
to be an advocate, can very well understand the import of these
expressions. By making these comments, he is certainly advocating and
supporting the claim that Jammu and Kashmir is not a part of India and
that it is occupied by Indian military with the people having being
reduced to the status of slaves. Thus, he is questioning the sovereignty
and territorial integrity of the Country.
15)    The petitioner by uploading these posts has cross the Lakshman
Rekha which demarcates the freedom of expression guaranteed under
Article 19 of the Constitution of India from the reasonable restrictions
imposed on such freedom on the ground of sovereignty and integrity of
India. The intention of a person can be gathered from the words spoke
or written or other expressions. Therefore, the expressions used by the
petitioner, who happens to be a law knowing person, clearly show that
he intended to advocate a particular ideology which supports the claim
of cessions of Jammu and Kashmir, which is an integral part of India.
This act of the petitioner, therefore, prima facie, falls within the
definition of ‘unlawful activity’ as contained in Section 2(o) of the
ULA(P) Act punishable under Section 13 of the Act.
16)    The ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in Vindod Dua’s case
(supra), on which learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance,
is not applicable to the facts of the instant case. This is so because in
Vinod Dua’s case (supra), the petitioner therein who happened to be a
journalist, had criticized the functioning of the Government of the day
and he had not supported and advocated any claim relating to cession
of a part of the Country whereas, in the instant case, the petitioner by
uploading the posts on his Facebook, has supported the claim of cession
of a particular part of the Country. Besides this, in Vinod Dua’s case,
the petitioner was booked for offence of sedition defined in Section
124A of IPC whereas in this case, the petitioner has been booked for
commission of offence under Section 13 of ULA(P) Act. The
ingredients of two offences are distinct from each other. Thus, the ratio
laid down in Vinod Dua’s case is not applicable to the facts of the
instant case.
17)    For the forgoing reasons, it cannot be stated that no offence is
made out from the contents of the impugned FIR and the material
annexed thereto. Therefore, this is not a fit case where this Court should
exercise its power under Section 482 of Cr. P. C to quash the
proceedings at this stage. Quashing the proceedings at this stage would
amount to stifling a genuine prosecution, which is not permissible in
view of the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of
Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of Maharashtra and
18)     Thus, there is no merit in this petition. The same is, accordingly,
dismissed. The interim order shall stand vacated.
19)     Case Diary be returned to the learned counsel for the