1.      The present writ petition has been filed by the Petitioners as Public
Interest Litigation (PIL), praying for the following reliefs:-
“a) Direct the respondents to forthwith accept the
petitioners No. I-5/ homeless, displaced patients in its
present condition and do necessary and immediate
arrangements for their housing, safety, well-being,
food, hot cooked meals 24 hour hospice cam and
shelter, caregivers to help them out to seek medical
nutmeat, medicine, counselling and care at an
appropriate place in 24 hours.
b) Direct the Respondent No I to expeditiously decide
all required policies and schemes at the national and
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 7213/2011                                                         Page 1 of 9
state level for food security, hot cooked meals,
permanent housing and shelter, hospice for terminally
ill, caregivers for assistance to all such patients at
terminal stage.
c) Direct the respondents to make required allotment of
housing for HIV/AIDS survivors in the government‟s
housing schemes for the poor, namely, Indira Awas
Yojna and Rajiv Awas Yojna; and create Night Shelter
for HIV/AIDS infected and affected citizens and Family
Home for HIV/AIDS infected and affected family
members.
d) Direct the Ministry of Urban Development and
Poverty Alleviation to enroll such citizens for allotment
of permanent housing with independent rights and
inheritance rights to benefit not only them but also
their widows or children.
e) Direct the Ministry of Finance, the Respondent no.
6 to provide appropriate financial allocation to the
departments concerned including that of the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare, Ministry of Labour and
Employment, Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment and the Departments concerned with
Food and Grain for welfare of such persons at the
national and state level;
f) Direct the Ministry of Labour and Employment to
establish Labour Welfare Centres, Hospice and Half
Way Homes, Long stay Homes for its terminally sick
and homeless evicted/former/retired labour force in
each and every state and district to facilitate its labour
force and their family members so that such persons
are not made to live on the street or hop from
temporary shelter to shelter or a square meal for
survival; to organize a labour census to identify the
needs of the vast unorganised migratory labour force.
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 7213/2011                                                       Page 2 of 9
g) Direct National AIDS Control Organisation, the
Respondent no. 2 to formulate policy and planning for
such marginalized citizens for their permanent
housing, food security, monthly pension and
subsistence allowance, hospice, halfway home, long
stay home etc.; To start Free Ambulance/Patient
Transport Facilities for providing easy access to
treatment to such persons.
h) To provide Tatkal single window counters in each
and every government hospitals and private hospitals
to run special Economically Weaker Section services
for such patients for expeditious and out of turn
medical and diagnostic services and earmark at least 4
beds in each hospital for such patients;
i) Direct the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment to establish Half Way Home, Long Stay
Home, Hospice for homeless, abandoned, destitute,
mentally sick and physically handicapped HIV/AIDS
citizens and their Children and Widows with immediate
effect.”
2.      It is stated that the Petitioners are suffering from HIV/AIDS and other
multiple disabilities and ailments. They have been given shelter by
Petitioner No.6/Shramik Referral Centre for People Living with HIV/AIDS.
It appears that owing to the stigma attached to the HIV/AIDS infection, the
Petitioners have been abandoned by their families and they have no shelter.
3.      A perusal of the material on record shows that notices were issued in
the matter and a detailed reply was filed by Respondent No.4/Ministry of
Urban Development & Poverty Alleviation. Respondent No.4 has brought to
the attention of this Court the existence of a scheme titled “Jawaharlal Nehru
Urban Renewal Mission” (JNNURM), which is aimed at providing housing
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 7213/2011                                                    Page 3 of 9
and basic services to urban poor and slum dwellers in 65 specified cities
under the Sub Mission Basic Services to Urban Poor (BSUP) and in other
cities/towns under the Integrated Housing and Slum Development
Programme (IHSDP). However, Respondent No.4 has stated that it does not
have a specific scheme targeted towards rehabilitating HIV/AIDS positive
persons, and, therefore, no relief can be claimed for allotment of a
house/shelter as far as Respondent No.4 is concerned.
4.      Two replies have been filed on behalf of Respondent No.6/GNCTD.
Vide the first reply, the GNCTD apprised this Court that a „National AIDS
Control Programme‟ is being implemented in Delhi since 1998 by the „Delhi
State AIDS Society‟, under the technical and financial support of National
AIDS Control Organization, Government of India. In this regard, Paragraph
2 of the affidavit reads as under:-
“2. That Delhi state AIDS control society, Govt of NCT
of Delhi is implementing National AIDS Control
Programme in state of Delhi Since 1998 under
Technical & financial support of National AIDS
control organization, Govt of India. The primary goal
of third phase of National AIDS Control Programme
(NACP III: 2007 -2012) is to Halt and reverse the
epidemic in India over the next five years through
following strategy :
i) Prevention of new infections (saturation of HRG
coverage and scale up of interventions for general
ii) Increased proportion of PLHIV receiving care,
support and treatment
iii) Strengthening capacities at district, state and
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 7213/2011                                                   Page 4 of 9
iv) Building    strategic   information  management
systems.”
5.      The latest Status Report dated 19.12.2022 filed on behalf of
Respondent No.6/GNCTD places on record the various rehabilitative
schemes floated, and measures taken by the GNCTD to provide aid and
assistance in order to ameliorate the condition of patients who are HIV
positive. The relevant portion of the Status Report has been reproduced as
“4. 12 Anti Retroviral Treatment (ART) centres
including one Centre in Tihar Prison) have been
established in Delhi that provide free investigations
and free antiretroviral treatment (ART) to PLHIV.
Besides under the VIHAAN Project of NACO, 5
Community Support Centres (CSCs) are being
operated in Delhi through the HIV positive People
Network for facilitation to outpatient and inpatient
care for people infected with HIVIAIDS (PLHIVs)
including treatment of opportunistic infections, drug
adherence and for linking PLHIV to social security
schemes available to all.
5. Govt. of NCT of Delhi provides financial assistance
to eligible People Living with HIV/AIDS (PLHA)/
Children Living with HIV/AIDS (CLHA), Orphan/
Destitute Children Infected with HIV /AIDS (OCI) and
Orphan Children Affected by HIV/AIDS (OCA), since
1st April 2012. The present criteria for enrolment
under the scheme are being resident of Delhi for 3
years with family income not exceeding 1 Lakh per
annum and regular on ART in proceeding 12 months of
enrolment. (Annexure I and II). The current status of
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 7213/2011                                                   Page 5 of 9
1     People/Children       living 5644            2296/-
with HIV/AIDS on ART
2     Orphan Children infected 32                  4706/-
4     Orphan children affected 26                  4018/-
6. There is a provision for annual increase of this
assistance by indexation to inflation capped at 5% per
annum. Delhi has been the first state to start the
Financial Assistance Scheme for PLHIV on ART in
Delhi to improve the treatment adherence and the
assistance under the scheme at present is highest in the
country. Since April 2012 an amount of Rs. 56.08
Crores has been disbursed to the eligible beneficiaries
since initiation of scheme up to December 20, 2022
7. Another scheme viz. 'Travel concession scheme for
PLHIVS/CLHIVs for People/Children infected with
HIV, attending the ART centres in Delhi for
undertaking visits to the ART centres' with eligibility
for enrolment being Delhi resident on ART from ART
Centres situated in Delhi under National AIDS Control
Programme irrespective of their income level. The
scheme provided for a travel assistance of Rs. 120/-
per visit to PLHIV with maximum 12 visits in a year
(Annexure II). The scheme is under process of
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 7213/2011                                                     Page 6 of 9
implementation with 120 enrolled beneficiaries and
with another 429 applications under process.
8. The Human Immune Deficiency Virus and Acquired
Act 2017, has been implemented across the country
w.e.f. 10th September 2018 to establish a robust system
to deal with grievances of protected persons. The Act
provides to addressing stigma and discrimination
faced by the People Living with HIV (PLHIVs,)
creating an enabling environment for enhancing access
to services, safeguarding rights of PLHIV & those
affected by AIDS, Promoting safe workplace in
healthcare settings to promote occupational exposure
and the Act brings in legal accountability and
establishes formal mechanisms for enquiring in to
complaints      and     redressing    grievances      by
appointing/designating Ombudsman. (Annexure IV).
9. Under section-8 of The HIV AIDS (P&C) Act 2017,
Disclosure of HIV status is prohibited and no one can
disclose the Status of HIV of a protected person other
than a “.. healthcare provider who is involved in the
care treatment or counselling of such person, when
such disclosure is necessary to provide care or
treatment..."
Or " an order of a Court that the disclosure of such
information is necessary in the interest of Justice for
the determination of issues and in the matter before
it..."
10. The Govt. of NCT of Delhi has notified rules under
'The HIV AIDS(Prevention and Control) Act 2017' vide
gazette notification dated 02.11.2022 designating
district Magistrates as Ombudsman in their respective
districts. (Annexure V).
11. In view of the above facts, it is hereby prayed
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 7213/2011                                                     Page 7 of 9
before the Hon'ble High Court that the Delhi
Government has taken all the possible measures to
provide the best possible care, support and treatment
to people Living with HIV-AIDS in Delhi and shall
extend all the support in future also, hence it is
requested to the Hon'ble Court that the present
submission may be taken on record and the case may
be dropped.”
6.      The above Status Report highlights the various schemes floated by the
GNCTD, which are targeted towards providing free Anti-Retroviral
Treatment (ART) to the patients and granting financial assistance to persons
affected with HIV/AIDS, children suffering from HIV/AIDS. Further,
another scheme titled „Travel concession scheme for PLHIVS/CLHIVs for
People/Children infected with HIV, attending the ART centres in Delhi for
undertaking visits to the ART centres‟ has also been implemented by the
GNCTD. The Status Report also reveals that 120 beneficiaries are enrolled
under this Scheme, and 429 applications are under process.
7.      It has also been brought to the notice of this Court that the Human
Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome
(Prevention and Control) Act, 2017 has been implemented across the
country with effect from 10.09.2018 (“2017 Act”) to establish a robust
system to deal with grievances of affected persons. The GNCTD, in exercise
of powers conferred under the Act of 2017, has framed Rules called as the
Delhi Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency
Syndrome (Ombudsman and Legal Proceedings) Rules, 2022. In order to
ensure compliance of the Rules, the GNCTD has even appointed the District
Magistrate as the „Ombudsmen‟ under the said Rules.
8.      A perusal of the above makes it abundantly evident that the GNCTD
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 7213/2011                                                   Page 8 of 9
is ensuring strict compliance under the statutory provisions of the 2017 Act.
Further, the GNCTD has taken all possible steps to ensure that affordable
treatment is available to individuals afflicted with HIV/AIDS, who do not
possess the financial wherewithal to do so.
9.      This Court finds it apposite to mention that the Government shall
ensure strict compliance of the statutory provisions under the 2017 Act, read
with its Rules made thereunder. The Government is also directed to ensure
free food and medical treatment to HIV positive persons who are below the
poverty line and hence, are unable to afford the same.
10.     In light of the aforesaid and the Status Report filed by GNCTD, no
further orders are required to be passed in the present PIL. Accordingly, the
same stands disposed of, along with pending applications, if any.
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 7213/2011                                                   Page 9 of 9