The issue that arises for consideration in this original petition is
as to whether Ext.P3 is a bond as defined under Section 2(a) of the Kerala
Stamp Act, 1959 (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”) or an agreement.
2.    This original petition is filed by the plaintiff in O.S. No.126 of
2017 on the files of the Additional Sub Court-I, Kozhikode and the
respondent herein is the defendant. The suit is one for realisation of a sum
of Rs.54,15,120/-. It is contended in the said suit that the plaintiff and
defendant have long-standing acquaintance and they had done several
business transactions in India and abroad including a business in mobile
phones and its accessories and that they decided to stop the same and on
settlement of accounts, it was found that a sum of Rs.53,57,000/- is
payable by the defendant to the plaintiff. Based on that Ext.A1 agreement
and Ext.A2 promissory note were executed on 16.01.2017, copies of which
are produced as Exts.P3 and P4.
3.     During the course of the trial of the suit, the court below as per
Ext.P5 order dated 14.10.2019 impounded Ext.P3 document upon entering
a finding that the obligation to pay money is created by Ext. P3 itself and
therefore the document has the character of a bond and directed the
petitioner to pay stamp duty and penalty. It is challenging Ext.P5 order of
the court below that the present original petition is filed.
4.     The learned counsel for the petitioner would contend that a
reading of Ext.P3 would clearly show that no liability was created by the
said document and the same was executed only to acknowledge and admit
a liability which already existed and therefore he contended that a
document whereby the executor undertakes to clear a pre-existing liability
within the period provided is only an agreement and not a bond. It is also
contended that no transaction was done nor any passing of consideration
took place on the date of execution of Ext.P3 and that no liability has been
created by the said document. Therefore, Ext.P5 order directing to pay
stamp duty and penalty treating it as a bond is unsustainable and liable to
be set aside by this Court. Since sufficient stamp duty applicable for
execution of an agreement is already paid, Ext.P3 is not liable for
impounding and no penalty can be imposed. In support of the contention,
the learned counsel relies on the decision in Mathai Mathew v. Thampi
(1989 (1) KLT 138); Krishnan Kutty v. Jayakrishnan (2005 (2) KLT SN.
26 Case No.32) and Radha v. Sankaranarayanan (2007 (1) KLT 20).
5.     On the contrary, the learned counsel for the respondent would
contend that the account has been settled as per the said agreement and
the amount liable to be paid to the petitioner as per the settlement of
accounts is clearly stated in Clause (3) of Ext.P3. Based on the same, he
would contend that as the account has been settled as per Ext P3 and an
obligation to pay money has been created by the said document itself, Ext
P3 will come within the definition of a bond as defined in Section 2(a) of the
Act. Therefore, it is submitted that Ext.P5 order of the trial court treating
Ext.P3 document as having the characters of a bond and the direction to
pay stamp duty and penalty is perfectly legal and valid and therefore no
interference is called for.
6.     I have considered the rival contentions of the parties.
7.     The term "bond" is defined as per Section 2(a) of the Act and it
obliges himself to pay money to another, on condition
that the obligation shall be void if a specified act is
performed, or is not performed, as the case may be;
and not payable to order or bearer, whereby a person
a person obliges himself to deliver grain or other
8.     For an instrument to partake the character of a bond an
obligation must have been created in the instrument itself. On such an
understanding of the definition of bond, as given in the Act, the contents of
Ext.P3 document need to be analysed. Clause (2) of Ext.P3 only states
that both parties today settled the accounts involved in the said business
transaction carried out during the last three years by mutual consent in full
satisfaction.   A reading of Clause (2) of the agreement will only show that
the parties have settled the accounts involved in the business transaction
on that day and not by the said agreement and the liability is not created by
the same. Further in Clause (3) of Ext. P3 agreement it is admitted by the
respondent that he owes Rs.53,57,000/- to the petitioner and that he
admits and acknowledges that Rs.53,57,000/- is outstanding to be paid to
the petitioner. The wording in Clause (3) of the said document makes it
explicitly clear that it is only an acknowledgment of an amount that is
outstanding to be paid to the petitioner as on the date of execution of the
Ext P3 document. As per the said agreement, the respondent only
undertook to repay the existing liability within a time frame.
9.    In Mathai Mathew's case (supra) this Court held that the
distinguishing feature of a bond is that the obligation must have been
created in the instrument itself and that if the obligation was a pre-existing
one, it does not partake the character of a bond. This Court further held
that one of the principles to be followed in interpreting a taxing statute is
that if two interpretations are possible effect should be given to that which
favours the citizen and not that which imposed a greater burden on them
and that the said principle can be followed in construing the provisions of
the Act where a citizen has to pay stamp duty on the instruments defined
therein. In Krishnan Kutty's case (supra) this Court held that where an
obligation is a pre-existing one, the subsequent document giving the nature
of the obligation or the terms and conditions of the contract shall be a mere
agreement. In Radha's case (supra) it is held that the distinguishing feature
of a bond is that the obligation must have been created in the instrument
itself and if the obligation was a pre-existing one, it does not partake the
character of a bond.
10.   As there is a specific acknowledgment in the agreement of an
amount that is outstanding to be paid to the petitioner as on the date of
execution of Ext P3 document, the same can only be construed as an
agreement and it does not partake the character of a bond as defined in
Section 2(a) of the Act. The decisions referred to above are squarely
applicable in the facts of the present case since Ext.P3 document only
acknowledges a pre-existing liability of an amount to be paid by the
respondent to the petitioner.
In the facts and circumstances of this case, Ext.P3 can only be
construed as an agreement and not as a bond. Therefore this original
petition (civil) is allowed by setting aside Ext.P5 order dated 14.10.2019 in
O.S.No.126 of 2017 on the file of the Additional Sub Court-I, Kozhikode
holding that Ext P3 is only an agreement and not a bond.