Date : 09-05-2022 These matters were called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Considering the submissions made by the learned
Amicus Curiae on 02.05.2022 that there are a large
number of children who have dropped out of schools
due to various reasons, we directed the NCPCR to
examine the matter and give suggestions about the
course    of    action    to     be    taken     by   State
Governments/Union     Territories      in    ensuring   the
continuance of education of children, especially at
the elementary school level.
The NCPCR has filed an affidavit on 07.05.2022,
in which it has been stated that Standard Operating
Procedures (SOP) for implementation of Section 12(1)
(c) of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education    Act,   2009  (RTE    Act,    2009)   has  been
formulated in the year 2021.        The information that
was    furnished    by   13     State     Governments/Union
Territories in respect of 152 districts, shows that
1,25,052 children have dropped out of school or are
not attending school regularly.       The suggestions made
by   the  NCPCR   relating   to   the   identification   of
children who have dropped out of school and measures
for ensuring the continuance of education of such
children, are as follows:
“9.1.1.That the District Education Officers (DEOs)
of the district should do the mapping of
such children who have been absent from
his/her school for 30 consecutive working
days and that those children should be
treated as drop out children.
9.1.2. That a child of 6-14 years of age should be
considered out of school if he/she has
never been enrolled in an elementary school
or if after enrolment has been absent from
school without prior intimation for a
period of 30 days or more.
9.1.3. That child who has never been enrolled in
school (as defined in Section 2(n) of RTE
Act, 2009) for formal education should also
fall under the category of out of school.
9.1.4. That child once enrolled into formal system
of education/school, if does not complete 8
years of compulsory elementary education,
should be treated as an out of school
child.
9.1.5. That all children above the age of 14
years, who do not fall under the purview of
RTE Act, 2009 but have had to drop out of
school due to financial constraints during
the COVID pandemic shall be treated as an
out of school child.
9.1.6. That the   District Education Officers and
District  Child Protection Officers should
identify  various reasons responsible for
children  being out of school should be
done.
9.2.1. That in case of death of one or both
parents of child and/or the earning member
of the family and/or the parents/guardians
have lost their livelihood and the child is
studying in private school, the expenditure
on elementary education of such children in
the same school may be borne by the
appropriate Government under Section 12(1)
(c) of the RTE Act, 2009.
9.2.2. That for this purpose, the child along with
guardian/any member of the family where the
child is studying shall approach the
District Magistrate and the Child Welfare
Committee (CWC) of the district.
9.2.3  That the children who have lost both or
single parent or parents/guardians who have
lost their livelihood can get their income
certificate    made   through   the   district
authorities. The District Child Protection
Officers shall provide assistance to such
children     in     procuring    the    income
certificate.        Based    on   the   income
certificate and the child’s eligibility,
the child shall be then admitted into a
school under Section 12(1)(c) of the RTE
9.2.4  That all categories of schools entrusted
with the responsibility under Section 12(1)
of the RTE Act, 2009 whether aided, unaided
or private schools shall implement the
provision of Section 12(1)(c) of RTE Act,
2009 and try to include children who have
lost their both or either of the parent
after April 2020 under the provision so as
to ensure that their education is not
disrupted.
9.2.5   That every school, including schools having
minority     institution    status     and   all
residential schools shall also follow the
procedure and ensure that no such child is
forced to leave the school in any manner
against the child’s choice and due to non-
payment of fees.
9.2.6   That for the classes above VIII (which is
generally beyond RTE application), where
children have lost one or both parents of
the child and/or the earning member of the
family and the child is studying in private
school, the State Government shall devise
guidelines for the schools and/or issue
necessary directions and/or devise a policy
for    reimbursing      the    expenditure    on
education of these children.
9.2.7. That the District Child Protection Officers
through the individual child care plan of
the child can assess and examine the
educational needs of the child.         The data
of children who need financial assistance
for education can be forwarded to the
Education Officers can then provide these
children with scholarships (as per their
eligibility) and/or provide financial aid
through donors, NGOs/CSOs etc.”
Mr.   Gaurav   Agrawal,    learned   Amicus   Curiae,
submitted     that     the     State     Governments/Union
Territories should comply with the suggestions made
by the NCPCR without fail.          We take note of the
serious  problem   of   discontinuance    of  education  of
children caused due to the pandemic as well as other
situations    arising     therefrom     which    we    cannot
envisage.    However, the facts that have been placed
before us pertaining to the number of children who
have  discontinued    elementary     education   would   show
that, for whatever reason, a worryingly large number
of children have not been attending schools.            There
is   an   obligation    on    the    part   of   the    State
Governments/Union      Territories      to    ensure     that
education   is  not   disrupted     and  in  case    of  such
disruption,    steps    to   be    taken    by   the    State
Governments/Union Territories are specified in the
relevant statutes.
The   State   Governments/Union      Territories    are
directed to comply with the suggestions made by the
NCPCR   in    its   SOP    dated     25.06.2021     and   the
recommendations    reproduced     above.     The   NCPCR   is
directed   to   have    a   web    portal   on   which    the
information relating to the action taken by the State
Governments/Union Territories for continuance of the
education   of   children   is    updated.   The   NCPCR   is
directed to file an affidavit after examining the
reports    sent    by    the    State     Governments/Union
Territories within a period of 8 weeks from today.
The State Governments/Union Territories may approach
the NCPCR for any modification/clarification of the
One of the issues that is flagged by the NCPCR
is that migration certificates are not being issued
promptly   by   schools  when   the    parents   of  children
studying in schools are moving from one place to the
other.    The State Governments/Union Territories are
directed   to   instruct  the   concerned    authorities   to
ensure   that   migration    certificates    are   issued  to
those children who are moving away from the place of
their education.
For implementation of the suggestions made by
the NCPCR, a nodal officer under Rule 2B(2) of the
is required to be appointed, according to the NCPCR.
The further suggestion that is made is that nodal
officers should identify those children who are not
attending and have dropped out of schools.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties,
we    direct     that    the    State      Governments/Union
Territories      shall   appoint      district-wise     nodal
officers,   either   from   the   Education   Department   or
from the Women and Child Welfare Department, who in
turn shall instruct Anganwadi workers, Asha workers,
health   workers    etc.   to   personally     inform   those
parents whose children have discontinued education
about   the   recommendations     made   by  the   NCPCR  and
orders passed by this Court.       The nodal officer shall
also take appropriate action to place the children
back in the schools from which they have dropped out,
so long as continuing in the same school is in the
best  interests     of   the  relevant     child.  The  status
report about the appointment of nodal officers and
the action taken for ensuring the continuation of the
education of children shall be filed by the State
Governments/Union Territories within a period of 6
weeks from today.      The said information shall also be
furnished to the NCPCR.
Wide   publicity     shall    be   given  by  the  State
Governments/Union Territories to the suggestions made
by the NCPCR as well as orders passed by this Court.
List on 01.08.2022 at the end of the Board.
After    persuading      the    State    Governments/Union
Territories to identify Children in Street Situations
(CiSS), have them produced before the Child Welfare
Committees    and   to   get   their    social   investigation
reports prepared as required under the SOP of the
NCPCR,    we     have     earlier     directed     the   State
Governments/Union Territories to frame policies for
rehabilitation of such children.              We are informed
that the details of those children who have been
identified    to   be   in   street    situations   have  been
furnished to the NCPCR.
Learned Amicus Curiae has brought to our notice
the information that is provided by the State of
Tamil Nadu, detailing the manner in which the State
proposes   to   rehabilitate   those   children   who  have
found begging, engaged in vending on the streets or
rag picking. Learned Amicus Curiae has also brought
to the notice of this Court that the other State
Governments   have   also  furnished    information.    The
affidavits filed by the State of Tamil Nadu may be
circulated    to   all   the  other    Advocates-on-Record
representing the State Governments, who are directed
to  get   instructions    from   their   respective   State
Governments/Union     Territories   and   provide   further
information relating to the steps that are required
for rehabilitation of these specific categories of
CiSS.   Without waiting for further orders, the State
Governments/Union Territories are directed to take
immediate steps for rehabilitation of the children,
in accordance with the provisions of the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015
and the rules made thereunder.
List on 01.08.2022 at the end of the Board.
List next week.