The present writ petition was filed by petitioner no.
1-  who   is   suffering    from   cerebral   palsy   along    with
petitioner   no.   2  (Abled,   Differently   Abled,   All   People
Together, formerly known as the Spastics Society of India).
The grievance was in respect of the treatment mooted out to
the first petitioner by the crew of Spice Jet.
2.    On  24th   March,   2015,   this  Court   recorded   that   a
representation    had   been    filed,   inter   alia,    to   seek
directions for the respondents to follow the Civil Aviation
Requirements (CAR) guidelines dated 1st May, 2008 with regard
to  the   carrying/lifting     of   differently   abled   persons.
Subsequently   this   Court   awarded   a  compensation    to   the
petitioner no. 1 on 12.5.2016.
3.    Subsequently, on 14.02.2017, this Court was apprised
of the revised CAR guidelines and that suitable amendments
are required to be made for effective care of differently
abled people.    The Director General of Civil Aviation (DGCA)
was directed to look into the suggestions submitted by the
petitioners   and   to   incorporate    amendments   in   the  CAR
guidelines   as   may   be   necessary   after   considering   the
directions of this Court as well as the remarks/comments of
the petitioners.
4.    It appears that the guidelines were revised on 2 nd
July, 2021. Now the draft guidelines regarding ‘Carriage by
Air of Persons with Disability and/or Persons with Reduced
Mobility’ have been put in public domain in the year 2021.
5.    Mr. Gonsalves, learned senior counsel appearing for
the petitioners has raised multiple objections to the draft
guidelines. We leave it open to the petitioners to submit
objections/suggestions to the draft guidelines with a hope
that the DGCA shall consider such suggestions even if the
time limit for submission of the suggestions has come to an
end. Such suggestions may be submitted within 30 days from
6.    Before   parting,   two  aspects   need  to   be  mentioned.
First is that no differently abled person should be manually
lifted without his consent. We find that the suggestion is
worth  considering,    as   lifting  of   a  person   manually  is
inhumane.    How,   the   differently   abled  person   should  be
treated with dignity is left to the DGCA.
7.    Another aspect we want to mention is about some of the
differently abled person use prosthetic limbs/calipers. Some
time,   they  are   directed   to  remove   their   prosthetic
limbs/calipers as a part of the security check. In the draft
guidelines circulated, it has been mentioned that scanning
of prosthetic limbs/calipers though full body scanner but to
what   extent  differently   abled  persons   with  prosthetic
limbs/calipers are required to be checked for the purpose of
security should be in a manner where, no such person is
asked to remove prosthetic limbs/calipers to maintain human
dignity while ensuring the requirement of security checks.
8.    With such direction and liberty, we dispose of the
present petition with the hope that the Director General of
Civil Aviation will take into consideration the suggestions,
if any, submitted by the petitioner.
9.    All pending applications stand disposed of.
Date : 01-12-2021 This petition was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
The Writ Petition is disposed of in terms of the
All pending applications stand disposed of.
[Signed Order is placed on the file]