1.      Heard Sh. Javid Ahmad Parray, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner and Sh. M.A. Chashoo, learned AAG, appearing for the
2.      The grievance of the petitioner in the present writ petition is regarding
9.053 Marlas of land falling under survey No. 550 of Moza Sultanpora
3.      The petitioner alleges that he is the owner of the said land and that
sometime in the year 2017, the R&B Department took possession of the said
land for construction of the long Steel Girder Bridge at Zalpora Sultanpora
Sumbal, Bandipora but without acquiring the said land in accordance with
any statutory provision or with the consent of the petitioner. The petitioner
has not been paid any compensation of the said land ever since then.
4.      The respondents 2, 3 and 4 have filed reply to the writ petition and
they accept that for the purposes of construction of the above Steel Girder
Bridge, the possession of the land of the petitioner aforesaid was taken over.
The representation of the petitioner for grant of compensation is under
consideration and the respondents propose to pay compensation as per the
stamp duty rate.
5.      The aforesaid facts and circumstances clearly reveal that the private
land of the petitioner has been taken over by the respondents forcibly without
the consent of the petitioner and without taking recourse to any procedure
prescribed in law. It is also an admitted fact that the petitioner has not been
paid any compensation in respect of the said land though the
determination/assessment of the compensation is under way as per the stamp
duty rate.
6.      It is well recognized that Right to Property is a basic human right
which is akin to a fundamental right as guaranteed by Article 300 A of the
Constitution of India and that no one can be deprived of his property other
than by following procedure prescribe in law.
7.      The facts as narrated above clearly reveal that the respondents have
violated the basic human right of the petitioner and has deprived him of his
property without following any procedure of Law.
8.      In view of the above, the respondents are liable to be penalized for
violating the basic human right of the petitioner and at the same time to pay
compensation of the said land at the stamp duty rate prevalent today as well
as the rental compensation for its use and occupation from the year 2017 till
9.      Accordingly, the respondents are directed to assess and determine the
compensation of the aforesaid land payable to the petitioner at the stamp duty
rate as prevalent today in the area within a period of 6 weeks and to make
payment thereof within a further period of 3 months. The respondents at the
same time shall also pay token rental compensation for the use and
occupation of the aforesaid land from the year 2017 till 2021 i.e., 05 years @
Rs. 1.00 lac per year within 3 months from today.
10.     In addition to the above, on account of violation of the right to
property of the petitioner which is guaranteed by the Constitution, the
respondents are directed to pay special penalty of Rs. 10.00 lacs to the
petitioner within a period of three months.
11.     In the event, the aforesaid amounts are not paid within the time
stipulated, it will be open for the petitioner to move an application and to
bring it to the notice of the Court whereupon the Court will swing into action
and take appropriate coercive measures against the respondents for the
realization of the aforesaid amount may be as arrears of land revenue.
12.     The writ petition is, accordingly, disposed of.