                                    1.      The hearing was conducted through video conferencing.
                                    2.      Appellant impugns award dated 27.11.2021 to the limited extent
                                    that it grants recovery rights against the driver of the vehicle.
                                    3.      Learned counsel for the appellant submits that since the vehicle
                                    was stolen and driver was a professional thief there was no liability on
                                    the insurance company to pay the amount.
                                    4.      The factual matrix of the case is that on 28.01.2015 the
                                    deceased was going to Pocket-1, Sector B-4, Narela, Delhi on a scooty
                                    and at about 5.30 AM when he reached near Pocket 13, Sector-4,
                                    MAC.APP.15/2022                                                Digitally Signed 1
Digitally Signed By:KUNAL                                                                          SACHDEVA
Signing Date:17.01.2022 23:32:45                                                                   22:00
to HMJ Sanjeev Sachdeva.
                                    Narela, Shahpur Road, Narela, Delhi the offending Eeco Car being
                                    driven in a rash and negligent manner by one Sh. Niraj @ Mika came
                                    and hit the scooty of the decease with great force. As a result of the
                                    forceful impact deceased fell down and sustained fatal injuries.
                                    5.      The tribunal has found that the offending vehicle was stolen by
                                    Niraj @ Mika and a complaint was already lodged with Police Station
                                    Narela with regard to the theft of the offending vehicle. The vehicle
                                    was insured with the appellant.
                                    6.      The question that arises for consideration is as to whether the
                                    insurance company is absolved of the liability to pay the amount in a
                                    case where the vehicle is stolen and unauthorisedly being driven by
                                    somebody else.
                                    7.      The Supreme Court of India in United India Insurance
                                    Company vs. Lehru and Ors, 2003(3) SCC 338 has held that in order
                                    to avoid the liability, the insurer must establish that there was a willful
                                    breach on the part of the insured.
                                    8.      Admittedly in the present case the insurance company has not
                                    been able to show any breach on the part of the insured to avoid its
                                    liability.
                                    9.      The judgment in the case of Lehru (supra) was also considered
                                    by the High Court of Karnataka in MFA No. 5342 of 2010 (MV) order
                                    dated 05.07.2018 titled Sri Sathish Kini vs. Smt. Jnaneshwari
                                    M.H.Nutan wherein, in similar circumstances, the Court has held that
                                    MAC.APP.15/2022                                               Digitally Signed 2
Digitally Signed By:KUNAL                                                                         SACHDEVA
Signing Date:17.01.2022 23:32:45                                                                  22:00
to HMJ Sanjeev Sachdeva.
                                    the judgment in Lehru (Supra) is complete answer to the contention of
                                    the insurance company and the insurance company may have a claim
                                    for contribution from the driver.
                                    10.    I am in respectful disagreement with the said judgment of the
                                    Madras High Court in New India Assurance Co Ltd vs. Selvarajamani
                                    & Ors, 1998 ACJ 547 relied on by learned counsel appearing for the
                                    appellant. Said judgment does not consider the proposition as laid
                                    down by the Supreme Court in Lehru (supra) as to whether there is a
                                    willful breach on the part of the insured or not so as to entitle the
                                    insurer to avoid the liability.
                                    11.    Furthermore, if the proposition of the insurance company was
                                    accepted, it would militate against the very concept of a beneficial
                                    legislation for the victims of an accident. If such a finding were to be
                                    returned then the effect would be that even though a vehicle is insured
                                    but is stolen, not only would the insurance company be entitled to
                                    avoid its liability but the owner of the vehicle who has insured his
                                    vehicle against theft and accident would be saddled with a liability for
                                    no fault of his. Alternatively, the claimants would be left without any
                                    remedy to seek compensation.
                                    12.    In view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Lehru (supra),
                                    which lays down that unless the insurance company is able to show
                                    that there is a willful breach of the policy on the part of the insured,
                                    insurance company cannot avoid its liability.
                                    13.    In the instant case, Tribunal has found that the vehicle was
                                    stolen and there was no willful breach of the terms and conditions of
                                    the insurance policy by the insured.
                                    14.    Accordingly, I find no infirmity in impugned award whereby
                                    the Tribunal has directed the insurance company to make the payment
                                    of the compensation amount and thereafter recover the same from the
                                    driver Niraj @ Mika who had stolen the vehicle.
                                    15.    I find no infirmity in the impugned award.
                                    16.    The appeal is accordingly dismissed.
                                    17.    Copy of the order be uploaded on the High Court website and
                                    be also forwarded to learned counsels through email by the Court
