The short interesting question comes forth in this matter is as
Mere reference of a party for settlement by recourse to
Section 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure would entitle refund of
court fee as provided under Section 69A of the Kerala Court Fees
and Suits Valuation Act (hereinafter referred to as `the Act' for
short), though the matter not settled finally?
2.     The plaintiff in O.S.No.3/2019 on the file of the
Additional Sub Court, North Paravur, has filed this Original
Petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India seeking
modification of order dated 07.06.2019 passed in O.S.No.3/2019 in
the above Suit, whereby the learned Sub Judge referred the parties
in the Suit for arbitration after closing the Suit, without order for
refund of 1/10th court fee paid by the petitioner/plaintiff in the Suit.
3.     The respondent herein is the defendant in the above
4.     Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner. Nobody
appeared for the respondent.
5.     It is argued by the learned counsel for the petitioner that
the petitioner herein paid 1/10 court fee to the tune of Rs.1,21,840/-
at the time of institution of the Suit. Since the parties were referred
to arbitration, the plaintiff is entitled to get return of the 1/10 court
fee paid by him. When the learned counsel was asked to point out
the enabling provisions in the Act, it is fairly submitted by the
learned counsel for the petitioner that there is no direct provision in
the Act enabling return of 1/10 court fee paid, on mere reference
under Section 89 of C.P.C.
6.     It is submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner
further that there is no decision on this point. However, the learned
counsel given emphasis to Section 69A of the Act to canvass refund
of 1/10 of court fee as contended. As per Section 69A introduced
by way of amendment w.e.f 1.4.2013, it has been provided as
“69A. Refund of court-fee in case where the dispute is settled under
Section 89 of the Code of Civil Procedure:-- Where a suit, appeal or other
Proceeding before any Court is settled by recourse to Section 89 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (Central Act 5 of 1908), the whole court-fee paid
on the plaint/Memorandum of Appeal or other Proceedings, except in
interlocutory matters, shall be ordered by the Court to be refunded to the
parties concerned by whom the court-fee was paid.”
A plain reading of the above provision would make it clear that
when a Suit or appeal or other proceedings before any court is
settled by recourse to Section 89 of C.P.C, the whole court fee paid
shall be refunded except in interlocutory matters. Thus it is clear
that Section 69A of the Act would come into play, only when the
case is settled by recourse to Section 89 of C.P.C. It is true that
settlement of disputes dealt under Section 89 of C.P.C includes
`arbitration' as well. However, Section 69A of the Act makes the
position without any iota of doubt that refund of court fee is
provided only when a Suit, appeal or other proceedings before any
court is settled by recourse to Section 89 of C.P.C and refund is not
permissible on mere reference of parties. Thus it is clear that mere
reference of parties by different modes of settlement provided
under Section 89 of C.P.C is not sufficient to refund the entire court
fee paid as contended, and the statutory mandate is settlement of
the dispute by recourse to Section 89 of C.P.C. Earlier, before
introduction of Section 69A, Section 69 of the Act delat with
refund of court fee in cases of compromise or when Suit is decided
on the admission of parties. Proviso to Section 69 of the Act
introduced by way of amendment w.e.f 5.12.1990 states that no
refund shall be ordered where only one-tenth of the amount of fee
on plaint as required Section 4A or one-third of the amount of fee
on memorandum of appeal as required by Section 52 has been paid
by the parties.
7.     While pressing for refund of court fee, the learned
counsel for the petitioner placed a Division Bench decision of this
Court reported in [2011(4) KHC 568], Manilal Panicker S. v. Titto
Abraham, to contend that while dealing with impact of Section 69,
this Court held that where a compromise or settlement has been
arrived at the Lok Adalat in a case referred to it, the entire court fee
paid, whether it is 1/3rd, 1/10th or one half, shall be refunded in the
manner provided under Central Court Fees Act.               The above
decision was rendered after referring Section 21 of the Legal
Services Authorities Act, 1987, holding that the said provision
envisages refund of court fees in the manner provided under the
Central Court Fees Act. The said decision further held that full
amount of the court fee paid in respect of the plaint in a case where
the court has referred the parties to the suit to any one of the ADR
mechanisms enumerated under Section 89(1) of C.P.C, is to be
refunded on settlement or compromise before it. It has been held
specifically that the right to refund the court fee, by virtue of
Section 21 of Legal Services Authorities Act would accrue only on
settlement or compromise. Be it so, it cannot be said that mere
reference of parties for arbitration or other modes of settlement
provided under Section 89 of C.P.C by itself is sufficient to refund
the court fee paid by the parties, either in full or 1/10 or 1/3, as the
case may be. There shall be a settlement in view of the reference
and in such cases alone refund provided under Section 69A of the
Kerala Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act can be resorted to.
8.     Here the petitioner has not produced any materials to
substantiate the fact that on reference to arbitration, the dispute was
settled.     In view of the matter, the contention raised by the
petitioner to the effect that the petitioner is entitled to get 1/10 th of
the court fee paid merely because the parties were referred to
arbitration by recourse to Section 69 of the Act cannot sustain and
therefore, the said contention is found against. Consequently, I am
not inclined to interfere with the order of the learned Munsiff in
any manner.
Accordingly, this Original Petition fails and hence the same is