Present:      Mr. Amandeep Singh Manaise, Advocate for the petitioner.
Prayer in the present petition is for grant of anticipatory bail to
the petitioner in FIR No.253 dated 03.11.2020 registered under Section 306
of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter to be referred as “the IPC”) at
FIR, in the present case, has been registered on the statement of
Preet wife of Arun Kumar @ Nannu and the said Arun Kumar @ Nannu is
stated to have committed suicide on 02.11.2020 at about 4.45 pm and as per
allegations in the FIR, the said Preet-complainant had submitted that she
suspected that her husband had consumed some poisonous substance
because he was upset with the petitioner, who had been threatening to kill
the family of deceased by calling up from his mobile No. i.e. 7504300059
and on account of the said calls, the deceased was very upset for the last 1-2
days preceding the date of complaint and thus, had committed suicide.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that in the
present case, FIR has been registered merely on the basis of suspicion and
there is no prima facie material to connect the petitioner with the suicide of
the deceased. It is further argued that neither there is any suicide note nor
any dying declaration. It is also argued that the deceased had not made any
complaint against the petitioner for any such alleged threat. Even the details
of the threat have not been mentioned. It is also stated that in fact, SP(D),
Batala and DSP City, Batala had conducted enquiry into the said FIR and
found that the petitioner has no role to play. It is further argued that mobile
number mentioned in the FIR i.e.7504300059 does not even belong to the
petitioner. It is also submitted that even in case, the allegations in the FIR
are taken on its face value, then also, they would not constitute the offence
under Section 306 of the IPC as the ingredients of abetment as laid down in
Section 107 of IPC are not attracted and thus, the offence of abetment is not
made out against the present petitioner.
Notice of motion.
On advance notice, Mr. Sukhbeer Singh, AAG, Punjab, appears
and accepts notice on behalf of the State and has submitted that he is fully
prepared to argue the matter and assist this Court. He has opposed the
present petition for grant of anticipatory bail to the petitioner and has
submitted, on instructions from ASI Manjinder Singh, that although, SP(D),
Batala and DSP City, Batala had held enquiry in favour of the petitioner but
the same is still pending before the SSP, Batala.
This Court has heard the learned counsel for the parties and
perused the paper book.
A Coordinate Bench of this Court in State of Punjab Vs.
Kamaljit Kaur @ Bholi and another, reported as 2008(2) RCR (Criminal)
562, had observed as under:-
“1. The present revision petition is directed by the State
against the discharge of Kamaljit Kaur alias Bholi and
Surinder Kumar alias Kala, accused. They were facing trial in
case FIR No. 108 dated 31-12-1994 registered at Police
Station Nawanshahr under Section 306, IPC. It is stated that
Paramjit Singh son of Darshan Singh Hira and his son
Amritpal alias Lovely committed suicide and left a suicide note
to the effect that his wife Kamaljit Kaur alias Bholi is a woman
of bad character. He is fed up with her. Therefore, he along
with his son Lovely Amritpal Singh is committing suicide. It is
further stated that his wife has illicit relations with three
persons namely, Palli of Commando Force, Ludhiana, Kala
residing opposite to their house and Ujjal Singh, her real
uncle. In the suicide note, he has expressed that in these black
days, such bad women are living in the Society. It is further
stated that his wife Bholi is a lady of loose character. It is
further stated that since Palli has come as a tenant in the
house, Bholi has become lady of loose character. It is further
stated that Kala had noticed Bholi in objectionable manner
with Kala. He wanted in suicide note that if law contemplates
action against wedded woman, the law should take its course.
2. On 27.8.1994 at 3.00 p.m. dead bodies of young
unknown person aged about 30 years and a child aged about
5- 6 years were found near the maize field. These dead bodies
were of Paramjit Singh and his son Amritpal alias Lovely.
Postmortem was conducted Visceras were sent to the Chemical
Examiner. The Chemical Examiner found the cause of death to
be Aluminum Phosphide. Suicide note was found from the
pocket of Paramjit Singh. After completion of investigation,
challan was submitted against Kamaljit Kaur alias Bholi and
Surinder Kumar alias Kala. The name of Ujjal Singh was
placed in column No. 2. Learned Sessions Judge, Jalandhar,
while discharging the respondents had observed as under:-
“It cannot be disputed that charge can be framed merely
on strong suspicion and the evidence at the time of
framing charge is not to be considered meticulously. But
I am of the considered opinion that the circumstances of
the case are such as, possibly, it cannot be stated that a
prima facie case is made out against the accused within
the meaning of Section 306 of the Code. Abetment of
suicide is punishable Under Section 306 of the Code.
Section 107 of the Code defines abetment as under:
107. A person abets the doing of a thing, who first,
instigates any person to do that thing; or Secondly,
engages with one or more other person or persons in
any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an act or
illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that
conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that thing; or
Thirdly, intentionally incite, by any act or illegal
omission, the doing of that thing.
misrepresentation, or by wilful concealment of a
material fact which he is bound to disclose, voluntary
causes or procures or attempts to cause or procure, a
thing to be done, is said to instigate the doing of that
thing.
For arguments sake, if it may be taken that the
wife is a woman of easy virtue, even then, it cannot be
stated if she had instigated or had aided the commission
of suicide. The learned P.P. for the State has not been
able to satisfy as to in which manner the commission of
suicide has been instigated or aided by the accused. The
husband might be feeling harassed or mentally disturbed
with the alleged illicit relations of his wife but
harassment and the mental disturbance do not constitute
the offence of abetment. It looks that the deceased
husband was unable to control his wife and he out of
frustration has not only committed suicide but has also
snuffed the life of his son. The authority Charabhushan
Bhimraj Bhushanwar and Ors. (supra) is hardly of any
help to the prosecution, I am of the firm view that from
the facts of the case no prima facie case is made out
against the accused. Though no direct authority is
available pertaining to such like facts yet with
advantage reference can be made to Shri Ram v. the
State of U.P. , Balbir Singh v. The State of Punjab
1987 (1) Crimes 76; Wazir Chand v. The State of
of Haryana v. Babu Ram 1992 (1) Criminal Courts
judgments 68 and Deepak v. State of M.P. 1984 Cri LJ
3. I have perused the order passed by learned Sessions
Judge Jalandhar. In Sanju alias Sanjay Singh Sengar v.
State of Madhya Pradesh 2002 (Supp) 1 JT 248, it was
held that the word 'instigate' denotes incitement or
urging to do some drastic or unadvisable action or to
stimulate or incite. Presence of mens rea, therefore, is
the necessary concomitant of instigation.
4. The conduct of wife of the deceased though may be
conduct of bad wife but was not for the purpose to incite
It was held by a Division Bench of this Court in Raj
Kumar v. State of Punjab 1983 (1) CLR 660 as under:
“12. Expression 'instigate' in the Concise Oxford
Dictionary is defined as 'urge on incite, bring about
by persuasion and in Webster, it has been defined as
'urge forward, provoke with synonyms of stimulate,
urge, spur, provide tempt, incite, impel, encourage,
animate. The word 'instigate' in common parlance
would mean to go, to urge forward or to provoke
incite or encourage to do an act.”
5. Every husband or wife may not be living a life of
virtue. The conduct of any spouse, if is not upto the
expectations of other spouse, and result into commission
of suicide by another abetment of suicide cannot be
imputed to the other spouse.”
A perusal of the above judgment would show that the said case
was also a case under Section 306 of the IPC in which two persons i.e.,
husband of the accused therein and their son had committed suicide and
there was a suicide note to the effect that Kamaljit Kaur, wife of the
deceased Darshan Singh was a lady of bad character and had illicit relations
with three persons and she was caught in an objectionable manner with one
of the said three persons and in the suicide note, it was specifically stated
that action should be taken against such a woman. Challan was filed against
the said lady as well as her paramour. After considering the provisions of
Sections 306 and 107 of Cr.P.C., it was observed by the Sessions Court as
well as by this Court that even in a case where the wife is alleged of being a
woman of easy virtue, then also, it cannot be said that she has instigated or
aided the commission of suicide and had observed that in case the husband
was feeling harassed or mentally disturbed due to the alleged illicit
relationship of his wife, then the harassment and mental disturbance would
not constitute the offence of abetment. It was further observed that the word
‘instigate’ denotes incitement or urging to do some drastic or unadvisable
action and the presence of mens rea is a necessary concomitant of
instigation. A person may be a bad wife but her conduct was not for the
purpose to incite the deceased to commit suicide and, thus, abetment of
suicide in such a case cannot be inferred and, thus, the wife in the above-
said case was discharged. To the similar effect is the judgment dated
06.12.2012 passed by this Court in CRA-S-1802-SB-2002, titled as Maya
Vs. State of Punjab, in which the wife and the paramour, both after being
tried and convicted thereupon, were ultimately acquitted.
In the present case, FIR has been registered by the complainant
solely on the basis of suspicion. Neither, there is any suicide note nor there
is any dying declaration nor the deceased had made any complaint with
respect to any alleged call of threat made by any person. SP (D) Batala and
DSP City Batala had conducted enquiry in the present case and had found
that the petitioner had no role to play in the same. Although, the said
enquiry is still pending approval with SSP, Batala, but in view of the same,
the custodial interrogation of the petitioner would not be required, moreso,
when as per the stand of the petitioner, the mobile No.7504300059, from
which the alleged threats were given, does not even belong to the petitioner.
The question, as to whether, even in case, the allegations in the FIR are
taken on its face value, the offence under Section 306 of IPC is made out or
not, would be a matter of trial and keeping in view the judgment of
Coordinate Bench of this Court in State of Punjab Vs. Kamaljit Kaur's
case (Supra), the present petition is allowed and in the event of arrest, the
petitioner is granted the concession of anticipatory bail subject to his
furnishing    personal   bonds        and surety   to   the    satisfaction of
Arresting/Investigating Officer and the conditions envisaged under Section
438(2) of Cr.P.C. However, the petitioner shall join the investigation as and
when called upon to do so.
It is made clear, in case, the petitioner fails to join the
investigation, then the State would be at liberty to move an application for
cancellation of the present anticipatory bail granted to the petitioner.
Nothing stated above shall be construed as an expression of
opinion on the merits of the case and the trial would proceed independently
of the observations made in the present case which are only for the purpose
of adjudicating the present bail application.