referred to as ‘DGGI’ for short), which works under
Central Board of Indirect Tax and Customs (CBIC) under
the Ministry of Finance, Government of India, had got
intelligence that certain firms were operating only on
paper and passing on inadmissible Input Tax Credit
(hereinafter referred to as ‘ITC’ for short) by issuing
invoices only,         without    any       actual   supply of goods
mentioned therein. An inquiry was conducted against one
such firm M/s. Ronak Traders, which confirmed that the
unit was non-existing and no eligible ITC was available
with the firm, as its GSTR-2A was nil and M/s. Ronak
Traders passed on fraudulent ITC of Rs.10.36 crore to
S.K. Traders by showing entire supply to them in their
GST returns. M/s. S.K. Traders was also found to be non-
existing, which in turn, has passed on ITC of Rs.10.29
crore to the two firms M/s. Alina Traders having legal
name      as      Mohsin    Salimbhai         Qureshi    having          GSTIN
24AAIPQ1079MIZB and M/s. Glaxy Traders having legal
name      as      Mohsin    Salimbhai         Qureshi    having          GSTIN
24AAIPQ1079M2ZA, both companies having business at
Ahmedabad. The said two firms are proprietorship firms
of Shri Mohsin Salimbhai Qureshi, the present applicant,
who was found indulged in receiving and passing of
fraudulent ITC to their buyers by way of creating a chain
of bogus firms, without physical receipt and supply of
2.2            It is stated in the memo of arrest that as per the
investigation two firms under the proprietorship of the
present applicant - Mohsin Salimbhai Qureshi namely
M/s. Alina Traders and M/s. Galaxy Traders have availed
and utilised ITC of Rs.8.18 crore and Rs.2.11 crore
respectively on the basis of invoices issued by M/s. S.K.
Traders, which is non-existing firm which in turn received
Rs.10.36 crore from another non-existent firm i.e. M/s.
Ronak Traders which has no GSTR-2A, without receipt of
goods mentioned therein and since the entire payment
has been made through utilisation of ITC which was not
legally available to both these firms, and therefore no tax
has been paid in respect of the invoices issued by these
two firms and therefore the availment of ITC of Rs.10.29
crore was not admissible as per section 16(2)[(b) & (c)] of
2.3            The applicant was arrested on 01.09.2021
under the provisions of section 69 of the Central Goods
and Services Tax Act, 2017 and produced before the
Court      of      Additional Chief      metropolitan      Magistrate,
Ahmedabad, thereby he was sent in judicial custody. The
applicant thereafter preferred bail application under the
provisions of section 437 of the Code before the court of
learned Magistrate, which came to be rejected vide order
dated 14.09.2021. Against the same, the applicant
approached the Court of learned City & Sessions Judge,
Ahmedabad by preferring Criminal Misc. Application
No.7105 of 2021, however, the same also came to be
rejected vide judgment and order dated 11.10.2021.
2.4            It    is   stated    that,     after     completion              of
investigation in connection with the present offence, a
complaint came to be filed before the Court of learned
Magistrate on 29.10.2021 for the offences punishable
under sections 132(1)(b), 132(1(c) read with section
132(1)(i) & 132(5) of the CGST, 2017 and section 132(1)
(b), 132(1)(c) read with section 132(1)(i) & 132(5) of the
Gujarat GST Act, 2017 and section 120B of the IPC.
2.5            It is stated that post filing of the complaint, the
applicant        had    preferred     Criminal     Misc.      Application
No.3907 of 2021 for regular bail, however, the same
came to be rejected vide order dated 22.11.2021. Being
aggrieved by the same, the present applicant has
preferred Criminal Misc. Application No.8614 of 2021,
which also came to be rejected vide order dated
07.12.2021 by the Additional Sessions Judge, Ahmedabad.
Hence, the present application.
3.             Mr.      Nirupam      Nanavaty,        learned           senior
advocate with Mr. Rahul R.Dholakia, learned advocate for
the applicant stated that, the applicant had appeared
before       the     complainant       on     31.08.2021        and         was
interrogated and thereby arrested on 01.09.2021 without
any basis or evidence. Mr. Nanavaty submitted that the
applicant is holding GST registration for M/s Alina
Traders w.e.f. 01.07.2017 and for M/s. Galaxy Traders
w.e.f. 09.11.2018 and the applicant is engaged in the
business of ferrous scrap, iron and steel scrap in both the
firms and that the applicant was holding registration
certificate under the erstwhile VAT law w.e.f. 13.12.2016
at the very same premises and was migrated from VAT to
GST regime under section 139 of the CGST Act, which
reveals that the applicant is tax paying citizen and not
conducting business only on paper.
3.1            Mr. Nanavaty, senior advocate, stated that
during the procedure of desealing the premises of the
applicant, search operations were carried out on 23/24th
February, 2021 and panchnamas were drawn and various
documents containing 19 box files were seized and order
of seizure in FORM GST INS-02 was issued. During the
said procedure, the officers also found stock containing
iron scrap at the business premises of the applicant and
therefore there ought not to be any dispute or doubt
about the transactions of sales and purchase by the
applicant, which are supported by legal and valid
documents and invoices. It is stated that both the firms
had taken ITC after making payment of goods and tax to
its suppliers as also verifying their status on website at
the time of purchase of goods and the status of all the
suppliers were active on the date of the purchase of
goods and initially the allegation was to the tune of
Rs.10.29        crores while  the       applicant    was       arrested,
however, the same was worked out to be Rs.14.89 in the
complaint sans any admissible evidence.
3.2            Mr. Nanavaty submits that the words ‘reason to
believe’ used in section 69(1) of the Act suggest that a
statute be it of any nature, civil, criminal, quasi criminal,
quasi civil has a definite destination to reach which in
legal parlance is described as ‘attainment of the object
for which the law has been enacted for’ and to analyze
the character of a statute, it has to be read as a whole
then only its true character and application can be
understood. He states that the GST Act is essentially a
fiscal statute and the statement of object and reason has
to be read together which is aimed at realization of
revenue. He submits that in the present scenario, the
statute itself provides a mechanism to recover the amount
payable to the government, however no such steps are
taken by the government till date and the applicant
without any show cause notice or any adjudication is
declared to be the offender of evasions of CGST to an
extent of amount of Rs.14.89 crores.
3.3            Senior Advocate Mr. Nanavaty states that, from
the provisions invoked in the complaint, the alleged
sections         are  mainly  applicable   to     the        original
beneficiaries and not the applicant, even, as per the
prosecution case and statement of the independent
witnesses, it is evident that the applicant was neither the
administration or operator of the alleged bogus firms. It is
submitted that the premises of the applicant was raided
and the necessary goods and documents were already
seized and the statement of the applicant was also
recorded by the authority; therefore, there is no question
of tampering with evidence or winning over witnesses in
this case and thus urged that no useful purpose would be
served by keeping the applicant in jail and therefore,
urged to release the applicant on bail. He submits that
there are no antecedents against the present applicant
and as the offences are triable by the court of Judicial
Magistrate, wherein the maximum punishment is upto 5
years and fine only.
3.4            Relying on the case of Arnesh Kumar Vs.
State of Bihar & Anr., reported in 2014 (8) SCC 273,
senior Advocate Mr. Nanavaty stated that, in the said
case the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that in the cases
where offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may be less than seven years or which may extend
to seven years; whether with or without fine, the arrest of
the accused may only be made where there is a necessity
for arrest. He also relied on the case of Sanjay Chandra
Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation [2012 (1) scc
40], Shri P.Chidambaram Vs. Central Bureau of
Investigation [in Criminal Appeal No.1603 of 2019]
4.             Mr. Utkarsh R.Sharma, learned advocate for
respondent no.2 relied on the affidavit-in-reply filed by
respondent no.2 and placing emphasis on the facts of the
case      stated    that,  the      present    applicant            is       a
mastermind/kingpin, who had created and operating 3
proprietary firms namely; M/s. Alina Traders (GSTIN:
(GSTIN:24AAIPQ1079M2ZA) and M/s. Green Life Traders
(GSTIN:24AANPQ9065EIZD).                 He submits         that        the
department had collected specific intelligence which
indicated that there were certain firms who were
operating only on paper and were passing on inadmissible
ITC by issuing invoices without supplying the goods
mentioned therein. It is stated that M/s. Alina Traders
and M/s. Galaxy Traders had received inadmissible ITC
from M/s. S.K. Traders, who in turn had received
inadmissible ITC from M/s. Ronak Traders. There was no
GSTR-2A return which confirms that M/s. Ronak Traders
had no inward supply and no ITC in their account,
whereas all the payment of GST amounting to Rs.10.36
crores for their outward supply had been shown to be
made only to M/s. S.K. Traders by utilising ITC. He stated
that similarly, M/s. S.K. Traders have shown outward
supply on payment of GST amounting to Rs.8.18 crores to
M/s. Alina Traders and outward supply on payment of
GST amounting to Rs.2.11 crores to M/s. Galaxy Traders
using ITC, which was wrongfully passed on by M/s. Ronak
4.1            Mr. Sharma further stated that based on these
facts, a search warrant was issued to search principal
place of business of M/s. Ronak Traders stated to be at
Fatehwadi, Ahmedabad; however, the premises could not
be located. He submits that further a search was
conducted on 11.02.2021 at the principal place of
business of M/s. S.K. Traders for Shop No.6, behind
and the same was also found to be non-existing and
accordingly, panchnama dated 11.02.2021 was drawn.
4.2            Advocate Mr. Sharma submitted that as M/s.
S.K. Traders have passed on their ITC to M/s. Alina
Traders and M/s. Galaxy Traders, proprietorship firms of
the applicant, having principal place of business at Pirana
Road, Shawasi, Ahmedabad, a search was conducted on
12.02.2021, however the premises was found to be locked
and on being contacted the applicant, showed his inability
to come at the premises for the reason that his son was
hospitalized, therefore, the premise was sealed under
panchnama dated 12.02.2021.
4.3            Mr.  Sharma  stated       that   an    e-mail         dated
16.02.2021 was issued to the applicant asking him to
approach the DGGI office for desealing of the premises
and for completion of proceedings but no response
received from him, yet e-mail dated 18.02.2021 was
issued in this regard. He stated that vide letter dated
23.02.2021 the applicant has requested to open the seal
and deputed Shri Irfanbhai as his authorised person and
another search was conducted on 23-24.02.2021 under
panchnama and the premise was found to be a shop
where iron scrap weighing to 11,145 kgs. were lying and
as    Mr.       Irfanbhai  could      not     produce       any         stock
register/records regarding said stock, mandatory under
section 35 of CGST Act, 2017, the said goods were seized
under the provision of section 67 of CGST Act, 2017.
4.4            Mr. Sharma further submitted that another
attempt was made to find the principal place of business
of M/s. Ronak Traders, however the same could not be
located and hence, it was concluded that the unit was not
in existence and the same exists only on papers and
accordingly the panchnama dated 26.02.2021 was drawn
and for further investigation, various correspondences
with the applicant were made. Mr. Sharma stated that
summons dated 26.02.2021 was issued to him directing
him to appear on 02.03.2021 for tendering his statement;
however, he did not appear and vide letter dated
02.03.2021, he informed that he will not appear before
the DGGI authorities as an inquiry was undergoing
against his firms before the State GST authorities and
requested to close the inquiry by transferring the inquiry
to    State        GST   authorities        under    section           6      of
4.5            Mr. Sharma contended that vide letter dated
02.03.2021, the applicant was informed that the inquiry
at SGST was closed, as his request for transfer of case to
SGST does not fall under section 6 of the said Act, 2017
thus another summons dated 09.03.2021 was issued to
him directing to appear on 11.03.2021 to tender his
statement and to approach the SGST authorities for
closure report. Mr. Sharma stated that another summons
was issued directing him to appear on 17.03.2021 to
tender his statement, but he neither appear nor made his
4.6            Mr. Sharma submits that it can be seen from
letter dated 24.02.2021 of the Assistant Commissioner of
State Tax, Ahmedabad that their inquiry was related to
availing of fake ITC of Rs.10,03,035/- by                 M/s. Alina
Traders from M/s. Alfa Enterprises and against the said
inquiry of the State GST, M/s. Alina Traders made
payment         of Rs.10,03,035/-      along with    interest          and
penalty, which clearly establishes that the applicant was
involved in receiving and utilising fake ITC in the past
4.7            Mr. Sharma further stated that during ongoing
investigation, statements of two of the transporters,
whose vehicles were mentioned in the purchase invoices
of M/s. Alina Traders and M/s. Galaxy Traders, were
recorded under section 70 of CGST Act, 2017, which
clearly establishes that no goods were received from M/s.
S.K. Traders. He states that a show cause notice dated
17.08.2021 was issued to M/s Alina Traders and M/s.
Galaxy Traders for disposal of goods seized under
panchnama dated 23-24.02.2021 and another summons
was issued on 31.08.2021 recording his statement in
connection with availment and utilization of huge amount
of ITC; however he did not accept the facts and failed to
give basic details of his employees/accountants etc. and
gave only their names and therefore it was clear that the
applicant, proprietor of M/s. Alina Traders and M/s.
Galaxy Traders, had availed ITC of Rs.10.29 crores from a
non-existent firm being M/s. S.K. Traders, without receipt
of    goods,       and has availed       and    utilized        ITC        in
contravention of Section 16 of CGST Act, 2017 and hence
he was arrested on 01.09.2021.
4.8            Mr. Sharma states that after arrest of the
applicant, on 01.09.2021 further investigation in the
matter was carried out and it was found that one more
supplier of M/s. Alina Traders being A.One Traders, is
existing only on papers and there was no ITC in GSTR-2A
returns of the said company; however all the payment of
GST had been shown to be made through ITC only. He
submits that total fraudulent ITC were availed and
utilized by the firms of the applicant increased from
Rs.10.29 crores to Rs.13.97 crores, which establishes the
fact that the applicant was involved in the offence to
defraud the government exchequer by availing and
utilizing the fraudulent ITC. Further huge sum of money
have been transferred to various firms with whom no
business activity was noticed.
4.9            Mr. Sharma further stated that after further
investigation, recording statements and gathering of
necessary evidences, the DGGI made an application
before the Additional Chief Metropolitan Court, sought
permission to record the statement of the applicant in the
jail itself, which was granted and the statement of the
applicant was recorded on 26.10.2021 from which it
revealed that the applicant is the mastermind of the scam
of issuing fake invoices without supply of the goods and
availing and utilising the ITC of Rs.14.89 crore. He stated
that since the amount involved is more than Rs.500 Lakh,
the said offences are cognizable and non-bailable as per
section 132(1)(i) and 132(5) of the CGST Act, 2017 and
therefore urged not to exercise discretion in favour of the
applicant to enlarge him on bail.
4.10           Mr.   Sharma    contended       that     the      evidence
collected so far clearly indicates that the accused is the
mastermind in creating fake firms who subsequently
defrauded the government exchequer to the tune of
Rs.14.89         crores.  Further,       from   the    statement              of
Shroffs/Angadiya,        it is   clearly     established        that       the
accused is operator of non-existent firms and directly
involved in this scam. He contend that the applicant had
never cooperated with the investigation and considering
the nature of offence committed by the applicant he was
arrested on 01.09.2021 and prosecution was launched on
29.10.2021, but the investigation is still going on and the
other stake holders or beneficiaries of said illegal
activities of availing and utilizing bogus ITC on the basis
of invoices without receipt of goods are also under
investigation and if he released on bail, he may tamper
with the evidence and influence other stakeholders or
witnesses in the case.
4.11           Mr. Sharma submitted that M/s. Ronak Traders,
M/s. S.K. Traders and M/s. A.One Traders are non-
existent at the registered premises while M/s. Green Life
Traders, M/s. Lina Traders and M/s. Galaxy Traders do
exists at the registered premises, but are involved mostly
on paper transactions and the applicant is the operator of
the non-existent firms M/s. S.K. Traders and M/s. A.One
Traders and he handles the Bank Accounts and he is
beneficiaries       of the  entire        transactions        and         has
transferred the funds to the tune of Rs.37 crores in the
Bank Account of Shroff firms namely M/s. Shreeji
Enterprise and M/s. Manali Corporation and receives
back cash from them after giving commission @ Rs.100/-
per lakh. He has tried to mislead the investigation by
putting the onus on one Shri Ayazbhai.
4.12           Mr. Sharma stated that the case law relied on
by the applicant in case of Arnesh Kumar Vs. State of
Bihar (supra) is not applicable in the present case as the
case law is of pre-GST era and have totally different
circumstances to this case and stated that furtehr int hes
aid case the Hon’ble Supreme Court has observed that, if
there are reasons to believe that the accused will further
commit the offence, tamper the evidence, prevent any
person from making and inducement etc., the person may
be arrested and in the present case, it is on record that
the accused had never cooperated with the investigation,
submitted wrong facts, therefore, there are chance that
he will try to hamper the investigation and will try to
induce the witnesses, therefore, urged that the present
application may be rejected.
4.13           Advocate   Mr.    Sharma       states    that        as     per
observation of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of
Nimmagadda Prasad Vs. C.B.I, Hyderabad, economic
offences constitute a class apart and need to be visited
with a different approach in the matter of bail and the
economic offences having deep rooted conspiracies and
involving huge loss of public funds, which needs to be
viewed seriously and considered as grave offences
affecting the economy of the country as a whole and
thereby posing serious threat to the financial health of
the country.
4.14           In support of his submissions Mr. Sharma relied
on the judgments of (i) Vimal Yashwantgiri Goswami
Vs.    State       of Gujarat,       rendered     in    Special          Civil
Application No.13679 of 2019 with allied matters (ii)
Union of India Vs. Rajnish Kumar, Tuli, [special
Leave        Criminal     Appeal         No.30    of     2010],            (iii)
Chauhan            Vs. State  of      Gujarat    [Criminal           Misc.
Application No.6237 of 2020] (v) P.V. Ramana Reddy
Vs. Union of India [Writ Petition Nos.4764 of 2019 &
Ors.] (vi) Union of India Vs. Sapna Jain [SLP (Crl.)
4322-4324/2019] (vii) judgment of Bombay High Court in
case of Mr. Tejas Pravin Dugad Vs. Union of India &
Ors [Criminal Writ Petition No.1715 of 2020] (viii)
Ramjas Foundation and Ors. Vs. UOI And Ors. [Civil
Appeal No.6662 of 2004].
4.15           Shri Sharma submitted that length of the
punishment prescribed to the offence should not weigh
higher than magnitude of the total scam undertaken to
defraud the government. The fraudulent ITC claim has
created a huge liability for the Government and submitted
that if the applicant is released on bail he may try to
influence the witnesses, who have given evidence against
him and thus may try to weaken the case of the
Department. Mr. Sharma submitted that while securing
the right of the accused, it would be equally necessary
that the Department gets an opportunity to present their
case uninfluenced by the hindrances, which may be
created by the applicant, who probably would attempt to
run away from the departmental actions for the recovery
of the taxes and penalties and may not cooperate during
such proceedings when the applicant has not shown his
willingness to deposit the loss caused to the government
exchequer by wrongly availing the ITC.
5.             The applicant has been arrested on 01.09.2021.
The complaint was filed on 29.10.2021. The reply filed in
the present matter reflects the course of action adopted
for    investigation     and     necessary         statements              were
recorded. The statement of the applicant was also
recorded while visiting him in the judicial custody. The
details of manipulations by the present applicant is stated
to have been found during the investigation. The shell
companies details have been recorded. The facts of the
money transferred through Shroff firms and the same
being tuned back to him, has been found during the
investigation       and  the   chargesheet          in    the      form         of
complaint dated 29.11.2021 shows the applicant as the
mastermind         operating   fake         firms   to     defraud           the
government exchequer. The facts of the complaint would
require to be proved by the Directorate General of GST
Intelligence, which is filed under section 132(1)(b) and
132(1)(c) read with section 132(1)(i), 132(5) of Central
Goods And Services Act, 2017 and section 132(1)(b) and
132(1)(c) read with section 132(1)(i), 132(5) of Gujarat
GST Act, 2017 and section 120B of the IPC. The
had ordered to register the complaint and had issued
summons to the accused under section 204(a) of the
Cr.P.C. making it returnable on 03.11.2021. The applicant
is still in jail. Pre-charge evidence would be recorded. The
trial will take its own time to conclude.
5.2            The Hon’ble Supreme Court in case of Sanjay
Chandra Vs. CBI, [2012 1 SCC 40], has referred the
case of State of Kerala Vs. Raneef, [(2011) 1 SCC
784], to observe that in deciding the bail applications an
important factor which should certainly be taken into
consideration by the court is the delay in concluding the
trial. Here, taking into consideration the course of
investigation adopted by the Department, the evidence,
so collected, the trial will take considerable time and it
may happen, if denied bail, the judicial custody be
prolonged beyond the statutory period of punishment
which is for five years.
5.3            Section 132(1)(i) provides for punishment as
that ‘in cases where the amount of tax evaded or the
amount of input tax credit wrongly availed or utilised or
the amount of refund wrongly taken exceeds five hundred
lakh rupees, with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to five years and with fine; and section 132(2)
provides that, where any person convicted of an offence
under this section is again convicted of an offence under
this section, then, he shall be punishable for the second
and for every subsequent offence with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to five years and with fine.
5.4            Section 138 of the Act makes provision for
compounding of offences under the Act, even after the
institution of prosecution, on payment by the person
accused of the offence, such compounding amount in
such manner as may be prescribed. The compounding
shall be allowed only after making payment of tax,
interest and penalty involved in such offences, on
payment of compounding amount as may be determined
by the commissioner, the criminal proceeding already
initiated in respect of the said offence shall stand abated.
6.              Taking into consideration the provisions of law
and the fact that the Commissioner is empower to recover
the due amount and propose for abating the proceedings
and as the trial will take its own time to conclude, this
Court finds this to be a fit case where discretion could be
exercised in favour of the applicant.
7.              Hence, the present application is allowed. The
applicant is ordered to be released on regular bail in
No.DGGI/AZU/Gr.E/12(4)510/2020-21 registered with the
office of DGGI, AZU, Ahmedabad on executing a personal
bond of Rs.1,00,000/- (Rupees One Lakh only) with one
surety of the like amount to the satisfaction of the trial
Court and subject to the conditions that he shall;
[a]     not take undue advantage of liberty or misuse
[b]     not act in a manner injurious to the interest of the
[c]     surrender passport, if any, to the lower court within
[d]     not leave India without prior permission of the
[e]     furnish the present address of residence to the
Investigating Officer and also to the Court at the time of
execution of the bond and shall not change the residence
without prior permission of the concerned trial court;
8.              The authorities shall adhere to its own Circular
relating to COVID-19 and, thereafter, will release the
applicant only if he is not required in connection with any
other offence for the time being. If breach of any of the
above conditions is committed, the Sessions Judge
concerned           will be free    to     issue  warrant         or       take
appropriate action in the matter. Bail bond to be executed
before the lower Court having jurisdiction to try the case.
9.              Rule is made absolute to the aforesaid extent.
Direct service is permitted. Registry to communicate this
order to the concerned Court/authority by Fax or Email