This appeal is preferred by the owner of the offending tipper lorry bearing registration
No .KA-27/ A-8377 against the judgment and award dated 03.10.2018 passed by the
Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Haveri (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Tribunal’, for
brevity) in MVC No.218/2015 on the ground of liability as well as on the quantum of
compensation awarded by the Tribunal.
2. Though this appeal is listed for admission, with the consent of the learned counsels
appearing for the parties, the appeal is taken up for final disposal. The parties to this
appeal are referred to by their rankings assigned to them before the Tribunal for the
sake of convenience.
3. Brief facts of the case that would be relevant for the purpose of disposal of this
On 23.11.2014 at about 8.00 a .m. the claimant No.1 herein after washing cloths
in Gokatti, was returning home along with her minor daughter baby Kalpana, aged
about 2 years and when they reached near the building of Midiyappa Hindinmani on
GuttalBelavigi road, the offending tipper lorry bearing registration No .KA-27/A-8377
which was driven in a rash and negligent manner by its driver, dashed against the
minor girl Kalpana and caused the accident. Kalpana who suffered grievous in juries
was immediately shifted to the hospital, but she succumbed to the injuries in the
hospital. A criminal case was therefore registered against the driver of the offending
tipper lorry. It is in this background, the claimants who are the parents of deceased
Kalpana who was aged about 2 years as on the date of accident, had filed a claim
petition under Section 166 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for short, the ‘Act’)
claiming compensation of ₹6,00 ,000/- with interest from the driver, owner and insurer
of the offending tipper lorry bearing registration No .KA-27/A-8377. The said claim
petition was partly allowed by the Tribunal and a compensation of ₹5,90,000/- with
interest at 6% per annum from the date of petition till realization was awarded and the
2nd respondent who is the owner of the offending tipper lorry was held liable to pay
the compensation and accordingly he was directed to deposit the compensation
amount before the Tribunal. Being aggrieved by the same, the owner of the offending
tipper lorry is before this Court.
4. Learned counsel for the appellant-owner of the offending lorry submits that the
Tribunal had erred in exonerating the liability of the insurer of the offending lorry,
though as on the date of accident, the insurance policy issued by the 3rd respondent-
insurer was in force. He submits that the Tribunal had exonerated the liability of the
insurer only on the ground that the driver of the offending lorry did not have valid and
effective driving licence to drive a heavy goods vehicle as on the date of accident. He
submits that admittedly the driver of the offending tipper lorry possessed a light motor
vehicle driving licence and therefore since the unladen weight of the offending lorry
being lesser than 7500 kg, the offending vehicle is required to be considered as a light
motor vehicle and the liability to pay compensation is required to be saddled on the
insurer of the offending tipper lorry. He submits that the unladen weight of the vehicle
as could be seen from Ex.R1 the ‘B’ register extract is only 6190 kg and therefore the
same is required to be considered as a light motor vehicle though the said vehicle is
categorized as heavy goods vehicle. In support of his contention, he has relied upon
the judgment of this Court delivered by a co-ordinate bench in the case of United
India Insurance Co.Ltd., V/s Lakshmamma and others reported in ILR 1996
Karnataka 2220 and also the judgment of another co-ordinate bench of this Court
rendered in MFA No.6284/2013 c/w MFA No.11421/2012 (MV) disposed off on
02.08.2021 in the case of Sarasa Bhandarthi and others V/s Smt .Geetha and
another. He submits that the Tribunal has not properly appreciated the judgment of
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Mukund Dewangan V/s Oriental
Insurance Company Limited reported in (2017) 14 SCC 663, which has resulted in
erroneously exonerating the insurer from its liability. He also submits that the
compensation awarded to the claimants is on the higher side. He submits that the
deceased was aged about 2 years as on the date of accident and therefore the
claimants are entitled only for a sum of ₹2,75,000/- as compensation having regard
to the judgment of the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Rajendra Singh and others
V/s National Insurance Company Limited and others reported in (2020) 7 SCC
5. Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the insurer of the offending vehicle
submits that admittedly the driver of the lorry did not possess licence to drive heavy
goods vehicle and as on the date of accident, he was only holding a light motor vehicle
driving licence. The vehicle in question is a transport vehicle and the gross weight of
the vehicle is much more than 7500 kg as could be seen from Ex.R1. Therefore, the
Tribunal has rightly exonerated the insurer from its liability. He submits that this
question has been considered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Mukund
Dewangan and it has been held that the transport vehicles of which gross weight is
more than 7500 kg cannot be considered as a light motor vehicle.
6. The claimants who have been served in the matter have remained unrepresented
before this Court.
7. I have carefully considered the arguments addressed on both sides and also
perused the material on record.
8. The undisputed facts of the case are that in the road traffic accident that had
occurred on 23.11.2014, wherein the offending tipper lorry bearing registration No.KA-
27/A-8377 was involved, the minor daughter of the claimants baby Kalpana, aged
about 2 years had died. It is not in dispute that the offending tipper lorry which was
involved in the accident was duly insured with the 3r d respondent-Insurance
Company and as on the date of accident, the said policy was in force. The Tribunal
had exonerated the liability of the insurer to pay the compensation on the ground that
the driver of the offending lorry did not possess valid and effective driving licence to
drive a heavy goods vehicle as on the date of accident. The vehicle in question was
a tipper lorry and the material on record would go to show that the unladen weight of
the said vehicle which is categorized as a heavy goods vehicle is 6190 and the gross
weight of the said vehicle is 16200 kg .
9. Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that since the unladen weight of
the vehicle involved in the accident, though it is a heavy goods vehicle, is less than
7500 kg and therefore the same has to be considered as a light motor vehicle and
accordingly the insurer of the offending vehicle is required to be saddled with the
liability to pay the compensation. The question whether transport vehicle and
omnibus, the gross vehicle weight of either of which does not exceed 7500 kg would
be a light motor vehicle and the holder of licence to drive class of light motor vehicle
as provided in Section 10(2)(d) would be competent to drive a transport vehicle or
omnibus, the gross vehicle weight of which does not exceed 7500 kg was referred to
larger bench by a division bench of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Mukund
Dewangan V/s Oriental Insurance Company Limited and others reported in
(2016) 4 SCC 298 and the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Mukund Dewangan
V/s Oriental Insurance Company Limited reported in (2017) 14 SCC 663 while
answering the said question has held that a transport vehicle and omnibus, gross
vehicle weight of either of which does not exceed 7500 kg would be a light motor
vehicle and the holder of driving licence to drive class of light motor vehicle as
provided in Section 10(2)(d) is competent to drive a transport vehicle or omnibus, the
gross vehicle weight of which does not exceed 7500 kg. Therefore, there is no merit
in the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that the Tribunal had erred
in exonerating the liability of the insurer and that the Tribunal had not properly
appreciated the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Mukund Dewangan V/s
Oriental Insurance Company Limited reported in (2017) 14 SCC 663. The vehicle
in question which is categorized as a heavy goods vehicle comes within the meaning
of Section 2(16) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 as the gross vehicle weight
undisputedly exceeds 12000 kg. Under the circumstances, the Tribunal was fully
justified in holding that the offending vehicle was used in violation of the terms and
conditions of the policy and therefore the insurer of the offending vehicle was not liable
to pay the compensation. I find no illegality or irregularity with regard to the finding
recorded by the Tribunal inso far as it relates to exonerating the liability of the insurer
and holding the insured/owner of the offending vehicle liable to pay the compensation.
10. The judgment in the case of Lakshmamma and others reported in ILR 1996
Karnataka 2220 was rendered by the co-ordinate bench of this Court much prior to
the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Mukund Dewangan
(supra). The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Mukund Dewangan has held that
a transport vehicle, the gross weight of which does not exceed 7500 kg would be a
light motor vehicle and the holder of the driving licence to drive class of light motor
vehicle as provided under Section 10(2)(d) is competent to drive a transport vehicle,
the gross vehicle weight does not exceed 7500 kg. The word “gross vehicle weight”
as defined in Section 2(15) of the Act means, in respect of any vehicle, the total weight
of the vehicle and load certified and registered by the registering authority as
permissible for that vehicle. Ex .R1 which is the ‘B’ register extract of the offending
vehicle would go to show that the registered laden weight of the said vehicle is 16200
kg which is much more than 7500 kg. Therefore, the gross weight of the offending
vehicle if considered as 16200 kg, the said vehicle is required to be considered as a
heavy goods vehicle in view of Section 2(16) of the Act, which states that any goods
carriage the gross weight of which exceeds 12000 kg would be considered as heavy
goods vehicle. In view of the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of
Mukund Dewangan, the judgment in the case of Lakshmamma and others reported
in ILR 1996 Karnataka 2220 is therefore no more a good law.
11. In the case of Sarasa Bhandarthi and others, the co-ordinate bench of this Court
having taken into consideration that the driver of the offending vehicle was having a
driving licence to drive light motor vehicle and also heavy goods transport vehicle has
held that in the said case that there was no breach of terms and conditions of the
policy. However in the case on hand, the driver of the offending vehicle admittedly
possessed only a driving licence to drive light motor vehicle and he does not possess
driving licence to drive heavy transport vehicle and therefore the judgment in the case
of Sarasa Bhandarthi and others cannot be made applicable to the present case.
12. Learned counsel for the appellant has also submitted that the compensation
awarded by the Tribunal to the claimants is on the higher side. The deceased girl was
aged about 2 years as on the date of accident. In respect of a non-earning member,
the compensation was being awarded based on the notional income fixed under
Section 163-A of the Act which is at ₹15,000/- per annum. Though the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the cases of Puttamma and others V/s K.L.Narayana Reddy and
another reported in (2013) 15 SCC 45 and R.K. Malik and another V/s Kiran Pa l
and others reported in (2009) 14 SCC 1 had observed that the notional income fixed
under Section 163-A of the Motor Vehicles Act was required to be enhanced and
increased, the same continued to exist without any amendment since 14.11.1994.
Therefore, the Hon’ble Supreme Court subsequently in the case of Kishan Gopal
and another V/s Lala and others reported in (2014) 1 SCC 244, fixed the notional
income at ₹30 ,000/- per annum in respect of a child who had died in the accident at
the age of 10 years. Subsequently in the case of Kurvan Ansari alias Kurvan Ali
and another V/s Shyam Kishore Murmu and another, Civil Appeal No.6902 of 2021
disposed of on 16.11.2021 , in a case where the deceased child was aged about 7
years considering the earlier judgments in the case of R.K. Malik and Kishan Gopal,
the Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that the notional income is required to be
increased taking into consideration the inflation, devaluation of rupee, cost of living
etc., and accordingly fixed the notional income at ₹25,000/- per annum in the said
case and after applying the multiplier of ‘15’ as prescribed under Schedule II of
Section 163-A of the Act, a compensation of ₹3,75,000/- was awarded towards loss
of dependency. Even in the present case, the same principle is required to be applied
and a compensation of ₹3,75,000/- is therefore awarded to the claimants towards loss
of dependency. Towards loss of filial consortium, the claimants are entitled for a sum
of ₹40,000/- each and towards funeral expenses, they are entitled for another sum of
₹15,000/. Therefore altogether they are entitled for a compensation of ₹4,70,000/- as
against ₹5,90,000/- awarded by the Tribunal. The compensation awarded to the
claimants shall carry interest at 6% per annum from the date of petition till realization.
13. The judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Rajendra Singh, which
is relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellant has been taken into
consideration in the case of Kurvan Ansari. Considering the fact that the judgments
in Puttamma and others, R.K .Mal ik and others and Kishan Gopal and another
were rendered taking into account the inflation, devaluation of the rupee and the cost
of living, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Kurvan Ansari has not followed
the judgment in the case of Rajendra Singh.
14. The appellant who is the owner of the offending tipper lorry is directed to deposit
the balance amount of compensation with interest before the Tribunal within a period
of six weeks from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order.
15. The amount in deposit before this Court is directed to be transferred to the Tribunal
for the purpose of disbursement. The order passed by the Tribunal in so far as it
relates to apportionment, disbursement and deposit etc., remains unaltered. The
Miscellaneous First Appeal is accordingly partly allowed.