Counsel for Petitioner :- S.M.Faraz I. Kazmi,Sr. Advocate
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,M.N. Singh
Heard Sri Anoop Trivedi, learned Senior Counsel along with Sri
S.M.Faraz I. Kazmi. learned counsel for the petitioner as well
as the learned Standing Counsel for the State-respondents.
By means of the instant petition, the petitioner prays for the following
reliefs which read as under:-
"(i) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of Mandamus directing
the respondents to grant promotion to the petitioner to the post of Deputy
Collector w.e.f. 23.08.2018, to which the officers junior to petitioner were
(ii) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of Mandamus directing
the respondents to grant him all consequential benefits admissible to him."
The submission of learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner is
that the petitioner joined the services of the State of Uttar
Pradesh as Nayab Tehsildar in the year 1996.
Considering his service record, he was promoted as Tehsildar
on 30.08.2013. The petitioner has rendered more than 22 years
of service and has been an outstanding officer as reflected from
his service records.
It has further been submitted that as per the prescribed
procedure for promotion from the post of Tehsildar to the post
of Deputy Collector, a report is prepared and sent by the Board
of Revenue to the Appointments and Personnel Department,
Government of U.P. which in turn forwards the same to the
State Public Service Commission and thereafter the proposal is
placed before the Departmental Promotion Committee
constituted by the Public Service Commission. The
recommendations of the Departmental Promotional Committee
and the Public Service Commission culminate in the promotion
orders as issued by the Department concerned.
It is urged that in the instant case, meeting of Departmental
Promotion Committee to consider the promotion of Tehsildars
to Deputy Collector was held on 02.08.2018 and 03.08.2018 at
the level of Public Service Commission. The petitioner was
eligible at the relevant time for being considered for promotion
to the post of Deputy Collector and accordingly the name of the
petitioner was also in the list at Serial No. 120 which was part
of the proposal.
On 23.08.2018, the recommendation made by the DPC and the
Public Service Commission released the list of Tehsildars
promoted to the post of Deputy Collector, however, shocking to
the petitioner, his name did not find place in the said list. Upon
making inquiries, it was informed that the petitioner's case has
been withheld and has been put in a sealed cover as the
petitioner was suspended on 01.08.2018 i.e. the date before the
meeting of the DPC, although, no charge sheet against the
petitioner on the date of the meeting of the DPC was served.
It has further been submitted that on the basis of a frivolous
complaint, the petitioner had been placed under suspension in
respect of same allegations made to the Chairman of Yamuna
Expressway Industrial Development Authority in respect of
certain purchase of 57.149 hectares of land for the development
by the Authority in District Mathura.
It has further been submitted that though the petitioner was
suspended but the departmental chargesheet was served on the
petitioner only on 15.03.2021 i.e. after more than 2 and half
years and that too in compliance of the order dated 06.08.2021
passed by this Court in Writ-A No. 1396 of 2021. It is also
pointed out that in respect of same allegations for which the
departmental charge sheet was issued, criminal proceedings
were also initiated on 25.09.2019 in the Court of Special Judge,
Court No. 2, Meerut where the petitioner was enlarged on bail
on 31.10.2019 and though the trial is still pending and out of 27
witnesses only one witness has been examined.
The crux of the submission of learned Senior Counsel for the
petitioner is that in view of the law laid down by the Apex
Court in the case of Union of India and others Vs. K.V.
Jankiraman and others reported in (1991) 4 SCC 109 which
has been followed by this Court in the case of Neeraj Kumar
Pandey Vs. State of U.P. and others in Writ-A No. 8151 of
2022 decided on 26.05.2022, the respondent-authorities are not
justified in keeping the matter of the petitioner pending. The
persons junior to the petitioner have been promoted and only on
the basis of the case which is pending against the petitioner, his
case has been placed under sealed cover and even though the
criminal trial may take time, yet, the promotion of the petitioner
cannot be deferred or kept in abeyance indefinitely. In view of
the aforesaid, it is submitted that the writ petition deserves to be
The record indicates that the petitioner had filed a Special
Leave Petition, Diary No. 32890 of 2022 wherein the Apex
Court expedited the proceedings before this Court by means of
order dated 08.12.2022. The record further indicates that the
pleadings have been exchanged as State has filed counter
affidavit dated 08.09.2022 and the petitioner has also filed his
response in shape of a rejoinder affidavit.
The learned counsel for the State-respondents while refuting the
aforesaid submissions has urged that the petitioner was
involved in serious irregularities and for the aforesaid reasons
was suspended on 01.08.2018.
It is also urged that prior to the date of DPC, the petitioner had
been suspended and in view of the Government Order dated
28.05.1997, it is urged that any person who is put under
suspension, his case regarding the recommendations will be
placed in a sealed cover.
It is also urged that the petitioner has also involved and
implicated in criminal proceedings where the CBI has given
approval for prosecution. The petitioner is facing charges in
Case Crime No. 421 of 2018. It has also been pointed out that
apart from the aforesaid, permission has also been given for
prosecuting the petitioner in Case Crime No. 209 of 2019 and
as such the case of the petitioner is squarely covered in terms of
the Government Order dated 28.05.1997 and therefore it cannot
be said that keeping the recommendations of the petitioner in
sealed cover is bad in law, accordingly, the petition deserves to
be dismissed.
The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner in rejoinder
affidavit has urged that on the date of DPC dated 02.08.2018,
no charge sheet or criminal proceedings were pending against
the petitioner and as such his recommendations ought not to
have been placed in sealed cover.
It has also been urged that filing of a chargesheet subsequent to
the date of DPC may not have any adverse impact as the date
when the case of the petitioner was to be considered by the
DPC is of importance and on that day no proceedings were
pending. The emphasis is that even the Government Order
which is relied upon by the respondent-State does not create
any impediment as on the date of the DPC, there was no
criminal proceedings or the charge sheet was issued nor the
departmental proceedings were pending. It is thus submitted
that the petitioner has been deprived and by keeping the matter
pending, the illegality is being perpetuated.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and from the
perusal of the material on record, it is not disputed that on the
given date i.e. 02.08.2018, no departmental proceedings were
pending against the petitioner nor the criminal proceedings.
It is also not disputed that the charge sheet in the departmental
proceedings was served on the petitioner on 15.03.2021 and in
the criminal proceedings, the charge sheet was filed on
25.09.2018 i.e. subsequent to the date of DPC. In so far as the
sealed cover procedure is concerned, the law is well settled and
the Apex Court in the case of K.V. Jankiraman (Supra) has
"16. On the first question, viz., as to when for the purposes of the sealed
cover procedure the disciplinary/criminal proceedings can be said to have
commenced, the Full Bench of the Tribunal has held that it is only when a
charge-memo in a disciplinary proceedings or a charge-sheet in a
criminal prosecution is issued to the employee that it can be said that the
departmental proceedings/criminal prosecution is initiated against the
employee. The sealed cover procedure is to be resorted to only after the
charge-memo/charge-sheet is issued. The pendency of preliminary
investigation prior to that stage will not be sufficient to enable the
authorities to adopt the sealed cover procedure. We are in agreement with
the Tribunal on this point..........................
17. There is no doubt that there is seeming contradiction between the two
conclusions. But read harmoniously, and that is what the Full Bench has
intended, the two conclusions can be reconciled with each other. The
conclusion No. 1 should be read to mean that the promotion etc. cannot be
withheld merely because some disciplinary/criminal proceedings are
pending against the employee. To deny the said benefit, they must be at the
relevant time pending at the stage when charge-memo/charge sheet has
already been issued to the employee. Thus, read, there is no inconsistency
in the two conclusions. "
This issue has also been considered by this Court in Km. Maya
(Mahila Constable Vs. State of U.P. and others) (2011) 5 ADJ
818 and relevant paragraph 19 of the said report reads as
"19. The concept of "sealed cover" is normally applicable when conduct
of an employee is under investigation, as to whether such person is guilty
of misconduct warranting any kind of punishment which may dis-entitle
him any promotion on higher post and during such period of suspended
animation the authority keeps the matter of promotion in sealed cover so
as to take a decision in this regard later on in accordance with the result
of inquiry held against such person. But in cases where the incumbent has
been considered for promotion in accordance with rules according to zone
of consideration and field of eligibility and has been found ultimately
selected therein, the question of keeping his result in a sealed cover is
nothing but a flimsy pretext inasmuch as result of selection is already
known to every body. Mere pendency of the matter of cadre allocation or if
for any reason the incumbent is not relieved for joining in Uttaranchal
State, it ought not to have caused any hindrance in the matter of carrier
advancement of such persons since for such pendency the incumbent
concerned cannot be said to be at fault."
Having considered the aforesaid submissions and the dictum of
the Apex Court in the case of K.V. Jankiraman (supra) and this
Court in the case of Km. Maya (Supra), the fact that
irrespective of the pendency of the criminal case, the petitioner
has continued to serve and mere pendency of the criminal case
cannot be taken as a ground to deny the promotion to the
petitioner nor the Competent Authority can withhold the
recommendation of the petitioner indefinitely on the ground of
adopting the sealed cover procedure during the pendency of the
criminal case. It is also relevant to notice that the respondent-
authorities are also required to take note of the Government
Orders dated 28.05.1997 and 09.01.2018 which apparently has
not been taken note of.
Accordingly, in view of the aforesaid, the present petition is
finally disposed of with a direction to the Competent Authority
to consider the claim of the petitioner for opening the sealed
cover within a period of eight weeks from the date, a copy of
this order is placed before the Authority concerned in light of
the observations made herein above taking note of the decisions
of the Apex Court in the case of K.V. Jankiraman (supra), Km.
Maya (Supra) as well as the two Government Orders dated
28.05.1997 and 09.01.2018.
With the aforesaid, the petition stands disposed of.