Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
1. Heard learned counsel for petitioner and learned State
Counsel appearing on behalf of opposite parties.
2. Petition has been filed assailing order dated 12th January,
2022 whereby petitioner's application for allotment of fair price
shop on compassionate ground has been rejected on the ground
that she does not come within definition of 'family' as
drescribed in paragraph IV(10) of the Government Order dated
5th August, 2019 since petitioner is the daughter in law of the
earlier fair price shop agreement holder.
3. Learned counsel for petitioner submits that initially
petitioner's father in law namely late Shyam Lal was the fair
price shop agreement holder of the fair price shop in question,
who passed away on 27th November, 2021 and petitioner being
his daughter in law filed the application for compassionate
appointment. It is submitted that the petitioner otherwise is fully
eligible to be appointed a fair price shop dealer of the shop in
question. It has been further submitted that the aspect that
daughter in law does not come within the preview of 'family'
has already been dealt with by this Court in the judgment and
order dated 22nd November, 2021 passed in Writ-C No. 18519
of 2021, Pushpa Devi versus State of U.P. and others in which
the petition for compassionate appointment by daughter in law
was allowed placing reliance on the Full Bench judgment of
this Court in the case of U.P. Power Corporation Limited versus
Smt. Urmila Devi reported in 2011(3) ADJ 432. As such it is
submitted that the impugned order is clearly against the dictum
of this Court.
4. Learned State Counsel refuting submissions advanced by
learned counsel for petitioner submits that petitioner's
application for compassionate appointment could have been
decided only in terms of the government order applicable in the
matter and since a daughter in law has not been defined as a
part of family in paragraph IV(10) of the government order
dated 5th August, 2019 petitioner's application was rightly
5. Upon consideration of submissions advanced by learned
counsel for parties and perusal of material on record, it is
apparent that petitioner's case is fully covered by the judgment
of this Court in the case of Pushpa Devi (surpa) and the Full
Bench decision in the case of U.P. Power Corporation Limited
6. While it is correct that a daughter in law is not covered
within the definition of 'family' in the government order dated
5th August, 2019 but such an exclusion has already been held
the ultra vires the constitution of India in the judgment
rendered by Full Bench of this Court in the case of U.P. Power
Corporation Limited (supra). Relevant portion of the judgment
"We must, however, note one feature of the definition of the
word 'family' as generally contained in most Rules. The
definition of 'family' includes wife or husband; sons; unmarried
and widowed daughters; and if the deceased was an unmarried
government servant, the brother, unmarried sister and widowed
mother dependant on the deceased government servant. It is,
therefore, clear that a widowed daughter in the house of her
parents is entitled for consideration on compassionate
appointment. However, a widowed daughter-in-law in the house
where she is married, is not entitled for compassionate
appointment as she is not included in the definition of 'family'.
It is not possible to understand how a widowed daughter in her
father's house has a better right to claim appointment on
compassionate basis than a widowed daughter-in-law in her
father-in-law's house. The very nature of compassionate
appointment is the financial need or necessity of the family. The
daughter-in-law on the death of her husband does not cease to
be a part of the family. The concept that such daughter-in-law
must go back and stay with her parents is abhorrent to our
civilized  society. Such daughter-in-law must, therefore, have
also right to be considered for compassionate appointment as
she is part of the family where she is married and if staying
with her husband's family. In this context, in our opinion,
arbitrariness, as presently existing, can be avoided by including
the daughter-in-law in the definition of 'family'. Otherwise, the
definition to that extent, prima facie, would be irrational and
arbitrary. The State, therefore, to consider this aspect and take
appropriate steps so that a widowed daughter-in-law like a
widowed daughter, is also entitled for consideration by way of
compassionate appointment, if other criteria is satisfied.
Learned Chief Standing Counsel to forward a copy of this order
to the Secretary of the concerned Department in the State
Government for appropriate consideration."
7. Although the aforesaid Full Bench judgment pertains to right
of a widowed daughter in law and in the present case the
petitioner is not a widowed daughter in law but in the
considered opinion of this Court, the same would not have any
difference whatsoever and the rigor of the Full Bench would be
applicable in the present case as well. The reason for the said
opinion of this Court is self evident from the reasoning
indicated in the Full Bench decision itself in which it has been
stated that the daughter in law upon death of her husband does
not cease to be part of family. Applying the same logic in the
case of daughter in law which has not been widowed, it can be
seen that the later would have a better claim than a widowed
daughter in law since she continues to be a part of family as
much as a widowed daughter in law. As such no distinction can
be carved out between a daughter in law whose husband is alive
and a widowed daughter in law.
8. Upon applicability of aforesaid judgment, it is apparent that
petitioner's application for compassionate appointment of the
fair price shop in question has been rejected only on the ground
that she does not come come within the definition of 'family' as
per paragraph IV(X) of the government order dated 5th August,
2019 this aspect of the matter having already been covered by
the judgments of this Court indicated herein above, the ground
for rejection of petitioner's application for compassionate
appointment is clearly unsustainable.
9. In view of aforesaid, the impugned order dated 12th January,
2022 is quashed by issuance a writ in the nature of Certiorari at
the admission stage itself. The opposite party No.4 i.e. Up
Ziladhikari, Tehsil Bhinga, District Shrawasti is directed to
reconsider the petitioner's application for appointment as fair
price shop dealer on compassionate basis expeditiously, within
the period of six weeks from the date a copy of this order is
produced before him. The application shall be considered by
reasoned and speaking order taking into account the judgments
rendered by this Court as indicated herein above.
10. With the aforesaid directions, the petition succeeds and is
allowed.