This Crl.M.C. has been filed to quash the proceedings in
S.C.No.287/2021 on the file of the Fast Track Special Court, Attingal.
The petitioner is the sole accused in S.C.No.287 of 2021.        He faces
charges under Sections 376(1) and 376(2)(n) of the Indian Penal Code.
The prosecution case is that the petitioner committed rape on
respondent No.3 after making a false promise of marriage.
2. In the First Information Statement dated 11.11.2019,
respondent No.3 alleged the following:-
The victim was employed as Senior Analyst in a company in
Technopark, Thiruvananthapuram.        The petitioner was working as an
Associate in the said Company. She fell in love with the petitioner in
March 2018. The petitioner told the victim that he liked her and offered
to marry her. When the petitioner repeatedly offered to marry her, the
victim agreed to marry him. Both of them travelled together to many
places.    On 27.5.2019, they travelled to Kanyakumari and stayed at
Indian Heritage Resort.       He maintained close contact with her.   The
petitioner    sexually  ill-treated  the   victim. The   petitioner  also
appropriated the gold ornaments that belonged to the victim.          The
Crl.M.C.No.702 of 2023
3. She gave a statement to the Magistrate concerned on
21.8.2020 under Section 164 Cr.P.C., wherein she alleged thus:-
The victim is a native of Coimbatore in Tamil Nadu.      The
petitioner pretended love towards the victim.    He undertook to marry
the victim.     In April 2019, the victim was taken to Sreekaryam,
Thiruvananthapuram in a car. While travelling in the car, he compelled
the victim to have oral sex. In May (27.5.2019), as requested by the
petitioner, the victim was taken to Kanyakumari. They took a room in
the Indian Heritage Hotel.      They stayed on the beach till 11 p.m.
When they returned to the hotel, the petitioner made the victim take
some juice.      After having consumed the juice, the victim lost her
memory. After that, the petitioner committed rape on the victim. In
the morning, the victim found a bite mark on her neck. The petitioner
made the victim have sexual intercourse with him after making a false
promise of marriage. Later, he avoided the victim and refused to marry
her.   He returned a sum of Rs.80,000/- and gold ornaments received
from her.    At the time of promising to marry the victim, the petitioner
actually had no intention to marry her.
4. Heard Sri.K.P.Satheesan, the learned Senior Counsel for
the petitioner, the learned counsel for respondent No.3, and the learned
5. The learned Senior counsel appearing for the petitioner,
relying on Mandar Deepak Pawar v. The State of Maharashtra &
Anr. (2022 LiveLaw (SC) 649) and Pramod Suryabhan Pawar v.
State of Maharashtra and Another [(2019) 9 SCC 698] submitted
that in the facts of the case, the prosecution failed to prima      facie
establish a false promise of marriage. The learned Senior Counsel
submitted that, at the most, the allegations amount only to a breach of
promise which the petitioner made in good faith but subsequently not
6. The learned counsel for respondent No.3 vehemently
resisted the contentions of the learned Senior Counsel.     The learned
counsel, relying on Anurag Soni v. State of Chhattisgarh [(2019)
13 SCC 1], contended that the petitioner had sexual intercourse with
the victim by giving false assurance that he would marry her.        The
materials placed before the Court, according to the learned counsel,
show that the petitioner never intended to marry her and procured her
consent only for a sexual relationship with her.
Crl.M.C.No.702 of 2023
7. The learned Public Prosecutor supported the prosecution
and contended that the acts of the accused fall under the definition of
“rape” as he had sexual intercourse with the victim by obtaining her
consent under a misconception of facts defined under Section 90 of
8. Section 375 of the Indian Penal Code sets out the
ingredients of the offence under Section 376 IPC.       In the facts of the
present case, the description Secondly under Section 375 IPC read with
Section 90 IPC is relevant.
Explanation 2. - Consent means       an unequivocal
voluntary agreement when the woman by       words, gestures
or any form of verbal or non-verbal         communication,
communicates willingness to participate      in the specific
Provided that a woman who does not physically resist
to the act of penetration shall not by the reason only of
that fact, be regarded as consenting to the sexual activity.”
10. Section 90 IPC reads thus:-
misconception.- A consent is not such a consent as is
Crl.M.C.No.702 of 2023
intended by any section of this Code, if the consent is
given by a person under fear of injury, or under a
misconception of fact, and if the person doing the act
knows, or has reason to believe, that the consent was
given in consequence of such fear or misconception;
Consent of insane person.- If the consent is given
by a person who, from unsoundness of mind, or
intoxication, is unable to understand the nature and
consequence of that to which he gives his consent; or
Consent of child.- unless the contrary appears
from the context, if the consent is given by a person who
is under twelve years of age.”
11. “Consent” is stated to be an act of reason coupled with
deliberation. It denotes an active will in the mind of a person to permit
the doing of an act complained of.         Section 90 IPC refers to the
expression “consent”. Section 90, though, does not define “consent”,
but describes what is not consent.        “Consent”, for the purpose of
Section 375, requires voluntary participation not only after the exercise
of intelligence based on the knowledge of the significance and moral
quality of the act but after having fully exercised the choice between
resistance and assent.     Whether there was consent or not is to be
ascertained only on a careful study of all relevant circumstances.
12. Consent may be expressed or implied, coerced or
misguided, obtained willingly or through deceit. Consent is an act of
reason, accompanied by deliberation, the mind weighing, as in a
Crl.M.C.No.702 of 2023
balance, the good and evil on each side. There is a clear distinction
between rape and consensual sex, and the court must very carefully
examine whether the accused had actually wanted to marry the victim,
or had mala fide motives, and had made a false promise to this effect
only to satisfy his lust, as the latter falls within the ambit of cheating or
deception. There is a distinction between the mere breach of a promise,
and not fulfilling a false promise. Thus, the court must examine whether
there was made, at an early stage, a false promise of marriage by the
accused; and whether the consent involved was given after wholly
understanding the nature and consequences of sexual indulgence.
There may be a case where the prosecutrix agrees to have sexual
intercourse on account of her love and passion for the accused, and not
solely on account of misrepresentation made to her by the accused or
where an accused on account of circumstances which he could not have
foreseen, or which were beyond his control, was unable to marry her,
despite having every intention to do so. Such cases must be treated
differently. (Vide: Anurag Soni v. State of Chhattisgarh [(2019) 13 SCC
1], State of H.P. v. Mango Ram [(2000) 7 SCC 224], Deepak Gulati v.
State of Haryana [(2013) 7 SCC 675], Kaini Rajan v. State of Kerala
Crl.M.C.No.702 of 2023
13. If the accused had any malafide intention and if he had
a clandestine motive, it is a clear case of rape. In Pramod Suryabhan
Pawar v. State of Maharashtra [(2019) 9 SCC 608], dealing with a
case in the context of a promise to marry, the Apex Court observed that
there    is  a   distinction   between    a  false  promise    given  on  the
understanding by the maker that it will be broken, and the breach of a
promise which is made in good faith but, subsequently not fulfilled. The
Apex Court, in paragraph 16, held thus:-
“16. Where the promise to marry is false and the
intention of the maker at the time of making the promise itself
was not to abide by it but to deceive the woman to convince
her to engage in sexual relations, there is a “misconception of
fact” that vitiates the woman's “consent”. On the other hand, a
breach of a promise cannot be said to be a false promise. To
establish a false promise, the maker of the promise should have
had no intention of upholding his word at the time of giving it.
The “consent” of a woman under Section 375 is vitiated on the
ground of a “misconception of fact” where such misconception
was the basis for her choosing to engage in the said act.”
The Apex Court summarised two propositions to find whether the
“consent” was vitiated by a “misconception of fact” arising out of a
promise to marry; (1) The promise of marriage must have been a false
promise, given in bad faith and with no intention of being adhered to at
the time it was given. (2) The false promise itself must be of immediate
relevance, or bear a direct nexus to the woman’s decision to engage in
the sexual act.
14. Coming to the facts of the case. In the FIS, the victim
stated that she fell in love with the petitioner. The victim is a native of
Tamil Nadu.      According to the victim, the petitioner made her believe
he would marry her. She added, on that belief, she travelled along with
him. On 27.5.2019, both went together to Kanyakumari. According to
the victim, she was made to consume juice while they were staying in
the room, and on taking the juice, she lost her memory and the
petitioner had sexual intercourse with her, which she could realise only
at 4.30 a.m. She also alleged that she had a bite mark on her neck.
15. The material placed before the Court, prima facie,
establishes that the petitioner had never intended to marry the victim
and procured her consent only for having sexual relations with her,
which falls under the definition of “rape”. The pleadings of the victim
point to the fact that her consent, to have sexual relations, was
obtained by the petitioner under a misconception of fact defined under
16. On the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article
226 of the Constitution of India or the inherent power under Section
482 Cr.P.C. to quash a criminal proceeding, in State of Haryana v.
Bhajan Lal (1992 Supp (1) SCC 335), the Apex Court held thus:-
Crl.M.C.No.702 of 2023
“102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various
relevant provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of the
principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series of
decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary power
under Article 226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of
the Code which we have extracted and reproduced above, we
give the following categories of cases by way of illustration
wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse
of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of
justice, though it may not be possible to lay down any precise,
clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of
myriad kinds of cases wherein such power should be exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report
or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and
accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any
offence or make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and
other materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not disclose a
cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police officers
under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of a
Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or
complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same do
not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a
case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable
offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer
without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under
Section 155(2) of the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so
absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no
prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the
provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which a
criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and
continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific
Crl.M.C.No.702 of 2023
provision in the Code or the concerned Act, providing
efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with
mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted
with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused
and with a view to spite him due to private and personal
grudge.”
17. The facts of the present case do not come under any of
the categories of cases enumerated in State of Haryana.
18. The power of quashing criminal proceedings has to be
exercised very sparingly and with circumspection, and that too in the
rarest of rare cases and the Court cannot be justified in embarking upon
an enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the
allegations made in the FIR, unless the allegations are so patently
absurd and inherently improbable so that no prudent person can ever
reach such a conclusion. The extraordinary and inherent powers of the
Court do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the Court to act
according to its whims or caprice. (Vide: Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt.
Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra and Ors. (2021 (3) KHC 25),               State of
Maharashtra and Others v. Arun Gulab Gawali and Others [(2010) 9
19. In the present case, charges have been framed against
the petitioner in accordance with Section 228 Cr.P.C. on a finding that a
Crl.M.C.No.702 of 2023
prima facie case has been made out.         The petitioner now seeks to
quash the proceedings in the Sessions Case. Once charges are framed
under Section 228 Cr.P.C. the High Court would not be justified in
invoking its inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to quash the
proceedings in the Sessions Case except in those rare cases where
forensic exigencies and formidable compulsions justify such a course.
Even in exceptional cases, the High Court can look into only those
documents which are unimpeachable and can be legally translated into
relevant evidence. This view gets support from the decision of the Apex
Court in Minakshi Bala v. Sudhir Kumar and Others [(1994) 4 SCC
20. The result of the above discussion is that the criminal
proceedings in S.C.No.287/2021 on the file of the Fast Track Special
Court, Attingal are not liable to be quashed.
The Crl.M.C. stands dismissed.