Counsel for Applicant :- Atul Verma,Hari Krishna Verma
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Heard Sri Atul Verma, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri
Pradeep Tiwari, Advocate holding brief of Sri Shiv Nath Tiwari,
learned AGA appearing on behalf of the State ATS and also
perused the material available on record.
By means of the present application, the applicant- Prakash @
Jai Prakash Ruhela, seeks bail in Case Crime No.07 of 2019,
Gomti Nagar, District- Lucknow, during the pendency of trial.
As per the allegations of the First Information Report dated
25.11.2019, the State ATS received an information that a
person, namely, Prakash is in touch with Pakistani nationals,
namely, Mamu, Neer and Asar who are involved in a racket of
running fake lotteries in India. On the information of a squealer,
one person came on a Scooty bearing no. UP-14 BK 8077 and
stopped at a liquor shop and alighted from an auto at the same
place and they were caught talking to each other. On being
asked to identify themselves, one Prakash @ Jai Prakash
Ruhela (the applicant) was apprehended and 30 ATM cards, his
Driving Licence, Rs.2500/- cash, three mobile phones and one
samsung tablet were recovered from his possession. He told the
police that he was in touch with the pakistani handlers engaged
in fake lottery by his mobile numbers 7078748746 and
8876769725. The other person has identified himself as
Dhiruddin Chaudhary and from his possession, five passbooks,
three cheque books, his driving licence, aadhar card, two ATM
cards, Rs.500/- and one mobile were recovered. Both persons
confessed to be involved in duping the Indian nationals by
opening fake accounts thereby facilitating in the Pakistani
nationals in using the said account.
Learned counsel for the applicant has contended that the
applicant is maliciously being prosecuted in the present case at
the inkling and connivance of local police and interested
persons to victimize him. He has not committed any offence
whatsoever. The applicant has been named on the basis of his
confession before the police which is not admissible in law. The
applicant is the bonafide owner of the recovered articles. The
applicant has nothing to do with the co-accused Dhiruddin
Chaudhary. The applicant is wanted in one more case of similar
kind in the State of Uttarakhand. Learned counsel has further
submitted that the charge-sheet has been filed against the
applicant but there is no evidence whatsoever against the
applicant being indulged in any kind of anti national activities
or terror funding. On various occasions, the prosecution has
sought time to get the evidence against the applicant pertaining
to be indulged in anti national activities but no evidence of
terror funding was either found or brought on record by it. The
trial has not proceeded any further as even the charge have not
been framed against the applicant. The applicant is languishing
in jail since 25.11.2019 and he deserves to be released on bail.
In case, the applicant is released on bail, he will not misuse the
liberty of bail and shall cooperate with the trial.
Per contra, Sri Pradeep Tiwari, Advocate holding brief of Sri
Shiv Nath Tiwari, learned AGA appearing on behalf of the State
ATS has vehemently opposed the bail prayer of the applicant on
the ground that the accused used to open fake accounts on the
basis of forged documents and asked the Indian nationals to
deposit their money in the said fake accounts on the pretext of
getting lottery and after deducting their commissions, the
accused persons transferred the remaining amount to the
accounts of Pakistani handlers. He has further stated that on the
data analysis of the recovered phone, it has been proved that
many account numbers and cash deposit receipts have been sent
to Pakistan through Whatsapp. He has also referred statements
of various persons who have been duped by the said nexus run
by the applicant and the co-accused Dhiruddin Chaudhary with
Pakistani nationals. Learned AGA has further referred to
various JPEG files wherein there is evidence of the said
transactions having taken place. He has also stated that there is
no explanation of recovery of 32 ATM cards, 5 passbooks, 3
cheque books, four mobile phones and one tablet from the
applicant. Learned AGA has referred various transactions
undertaken in the bank statements of the applicant between
17.02.2017 to 25.12.2019 and that too in the account of the
applicant and his deceased wife Shashi Ruhela. The evidence
collected during investigation categorically establishes the
offences and the activity of the accused applicant with the
handlers sitting in Pakistan. He has further stated that the
charge-sheet against the applicant has been filed for the
offences u/s 420, 467, 468, 471 and 120-B IPC and further
investigation of the case is still in progress. He has further
stated that on the data analysis of aforesaid mobile numbers has
revealed the details of the Whatsapp chatting and audio clips
with the handlers sitting in Pakistan wherein 81 bank deposit
receipts have also been sent to Pakistani handlers as proof of
deposit. Much reliance has been placed on the statements of
victims, namely, Hemant Kumar, Smt. Asha Devi and Mohd.
Salam Ansari categorically establishing the factum of cheating.
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, number of
articles recovered from the possession of the applicant and also
the evidence placed on record as well as the submissions
advanced by the learned counsel for the parties, this Court is of
the view that since the matter pertains to national security
although the provisions of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act
have not been initiated against the applicant as yet, this Court
does not find it a fit case for bail.
In view of the above, the bail application of the applicant is
rejected.
It is further provided that the said observations shall have no
bearing whatsoever on the merits of the trial.