1.      The instant writ petition has been preferred seeking the
following reliefs: -
“A. Issue a writ of certiorari and call for the records leading up
to the Impugned Order dt.27.01.2021, declare such order as
illegal and set it aside,
B. Issue a writ of mandamus or direction to Respondents to
refund the Petitioner‟s security deposit of Rs.25,00,000/-
forfeited by the Impugned Order,
C. Issue a writ of mandamus or direction permitting Petitioner
to apply for and seek Haj quota for Haj 2021 and thereafter,
without reference to Impugned Order dt.27.01.2021”
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                    Page 1 of 37
2.        The petitioner is essentially aggrieved by the order of 27
January 2021 passed by the first respondent debarring it from
applying for being enlisted as a Haj Group Operator1 for a
period of five years together with the forfeiture of the security
deposit of Rs.25 lakhs. For the purposes of evaluating the
challenge which stands raised, the following salient facts would
merit notice.
3.       The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia regulates the annual inflow
of pilgrims to Mecca based on a country-wise quota which is
announced periodically. The quota fixed for the nation is
envisaged to be distributed through the Haj Committee set up
under the Haj Committee Act, 20022. Out of the quota so
prescribed and fixed for the country, a smaller percentage is
earmarked to be distributed amongst Private Tour Operators
who are also called Haj Group Operators [hereinafter and for the
sake of brevity to be called “HGOs”]. The policy for registration
and allocation of the Haj quota amongst HGOs‟ stands
encompassed in the order of 20 December 2018 issued by the
Ministry of Minority Affairs (Haj Division)3 under the Union
Government. The aforesaid policy governs the selection of HGOs
during the period 2019-2023.
4.       Being desirous of being selected as an HGO, the petitioner
submitted an online application on 20 January 2019. As would be
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                            Page 2 of 37
evident from a reading of the relevant parts of the policy, the
following broad categories were formulated:-
“The new Policy for 2019-2023 created three categories:
A. Category I* - HGOs having experience of 12 years or more
in Haj operations with annual turnover of Rs.5 Crores or more
from Haj and/or Umrah operations in any of the preceding two
years (30% quota).
B. Category I - HGOs having experience of minimum 6 years
in Haj with annual turnover of Rs.3 Crore or more from Haj
and/or Umrah operations in any of the preceding two years
(40% quota).
C. Category II- HGOs having annual turnover of Rs.1 Crore or
more from Haj and/or Umrah operations in any of the
preceding two years (30% quota).”
5.      In terms of the eligibility conditions prescribed in the policy
document, an HGO was required to have a minimum annual
turnover of Rs. 1 /3/5 crores or more as may be applicable from
Haj “and/or” Umrah operations in any of the two financial years
preceding the empanelment year. The petitioner, who had not prior
to the making of the aforesaid application been enlisted or selected
as an HGO, had applied under Category II.
6.      Upon the submission of the aforesaid application and on due
scrutiny thereof, the respondents No.1 issued a communication on
03 April 2019 pointing out various defects which had been noticed
in the application submitted by the petitioner. It becomes pertinent
to note that the respondents found upon examination of the
document which had been submitted by the petitioner that
although it had set out receipts reflected in its audited Profit and
Loss Account for Financial Year 2017-18 as being from Haj
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                               Page 3 of 37
operations, since the petitioner had never been selected as an HGO
earlier, the declarations made in that respect were doubted. The
respondents further noted that the extracts of the Income Tax
Return4 and the Tax Audit Report had not been downloaded from
the official portal of the Income Tax Department and thus could
not be validated.
7.      While responding to the aforesaid deficiency letter, the
petitioner by its communication of 08 April 2019 wrote to the
respondents admitting that it had not earned any revenues from
Haj operations in the previous years and that the receipts which
had been shown in the ITRs were from Umrah operations only. In
support of the aforesaid clarification, a certificate of a Chartered
Accountant was also enclosed. The petitioner further asserted that
the aforesaid was due to an inadvertent mistake made in the
application form that had been submitted.
8.      Along with the aforesaid communication, the petitioner also
enclosed a CA certificate as well as its latest ITR and Tax Audit
Report and projected those documents as having been downloaded
from the official portal of the Income Tax Department. It becomes
pertinent to note that the ITR which was submitted by the
petitioner bore an acknowledgement number identical to that
which stood embossed on the original copy of the return which
had been submitted along with the application. Under the column
relating to “other income” and more particularly at point 2(x)(i)
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                          Page 4 of 37
thereof, the ITR purported to declare gross receipts or revenue as
having been earned by the petitioner from Umrah operations.
There was thus an evident disparity between the disclosures which
were set forth in the original ITR copy which had been submitted
and the one which was submitted along with the letter of 08 April
2019. This indubitably because while the ITR originally filed
purported to show gross revenues earned from Haj operations, the
return subsequently filed purported to hold out that the petitioner
had made a declaration in its return that gross revenues had been
earned from Umrah operations.
9.      On 20 May 2019, the respondent No.1 notified the list of
eligible HGOs as well as those who had been found to be
ineligible. The name of the petitioner figured in the latter. On 20
May 2019, a further notification came to be issued by the
respondent No.1 permitting all those who sought ventilation of
grievances arising out of the selection of HGOs of an avenue of
approaching a committee that had been constituted by the Ministry
for considering any representation that may be made. The
aforesaid committee constituted for the purposes of redressal of
grievances is known as the Apex Committee. The notification of
20 May 2019 is extracted hereinbelow: -
Subject: Registration of Haj Group Organisers for Haj
2019 - regarding.
With reference to this Ministry's circular
No.5/24/2018-Haj dated 20.12.2018 inviting applications for
registration and allocation of quota to the Haj Group
Organisers for Haj 2019, a total of 807 applications were
received in the Ministry for registration under different
categories (121 in Category-1*, 198 in Category-1 and 488 in
Category-2). These applications were examined in the
Ministry in terms of the provisions of the Policy for Haj Group
Organisers for Haj 2019-23 and on the basis of the documents/
information submitted by the HGOs in their application and
their subsequent clarifications/ replies.
2.      As a result of the scrutiny process, 117 HGOS in
Category-1*, 195 HGOs in Category-1 and 394 HGOS in
Category-2 have been found eligible for registration for Haj
2019. The List of eligible HGOs in Cat-1*, Cat-1 and Cat-2 is
at Annexure I, II and III respectively. The list of HGOs who
are not found eligible for Haj 2019 is at Annexure-IV.
3.      Those HGOs who have been found eligible subject to
certain conditions are requested to submit the requisite
documents to the Haj Division by 23.05.2019 positively.
4.      A Committee has been constituted in the Ministry
under the Chairmanship of Additional Secretary (MA) to look
into the grievances of the HGOs for Haj 2019. Accordingly,
the HGOS who wish to represent their case with new facts,
may submit their representation to the Haj Division, West
Delhi - 110 066 or through email to ushaj-mma@gov.in latest
by 23.05.2019 (5:00 p.m.). The representations received after
due date and time will not be considered.
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                       Page 6 of 37
Ministry of Minority Affairs
10.     On 20 May 2019, the respondent by its communication of
the said date apprised the petitioner of the reasons which had
weighed in rejecting the application that had been made. This is
evident from Para 2 of the said communication which is
reproduced hereinbelow: -
“2.     As per Clause 4 of Annexure I of HGO Haj Policy,
HGO is required to show a minimum annual turnover of INR 1
Crore/ 3 Cr/ 5 Cr or more as applicable from Haj and/or
Umrah operations in any of the preceding two financial years
along with balance sheet and profit and loss account duly
audited by the statutory auditors, tax audit report and income
tax return (ITR). As per the technical advice received from the
empanelled Chartered Accountant firms and on scrutiny of the
clarification/reply of the HGO, it has been observed that in its
clarification, the HGO submitted the ITR from income tax
portal in which the source of income is disclosed as Gross
Receipt from Umrah. However, in ITR submitted earlier along
with the application, the source of Income was disclosed as
Gross Receipt from Haj. Revised ITR is not filed by the PTO
as the Acknowledgement Number (357720061301018) is same
for both the ITR. Therefore, authenticity of the document
could not be established. Hence the provisions of clause 4 of
Annexure I of HGO Policy has not been complied.”
11.     The respondents essentially held that there was an evident
discrepancy in the two ITR copies which had been submitted by
the petitioner on two separate occasions with one disclosing gross
receipts from Haj while the other showing gross receipts from
Umrah. It further noted that the acknowledgement number on both
those returns were identical. They further went on to observe that
since the authenticity of the two documents could not be
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                  Page 7 of 37
established, the petitioner has been found ineligible for registration
and allocation of quota for Haj 2019.
12.      On 23 May 2019, the petitioner is stated to have made a
representation to the respondents asserting that due to oversight
and typographical mistakes, the ITR had shown “Gross Receipts
from Haj” instead of “Gross receipts from Umrah”. It contended
that upon the aforesaid mistake coming to light, it had also
approached the Income Tax authorities for rectification. The
rectification application along with the acknowledgement issued
by the Income Tax Department was also enclosed. It becomes
relevant to note that the rectification application which has been
duly placed on the record is shown to have been filed on or about
13.     The aforesaid rectification application came to be allowed
and granted on 01 June 2019. In the meanwhile, the representation
made by the petitioner for a review of the decision taken by the
respondents rejecting its application came to be placed before the
Apex Committee in terms of the notification of 20 May 2019.
Upon due consideration of the representation as well as the
additional document which had been submitted by the petitioner,
the Committee found that modifications had been made in the
copy of the ITR which had been originally submitted even though
the acknowledgement number was identical. It further noted that
the rectification application had been made only on 22 May 2019
and thus evidently after the application of the petitioner had come
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                          Page 8 of 37
to be rejected. It also observed that the rectified ITR had
ultimately been issued after the last date for submission of
applications.
14.     The Committee, in view of the aforesaid, not only
proceeded to reject the representation made by the petitioner, it
proceeded further to form the opinion that the petitioner appeared
to have indulged in “fudging of documents and thus misleading the
Government authorities for securing Haj quota”. Accordingly, and
in light of clause 2 of Annexure II of the policy document, it
recommended the debarment of the petitioner for a period of five
years besides forfeiture of its security deposit.
15.      The aforesaid recommendation of the Committee was duly
accepted by the respondents as would be evident from its
communication of 02 July 2019. Paragraphs 6 and 7 of the
aforenoted communication are extracted hereinbelow: -
“6.     The Committee observed that this is a case of fudging
of documents and thus misleading the Government authorities
for securing Haj quota. As per clause 2 of Annexure-II of
HGO Policy, HGOS that misrepresent or mislead the
authorities in their application and documents will be
automatically debarred from applying for at least 5 subsequent
years besides forfeiture of security deposit. Accordingly, the
Committee recommended that the HGO M/s Al Sudais Haj &
Umrah Service be debarred for registration and allocation of
quota for Haj 2019 and action may be initiated against the
HGO as per the HGO Policy.
7.      The recommendation of the Committee has been
accepted by the Ministry. Hence, M/s Al Sudais Haj &
Umrah Service has not been found eligible for registration
and allocation of quota for Haj 2019 and action has been
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                Page 9 of 37
initiated for its debarment and forfeiture of security deposit as
per the HGO Policy 2019-23.”
16.     On 27 February 2020, a show cause notice came to be
issued by the respondents calling upon it to explain why it not be
debarred for at least five subsequent years and its security deposit
be not forfeited. The aforesaid show case notice was founded on
the recommendations of the Apex Committee noticed hereinabove.
This is clearly evident when one reads the following recitals as
appearing in the show cause notice:-
“2.     The Committee noted that it has been established
beyond doubt that the government documents (ITR
downloaded from Income tax website) were fudged to satisfy
the query raised by the empanelled Chartered Accountant Firm
and to secure Haj quota, which is tantamount to
misrepresentation of documents to the Government authorities.
The Committee observed that if an HGO, in connection with a
requirement under HGO Policy, provides any information that
is false or misleading, or produces any false document; he
shall be liable to be punished under the provisions of the
Policy. As per clause 2 of Annexure-II of HGO Policy, HGOs
that misrepresent or mislead the authorities in their application
and documents will be automatically debarred from applying
for at least 5 subsequent years besides forfeiture of security
deposit. Accordingly, it recommended that action may be
initiated against the HGO M/s Al Sudais Haj & Umrah Service
as per HGO Policy 2019-23 for misrepresentation of
documents in the application for Haj 2019. The
recommendation of the Committee has been approved by the
Competent Authority in this Ministry.
3.      You are, therefore, requested to explain within a period
of 7 days as to why the security deposit of M/s Al Sudais Haj
& Umrah Service should not be forfeited and it should not be
debarred from applying, for at least 5 subsequent years under
clause 2 of Annexure II of HGO Policy for Haj 2019-23 for
fudging of documents submitted along with its application for
17.     Responding to the said notice, the petitioner refuted the
allegation of any attempt having been made to mislead the
respondents and contended that the mistake was bona fide. It
further held out an assurance that it would take utmost care in the
future. Ultimately and upon a consideration of the aforesaid reply,
the respondents proceeded to pass the impugned order of 27
January 2021. For our purposes, it would be relevant to extract the
following paragraphs as they appear in the impugned order: -
“12. The representations of the HGO in response to the
show cause notice were examined in the Ministry and it was
decided to get the veracity/ authenticity of these documents
verified from the Income Tax Department. Accordingly,
Principal Commissioner Income Tax -23, Mumbai was
requested to verify the veracity/authenticity of the documents
(ITRs submitted by HGO).
13.     IT Department has informed that the narration at point
no.2(x(i) of Part A - P&L Account for the FY 2017-18 filed
along with the original IT Return for AY 2018-19 (Ack
No.357720061301018) is "Gross Receipt from Haj" and there
is no narration such as 'Gross Receipt from Umrah'. Further, as
per E-filling portal, the assessee Shri Arif Hasan Shaikh (PAN
ANCPS1891C) filed the return of income for AY 2018-19 on
30.10.2018 bearing E- filing acknowledgement no
357720061301018 and there is no other return of income filed
for the year under consideration besides the return of income
filed on 30.10.2018. A copy of the Original ITR was also
provided by the IT Department.
14.      From the Original ITR furnished by the IT Department
and that submitted by the HGO for the AY 2018-19, it has
been observed that besides the narration as mentioned above,
following changes have also been made by the HGO:
(i)    The copy of ITR provided by IT Dept mentions trade
name of proprietorship of HGO as "AL SUDAIS TOURS &
TRAVELS" whereas the copy of ITR submitted by HGO
mentioned name as "AL SUDAIS HAJ & UMRAH TOURS".
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                 Page 11 of 37
(ii) The copy of ITR provided by IT Dept mentions address
of HGO as "Shop No 8, 1st Floor, 279, Circular Bldg, S.V.
Maharashtra" but the copy of ITR submitted by HGO
mentioned address as "Shop no 6. Ground floor, Maklai Park
15.     Therefore, the original ITR submitted by the HGO was
fudged at various places. Also, as per IT Department, the HGO
had filed only one return for the AY 2018-19. The HGO had
Fudged Government documents (ITR downloaded from
Income tax website) to satisfy the query raised by the
empanelled Chartered Accountant Firm of MoMA and to
secure Haj quota. HGO also misrepresented about filing of
Rectification Returns for AY 2018-19.
16.     As per Clause 2 of Annexure II of HGO Policy for Haj
2019-23, HGOs that misrepresent or mislead the authorities in
their application and documents will be automatically debarred
from applying for at least 5 subsequent years besides forfeiture
of security deposit. This debarment will apply to all companies
and firms in which the director/proprietor/partner of the
debarred firm is present, provided that blacklisting will not be
ordered unless an opportunity to show cause against such
blacklisting is given to the HGO concerned. The HGO had
been given opportunity vide this Ministry's show cause dated
17.     Keeping in view the above position, it has been
decided with the approval of the Competent Authority in the
Ministry that as per the provisions of clause 2 of Annexure II
of HGO Policy 2019-23, the security deposit of Rs.25 lakh
submitted by M/s Al Sudais Haj & Umrah Services for Haj
2019 be forfeited for fudging the documents thereby
misrepresenting the authorities in its application for
registration during Haj 2019 and the HGO be debarred from
applying as Haj Group Organiser for 5 years starting from Haj
2019. This debarment shall apply to all companies/ firms in
which the proprietor of the debarred firm is present. The
debarment will continue till Haj 2023.”
18.     On a consideration of the aforesaid and the material placed
on the record, the Court notes that the respondents have ultimately
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                  Page 12 of 37
found that the original ITRs had set forth the gross revenues that
had been received by the petitioner from Haj and at no time had
those returns referred to those gross receipts as having been earned
from Umrah operations. The respondents have also taken note of
the apparent discrepancy in the address appearing in the multiple
copies of the ITRs that were submitted by the petitioner with the
original mentioning it as being housed in shop No. “6” and another
version mentioning it as being housed in shop No. “8”.
19.     The respondents in this respect have held that the ITR
provided by the Income Tax Department shows the address as set
forth in the ITR as being shop No. “8”. They have also noted the
fact that quite apart from the original ITR having been “fudged” at
various places, the Income Tax Department had apprised them that
only one return had been filed for Financial Year 2018-19. It
accordingly proceeded to debar the petitioner for a period of five
years and further framed directions for forfeiture of its security
deposit.
20.      Appearing for the petitioner, Mr. Krishnan submitted that
the respondents appear to have proceeded on a blatantly incorrect
foundation that no rectification application had been filed and that
the original ITR for Financial Year 2018-19 had not been rectified.
This, according to learned counsel, is clearly belied from the
documents which have been placed on the record and which
clearly establish that an application for rectification had come to
be preferred on 22 May 2019 and which was ultimately allowed
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                          Page 13 of 37
by the Income Tax Department on 01 June 2019. According to
learned counsel, the mention in the ITRs of revenues obtained
from Haj operations was a genuine mistake since undisputedly the
petitioner had never been selected as an HGO by the respondents.
Mr. Krishnan further urged that the record of the respondents
would clearly establish that it had only undertaken activities
connected with Umrah operations.
21.     On a more fundamental plane, learned counsel submitted
that the proceedings before the respondent had evidently come to a
close on 20 May 2019 on which date its application for being
enlisted as an HGO had come to be rejected. Learned counsel
submitted that the notification of 20 May 2019 and which
conferred an opportunity on the entities whose applications had
been rejected to make a representation was effectively envisioned
to be for redressal of grievances. It was in the aforesaid backdrop
that learned counsel submitted that such an entity could not have
been placed in a more disadvantageous position than where it
stood on the date of the rejection of its application. The
submission essentially was that the Apex Committee could not
have visited an applicant with penalties which were neither
contemplated nor inflicted by the principal authority and that too
in proceedings which were confined to the consideration of
representations that were made.
22.     Learned counsel also submitted that the action of the
respondents is wholly disproportionate bearing in mind the fact
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                          Page 14 of 37
that the declarations appearing in the ITR had been ultimately
rectified by the Department itself. Learned counsel in support of
his aforesaid contentions had placed reliance upon the following
1. Kulja       Industries        Limited       versus     Chief    General
Nigam Limited and Ors.5
2. Coimbatore District Central Cooperative Bank versus
Employees Assn. and Anr.6
3. Ashok Kumar Nigam versus State of Uttar Pradesh and
23.      Learned counsel appearing for the first respondent had
while reiterating the pleas taken in the counter affidavit filed in
these proceedings, submitted that the multiple ITRs which were
tendered by the petitioner clearly evidence the inconsistent
declarations made by it. It was pointed out that while originally the
ITR as submitted sought to disclose revenue received from Haj
operations, the subsequent copy which was filed purported to hold
out that the declaration in respect of revenue earning was in
respect of Umrah operations. It was further submitted that the
rectification application undisputedly came to be made after the
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                    Page 15 of 37
application of the petitioner had been rejected and a decision to
that effect had been duly communicated. It was further urged that
the rectification admittedly came to be granted approval by the
Income Tax Department on 01 June 2019 and thus clearly after the
last date of submission of applications and in any case after the
final order rejecting the application of the petitioner had come to
be passed.
24.     Taking the Court through the contents of the counter
affidavit which has been filed, learned counsel further submitted
that the action to debar the petitioner as well as forfeiture of its
security deposit was based on the recommendations as framed by
the Apex Committee and which had been duly accepted and
endorsed by the Ministry. It was further argued that the policy in
terms of clause 2 contained in Annexure II had clearly placed
parties on notice of a misrepresentation inevitably leading to
respondents being entitled to debar them from applying for five
subsequent years in addition to forfeiture of the security deposit.
Clause 2 as contained in the policy is extracted hereinbelow: -
“19. That the Clause 2 of Annexure 2 of HGO Policy clearly
"HGOs that misrepresent or mislead the authorities in their
application and documents will be automatically debarred
from applying for at least 5 subsequent years besides forfeiture
of security deposit. This debarment will apply to all companies
and firms in which the director/proprietor/partner of the
debarred firm is present, provided that blacklisting will not be
ordered unless an opportunity to show cause against such
blacklisting is given to the HGO concerned.”
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                 Page 16 of 37
25.     It would be pertinent to note that the writ petition has been
principally contested by respondent No.2, the Haj Committee of
India which had filed detailed written submissions also in these
proceedings. Although the said respondent is neither a necessary
nor a proper party, since it was duly represented by learned
counsel, the Court had permitted submissions to be addressed at its
behest also. Taking the Court through the written submissions
which were filed, learned counsel pointed out that in the ITR
which had been initially filed, undisputedly, the petitioner had
placed reliance on revenues generated from Haj operations and
which fact was also evidenced from the disclosures made therein.
Learned counsel laid emphasis on the fact that the ITRs which
were submitted along with the clarificatory letter of 08 April 2019,
ex facie, amount to a misrepresentation and a clear attempt to
deceive and misinform the respondents. Learned counsel pointed
out that the ITRs which were submitted along with the aforesaid
communication were asserted to be those existing on the portal of
the Income Tax Department. The aforesaid assertion, according to
learned counsel, has been clearly found to be fictitious and
incorrect since at least on that date the return had neither been
rectified nor had any corrections thereto been permitted by the
26.     Learned counsel also laid stress on the discrepancies
existing in the address details which appear in the multiple copies
and versions of the ITR which had been submitted by the
petitioner. It was lastly submitted that, in any case, the
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                          Page 17 of 37
rectification came to be allowed after the last date of submission
of applications and after the applications submitted by the
petitioner had come to be finally rejected by the first respondent.
In view of the aforesaid, it was his submission that the debarment
of the petitioner as well as forfeiture of security could not be
assailed by the petitioner.
27.     It was further urged that the consequences of submission of
misleading documents or acts of misrepresentation stood duly set
out in clause 2 as appearing in Annexure II of the HGO policy. In
view of the aforesaid, learned counsel urged that it was clearly not
open to the petitioner to question or assail the ultimate action
taken by the first respondent. It is these rival submissions which
fall for consideration.
28.     As this Court reviews the records which have been placed
on the writ petition, it is manifest that the ITRs which were
submitted along with the original application appeared to suggest
that the petitioner had declared gross receipts and revenues as
having been derived from Haj operations. Undisputedly, the
petitioner had prior to the making of the application in question
never been enlisted as an HGO. It could not have consequently
asserted that it had earned revenues from Haj operations.
29.     Once the deficiency letter came to be issued, the petitioner
proceeded to submit certain documents along with its letter of 08
April 2019. In the said communication, it was clearly and
unequivocally conceded by the petitioner that it could not have
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                           Page 18 of 37
claimed any turnover connected with assisting the passage of
persons to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia during the Haj. It
consequently clarified that due to oversight, the turnover had been
shown as having been obtained from Haj operations when in fact
they were drawn only from Umrah business receipts. The
certificates of the Chartered Accountant which were appended to
the aforesaid communication had also asserted that the revenues
had been obtained from the carrying on of operations relating to
Umrah as distinct from Haj.
30.     However, a copy of the ITR which was submitted purported
to represent as if the revenues which were disclosed therein had
been obtained from Umrah operations. This clearly could not have
been the position which prevailed on that date since the ITR
submitted for the assessment year in question had yet not been
rectified. The statement, therefore, to the aforesaid extent was
clearly incorrect and misleading. This could not possibly have
been the position since the application for rectification came to be
made only on 22 May 2019. The recitals appearing in the
concerned ITR consequently could not have been deemed to have
been amended prior thereto. The rectification application
ultimately came to be granted on 01 June 2019. However, and by
this time, the application of the petitioner had come to be finally
rejected by the first respondent in terms of the order of 20 May
2019. The rectification thus could not have inured to the benefit of
the petitioner nor could it had been taken into consideration for the
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                          Page 19 of 37
purposes of reviving an application which had already been
rejected on 20 May 2019.
31.     The petitioner, however, sought to explain the same as
being an action taken by the Chartered Accountant and principally
amounting to an overzealous attempt on its part to present a stand
that the ITR showed and carried disclosures relating to revenues
obtained from Umrah operations. The Court finds itself unable to
accept this explanation since the representation had been made by
the petitioner itself. It cannot now seek to disavow the Chartered
Accountant who had been engaged by it or distance itself from the
evident attempt to mislead by virtue of submission of an ITR
return which purported to show and represent revenues as having
been obtained from Umrah operations.
32.     However, and as the record would bear out, the petitioner
sought to represent its case in light of the provisions made in Para
4 of the notification dated 20 May 2019. It is the aforesaid
representation which appears to have been placed for the
consideration of the Apex Committee. A representation in terms of
Para 4 of the notification of 20 May 2019 was clearly envisaged
for redressal of grievances. It could not, in the considered opinion
of this Court, have been utilized to foist further or additional
penalties upon the petitioner. That was clearly not the province or
the remit of the Apex Committee. While examining grievances
raised by the applicants, the said Committee could not have
possibly visited the representee with penalties far greater or in
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                           Page 20 of 37
excess of those that the original authority may have chosen to
impose.
33.     It becomes pertinent to observe that the first respondent
while proceeding to reject the application of the petitioner had
chosen neither to debar it nor to initiate any action for forfeiture of
its security deposit. That decision admittedly appears to have been
the view and the opinion formed by the Apex Committee. In fact,
the record would establish that it was the recommendation of the
Apex Committee which predicated the issuance of the show cause
notice. Learned counsel for the petitioner had in this connection
referred to the principles laid down by the Supreme Court in
Ashok Kumar and more particularly to the following passages as
appearing therein: -
“4. The legal position, as to the powers of the High Court
to direct enhancement of punishment in a writ petition arising
out of disciplinary action taken against an employee, stands
concluded by the decisions of this Court, referred to above.
In Pradeep Kumar case [Pradeep Kumar v. Union of India,
(2005) 12 SCC 219] , in a somewhat similar circumstances, a
similar question had arisen for consideration before this Court.
In that case too the High Court had found the punishment of
reduction in pay and denial of increments awarded to the
appellant to be inadequate, for the gravity of the misconduct.
The High Court had accordingly remanded the matter back to
the disciplinary authority to award the maximum punishment
of dismissal from service which direction was then assailed
before this Court on the ground that the High Court had no
such power to direct enhancement of punishment either by
itself or by remanding the matter to the disciplinary authority.
An employee complaining against the punishment awarded to
him could not, observed this Court, be placed in a worse-off
position for coming to the Court.
5. The following passages from the judgment is in this
regard are apposite: (Pradeep Kumar case [Pradeep
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                 Page 21 of 37
Kumar v. Union of India, (2005) 12 SCC 219], SCC pp. 219-
“3. According to the appellant, similar punishment was
inflicted on the other two employees. Being aggrieved,
all three employees filed separate writ petitions before
the High Court. The writ petitions of the other two
employees were merely dismissed as withdrawn. As far
as the appellant was concerned, the High Court not only
dismissed the writ petition but also directed the
punishing authority to reconsider the punishment
imposed in view of the observations of the High Court
and held that the maximum penalty of dismissal from
service ought to have been accorded. There was a
further direction that the action taken against the
appellant should be intimated to the Court as soon as
possible.
4. Irrespective of the crime/offence with which the
appellant may have been charged, it was not open to the
High Court to have issued such a direction. The scope
of judicial review did not allow the High Court to have
interfered with the punishment imposed by the
disciplinary authorities on the appellant. Besides, a writ
petitioner cannot be put in a worse position by coming
to court. The directions of the High Court are not
sustainable and must be set aside. We are told by the
learned counsel for the appellant that the respondent
authority pursuant to the directions issued by the High
Court initiated proceedings against the appellant for the
purpose of imposing the penalty of dismissal from
service. We have held that the direction of the High
Court was wholly outside its jurisdiction. The appeals
are thus allowed and the High Court's directions are set
aside. The disciplinary enquiry initiated on the basis of
the High Court's order is consequently also quashed.
However, the writ petitions will stand dismissed. There
is no order as to costs.”
6. To the same effect is the decision in Ramesh Chander
Singh case [Ramesh Chander Singh v. High Court of
Allahabad, (2007) 4 SCC 247 : (2007) 2 SCC (Cri) 266] where
too the question whether the High Court could interfere with
the order of punishment in a matter where the employee
challenged the punishment awarded to him in a writ petition,
fell for consideration before this Court. The question was
answered in the following words: (SCC p. 252, para 6)
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                  Page 22 of 37
“6. Based on the enquiry report, the appellant was served
with a notice to show cause as to why his two
increments should not be withheld with cumulative
effect. The matter was placed before the Full Court on
20-11-1999 and the Full Court by its resolution imposed
a major punishment of withholding two annual
increments of the appellant with cumulative effect. The
appellant filed a review application against the said
punishment and the same was rejected. Thereupon, he
filed a writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution challenging the punishment imposed on
him. By judgment dated 3-10-2005, the writ petition
was dismissed and in the very same judgment the
appellant was directed to show cause within three weeks
from the date of the judgment as to why the High Court
should not consider substitution of the punishment
imposed, by removing him from service. Pursuant to the
notice, the appellant appeared and presented his case
before the Division Bench. By judgment dated 25-11-
2005, the appellant was reduced to the rank next below,
that is, Civil Judge (Senior Division). Both the
judgments of the Division Bench are challenged before
7. We have, in the light of the above decisions, no
hesitation in holding that the High Court had fallen in a
palpable error in directing issuance of a show-cause notice to
the appellant. The appellant could not, as observed earlier, be
placed in a worse-off situation because of his having sought
redress against the punishment awarded to him by the
disciplinary authority which in the instant case is the High
Court itself.
8. In the result, we allow this appeal and direct setting
aside of that part of the order [Ashok Kumar Nigam v. State of
U.P., 2012 SCC OnLine All 4210] passed by the High Court
whereby the High Court had directed the issuing of show-
cause notice to the appellant for award of a heavier
punishment upon him. The fact that the appellant has since
retired from service, is only an added feature why the direction
of the High Court should be set aside. The parties are left to
bear their own costs.”
34.      In Ashok Kumar Nigam, the Supreme Court was called
upon to consider the correctness of the order passed by the
Allahabad High Court which had proceeded to direct enhancement
of punishment on a writ petition which had been preferred by an
employee aggrieved by the disciplinary action taken against him.
It was in the said backdrop that the Supreme Court had observed
that the High Court would clearly have no power to direct
enhancement of the punishment. It had pertinently observed that
an employee complaining against the punishment awarded to him
cannot be placed in a “worse-off position” merely because he
chose to approach the High Court to seek redress against the order
of the disciplinary authority. The aforesaid principles, though
enunciated in the context of a High Court having enhanced the
punishment imposed, would clearly be apposite to evaluate the
validity of the action that was taken by the Apex Committee.
35.     The Apex Committee while considering the grievance
raised by the applicant and when petitioned to examine the same
could not have possibly proceeded to either impose or recommend
punishments which had not been contemplated by the original
authority. The adoption of such a recourse would amount to
recognizing the Apex Committee as being empowered to enhance
any punishment that the original authority may have chosen to
impose. In fact, if the action of the Apex Committee were to be
accorded a judicial imprimatur, it would amount to recognizing a
power inhering in it to independently impose and inflict penalties
even though the original authority may have refrained from doing
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                           Page 24 of 37
so. Such a course of action cannot be countenanced more so when
one bears in mind the limited extent of the remit of the Apex
Committee and which was indubitably confined to the
consideration of representations. A committee which is constituted
merely as an avenue for redressal of grievances cannot be
recognised to be vested with such a power. The Court
consequently comes to hold that the action of the Apex Committee
in proceeding to frame peremptory recommendations for the
debarment of the petitioner as well as for forfeiture of the security
deposit cannot possibly be sustained.
36.     That takes the Court then to the action initiated by the first
respondent based upon the recommendation of the Apex
Committee. As would be evident from the contents of the show
cause notice dated 27 February 2020, the initiation of action was
based entirely upon the recommendation framed by the Apex
Committee. This becomes palpably evident from a reading of Para
2 of the show cause notice. The Court further notes that Para 2 of
the show cause notice then proceeds to observe that the
recommendation of the Apex Committee had been approved by
the competent authority in the Ministry. The aforesaid aspect
assumes significance since the language as employed in Para 2
clearly appears to suggest that a decision to visit the petitioner
with debarment and forfeiture appears to have been already
formed. The show cause notice clearly evidences the entire issue
having been already prejudged and predetermined.
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                          Page 25 of 37
37.      It is the aforementioned facts which leads the Court to recall
the pertinent principles relating to the mindset of an authority
which issues a show cause notice, as were expounded by the
Supreme Court in Oryx Fisheries Pvt. Ltd. v. Union of India8:-
“27. It is no doubt true that at the stage of show cause, the
person proceeded against must be told the charges against him
so that he can take his defence and prove his innocence. It is
obvious that at that stage the authority issuing the charge-
sheet, cannot, instead of telling him the charges, confront him
with definite conclusions of his alleged guilt. If that is done, as
has been done in this instant case, the entire proceeding
initiated by the show-cause notice gets vitiated by unfairness
and bias and the subsequent proceedings become an idle
ceremony.
28. Justice is rooted in confidence and justice is the goal of
a quasi-judicial proceeding also. If the functioning of a quasi-
judicial authority has to inspire confidence in the minds of
those subjected to its jurisdiction, such authority must act with
utmost fairness. Its fairness is obviously to be manifested by
the language in which charges are couched and conveyed to
the person proceeded against.
29. In the instant case from the underlined [Ed. : Herein
italicised.] portion of the show-cause notice it is clear that the
third respondent has demonstrated a totally closed mind at the
stage of show-cause notice itself. Such a closed mind is
inconsistent with the scheme of Rule 43 which is set out
below. The aforesaid Rule has been framed in exercise of the
power conferred under Section 33 of the Marine Products
Export Development Authority Act, 1972 and as such that
Rule is statutory in nature.
31. It is of course true that the show-cause notice cannot be
read hypertechnically and it is well settled that it is to be read
reasonably. But one thing is clear that while reading a show-
cause notice the person who is subject to it must get an
impression that he will get an effective opportunity to rebut the
allegations contained in the show-cause notice and prove his
innocence. If on a reasonable reading of a show-cause notice a
person of ordinary prudence gets the feeling that his reply to
the show-cause notice will be an empty ceremony and he will
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                     Page 26 of 37
merely knock his head against the impenetrable wall of
prejudged opinion, such a show-cause notice does not
commence a fair procedure especially when it is issued in a
quasi-judicial proceeding under a statutory regulation which
promises to give the person proceeded against a reasonable
opportunity of defence.
32. Therefore, while issuing a show-cause notice, the
authorities must take care to manifestly keep an open mind as
they are to act fairly in adjudging the guilt or otherwise of the
person proceeded against and specially when he has the power
to take a punitive step against the person after giving him a
show-cause notice.
33. The principle that justice must not only be done but it
must eminently appear to be done as well is equally applicable
to quasi-judicial proceeding if such a proceeding has to inspire
confidence in the mind of those who are subject to it.
34. A somewhat similar observation was made by this
Court in Kumaon Mandal Vikas Nigam Ltd. v. Girja Shankar
Pant [(2001) 1 SCC 182 : 2001 SCC (L&S) 189] . In that case,
this Court was dealing with a show-cause notice-cum-charge-
sheet issued to an employee. While dealing with the same, this
Court in para 25 (SCC p. 198 of the Report) by referring to the
language in the show-cause notice observed as follows:
“25. Upon consideration of the language in the show-
cause notice-cum-charge-sheet, it has been very
strongly contended that it is clear that the officer
concerned has a mindset even at the stage of framing
of charges and we also do find some justification in
such a submission since the chain is otherwise
complete.”
After para 25, this Court discussed in detail the emerging law
of bias in different jurisdictions and ultimately held in para 35
(SCC p. 201 of the Report), the true test of bias is:
“35. The test, therefore, is as to whether a mere
apprehension of bias or there being a real danger of
bias and it is on this score that the surrounding
circumstances must and ought to be collated and
necessary conclusion drawn therefrom—in the event
however the conclusion is otherwise inescapable that
there is existing a real danger of bias, the
administrative action cannot be sustained:”
(emphasis supplied)
35. Going by the aforesaid test any man of ordinary
prudence would come to a conclusion that in the instant case
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                   Page 27 of 37
the alleged guilt of the appellant has been prejudged at the
stage of show-cause notice itself.”
38.     Tested on the aforesaid lines, the show cause notice as well
as all consequential proceedings that were taken and that led up to
the passing of the impugned order are thus additionally liable to be
set aside on this score.
39.     The Court then lastly proceeds to consider the submission of
learned counsel for the petitioner based on the doctrine of
“proportionality”. The precepts underlying the proportionality
principle were eloquently enunciated by the Supreme Court in
Coimbatore District in the following terms: -
“Doctrine of proportionality
17. So far as the doctrine of proportionality is concerned, there
is no gainsaying that the said doctrine has not only arrived in
our legal system but has come to stay. With the rapid growth
of administrative law and the need and necessity to control
possible abuse of discretionary powers by various
administrative authorities, certain principles have been evolved
by courts. If an action taken by any authority is contrary to
law, improper, irrational or otherwise unreasonable, a court of
law can interfere with such action by exercising power of
judicial review. One of such modes of exercising power,
known to law is the “doctrine of proportionality”.
18. “Proportionality” is a principle where the court is
concerned with the process, method or manner in which the
decision-maker has ordered his priorities, reached a conclusion
or arrived at a decision. The very essence of decision-making
consists in the attribution of relative importance to the factors
and considerations in the case. The doctrine of proportionality
thus steps in focus true nature of exercise—the elaboration of a
rule of permissible priorities.
19. de Smith states that “proportionality” involves “balancing
test” and “necessity test”. Whereas the former (balancing test)
permits scrutiny of excessive onerous penalties or
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                  Page 28 of 37
infringement of rights or interests and a manifest imbalance of
relevant considerations, the latter (necessity test) requires
infringement of human rights to the least restrictive alternative.
[Judicial Review of Administrative Action (1995), pp. 601-05,
para 13.085; see also Wade & Forsyth: Administrative
Law (2005), p. 366.]
20. In Halsbury's Laws of England (4th Edn.), Reissue, Vol.
1(1), pp. 144-45, para 78, it is stated:
“The court will quash exercise of discretionary powers in
which there is no reasonable relationship between the
objective which is sought to be achieved and the means used to
that end, or where punishments imposed by administrative
bodies or inferior courts are wholly out of proportion to the
relevant misconduct. The principle of proportionality is well
established in European law, and will be applied by English
courts where European law is enforceable in the domestic
courts. The principle of proportionality is still at a stage of
development in English law; lack of proportionality is not
usually treated as a separate ground for review in English law,
but is regarded as one indication of manifest
unreasonableness.”
21. The doctrine has its genesis in the field of administrative
law. The Government and its departments, in administering the
affairs of the country, are expected to honour their statements
of policy or intention and treat the citizens with full personal
consideration without abuse of discretion. There can be no
“pick and choose”, selective applicability of the government
norms or unfairness, arbitrariness or unreasonableness. It is not
permissible to use a “sledgehammer to crack a nut”. As has
been said many a time; “where paring knife suffices, battle axe
is precluded”.
22. In the celebrated decision of Council of Civil Service
Union v. Minister for Civil Service [1985 AC 374 : (1984) 3
proclaimed: (All ER p. 950h-j)
“Judicial review has I think developed to a stage today when,
without reiterating any analysis of the steps by which the
development has come about, one can conveniently classify
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                   Page 29 of 37
under three heads the grounds on which administrative action
is subject to control by judicial review. The first ground I
would call „illegality‟, the second „irrationality‟ and the third
„procedural impropriety‟. That is not to say that further
development on a case-by-case basis may not in course of time
add further grounds. I have in mind particularly the possible
adoption in the future of the principle of „proportionality‟….”
(emphasis supplied)”
40.     Coimbatore District bids an administrative authority to
weigh and balance the competing aspects that must be borne in
mind and inform the decision making process. Proportionality, as
the Supreme Court noted in the aforesaid decision, involves the
application of the “balancing test” as well as the “necessity test”.
The former deals with the validity of penalties which may be
viewed as onerous and an outcome of a failure to balance relevant
considerations and options available with an administrative
authority. De Smith in his celebrated treatise on Administrative
Law described it to be “a manifest imbalance of relevant
considerations”.
41.     When tested on the aforesaid principles, the Court finds that
undisputedly the petitioner had not derived any benefit from the
inaccurate disclosures which were made before the respondents.
Even if the contents of the letter dated 08 April 2019 were to be
taken into account, those would clearly suggest that the petitioner
had accepted the fact that it had not earned any revenues from Haj
operations. In fact, it had fairly conceded that the gross revenues
as depicted in the ITR were from Umrah operations only. While it
is apparent that the ITR which was submitted along with the
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                   Page 30 of 37
aforesaid letter was misleading, the Court bears in mind that the
contents of the ITR filed for the concerned assessment year had
ultimately come to be duly rectified and the stand of the petitioner
of having earned revenues from Umrah as opposed to Haj was
duly accepted by the Income Tax Department itself. The Court
also takes into consideration the undisputed fact that in the
absence of the petitioner having been selected as an HGO in the
past, it could not have possibly been recognized to have obtained
revenues from those operations.
42.     Turning then to clause 2 of Annexure - II, it would be
pertinent to note that the power conferred on the respondent to
debar or to forfeit a security deposit cannot possibly be understood
as being predetermined penalties which could be said to be
inevitable or ineluctable. The mere usage of the word
“automatically” also does not lead this Court to conclude that the
penalty of debarment or forfeiture is to be necessarily imposed.
Those penalties would be warranted provided the circumstances of
a particular case or the conduct of a party warrants the imposition
of those measures. The doctrine of proportionality applies with full
vigor even to an action of blacklisting. This is evident from the
following principles enunciated in Kulja Industries:-
“19. Even the second facet of the scrutiny which the
blacklisting order must suffer is no longer res integra. The
decisions of this Court in Radhakrishna Agarwal v. State of
Royappa v. State of T.N. [(1974) 4 SCC 3 : 1974 SCC (L&S)
165] ; Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India [(1978) 1 SCC 248]
; Ajay Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi [(1981) 1 SCC 722 :
Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India [(1979) 3
SCC 489] and DwarkadasMarfatia and Sons v. Port of
Bombay [(1989) 3 SCC 293] have ruled against arbitrariness
and discrimination in every matter that is subject to judicial
review before a writ court exercising powers under Article 226
or Article 32 of the Constitution.
20. It is also well settled that even though the right of the writ
petitioner is in the nature of a contractual right, the manner, the
method and the motive behind the decision of the authority
whether or not to enter into a contract is subject to judicial
review on the touchstone of fairness, relevance, natural justice,
non-discrimination, equality and proportionality. All these
considerations that go to determine whether the action is
sustainable in law have been sanctified by judicial
pronouncements of this Court and are of seminal importance in
a system that is committed to the rule of law. We do not
consider it necessary to burden this judgment by a copious
reference to the decisions on the subject. A reference to the
following passage from the decision of this Court in Mahabir
Auto Stores v. Indian Oil Corpn. [(1990) 3 SCC 752] should,
in our view, suffice: (SCC pp. 760-61, para 12)
“12. It is well settled that every action of the State or an
instrumentality of the State in exercise of its executive
power, must be informed by reason. In appropriate cases,
actions uninformed by reason may be questioned as
arbitrary in proceedings under Article 226 or Article 32 of
the Constitution. Reliance in this connection may be placed
on the observations of this Court in Radhakrishna
Agarwal v. State of Bihar [(1977) 3 SCC 457 : (1977) 3
SCR 249] . … In case any right conferred on the citizens
which is sought to be interfered, such action is subject to
Article 14 of the Constitution, and must be reasonable and
can be taken only upon lawful and relevant grounds of
public interest. Where there is arbitrariness in State action
of this type of entering or not entering into contracts, Article
14 springs up and judicial review strikes such an action
down. Every action of the State executive authority must be
subject to rule of law and must be informed by reason. So,
whatever be the activity of the public authority, in such
monopoly or semi-monopoly dealings, it should meet the
test of Article 14 of the Constitution. If a governmental
action even in the matters of entering or not entering into
contracts, fails to satisfy the test of reasonableness, the same
would be unreasonable. … It appears to us that rule of
reason and rule against arbitrariness and discrimination,
rules of fair play and natural justice are part of the rule of
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                      Page 32 of 37
law applicable in situation or action by State instrumentality
in dealing with citizens in a situation like the present one.
Even though the rights of the citizens are in the nature of
contractual rights, the manner, the method and motive of a
decision of entering or not entering into a contract, are
subject to judicial review on the touchstone of relevance
and reasonableness, fair play, natural justice, equality and
non-discrimination in the type of the transactions and nature
of the dealing as in the present case.”
43.     The aforesaid aspect was highlighted in a decision of
our Court in Raman Kalra v. Govt. (NCT of Delhi)9, as
would be evident from the following passages:
“26. In the present case, the NIT provides for a bidder,
who either withdraw his bid within the validity period or
defaults in paying the amounts in terms of the LOA, to be
visited with the consequences of forfeiture of EMD/bid
security and also be debarred from participating in
tenders/RFPs issued by DTIDC for a period exceeding four
years (the current financial year and four succeeding
financial years). Ex facie such provision of debarring a bidder
is harsh and may in certain circumstances be wholly
inequitable. The period of blacklisting is also significantly
long. In the circumstances, it would be necessary for DTIDC
to examine the proportionality of such measure in the context
of the facts of each case. In a given case, a bidder may have
been prevented by reasons completely beyond his control and
may be in a position to establish the same. In such cases, it
may not be apposite for DTIDC to ignore the mitigating
circumstances and impose such a harsh punishment of
debarring the bidder for more than a period of four financial
years. It is difficult to accept that such an imposition of a
harsh and severe punitive action should follow mechanically.
27. This Court is thus of the view that it is necessary for
DTIDC to permit the bidder against whom such action of
blacklisting is proposed, to explain and show cause why such
action for debarring him not be taken and/or that the period
of blacklisting be reduced. In Otik Hotels (supra), a
Coordinate Bench of this Court observed that no show cause
notice was required because the tender documents itself
stipulated that the applicant who failed to pay the licence fee
as required would be debarred from participating in bidding
for future projects of the respondent therein for a period of
one year. However, the Court also found that in the facts of
that case, punishment of debarment for a period of one year
was not proportionate and consequently, reduced the
punishment of debarment imposed on the petitioner therein to
a period of one month. Thus, the said decision also
underscores the importance of evaluating whether the harsh
measure of debarring a defaulting bidder for a period ought
to be taken mechanically, without considering the question if
such measure is proportionate in the given circumstances.
This Court is of the view that such question cannot be
considered without affording the bidder a chance to furnish
an explanation.
28. In the case of Naresh Khetrapal (supra), a Division
Bench of this Court considered a challenge to the clause of
the tender document whereby the Ministry of Tourism had
reserved its right to not to accept bids from agencies resorting
to unethical practices or against whom investigation/enquiry
proceedings had been initiated by investigating agencies. The
Court held that such a clause could not be read in a manner
so as to exclude from its ambit, the principles of fair play and
natural justice.
29. Indisputably, DTIDC would have the discretion to not
to deal with a bidder who has been found to be untrustworthy
as he has defaulted. In Patel Engineering Ltd. v. Union of
India: (2012) 11 SCC 257, the Supreme Court had reiterated
the principle that the “authority of the State to blacklist a
person is a necessary concomitant to the executive power of
the State to carry on the trade or the business and making of
contracts for any purpose, etc”.
30. However, the exercise of such powers cannot be
arbitrary or unreasonable and must take into account the
doctrine of proportionality and fair play. Thus, although
paragraph 4.7 of the NIT expressly provides that the failure
on the part of the bidder to pay advance licence fee and
security deposit within seven days of the receipt of LOA
would result in the bidder being debarred for the specified
period; this Court is not persuaded to accept that the said
punitive measure would follow automatically and without
affording the bidder a chance to represent against the same.
The provisions to debar the bidders on account of any default
must be read as only enabling DTIDC to take such action.
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                   Page 34 of 37
Such provision also serves as a notice to the bidders that their
default could invite such measures. However, the bidders
ought to be given a right to represent against the imposition
of such punitive measures and it is necessary for DTIDC to
consider the same before imposing such punitive measures.
31. In the circumstances, the decision of DTIDC to debar
the petitioner for the financial year 2016-17 and four further
financial years is set aside. DTIDC is at liberty to blacklist
and debar the petitioner from participating in future tenders;
however, it would be necessary for DTIDC to issue a notice
indicating its intention to impose such punishment and take a
final decision to do so after considering the petitioner's
response, if any, and following the principles of natural
justice.”
44.     When tested on the aforesaid lines, the Court finds that the
petitioner was visited with the maximum punishment and imposed
the most onerous of penalties which were contemplated under the
Policy without the assignment of any reason why the harshest of
penalties was warranted. The authorities, in fact, appear to have
acted solely on the basis of the recommendations of the Apex
Committee. As was noticed in the preceding parts of this decision,
the first respondent had originally neither imposed nor
contemplated the imposition of the penalty of debarment and
forfeiture of security. The Apex Committee, as has been held
above, had no authority to either impose such a penalty or make a
recommendation in that regard while dealing with a representation
for redressal of grievances. While the enclosures of 08 April 2019
clearly attempted to convey a position which was wholly incorrect
and     inaccurate,      the     petitioner     had    in   its representation
unequivocally conceded that it had not earned any revenues from
Haj operations. It had described that declaration as being an
oversight. The inaccuracy as evident upon a perusal of the ITR
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                                  Page 35 of 37
which was filed came to be duly rectified by the Income Tax
Department and the mistake that had occurred during the course of
filing was ultimately corrected. While the rectification which
apparently came to be granted after the rejection of the application
of the petitioner may have had no bearing on the validity of the
decision taken by the first respondent to reject the application of
the petitioner, it was clearly a circumstance which had relevance
insofar as the proposed action of blacklisting and forfeiture was
concerned.
45.     The petitioner has undisputedly suffered the impact of
debarment for the entire period of 05 years as imposed. This since
in terms of the impugned order, the same was to take effect from
2019. The petitioner has already undergone the entire period of
debarment during the pendency of these proceedings before this
Court. While it would not be possible for the Court to turn the
clock around, it must be held that the unsustainable order of
blacklisting would not operate so as to render the petitioner
disqualified in case it was to apply for enlistment as an HGO in
the future years. For reasons aforenoted, the additional punishment
of forfeiture of security deposit also clearly appears to be
disproportionate and arbitrary.
46. Accordingly, and for the aforesaid reasons, the instant writ
petition shall stand allowed on the following terms. The impugned
order dated 27 January 2021 shall stand quashed. The petitioner
shall be entitled to consequential reliefs including the refund of the
W.P.(C) 2588/2021                                           Page 36 of 37
security deposit which stood forfeited. Since the Court has found
that the debarment would not sustain, the same shall not act as a
disqualification in the future years.