Dated this the 17th day of September, 2021
One fine morning the Bar Association, Alappuzha received
an anonymous letter alleging that the petitioner, a lady who is
not a graduate in law     and not enrolled as an Advocate before
the Bar Council of Kerala, is practising        in the Courts in the
District. Then the Bar Association         without delay decided in
setting the law into motion by lodging a complaint. Pursuant to
the     complaint forwarded by the Bar Association, Alappuzha,
Crime No. 474 of 2021 has been registered by the North Police
Station, Alappuzha against the petitioner for having committed
offences punishable under Sections 417, 419 and 420 of           the
Indian Penal Code. Apprehending arrest in connection with the
said crime, the petitioner has approached this Court with this
application under Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
2. The prosecution case in a nutshell are as follows:
The petitioner is a native of Alappuzha. She was
practising as a Lawyer in various courts at Alappuzha for the
last two and a half years      with the enrolment number      of
another Advocate. She        fraudulently approached the Bar
Association,       Alappuzha     with     enrolment       number
K/1177/2018,        which   belongs    to   an    advocate    of
Thrivanathapuram and secured membership.                She was
regularly appearing before the various courts in Alappuzha
District.    She   had also submitted   applications before the
civil courts and thus her name was also         included in the
panel of Commissioners and was appointed as Commissioner
in so many cases. She has also appeared before the
Sessions courts in certain sessions cases for the accused as
State brief. Thus, she was actively and smoothly practising
the     profession  as  an   Advocate   attached    to   the Bar
Association Alappuzha even without a law degree. After her
admission as a member, she had contested the election of
the Bar Association and was elected as an office bearer of
the Association. On receipt of the anonymous letter, the
association cross checked    matter   with the Bar Council of
Kerala and then it was realized that the enrolment number
used by the petitioner actually belongs to an Advocate of
Thiruvananthapuram District and this petitioner had never
enroled as an Advocate before      the Bar Council of Kerala.
So, immediately     an Executive Committee meeting        was
convened and an opportunity was given to her to offer her
explanation by issuing a    notice. Though the notice    was
served on her, there was no        response.  Thereafter, the
Secretary of Bar Association had given the First Information
Statement before the police. Pursuant to     the same     this
crime has been registered against her before the Alappuzha
3. Heard Adv. Roy Chacko, the learned counsel for the
petitioner,    Adv. B. Pramod, the learned counsel for the
additional 3rd respondent and Smt. Sreeja V, the learned
Senior Public Prosecutor. Perused the records.
4. It is significant to note that the petitioner has put in
black and white        that  she    is not a law graduate. It is
submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioner that as
she lost some papers          in the examination she did not
complete her LL.B course         and   due to her poor financial
circumstances at home           she   could    not   successfully
complete her course. Then, she joined as a law Intern in
the office of an Advocate at Alappuzha and attended courts
regularly at Ramangiri and Alappuzha, but that was without
wearing the attire of an Advocate. Later due to the
compulsion of certain friends in the Bar Association at
Alappuzha, she        submitted    nomination to    contest  the
election of the     Bar Association     for the year 2020-2021.
Though, she has not been admitted as a member of the Bar
Association, her nomination was accepted and she won the
election.    In fact, she has not committed any offence as
alleged by the prosecution. No offence is      attracted so as
to have her custody by the police to proceed with the
investigation of the case, is the argument advanced on
behalf of her.
5. Per contra, the learned Public Prosecutor strenuously
opposed the application contending that the petitioner who
has not even completed      her graduation in law, committed
cheating by impersonation by producing documents with the
enrolment number        of an Advocate of Thrivanathapuram
and fraudulently obtained membership in the Association
and thereafter started the profession of an Advocate, as if
she was enroled as an Advocate before the Bar Council of
Kerala. She    regularly appeared before various courts      at
Alappuzha for about two and half years till       filing of the
compliant against her. She even contested cases before the
Sessions Courts    as State Brief   and obtained orders from
various Courts appointing her as Advocate Commissioner
and submitted reports before the courts. According to the
prosecution, in short she has cheated the District Judiciary,
Advocates as well as the entire public and therefore       the
offences alleged against her are no doubt          grave and
serious in nature and the prosecution has to probe into the
details so as to collect the entire materials to proceed with
the investigation of the case with her in custody.     Hence,
granting of pre-arrest bail is vigorously opposed by the
learned public prosecutor.
6. The Additional 3rd respondent, who is a member of
the Bar Association, Alappuzha has been impleaded as per
the order in Crl.M.A. No. 1 of 2021.    He has also opposed
the application with all vigour contending that the petitioner
has played fraud on the entire legal fraternity by appearing
before various courts with the enrolment number of another
Advocate of Thiruvananthapuram. It is further pointed out
by the learned counsel that she used to appear before the
courts in the prescribed uniform of a lawyer and that the
submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner that she
never used the        white bands and      Advocates' gown is
absolutely incorrect.    She was    actively participating in all
activities of the Bar Association. She secured membership in
the Association by producing false documents with the intent
to deceive as she did not possess an enrolment certificate.
The investigating agency has registered the case against her
only under Sections 417, 419 and 420 of Indian Penal Code.
But the offences committed by her includes offences under
Sections 416, 465, 468 and 473 of Indian Penal Code as well
as under Section 45 of the Advocates Act, 1961.
7.   I have    considered the rival submissions of the
parties in detail. The petitioner is a young lady aged only 27
years.     It is   an admitted fact    that she has not even
completed her course in LL.B, though she was a student at
Law Academy Law College at Thiruvananthapuram for a
short period.     She has not obtained a degree in Law.       As
mentioned above the definite case of the petitioner is that
she never appeared as an Advocate or attended the courts
as an Advocate wearing the uniform prescribed for a lawyer.
But she      joined  only as a law intern in the office of an
Advocate at      Alappuzha.    Apparently  the said contention
appears to be a falsehood by Annexure R3(a), the copy of
a judgment in Sessions Case No.489 of 2013 disposed of by
the     learned Additional Sessions Judge-III, Alappuzha on
03.03.2021. Annexure. R3(a) indicates       that this petitioner
had appeared and       contested    as the defence   lawyer for
the accused Nos. 1 to 5, who faced trial           before    the
and R3(c) are the       news items published    regarding    the
acquittal of those accused       by the learned     Additional
Sessions Judge in the above referred       case. In the news
item also her name is seen mentioned as the Advocate who
appeared for the accused.       Annexure R3(d) is the notice
published by her when she contested the election to the Bar
Association, soliciting support and help from the members of
the Bar Association. In that notice also, her name is shown
as “Adv. Sessy Xavier”. As admitted by her in her statement,
she won the       election   as an office bearer of the Bar
Association for the year 2020-2021 and thus turn out to be
a member of the Executive Committee of the Advocates
Association of Alappuzha.
8. Before proceeding further, it is useful to refer to
certain provisions of the The Advocates Act, 1961 (for short
'the Act').  The    Act deals with the law relating   to legal
practitioners which extend to the whole of India.      Section
24 of the    Act deals with the provision where persons are
admitted as Advocates on a State roll.       Section 24 (1) (c)
says that    a person who has obtained a degree in law is
qualified to be  admitted      as an Advocate, if he fulfills the
conditions narrated therein.       Section 25 deals with the
authority to whom an application for enrolment has to be
submitted. Section 26 deals with disposal of an application
for admission as an Advocate.        Therefore, only  a person
holding a Law Degree is entitled to get his name enroled in
the roll as an Advocate and only after        enrolment as an
Advocate, one could practise the profession of law as an
Advocate    as reflected in Section 29      and 30 of the Act.
Here, admittedly, this petitioner is not holding a degree in
law and so     she never enroled as an Advocate before the
Bar Council of Kerala, till date.
9. But as mentioned earlier, prima facie it appears that
she got admission as a member of the Bar Association by
furnishing the     enrolment number        of an Advocate of
Thiruvananthapuram.      Only    the  members     of  the   Bar
Association can contest an election and she contested       the
election and was successful in her attempt.
10. After obtaining membership in the Bar Association,
she appeared before the various courts in Alappuzha district
as an Advocate.    Advocates     are permitted to represent or
even appear before a court of law only in uniform. Her case
that she had only joined the office of a Senior Advocate as
law intern appears to be a false statement as revealed from
the records made available before this court.
11. Here, the main question that falls for determination
is whether she is entitled to get an order of pre-arrest bail in
the case. The learned counsel for the petitioner has pointed
out that she being a member of a poor family, out of her
immaturity and lack of wisdom appeared in the courts and
contested     the election    of the  Bar Association   as her
nomination was accepted by the Association.           She only
joined as         a law intern attached to the office of a senior
lawyer      and she never functioned as a lawyer and so her
custodial interrogation is not at all required, is the definite
stand of the learned counsel for the petitioner.
12.      In Dataram Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh
((2018) 3 SCC 22)              cited by the learned counsel for the
petitioner       the Apex Court          observed as under :
''….. A fundamental postulate of criminal jurisprudence is
the presumption of innocence, meaning thereby that a person
is believed to be innocent until found guilty..................''
''........Yet  another     important  facet   of  our   criminal
jurisprudence is that the grant of bail is the general rule and
putting a person in jail or in a prison or in a correction home
(whichever        expression    one    may  wish   to   use  )    is an
''4.    To put it shortly,     a humane attitude is required to be
adopted by a Judge, while dealing with an application for
remanding a suspect or an accused person to police custody or
13. The decision of the Supreme Court in Nathu Singh
v. State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. Ompal Singh v.
State of Uttar Pradesh and Ors. (AIR 2021 SC 2606) has
also been relied on by the learned counsel to argue that the
petitioner is entitled for pre-arrest bail as it was observed
by Apex Court while referring to the power under Section
438 Cr.P.C in paragraph 25 as follows:
“25.    However, such discretionary power cannot be
exercised in an untrammeled manner. The Court must take
into account the statutory scheme under Section 438 Cr.P.C.,
particularly, the proviso to Section 438(1) Cr.P.C. and
balance    the   concerns   of   the   investigating   agency,
complainant     and   the   society   at   large    with   the
concerns/interest of the applicant. Therefore, such an order
must necessarily be narrowly tailored to protect the interests
of the applicant while taking into consideration the concerns
of the investigating authority.   Such an order must be a
reasoned one.”
14.    It  is   well  settled   that   while    considering    an
application for bail the court has to take into consideration
the nature and gravity     of the  accusation levelled against
the accused, the     larger interest of the public, reasonable
apprehension of tampering with the evidence, likelihood of
absconding     etc. In the instant case,     prima facie,  the
petitioner      has not only cheated the Bar Association,
Alappuzha, the District judiciary of Alappuzha, the general
public, but also the entire Judicial system. As observed
above, she is not a law graduate and she never enroled as
an    advocate   before   the  Bar   Council  of  Kerala,  but
clandestinely produced the enrolment number of another
Advocate and the said number was exhibited by her as her
roll number in all her activities as an Advocate before the
courts in Alappuzha District and fraudulently used        that
number for various purposes as if she had enroled as an
Advocate with the roll number. Doubtless that the gravity of
the offences alleged against her is grave and serious in
nature. Offences alleged is all the more grave as she
committed fraud on the Courts and Judicial system. The
allegations leveled against her are highly serious and
sensitive having grave repercussions in the society.      The
illegal activities adopted by her that too before the court of
law has to be dealt with an iron hand. If leniency is taken,
just considering the fact that she is a young lady, it will be
a shame for the whole     Judicial system and would shake the
confidence of the public in judicial system.
15. The Lawyers' profession is considered to be one
of the noblest profession. Lawyers      have to play a pivotal
role    in the administration of justice   as only with their
sincere and purposeful effort and assistance the Courts could
administer justice properly. They owe onerous responsibility
and duty     towards   Courts and they are considered as the
officers of the Courts. Their first responsibility is towards
their clients and then to the courts. So, misrepresenting or
presenting     as an Advocate before a client and obtaining
his/her    brief as if she is an Advocate, itself would amount
to cheating towards the public.      As observed above, prima
facie   the materials so far gathered by the investigating
agency indicate that, she has cheated the Bar Association
Alappuzha, the clients approached her with brief, the entire
judiciary especially the District judiciary, Alappuzha and the
general public.
16. It is prima facie evident that she had submitted an
application before the Bar Association with the enrolment
number of another Advocate for admission as a member of
the Association.     The minimum requirement to become a
member of a Bar Association is to hold a Law Degree and
then enrolment as an Advocate before the Bar Council, as
Bar association is the association of Lawyers. Here,     prima
facie, it is clear that this petitioner is not having any such
qualification and    she had     deceived the Bar Association,
Alappuzha by submitting a document fraudulently and with
dishonest   intention  secured   the    membership.      After
obtaining the membership in the Bar Association, she started
to appear before the court of law and continued the same
for the last two and a half years and also contested in the
election held by the association and elected as an office
bearer.   As she functioned as the       librarian of the Bar
Association she was in charge of the records of the
association. At this juncture,   I would like to add that it is
always advisable that the Bar Associations before admitting
a new member to cross check and verify with the Bar
council, so that such incidents can be prevented in future.
17.  As per the FI Statement of the informant, the
application submitted by her for admission before the
association was also found missing from the records along
with some other applications submitted on the same day.
The investigating agency has to trace out the same along
with the other required documents. From the materials so
far collected, it could be seen that there is a strong case
against   this  petitioner  to   be    proceeded  with.    The
investigating agency is supposed to go deep into all those
matters by exercising their skill so as to ascertain what are
the offences committed by this petitioner apart from the
offences she has been booked by the prosecution. In fact, I
find merit in the argument advanced by the learned counsel
for the 3rd respondent that apart from the offences for which
she has been booked as such, the illegal activities committed
by her makes out some more offences under           the Indian
Penal Code as well offences under the Advocates Act, 1961.
To probe into those details, definitely custodial interrogation
of this petitioner appears to be essential and inevitable. If
she is granted bail, the possibility to abscond also cannot be
ruled out. The argument of the learned counsel for the
petitioner that she is coming from a poor financial situation
and a young lady or she is        immature etc are not at all
justifiable reasons or grounds to exercise the discretion of
this Court under Section 438 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure in her favour. It is well settled by a plethora of
decisions of the Supreme Court that      the discretion of the
court must be exercised with care and circumspection,
depending on circumstances justifying its exercise. More so
law     applies to everyone equally. She has to surrender
before the investigating officer forthwith or else she has to
be arrested    to proceed with the investigation of the case.
Therefore, I find that this petition deserves a dismissal and
I prefer to do so.