01.   1. This matter is taken up through hybrid arrangement.
2. Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned
counsel for the State.
3. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the
petitioner has approached with a complaint copy before
the    Inspector-in-charge,     Astaranga   Police   Station,
District- Puri on 04.05.2022 for registration of FIR against
the     accused     persons    and    seeking    appropriate
investigation thereupon. However, the Inspector-in-
charge of said Police Station whimsically refused to
register the F.I.R.
4. Aggrieved by such non-registration of FIR, the
petitioner has approached the Superintendent of Police,
Puri, by way of a representation dated 29.05.2022 and the
said representation is still pending with him.
5. Learned counsel for the petitioner further submits that
though he has handed over the said complaint copy to
the Inspector-in-charge of Police, Astaranga P.S., District-
Puri which has been duly received by him, but there is no
endorsement or acknowledgement receipt or any stamp
acknowledging the receipt to that effect by the Police for
which the petitioner is unable to show as to whether the
copy the FIR has been received by the Police Station or
6. It is often observed that some amount of institutional
lethargy has crept in to so many Police Stations of the
State. Many Police Officers are refusing to register the
F.I.R.    whimsically    or    due    to    some     externous
circumstances. In such view of the matter, the Director
General of Police is directed to issue the following
instructions to all the police stations of the State:
a) Whenever a person comes to the Police Station with a
complaint, the Officer posted at the Police Station
shall compulsorily receive the complaint and endorse
the complaint by way of a receipt or by way of stamp
acknowledging the said receipt at that Police Station
with time and date. The Police Officer shall further
insist a photo copy of the said complaint to be given
back to the complainant.
b) While a prescribed format is not necessary, it is
essential that the In-charge of the Police Station shall
indicate the minimum information required to
substantiate a complaint and shall suggest what
supporting documents are relevant and can add
weight to the complaint.
c) The concerned official must be courteous to the
complainant who approaches to the Police station and
furnish a pen and a paper to the complainant, on
request.
d) The complainant may also be given a comfortable
space to sit and write the complaint.
e) If the person is illiterate, the complaint must be
dictated by the complainant to the officer-in-charge
who shall reduce the same in writing and dictate it to
the complainant before it is signed and stamped by
the officer.
f) A copy (photo-copy) of the FIR filed must be returned
to the complainant by the concerned officer free of
cost.
7. The content of this order is directed to be circulated to
all the police stations of the state by way of
instructions from the office of Director General of
Police, Odisha within a period of fifteen days from
today.
8. The aforesaid copy of the instructions be circulated to
all the Police Stations of the State along with an affidavit
shall be filed before this Court. It is essential that the
police officer need to be sensitized for registering the FIR
throughout the State when a complainant approaches the
Police Station. It is further directed that strong action
should be prescribed against the erring police officer
including the initiation of disciplinary proceedings
against them for whimsically not registering F.I.R.
9. It is out of place to mention that all the police officers,
constabulary etc. need to be sensitized to be courteous to
the public when they approach the police station and at
least they should be offered a chair at the police station.
10. List this matter on 23rd of December, 2022.
11. A free copy of this order be handed over to the
learned counsel for the State for compliance.