The aforesaid bunch of mandamus appeals
have been taken up together to avoid the prolixity of
repetition as identical orders are assailed therein by
the respective parties.
By the order impugned dated November 22,
2021, the learned Single Bench directed the Director,
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) to constitute a
committee headed by an Officer not below the rank of
Joint Director, Officers not below the rank of Deputy
Inspector General to initiate an enquiry because of
the conflicting stands taken by the Board as well as
the School Service Commission and, therefore, an
enquiry is required to be conducted which should not
be construed as an investigation to identify the
miscreants       who    caused     the    letters   of
recommendation in order to secure appointments of
the undeserving candidates.
The     issue   relates   to   appointment    of
approximately 25,000 teachers and non-teaching staff
from 2018 on the basis of the recommendation made
by the Central School Service Commission to the
West Bengal Board of Secondary Education and the
appointment letters were issued by the Board on the
basis of such recommendations.
The writ-petitions were filed challenging the
modalities     adopted    by   the   School    Service
Commission beyond the conceivable adherence of
the Rules and the Norms applicable therefor and the
recommendations having made after the expiry of the
panel by efflux of time. Even the allegation proceeds
that persons who were not included in the panel or
have been shown fairly low in the serial maintained
therein, have been favoured leaving deserving
candidates. It is discernible from the impugned order
that all the appearing candidates representing the
rival parties thereto, echoed that there must be an
enquiry to be conducted to unearth the truth and
further suggested a Special Enquiry Team under the
supervision of a retired Judge to be constituted.
However, the single Bench did not find such
suggestion to be practical or viable for such roving
enquiry and directed the enquiry to be conducted by
the Central Bureau of Investigation.
Based upon the perception that the dispute
pertains to different organs of the State and the
enquiry to be conducted by another organ of the
State, such enquiry was directed to be conducted by
an independent agency i.e. the CBI. The writ-petitions
namely MAT 1254 of 2021, MAT 1255 of 2021 and
MAT 1256 of 2021 were moved before us on
November 24, 2021. The portion of an order by which
the single Bench directed the enquiry to be conducted
by the CBI was stayed for a period of three weeks.
The Bench further directed the Commission as well
as the Board to file all the relevant documents with
the Registrar General, which were directed by the
single Bench to be handed over to the CBI in sealed
Our attention is drawn to the report of the
Registrar General of this Court wherefrom it appears
that the West Bengal Board of Secondary Education
filed the documents containing the recommendations
made by the School Service Commission as well as
the supporting documents which have been kept in
safe custody.
However, Mr. Kishore Dutta, learned Advocate,
appearing for the Commission submits that it was all
along the stand of the Commission that they never
issued such recommendations and, therefore, there is
no necessity for submitting any documents.
We    are   unimpressed   with  the  aforesaid
submissions for the simple reason that there was no
letter of recommendation ever issued by the School
Service Commission pertaining to such recruitment.
However, the dispute raised upon some of the letters
of recommendation alleged to have been issued by
the School Service Commission which does not mean
that the letter of recommendations having issued,
shall not form part of the record. In view of such
misconstruction of the order having passed on
November 24, 2021, we direct the commission to file
all the letters of recommendation which according to
them had been issued, as well as the supporting
documents, with the Registrar General by tomorrow.
It is beyond cavil of doubt that in an adversarial
litigation, the importance of the pleadings and reliefs
are required to be looked into before the Court
embark its journey in granting the final relief to the
parties. Equally, it is true that in course of hearing if
something transpires, the foundation thereof can be
traced from the pleading itself, there is no difficulty on
the part of the Court to mould the relief.
The constitutional Court proceeds in pursuit of
quest for truth and cannot remain a mute spectator
when       irregularities and/or  discrepancies    and/or
illegalities are surfaced during the hearing. We are
conscious of the proposition of law that the Court
should not adopt the concept of moulding the relief at
the first hearing of the case but if in course of hearing
Courts find certain materials which require a direction
or decision to be taken for ends of justice, there is no
impediment in moulding the relief and passing such
Mr.     Saktinath   Mukherjee,    learned   Senior
Advocate. appearing for the appellants in MAT 1273
of 2021, vociferously submits that the Court cannot
implead a party without considering the controversies
involved in the litigation unless the presence of such
party     is  required    for  complete   and   effective
adjudication thereof. According to him, his clients
have been impleaded without there being any relief
claimed against them nor there is any finding returned
in the order impleading his clients on a well-settled
proposition envisioned under Order I Rule 10(2) of
the Code of Civil Procedure.
A person can be added as a party in the
proceeding if his presence is necessary for complete
and effective adjudication of the dispute or in absence
of such person the dispute cannot be adjudicated
completely and effectively. The entire writ-petition
runs through several pages pointing irregularities
and/or illegalities committed by the authorities in
appointing persons who do not deserve an order of
appointment and if those persons are impleaded as
party, we do not think there is any infirmity and/or
illegality as any decision which would ultimately
prejudice their rights, should not be passed in their
absence or without affording any opportunity of
hearing. However, if such added respondents still feel
that they are neither a proper party nor necessary
party, it is open to them to take an appropriate steps
as permissible in the law before the single Bench.
Since     the   entire  mandamus     appeals   are
restricted on an enquiry being conducted over the
irregularities and illegalities unearthed in course of a
proceeding, we feel that the enquiry is inevitable and
should reveal the truth. Equality in opportunity to
apply for employment is the hallmark of constitution.
Equally the employment to the successful and
deserving candidates is one of the constitutional
rights. All such constitutional mandates cannot be
allowed to be withdrawn, more particularly, in
exercise of a cherry-picking of a person appears to be
a blue-eyed boy or the person in the helm of affairs.
There has been variation in the stand of the
commission as well as the Board and, therefore, the
enquiry is required to be made to reveal the truth and
also to fix the responsibilities for such misdeeds.
Enquiry or investigation by the CBI must be taken
recourse as a last resort and the power must be
exercised in a rare and exceptional case. There must
be   a   strong   evidence   of   the  failure of   the
administration and partiality is patent from the
records. Simply because the controversy raised upon
two different departments of the State or the enquiry
is to be conducted by another department of the
State, the enquiry must be done by an independent
agency cannot be the rule nor the ground for directing
the investigation by the CBI. Undoubtedly, there has
been a discrepancy and/or irregularities found from
the rival stands of the Commission as well as the
Board which require an extensive enquiry to be
undertaken and we feel that if the entire enquiry is
monitored by a retired Judge of the High Court upon
constituting a Special Team, it would be subserve the
We, therefore, appoint Mr. Justice Ranjit Kumar
Bag, a retired Judge of this Court as Chairperson to
monitor the entire process of enquiry under whose
supervision and surveillance the enquiry team would
act. The Special Team shall consist of Mr. Asutosh
Ghosh, Member of West Bengal School Service
(Administration), West Bengal Board of Secondary
Education and Mr. Arunava Banerjee, a practicing
Lawyer of this Court.
Registrar General is directed to hand over the
documents submitted by the Board as well as the
Commission to the Chairperson of Special Team
herein constituted, immediately upon filling of the
documents by the Commission in compliance with the
above direction.
The report shall be submitted before the single
Bench within two months from date.          After the
submission of the report, the single Bench will deal
with the matter and an appropriate order would be
passed depending upon the report so submitted.
The State shall bear the remuneration of the Mr.
Justice Ranjit Kumar Bag (retired), assessed at
Rs.2,00,000/-   (Rupees    Two   Lakhs    only). The
remuneration of the Mr. Arunava Banerjee, learned
Advocate shall also be paid by the State, assessed at
Rs.50,000/- (Fifty Thousand only).    The State shall
also provide the conveyance as well as other
transportation to the Members of the Committee
including the Chairperson as and when required.
The order impugned is modified to the extent as
indicated hereinabove.
The appeals being MAT 1254 of 2021, MAT
1255, MAT 1256 and MAT 1273 of 2021 are
accordingly disposed of. Connected applications, if
there be any, are also disposed of.