The Appeal has been filed seeking to set aside the judgment of
the Vacation & Sessions Judge, Coimbatore made in Crl.M.P.No.2394
of 2022     dated 12.5.2022 in Cr.No.85 of 2022 and enlarge the
appellant/appellant on bail.
2. The appellant, who was A1, later on alteration of FIR, re
arrayed as A3 in a case registered by the respondent in Crime
No.85/2022 for the alleged offences under section 153A(1)(b), 120(B)
of IPC and Section 7(1)(a) of CLA Act 1932 @ Section 153A(1)(b),
120(B) of IPC and Section 7(1)(a) of CLA Act 1932 and section 25(1A)
of Arms Act @ Section 153A(1)(b), 120(B) and 201 of IPC and Section
7(1)(a) of CLA Act, 1932 and section 25(1A) of Arms Act and Section
16 of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.  The appellant was
arrested and remanded to judicial custody on 08.03.2022 and he is in
incarceration for more than 100 days.
i) According to the prosecution, on 07.03.2022 at about 9 A.M
when Tr. P.Silambarasan, Sub Inspector of Police of Selvapuram Police
Station with his Head Constable 2395 Solomon was on rounds duty, he
noticed the appellant moving in suspicious circumstances at the
junction of Indra Nagar and Amul Nagar 1st Street and on enquiry, the
Sub Inspector of Police found that the appellant was having his driving
license with an address "Sadam Husain, S/o.Mohammed Iqbal,
ii) On further enquiry, the appellant confessed that he was
deputed by one Bakrudeen, IMDA President of Chennai over phone to
surveil the movements of one Kumaresan residing at Meenakumari
Illam, Indira Nagar, Selvapuram as one Arunkumar, son of the said
Kumaresan     loved  and   married   one  Sahanaazmi,    daughter     of
Rajamohammed and Noor Nisha of Tiruvarur, and the said Kumaresan
had objected for his son Arunkumar to convert to Islam faith by
relinquishing Hindu religion and therefore, if the said Kumaresan is
killed, there would not be any difficulty for Arunkumar to embrace
Islam faith and hence Noor Nisha had requested Bakrudeen to assist
this matter and it would be a lesson in future to prevent others to
marry Islam people and change them to Hinduism and the appellant
had also confessed that he had come for this purpose with Bakrudeen,
Imran and Mohammed Ali Jinna who were available on the way to
Jalagandeeswarar Temple at Puttuvikki Road to watch the residence of
Kumaresan, and that they had committed a conspiracy and hatched a
plan if the appellant would give a signal at the appropriate movement
Bakrudeen, Imran and Mohammed Ali Jinna would join him to commit
the murder of Kumaresan. During enquiry, the appellant had exhibited
the photo of Kumaresan from his mobile phone, which was forwarded
to him by Bakrudeen.
iii) Mr.Silambarasan, Sub Inspector of Police had produced the
appellant, his driving licence and mobile phone to Mr.Natarajan, Sub
Inspector of Police who registered the case in D-2 Selvapuram Police
Station    Cr.No.85/2022    U/s.  U/s.153A(1)    (b)  and   120B  IPC,
Sec.7(1)(a) of Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1932.
iv) Thiru.Saravanan, Inspector of Police, D-2 Selvapuram Police
Station took up the investigation and inspected the said place where
the appellant was first seen by Silambarasan, Sub Inspector of Police.
He prepared an observation mahazar in the presence of witnesses
Gobalakrishnan and Venkatarajan and rough sketch and recorded the
statements of Sub Inspectors Silambarasan, Natarajan and Head
Constable Solomon and mahazar witness Venkalarajan.
v) The Inspector arrested the appellant at 12.45 pm at the Police
Station and recorded his confession statement in the presence of
witnesses Ashokkumar, Village Administrative Officer and Babu, Village
Assistant of Kumarapalayam Village. The appellant had stated in his
confession that the said three of his associates Bakrudeen, Imrankhan
and   Mohammed     Ali  Jinna  would   be  available  on the  way   to
Jalagandeeswarar Temple at Puttuvikki Road and that he would point
out them if he was taken over there. Thereupon, the appellant took
the Inspector and party to the said place and the Inspector arrested
the said Bakrudeen, Imrankhan and Mohammed Ali Jinna at 2.15 P.M.
The Inspector of Police had examined and recorded the confession
statement of Bakrudeen and on his confession and production from a
nearby thorny bush in a concealed manner, the Inspector of Police
seized 3 long sized bill hooks and the mobile phone of Bakrudeen
under a recovery mahazar attested by the said witnesses Ashokkumar
vi) The appellant further mentioned in his confession statement
that their another associate by name Ajay would be waiting at
Ukkadam Bus Stand and thereby took the Inspector of Police and party
to Ukkadam Bus Stand and pointed out the said Ajay. The Inspector of
Police had arrested the said Ajay and recorded his confession
statement in the presence of the said witnesses Ashokkumar and
Babu. The said Ajay, in his confession statement, had stated that he
was called as Ajay by his associates, but his original name was
Ramveer. It was disclosed in the confession statement that Bakrudeen
and Ajay would arrange for a firearm and all of them would escape to
Uttarpradesh, the State of Ajay after the execution of their plan.
vii) On the basis of the recovery of 3 long sized bill hooks from
Bakrudeen, Imrankhan and Mohammed Ali Jinna, the Inspector of
Police had altered the offence by adding Sec.25(1A) of the Arms Act on
the same day. All the said five accused were produced before Judicial
Magistrate No.V, Coimbatore and they were remanded to judicial
viii) During further investigation, the Inspector arrested Noor
Nisha, wife of Rajmohammed at Koothanallur in Tiruvarur District on
12.04.2022, examined and recorded her confession statement and
also seized her mobile phone under a recovery mahazar in the
presence of witnesses Sub Inspector of Police, Maruthampal and
Women Head Constable 2608, Shoba and got her remanded to judicial
ix) On 20.04.2022, the Inspector of Police added the Penal
provisions of Sec.16 for contravention of Sec.15 and 18 of the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 and Sec. 201 IPC and
further investigation was taken up by the Assistant Commissioner of
Police, Kuniyamuthur Range, Coimbatore City as the provisions of the
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act were invoked.
xi)  While   so,  the   appellant   filed a  bail   Application   in
Crl.M.P.No.1299 of 2022 and it was dismissed by the Principal District
and Sessions Judge, Coimbatore on 23.03.2022. The appellant had
filed the second bail petition before the same Court in Crl.M.P.No.2129
of 2022 and it was also dismissed by the same court on 27.04.2022.
He had filed his third bail petition in Crl.M.P.No.2394 of 2022 and it
was also dismissed by the Vacation and Sessions Judge, Coimbatore
on 12.05.2022 and hence, the appellant has now filed the present
Crl.A.No.597 of 2022 to set aside the said Order of the Vacation and
Sessions    Judge,   Coimbatore   in   Crl.M.P.No.2394   of  2022    dated
4. The crux of the submissions made by the learned counsel
appearing for the appellant Mr.S.M.A.Jinnah are as under:-
i) The appellant is working at his father’s grocery shop and
voluntarily involved him in a Social services through one whatsapp
group namely “Indian Muslim Development Association” in Trichy on
the love over the society and posted all his services at his Facebook
pages. In this regard, the appellant had received a lot of threat in
respect to his social service under the by forming an Association called
“Indian Muslim Development Association”, particularly from the police
ii) The police namely Suresh working at Trichy Intelligence came
to the appellant's Grocery shop and threatened him to stop his social
services and when the same was not followed by the appellant, they
got personal vengeance against the appellant.
iii) While so, on 04.03.2022 at about 06.00 pm, the appellant
was called by the said Suresh to the Commissioner office without
giving any summon. When the same was questioned by the appellant’s
father, they replied as if it is just for an enquiry, however, the
appellant was detained in an illegal custody and brutally harassed by
the police officials and his signatures were obtained in empty papers
and subsequently, he was handed over to the respondent police and a
case was falsely foisted by the respondent police against the appellant.
iv) In this regard, the appellant's father sent a detailed legal
representation to the Commissioner of Police, Coimbatore dated on
v) The allegation of the prosecution case is entirely false as he
did not commit any offence as alleged by the prosecution and he is an
innocent. He did not have any criminal case against him and he serves
as a social activist and helps the poor with the help of an organization,
however, the instant case was registered against the appellant to
cover up their misdeeds.
vi) Originally the appellant was taken by the Trichy Police
illegally and kept in illegal custody and thereafter, the false case was
foisted against him. The averments of the FIR is totally false. The
appellant had never been to the place of occurrence as stated by the
FIR. The complaint lodged by the Sub Inspector of clearly discloses
that a false and cooked up case is foisted against the innocent people
belonging to the minority to brand them as anti national elements.
vii) The respondent had filed alteration report only for the
purpose of keeping the appellant in long incarceration by invoking
section 16 of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, however, ignoring
the said aspect, the remand was extended by the Learned Judicial
Magistrate V, Coimbatore which, is totally against the provision of
Section 43D(2)(B) of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
viii) The prosecution version does not reveal any ingredients of
the offence charged in the FIR and alteration report and the allegation
in the FIR, at no stretch of imagination, can fall within the definition of
"Terrorist Act" as required under section 2(1)(k) and under Section 15
of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 and the association in
which the appellant is a Member is also not a "Terrorist Organization".
ix) In fact, the first respondent had referred the investigation of
the case to the National Investigation Agency (NIA), the second
Respondent, however, the second respondent, finding that the facts of
the case do not warrant investigation by NIA, had rejected the
proposal for investigation by them.
x) The Trial Court failed to consider the fact that there are no
criminal antecedents for the appellant.
xi) The case of the prosecution is not genuine and is shrouded
with doubts when especially neither the said Arunkumar nor his father
has made any complaint to the respondent police. The entire case has
been foisted on the basis of some vested elements, who are against
the Association, in which the appellant is a member, which is carrying
on benevolent activities.     The appellant Association is not a banned
xii) The Trial Court failed to exercise the discretion in a judicious
manner known to law and it is not sustainable as it is in violation of
parameters of granting a bail as laid down by the Apex Court. Thereby
the order of dismissal of bail is liable to be set aside and the appellant
is entitled to bail.
5. In support of his contention, the learned counsel for the
appellant would rely upon the decision in
i) National Investigation Agency vs. Zahoor Ahmad Shah Watali
ii) Union of India vs. K.A.Najeeb (2021) 3 SCC 713
6. A counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of the first
respondent and pointing out the contents of the same, Mr.M.Babu
Muthumeeran, learned Additional Public Prosecutor would submit his
arguments as under:-
i) The appellant filed a bail application in Crl.M.P.No.1299 of
2022 and it was dismissed by the Principal District and Sessions Judge,
Coimbatore on 23.03.2022. The appellant filed a second              petition
before the same Court in Crl.M.P.No.2129 of 2022 and it was also
dismissed by the same court on 27.04.2022 and he had filed the
present bail petition in Crl.M.P.No.2394 of 2022 and it was also
dismissed by the Vacation and Sessions Judge, Coimbatore on
12.05.2022 and aggrieved against the same, the appellant has now
filed the present Criminal Appeal to set aside the said Order of the
Vacation and Sessions Judge, Coimbatore in Crl.M.P.No.2394 of 2022
ii) The false implication of the appellant in the case is denied. In
fact, the appellant himself admits in paragraph No.3 of his affidavit
that he had involved himself in an organization, namely “Indian Muslim
Development Association” in Trichy and he has posted all his services
of the said society at his Facebook pages.
iii) The allegation of he being threatened by a police by name
Suresh working at Trichy Intelligence Section to stop his activities with
Indian Muslim Development Association and personal vengeance
against the appellant on his refusal to     abide by the same is a false
iv) The allegation that the appellant was detained in illegal
custody from 4.3.2022 at the instance of one Suresh is utter false and
the representation of the appellant's father given on 10.3.2022 to the
Commissioner of Police, Coimbatore City           was duly enquired and
rejected for want of merits.
v) It is not a valid ground     to say that the appellant has been
under incarceration for 100 days and considering his age and health
conditions, he is entitled to grant of bail.
vi) There are certain materials in the exclusive knowledge of the
investigating officer to show that the appellant would likely tamper
evidence and hamper the investigation if enlarged on bail.
vii) Though the appellant has no criminal antecedent, the
offences involved in the present case are very grave and likely to incite
communal violence.
viii) The appellant is not entitled to bail in view of the settled law
that the accused involved in heinous offences are not eligible for bail
till the completion of trial.
ix) Considering all the aspects, the Vacation Sessions Judge,
Coimbatore has passed a speaking order declining to grant bail, which
does not warrant any interference and hence, the Criminal Appeal is
liable to be dismissed.
7. Mr.R.Karthikeyan, learned Special Public Prosecutor appearing
for the second respondent would submit that in fact, the first
respondent had forwarded a proposal for taking up the investigation,
however, the second respondent had not accepted the proposal of
investigation by NIA.
8. Heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and
perused the materials available on record.
9. The order under challenge in this Criminal Appeal is one of
denial of bail sought for by the appellant, who is alleged to have
committed offences punishable under Sections section 153A(1)(b),
120(B) of IPC and Section 7(1)(a) of CLA Act 1932 @ Section
153A(1)(b), 120(B) of IPC and Section 7(1)(a) of CLA Act 1932 and
section 25(1A) of Arms Act @ Section 153A(1)(b), 120(B) and 201 of
IPC and Section 7(1)(a) of CLA Act, 1932 and section 25(1A) of Arms
Act and Section 16 of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 1967.
10.   The   case  of  the   prosecution   is  that     when  one
P.Silambarasan, Sub Inspector of Police of Selvapuram Police Station
with his Head Constable 2395 Solomon was on usual rounds on duty,
he found the appellant loitering at the junction of Indra Nagar and
Amul Nagar 1st Street and on suspicion, he had enquired the
appellant, which revealed that the appellant was deputed by one
Bakrudeen, IMDA President of Chennai over phone to watch over the
movements of one Kumaresan of that locality.        His further enquiry
revealed that the appellant had been deputed so by Bakrudeen as an
outcome of a criminal conspiracy to give signals to the said Bakrudeen
and his associates Imran and Mohammed Ali Jinna to enable them to
murder the said Kumaresan, as he had objected to conversion of his
son Arunkumar to Islam on marrying a girl by name Sahana Azmi,
daughter of Rajamohammed and Noor Nisha of Tiruvarur, with whom,
he had fallen in love.
11. It is the further case of the prosecution that their further
investigation revealed that the intention of all the accused was to
murder the said Kumaresan, a Hindu and thereby create a fear and
strike terror in the minds of people of other religion so that they would
not venture to marry people from Islam faith and convert them to
Hinduism which attracts the offence punishable under Section 16 of
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 apart from the other IPC
offences and thereby the appellant is not entitled to grant of bail in
view of the bar provided under section 43D(5) of the              Unlawful
12. Whereas, it is the case of the appellant that he is an innocent
social activist being a Member of an organization called "Indian Muslim
Development Association" engaged in Social Activities in Trichy and he
use to post his services in his Facebook pages, which was objected by
some police personnel, however, he had not stopped and having
aggrieved over the same, a false case has been foisted against him
and he is being harassed under the guise of he having been indulging
in terrorist activities leading to communal clash and the entire case of
the prosecution is a fabricated one on the instigation of some vested
elements, which are against the appellant and even assuming for a
moment, the averments against the appellant are accepted, they
would not make out a case for offence punishable under Section 16 of
13. Having perceived that the offences alleged against the
appellant is grave in nature and finding that the investigation is in the
premature stage the court below had denied the personal liberty
sought for by the appellant pending investigation of the case, the
correctness of which is in question before us.
14. Therefore, before entering into the merits of the case, this
court feels that it would be relevant to refer to the provisions of the of
the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act and they are extracted
"2. Definitions.—(1) In this Act, unless the context
otherwise requires,—
(k) “terrorist act” has the meaning assigned to it in
section 15, and the expressions “terrorism” and
“terrorist” shall be construed accordingly;
15. Terrorist act.— (1) Whoever does any act with
intent to threaten or likely to threaten the unity,
integrity, security, economic security, or sovereignty
of India or with intent to strike terror or likely to
strike terror in the people or any section of the
people in India or in any foreign country,—
(a)    by   using  bombs,   dynamite   or  other
explosive substances or inflammable substances or
firearms or other lethal weapons or poisonous or
noxious gases or other chemicals or by any other
substances (whether biological radioactive, nuclear or
otherwise) of a hazardous nature or by any other
means of whatever nature to cause or likely to
(i) death of, or injuries to, any person or
(ii) loss of, or damage to, or destruction of,
(iii) disruption of any supplies or services
essential to the life of the community in India or in
any foreign country; or
(iiia) damage to, the monetary stability of India
by way of production or smuggling or circulation of
high quality counterfeit Indian paper currency, coin
or of any other material; or
(iv) damage or destruction of any property in
India or in a foreign country used or intended to be
used for the defence of India or in connection with
any other purposes of the Government of India, any
State Government or any of their agencies; or
(b) overawes by means of criminal force or the
show of criminal force or attempts to do so or causes
death of any public functionary or attempts to cause
death of any public functionary; or
(c) detains, kidnaps or abducts any person and
threatens to kill or injure such person or does any
other act in order to compel the Government of
India, any State Government or the Government of a
foreign    country    or   an   international or  inter-
governmental organisation or any other person to do
or abstain from doing any act; or
(2) The terrorist act includes an act which
constitutes an offence within the scope of, and as
defined in any of the treaties specified in the Second
16. Punishment for terrorist act.—(1) Whoever
commits a terrorist act shall,—
(a) if such act has resulted in the death of any
person, be punishable with death or imprisonment for
life, and shall also be liable to fine;
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
five years but which may extend to imprisonment for
life, and shall also be liable to fine."
15.   The appellant has been charged for offences punishable
under Sections section 153A(1)(b), 120(B) of IPC and Section 7(1)(a)
of CLA Act 1932 @ Section 153A(1)(b), 120(B) of IPC and Section
7(1)(a) of CLA Act 1932 and section 25(1A) of Arms Act @ Section
153A(1)(b), 120(B) and 201 of IPC and Section 7(1)(a) of CLA Act,
1932 and section 25(1A) of Arms Act and Section 16 of Unlawful
16. The offence under Section 16 of the Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act 1967 falls within Chapter IV of the said Act. When an
offence falls within the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act, necessarily,
while deciding an Application for bail, the court has to take into
consideration the proviso to Section 43D(5) of the Act and this court
has to formulate an opinion as to whether there are reasonable
grounds for believing that the accusation against the accused is prima
facie true.
17.   Now, coming to the facts of the case on hand, the core
allegation against the appellant is that he had been party to the
conspiracy to murder one Kumaresan and thereby to create a fear and
strike terror among a section of people to prevent them indulging in
inter religious marriage as the said Kumaresan had objected for
conversion of his son Arunkumar who had married a Muslim girl out of
their love affair.
18. It is very much relevant to note that no offence had actually
taken place and no complaint has arisen from the so-called victim viz.,
Kumaresan, but, it is the case of the prosecution that merely on a
suspicion that has arisen in the mind of a police officer on seeing the
appellant during his routine rounds, he had enquired him and on the
confession statement given by the appellant, the entire case of the
prosecution had commenced and thereafter, keeping the statement of
the appellant as a base, the other links of the case of the prosecution
viz., the associates of the appellant in the alleged conspiracy had been
19. Initially, the prosecution had come out with the allegations
against the accused for the offences punishable under the provisions
of IPC and Criminal Law Amendment, later, the offence under the
provisions of Arms Act got included and thereafter, the offence
punishable under the provision of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act
was introduced.
20. Such gravity of offences alleged by the prosecution against
the appellant is viewed as a hurdle by the court below for grant of
personal liberty to the appellant during investigation.    Therefore,  it
has become necessary for this court to go into the merits of the case
to some extent.
21. The gravity of offence alleged against the appellant and
other accused in the case on hand is culled out by the prosecution
from the motive attributed to the accused. The motive so attributed
against the accused by the prosecution has got two limbs, one being
the removal of the hindrance in converting one Arunkumar, who had
married a Muslim girl from Hinduism to Islam and the other being the
threat to the other section of people not to collide with Islam.
22. A logical analysis would reveal that both the limbs of motive
travel vice versa and they cannot be meeting at any point. It is the
case of the prosecution that by committing murder of Kumaresan, a
Hindu and father of Arunkumar, the accused had intended to remove
the obstacle in their ambition to convert the said Arunkumar to Islam,
whereas, the intention attributed to them to create a fear among the
people of other section is the other extreme of the first limb.    The
modus operandi of the accused could have been secret had their
intention was to murder the said Kumaresan so as to avoid his
objection in converting his son to Islam and it could be an open one
had the intention of the accused was to create fear among the people
of other section. From the perusal of the case diary and the materials
available, other than the appellants and the other accused having been
arrested based on suspicion and their confession being recorded while
in custody and recovery of Bill Hooks from the other accused, there is
no other material to pin point that the appellant and other accused had
intended to commit the murder of Kumaresan and to create terror and
fear among the public and people of other section.
23. Moreover, a perusal of the materials available on record
reveals that the State police has referred the case to be investigated
by the National Investigation Agency, however, said proposal was
rejected     by the National Investigation Agency which speaks much
about the case of the prosecution.
24. It would also be relevant to refer here the aspects to be
considered for deciding an application for bail as laid down by a
Division Bench of the Apex Court in National Investigation Agency
"(i) whether there is any prima facie or reasonable
ground to believe that the accused had committed the
(ii) nature and gravity of the charge;
(iii) severity   of the punishment in the event of
(iv) danger of the accused absconding or fleeing, if
(v) character, behaviour, means, position and standing
(vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated;
(vii) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being
(viii) danger, of course, of justice being thwarted by
grant of bail."
25. With regard to grant of bail in the cases of grave offences, it
is relevant to note that while dismissing an appeal filed by the Union of
India against grant of bail in a case of offence punishable under
Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, a Full Bench of     the Apex
Court in Union of India v. K.A. Najeeb (2021) 3 SCC 713, has held
"17. It is thus clear to us that the presence of
statutory restrictions like Section 43-D(5) of the UAPA
per se does not oust the ability of the constitutional
courts to grant bail on grounds of violation of Part III
of the Constitution. Indeed, both the restrictions
under a statute as well as the powers exercisable
under    constitutional    jurisdiction  can  be   well
harmonised.      Whereas      at     commencement     of
proceedings, the courts are expected to appreciate
the legislative policy against grant of bail but the
rigours of such provisions will melt down where there
is no likelihood of trial being completed within a
reasonable time and the period of incarceration
already undergone has exceeded a substantial part of
the prescribed sentence. Such an approach would
safeguard against the possibility of provisions like
Section 43-D(5) of the UAPA being used as the sole
metric for denial of bail or for wholesale breach of
constitutional right to speedy trial.
26. In case on hand, as stated above, initially, a case was
registered based on suspicion and confession statement of the
appellant for an offence punishable under Sections           153A(1)(b),
120(B) of IPC and Section 7(1)(a) of CLA Act 1932.        Later,   on the
basis of the recovery of 3 long sized bill hooks from the other accused,
the case was altered to one under Sections 153A(1)(b), 120(B) of IPC
and Section 7(1)(a) of CLA Act 1932 and section 25(1A) of Arms Act
and subsequently, once again, on the basis of the confession of Noor
Nisha, it was altered to one under Sections 153A(1)(b), 120(B) and
201 of IPC and Section 7(1)(a) of CLA Act, 1932 and section 25(1A) of
Arms Act and Section 16 of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
27. There was no complaint from any person and nobody was
injured in this case.    Therefore, in the opinion of this court, the
provisions of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act have been included
only in order to deny/delay the appellant from getting bail from the
28.   As stated above, taking into consideration the facts and
circumstances of the case in the light of the decisions referred to
above and a perusal of the case diary, this court is of the opinion that
the allegations against the appellant do not fall within the definition of
"Terrorist Act" and there are no reasonable grounds for believing that
the accusation against the appellant is prima facie true.
29. In view of the above, the Criminal Appeal is allowed and the
order dated 12.5.2022 in Crl.M.P.No.2394 of 2022 passed by the
Vacation & Sessions Judge, Coimbatore is set aside and the appellant
is ordered to be released on bail in Crime No.85 of 2022.
a) on executing a bond for a sum of Rs.25,000/- (Rupees twenty
five thousand only)      with two sureties each for a likesum to the
satisfaction of Judicial Magistrate V, Coimbatore;
(b) the sureties shall affix their photographs and Left Thumb
Impression in the surety bond and the learned Judicial Magistrate V,
Coimbatore may obtain a copy of their Aadhar Card or Bank Pass Book
to ensure their identity;
(c) the appellant shall report before the respondent on every
Monday and Thursday at 10.30 a.m. until further orders.
(d) the appellant shall not leave the State of Tamil Nadu without
intimating the respondent police.
(e) the appellant shall not commit any offences.
(f) the appellant shall not abscond during investigation.
(g) the appellant shall not tamper with evidence or witness.
(h) the appellant shall furnish the Mobile Number, which shall not
be changed till the issue comes to a logical end.         However, he is
permitted to change the portability.
(i) the appellant shall surrender his passport, if any, to the Trial
Court.    For the purpose of renewal, the original can be taken by
making an application and the renewed one shall be surrendered
within a week of receipt of the same;
(j) the appellant shall not travel abroad without the permission
of the Court.      In case he wants to go abroad, while seeking
permission, he shall furnish the address and place, where he is going
to stay together with mobile number and email and if he stays in hotel,
the details of the accommodation and the period of stay, mode of
travel alongwith the complete itinerary shall be furnished to the Trial
Court as well as Police.
(k) on breach of any of the aforesaid conditions, the learned
Judicial Magistrate V, Coimbatore is entitled to take appropriate action
against the appellant in accordance with law as if the conditions have
been imposed and the appellant released on bail by the learned
Judicial Magistrate V, Coimbatore himself as laid down by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in P.K.Shaji vs. State of Kerala [(2005)AIR SCW
(l) if the appellant thereafter absconds, a fresh FIR can be
registered under Section 229A IPC.
30. Before parting with, we make it clear that the observations
and findings recorded in this judgment are only for the limited purpose
of considering the application for bail and the Special Court shall not be
influenced by the same during the trial or while rendering its decision.