Counsel for Applicant :- Mahmood Alam,Anjani Kumar
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
1.     Heard Sri H.G.S. Parihar, learned Senior Advocate, assisted by
learned counsel for the petitioner and Sri Alok Saran along with Sri
Rajesh Kumar Singh, learned Additional Government Advocates for
2.     By means of this application, the applicant has made following
“Wherefore, it is most respectfully prayed that this
Hon'ble may graciously be pleased to:
i) Quash and set aside the impugned revisional order
dated 21.10.2022 passed by the Ld. Court of Sessions Judge,
Sultanpur in Criminal Revision No.219 of 2022 (Arvind
Kejriwal vs State of UP) arising out of Case Crime
No.608/2014 registered at Police Station Musafirkhana,
District Amethi, whereby, the criminal revision preferred by
the Applicant has been dismissed.
ii) Quash and set aside the impugned order dated
04.08.2022 passed by the Ld. Court of ACJM Room No.18
(Special Judge MP/MLA), Sultanpur in Criminal Case No.
360/2014 (State vs Arvind Kejriwal) arising out of Case
Crime No.608/2014 registered at Police Station
Musafirkhana, District Amethi, whereby, application of the
Applicant seeking discharged under Section 239 CrPC has
been dismissed.”
3.     Precisely, the applicant has assailed the judgment and order
dated 21.10.2022 passed by the learned Sessions Judge, Sultanpur in
criminal revision rejecting the revision filed by the present applicant
upholding the order dated 04.08.2022 passed by the learned trial Court
MP/MLA/Sultanpur, who has rejected the discharge application of the
present applicant.
4.     Notably, this is the third petition/application filed under Section
482 Cr.P.C. before this Court.
5.     Before adverting to earlier orders being passed in the petitions/
applications filed by the present applicant under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
before this Court, it would be apt to discuss the brief facts of the
present case. One Prem Chandra, Flying Squad Magistrate, lodged an
FIR bearing Case Crime No.608 of 2014, under Section 125 of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 (hereinafter referred to as “the
alleging inter-alia that the accused-applicant flouted the Model Code
of Conduct by making public statement “Jo Congress ko vote dega,
mera manana hoga, desh ke saath gaddari hogi. Bhajpa per katakch
karte hue kaha ki jo Bhajpa ko vote dega use Khuda bhi muaf nahin
karega, des ke sath gaddari hogi”. After completion of investigation,
the Investigating Officer has submitted the charge sheet against him.
Learned trial court has taken cognizance against the accused on
06.09.2014 under Section 125 of the Act, 1951 and summoned him.
6.     The present applicant has filed a petition under Section 482
Cr.P.C. bearing U/S 482/378/407 No.3662 of 2015; Arvind Kejriwal
Vs. State of U.P. and Ors, seeking prayer for quashing the entire
proceedings of Case No.360 of 2014 arisen out of Case Crime No.608
of 2014 (supra). He has also prayed for quashing the charge sheet,
which has been filed in the aforesaid case. The aforesaid petition was
disposed of finally vide order dated 03.08.2015 giving liberty to the
applicant to file appropriate application before the learned court below
taking all pleas and ground including the ground for exemption of his
personal appearance and such application was directed to be
considered strictly in accordance with law. For a period of four weeks,
the bailable warrant which was issued against the present applicant
was stayed. For the convenience, the order dated 03.08.2015 is being
reproduced hereunder:-
appearing on behalf of applicant along with Shri C.L.
Gupta, Advocate and Shri Rishad Murtaza, learned
Government Advocate on behalf of State.
By means of of the instant petition under Section
482 Cr.P.C., the applicant has prayed for quashing of
the entire criminal proceedings of Case No. 360 of 2014
arising out of Case Crime No. 608 of 2014, under
Sections 125 of the Representation of the People Act,
1951 relating to the Police Station, Musafir Khana,
District Amethi which is pending in the Court of Judicial
applicant has further prayed for quashing of the
chargesheet filed in the aforesaid Case Crime No. 608 of
The learned counsel for the applicant, after some
arguments, submits that the applicant had sought
exemption from personal appearance by moving an
application before the Court concerned on 20.07.2015
but the same was dismissed. He further submits that
Section 317 Cr.P.C. empowers the Court to pass
appropriate order for exemption. The learned counsel
for the applicant further submits that the applicant
intends to file an application for discharge but in the
mean time, the bailable warrant issued against the
applicant may be kept in abeyance.
The learned Government Advocate has submitted
that although one application moved on behalf of the
applicant for exemption from personal appearance has
been rejected on technical ground but it is still open for
the applicant to move fresh application for exemption
from personal appearance on proper grounds and he has
no objection in this regard. In case, the Court below
considers the application for exemption from personal
appearance proper, fresh order may be passed in
accordance with law. So far as application for discharge
is concerned, the said application has not yet been
moved and therefore, no direction for expeditious
disposal thereof can be passed at this stage.
In view of the above, the present application is disposed
of with the observation that the grounds taken by the
applicant in the instant application under Section 482
Cr.P.C. may be taken at appropriate stage before the
Court below and it will be open for the learned Court
below to pass appropriate order. It is further observed
that if the applicant applies for exemption from personal
appearance, the same shall also be considered by the
Court below in accordance with law.
The bailable warrant issued against the applicant
shall remain in abeyance for a period of four weeks from
today.
Copy of this order may be provided to the learned
counsel for the applicant within 24 hours on payment of
usual charges.”
7.     Perusal of the aforesaid order dated 03.08.2015 reveals that the
learned counsel for the applicant had argued that the applicant had
sought exemption from personal appearance by moving an application
before the court concerned on 20.07.2015 but the same was dismissed.
Learned counsel further argued in such petition that the applicant
intends to file an application for discharge, therefore, the bailable
warrant being issued against the applicant may be kept in abeyance.
8.     After rejection of the application of the present applicant by the
learned trial court on 20.07.2015 whereby he had sought exemption
from personal appearance, another application was filed by the
applicant in compliance of the order dated 03.08.2015 passed by this
Court and the learned court below rejected such application vide order
dated 12.08.2015. Therefore, the present applicant has filed second
petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. bearing U/S 482/378/407 No.4136
of 2015; Arvind Kejriwal Vs. The State of U.P. and Ors., with the
same prayer which has been made in the first petition filed under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. with another prayer that the order dated
12.08.2015 whereby the exemption application of the present
applicant had been rejected may be quashed.
9.     In the second petition, considering the prayers of the present
applicant and noticing the fact that the present applicant has not
appeared before the learned court below and has not filed any
personal bond with or without sureties and has filed two applications
for exemption under Section 205 Cr.P.C., which have been rejected by
orders dated 20.07.2015 and 12.08.2015 framed the question for
adjudication to the effect that “Whether after taking cognizance and
issuance of the process, may be summons or warrant, the exemption
application under Section 205 or 317 Cr.P.C.is maintainable without
personal appearance and without furnishing bail bonds? The aforesaid
petition was disposed of finally vide order dated 27.08.2015, which
“Heard learned counsel for the petitioner, Shri Rishad
Murtza, learned Government Advocate and perused the
record.
This petition has been filed with the following
(i) to quash the order dated 12.08.2015 in Criminal Case
No.360 of 2014, "State of U.P. vs. Arvind Kejriwal" in
pursuance of the Charge Sheet No.122 of 2014 dated
09.07.2014 in Case Crime No.608 of 2014, under Section 125
of the Representation of People Act, 1951, Police Station-
Kotwali Musafirkhana, District-Amethi, pending before the
learned Judicial Magistrate, Musafirkhana, District-Amethi.
(ii) to stay the entire criminal proceedings in Criminal Case
No.360 of 2014, "State of U.P. vs. Arvind Kejriwal" in
pursuance of the Charge Sheet No.122 of 2014 dated
09.07.2014 in Case Crime No.608 of 2014, under Section 125
of the Representation of People Act, 1951, Police Station-
Kotwali Musafirkhana, District-Amethi, pending before the
learned Judicial Magistrate, Musafirkhana, District-Amethi,
during pendency of the present case.
(iii) to order to concerned Hon'ble Court for deciding the
pending application of the applicant filed under the proviso
of Section 239 Cr.P.C. in Criminal Case No.360 of 2014,
"State of U.P. vs. Arvind Kejriwal" bearing Case Crime
No.608 of 2014, under Section 125 of the Representation of
District-Amethi, pending before the learned Judicial
Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that
the petitioner is the Chief Minister of Delhi against whom a
case under Section 125 of Representation of People Act has
been registered. The application for discharge under Section
239 Cr.P.C. has been moved which has not yet been decided
and the application for personal exemption filed under
Section 205 Cr.P.C. has wrongly been rejected. It has also
been submitted that the petitioner is ready to file the
undertakings before the Court that whenever his personal
appearance is required, he shall appear personally.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the
provisions of Section 88 Cr.P.C., which reads as under:-
"88. Power to take bond for appearance. When any
person for whose appearance or arrest the officer presiding
in any Court is empowered to issue a summons or warrant, is
present in such Court, such officer may require such person
to execute a bond, with or without sureties, for his
appearance in such Court, or any other Court to which the
case may be transferred for trial".
The main question for consideration is that whether
after taking cognizance and issuance of the process, may be
summons or warrant, the exemption application under
Section 205 or 317 Cr.P.C.is maintainable without personal
appearance and without furnishing bail bonds?
In the present case, it is admitted that till now the
petitioner has not appeared before the court below and has
also not filed any personal bond with or without sureties.
The application for exemption under Section 205 Cr.P.C. was
moved, which has been rejected by order dated 12.08.2015.
The similar application was also moved previously, which
was        also        rejected     on      20.07.2015.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the
judgment of this Court rendered in Santosh Chauhan &
others vs. State of U.P. & another reported in [(2011) (4)
ALJ 121], in which, this Court has considered the scope of
Section 205 Cr.P.C. but nowhere it has been held that
without submitting the personal bond or sureties, the
exemption under Section 205 Cr.P.C. can be granted.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has further relied
upon the case Roitong Singpho vs. Sajjan Kumar Agarwal
reported in AIR 2009 (NOC) 129 (GAU), in which, the
Hon'ble Gauhati High Court has held that the Court has to
take into account the magnitude of sufferings, which a
particular accused person may have to bear with, in order to
make himself present in the Court and the discretion must be
exercised judiciously. The Gauhati High Court as well as
Allahabad High Court have relied upon the case M/s.
Bhasker Industries Ltd. vs. M/s. Bhiwani Denim and Apparels
Ltd and others reported in AIR 2001 (SC) 3625.
In the case of M/s. Bhasker Industries Ltd. vs. M/s.
Bhiwani Denim and Apparels Ltd and others reported in AIR
2001 (SC) 3625, the Hon'ble Apex Court has considered the
scope of Sections 205 (2), 251 and 317 Cr.P.C. and has held
in paras-12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 19 as under:-
"12. We cannot part with this matter without advertising to
the plea made by the second accused before the trial court for
exempting him from personal appearance. He highlighted
two factors while seeking such exemption. First is that the
offence under Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act
is relatively not a serious offence as could be seen from the
fact that the legislature made it only a summons case. Second
is, the insistence on the physical presence of the accused in
the case would cause substantial hardships and sufferings to
him as he is a resident of Haryana. To undertake a long
journey to reach Bhopal for making his physical presence in
the court involves, apart from great hardships, much
expenses also, contended the counsel. He submitted that the
advantages the court gets on account of the presence of the
accused are far less than the tribulations the accused has to
suffer to make such presence in certain situations and hence
the court should consider whether such advantages can be
achieved by other measures. Therefore, he relied on Section
317 of the Code. It reads thus:
"317 provision for inquiries and trial being held in the
absence of accused in certain cases.- (1) At any stage of an
inquiry or trial under this Code, if the Judge or Magistrate is
satisfied, for reasons to be recorded, that the personal
attendance of the accused before the Court is not necessary
in the interests of justice, or that the accused persistently
disturbs the proceedings in Court, the Judge or Magistrate
may, if the accused is represented by a pleader, dispense with
his attendance and proceed with such inquiry or trial in his
absence, and may, at any subsequent stage of the
proceedings, direct the personal attendance of such accused.
(2) If the accused in any such case is not represented by a
pleader, or if the Judge or Magistrate considers his personal
attendance necessary, he may, if he thinks fit and for reasons
to be re corded by him, either adjourn such inquiry or trial,
or order that the case of such accused be taken up for tried
13. Sub-section (1) envisages two exigencies when the court
can proceed with the trial proceeding in a criminal case after
dispensing with the personal attendance of an accused. We
are not concerned with one of those exigencies i.e. when the
accused persistently disturbs the proceedings. Here we need
consider only the other exigency. If a court is satisfied that in
the interest or justice the personal attendance of an accused
before it need not be insisted on, then the court has the power
to dispense with the attendance of that accused. In this
context a reference to Section 273 of the Code is useful. It
says that "except as otherwise expressly provided, all
evidence taken in the course of the trial or other proceeding
shall be taken in presence of the accused or, when his
personal attendance is dispensed with, in the presence of his
pleader." If a court feels that insisting on the personal
attendance of an accused in a particular case would be too
harsh on account of a variety of reasons, can't the court
afford relief to such an accused in the matter of facing the
prosecution proceedings?
14. The normal rule is that the evidence shall be taken in the
presence of the accused. However, even in the absence of the
accused such evidence can be taken but then his counsel must
be presence in the court, provided he has been granted
exemption from attending the court. The concern of the
criminal court should primarily be the administration of
criminal justice. For that purpose the proceedings of the
court in the case should register progress. Presence of the
accused in the court is not for marking his attendance just for
the sake of seeking him in the court. It is to enable the court
to proceed with the trial. If the progress of the trial can be
achieved even in the absence of the accused the court can
certainly take into account the magnitude of the sufferings
which a particular accused person may have to bear with in
order to make himself present in the court in that particular
15. These are days when prosecutions for the offence under
Section 138 are galloping up in criminal courts. Due to the
increase of inter-State transactions through the facilities of
the banks it is not uncommon that when prosecutions are
instituted in one State the accused might belong to a different
State, sometimes a far distant State. Not very rarely such
accused would be ladies also. For prosecution under Section
138 of the NI Act the trial should be that of summons case.
When a magistrate feels that insistence of personal
attendance of the accused in a summons case, in a particular
situation, would inflict enormous hardship and cost to a
particular accused, it is open to the magistrate to consider
how he can relieve such an accused of the great hardships,
without causing prejudice to the prosecution proceedings.
16. Section 251 is the commencing provision in Chapter XX
of the Code which deals with trial of summons cases by
magistrates. It enjoins on the court to ask the accused
whether he pleads guilty when the "accused appears or is
brought before the magistrate". The appearance envisaged
therein can either be by personal attendance of the accused
or through his advocate. This can be understood from Section
205(1) of the Code which says that "whenever a magistrate
issues a summons, he may, if he sees reason so to do,
dispense with the personal attendance of the accused and
permit him to appear by his pleader."
17. Thus, in appropriate cases the magistrate can allow an
accused to make even the first appearance through a counsel.
The magistrate is empowered to record the plea of the
accused even when his counsel makes such plea on behalf of
the accused in a case where the personal appearance of the
accused is dispensed with. Section 317 of the Code has to be
viewed in the above perspective as it empowers the court to
dispense with the personal attendance of the accused
(provided he is represented by a counsel in that case) even
for proceeding with the further steps in the case. However,
one precaution which the court should take in such a
situation is that the said benefit need be granted only to an
accused who gives an undertaking to the satisfaction of the
court that he would not dispute his identity as the particular
accused in the case, and that a counsel on his behalf would
be present in court and that he has no objection in taking
evidence in his absence. This precaution is necessary for the
further progress of the proceedings including examination of
the witnesses.
19. The position, therefore, bogs down to this: It is within the
powers of a magistrate and in his judicial discretion to
dispense with the personal appearance of an accused either
throughout or at any particular stage of such proceedings in
a summons case, if the magistrate finds that insistence of his
personal presence would itself inflict enormous suffering or
tribulations to him, and the comparative advantage would be
less. Such discretion need be exercised only in rare instances
where due to the far distance at which the accused resides or
carries on business or on account of any physical or other
good reasons the magistrate feels that dispensing with the
personal attendance of the accused would only be in the
interests of justice. However, the magistrate who grants such
benefit to the accused must take the precautions enumerated
above, as a matter of course. We may reiterate that when an
accused makes an application to a magistrate through his
duly authorised counsel praying for affording the benefit of
his personal presence being dispensed with the magistrate
can consider all aspects and pass appropriate
orders thereon before proceeding further."
I have gone through the judgment and considered the
law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the aforesaid
case. The aforesaid case relates to the proceedings under
Section 138 N.I. Act, which is a summon case, while in the
present case, the charge-sheet has been filed against the
petitioner for the offence punishable under Section 125 of
Representation of People Act, 1951 and the offence
punishable under Section 125 of Representation of People
Act is punishable with a term of three years or with fine or
with both. Therefore in view of the provisions of Section 2 (x)
of Cr.P.C., it is a warrant case because the term of
imprisonment is exceeding two years. It is not disputed that
the provisions of Code of Criminal Procedure are applicable
regarding the offence punishable under the Representation of
As far as the provisions of Section 88 Cr.P.C. are
concerned, as quoted above, such provisions can be availed
only in case the person for whose appearance or arrest the
summon or warrant has been issued to present in such Court.
Section 88 Cr.P.C. also does not speak to exempt the accused
without executing the bond with or without sureties for his
appearance in the Court. In view of the provisions of Section
90 Cr.P.C., this provisions is also applicable only to every
summon and every warrant of arrest issued under this Code.
Admittedly, the petitioner has not yet appeared personally
before the Court. Therefore, he cannot get the benefit of
Article 14 of the Constitution of India provides
equality before the law and equal protection of laws. When
the Constitution has not distinguished between the powerful
and powerless persons, then certainly the courts also cannot
grant any special concession to any powerful person like in
this case where the petitioner is the Chief Minister of N.C.T.
Delhi. Law is equal for all and equal protection has to be
granted to all. There is no such provision in the Code of
Criminal Procedure which provides that the trial of warrant
case can proceed even in the absence of the accused or
without his appearing personally and submitting the bail
bonds. It is not disputed that on the subsequent dates of
hearing, the personal appearance of the accused may be
exempted if sufficient cause is shown provided the accused is
represented by a pleader. But at the same time, the Code of
Criminal Procedure empowers the Trial Court to direct the
personal attendance of such accused.
In the present case, the First Information Report was
lodged against the petitioner regarding the offence
punishable under Section 125 of Representation of People
Act and after the investigation, the charge-sheet has been
filed against him for the offence punishable under Section
125 of Representation of People Act. Section 125 of
Representation of People Act, 1951 reads as under:-
"125, Promoting enmity between classes in connection with
election. Any person who in connection with an election
under this Act promotes or attempts to promote on grounds of
religion, race, caste, community or language, feelings of
enmity or hatred, between different classes of the citizens of
India shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both."
The present case relates to the alleged speech of the
petitioner on 02.05.2014 in connection with an election which
allegedly attempts to promote feelings of enmity or hatred
between different classes of the citizens of India. The
politicians are required to observe more caution in their
speeches as they have to rule the country and they should
promote the spirit of common brotherhood, fraternity and
harmony amongst all the people of India transcending
religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities. The
politicians as a citizen of India have also to abide by
fundamental duties as provided in Article 51-A of the
Constitution of India, apart from the restrictions and
guidelines imposed by Representation of People Act, 1951,
because they are not above the Constitution.
But what we are experiencing now a days is that some
of the politicians have no control over their fire-brand
speeches with a view to attract or misguide the voters in their
favour. Such tendency should be discontinued because the
public of India has now become much more aware about the
real truth. The politicians must use the Parliamentary
Language. However, these observations shall not affect the
merits of the present case.
The procedure for trial of warrant case by the
Magistrate is contained in Chapter-XIX of the Code. Section
238 Cr.P.C. Specifically provides that when in any warrant
case instituted on a police report, the accused appears or
brought before the Magistrate, on the commencement of trial,
the provisions of Section 207 Cr.P.C. shall be complied. The
language of the aforesaid provision of Section 238 Cr.P.C.
also envisaged that either the accused should appear or he
should be brought before the Magistrate. This provision also
does not classify that on the commencement of warrant trial,
the accused has liberty to appear through counsel. Because it
is a warrant trial, therefore, the accused has to appear in the
Court and the accused cannot claim exemption under Section
205 Cr.P.C. till he has furnished bonds with or without
sureties as per the direction of the Trial Court.
The question whether after taking cognizance and
issuance of the process, may be summon or warrant, the
exemption application under Section 205 or under Section
317 Cr.P.C. is maintainable without personal appearance
and without furnishing bail bonds is, therefore, decided
accordingly that in case of an accused is warrant trial, the
provisions of Section 205 or Section 317 Cr.P.C. will not
apply unless the accused has been granted bail and he has
furnished bail bonds.
This petition has been filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C..
The scope of 482 Cr.P.C. has been considered by Hon'ble the
Apex Court in various judgments.
The power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is not to be
exercised in a routine manner, but it is for limited purposes,
namely, to give effect to any order under the Code, or to
prevent abuse of process of any Court or otherwise to secure
ends of justice. Time and again, Apex Court and various High
Courts, including ours one, have reminded when exercise of
power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. would be justified, which
cannot be placed in straight jacket formula, but one thing is
very clear that it should not preampt a trial and cannot be
used in a routine manner so as to cut short the entire process
of trial before the Courts below. If from a bare perusal of
first information report or complaint, it is evident that it does
not disclose any offence at all or it is frivolous, collusive or
oppressive from the face of it, the Court may exercise its
inherent power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. but it should be
exercised sparingly. This will not include as to whether
prosecution is likely to establish its case or not, whether the
evidence in question is reliable or not or whether on a
reasonable appreciation of it, accusation would not be
sustained, or the other circumstances, which would not justify
exercise of jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C. I need not
go into various aspects in detail but it would be suffice to
refer a few recent authorities dealing all these matters in
detail, namely, State of Haryana and others Vs. Ch. Bhajan
Lal and others 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335, Popular Muthiah Vs.
State represented by Inspector of Police (2006) 7 SCC 296,
Hamida vs. Rashid @ Rasheed and Ors. (2008) 1 SCC 474,
Dr. Monica Kumar and Anr. vs. State of U.P. and Ors. (2008)
8 SCC 781, M.N. Ojha and Ors. Vs. Alok Kumar Srivastav
and Anr. (2009) 9 SCC 682, State of A.P. vs. Gourishetty
Mahesh and Ors. JT 2010 (6) SC 588 and Iridium India
Telecom Ltd. Vs. Motorola Incorporated and Ors. 2011 (1)
In Lee Kun Hee and others Vs. State of U.P. and
others JT 2012 (2) SC 237, it was reiterated that Court in
exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C. cannot
go into the truth or otherwise of the allegations and
appreciate evidence, if any, available on record. Interference
would be justified only when a clear case of such interference
is made out. Frequent and uncalled interference even at the
preliminary stage by High Court may result in causing
obstruction in the progress of inquiry in a criminal case
which may not be in public interest. It, however, may not be
doubted, if on the face of it, either from the first information
report or complaint, it is evident that allegation are so
absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no
fair-minded and informed observer can ever reach a just and
proper conclusion as to the existence of sufficient grounds for
proceeding, in such cases refusal to exercise jurisdiction may
equally result in injustice, more particularly, in cases, where
the complainant sets the criminal law in motion with a view
to exert pressure and harass the persons arrayed as accused
in the complaint.
However, in this matter, after investigation, Police has
found a prima facie case against accused and submitted
charge-sheet in the Court below. After investigation the
police has found a prima facie case of commission of a
cognizable offence by accused which should have tried in a
Court of Law. At this stage there is no occasion to look into
the question, whether the charge ultimately can be
substantiated or not since that would be a subject matter of
trial. No substantial ground has been made out which may
justify interference by this Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
In view of the above, I do not find any error of law or
perversity in the order dated 12.08.2015, by which, the
application for exemption has been rejected.
As far as the prayer to stay the entire criminal
proceedings is concerned, I also do not find any sufficient
ground to stay the aforesaid criminal proceedings because in
view of the provisions of Chapter-XIX of Code of Criminal
Procedure, the accused has a right to move the application
for discharge under Section 239 Cr.P.C. and if that
application is rejected then certainly the Magistrate is
empowered to frame the charge as provided under Section
240 Cr.P.C. Therefore, the prayer no. (ii) is also
As far as prayer (iii) is concerned, there is already
specific provision of Section 239 Cr.P.C. to decide the
application for discharge and for that the orders of this Court
are not required. But certainly, before deciding the
application under Section 239 Cr.P.C., the appearance of the
accused in the Court for filing of the bond with or without
sureties is necessary. Therefore, this prayer is also
In the last, learned counsel for the petitioner has
prayed that the accused is ready to appear personally in the
Court and file the bail bonds, therefore, some protection may
be granted to him.
Considering the request of learned counsel for the
petitioner, it is provided that if the petitioner, Arvind
Kejriwal, surrenders before the court below within four
weeks from today and moves an application for bail, the same
shall be considered and disposed of expeditiously in
accordance with law and in terms of law laid down in the
case of Smt. Amrawati and another vs. State of U.P., 2005;
Cr.L.J.755, which has been affirmed by Hon'ble the Apex
Court in Lal Kamlendra Pratap Singh vs. State of Uttar
Pradesh and Ors. reported in (2009) 4 SCC 437. Till then, no
coercive action shall be taken against the petitioner.
The petition stands disposed of accordingly.”
10.    While disposing of the aforesaid petition, this Court has
observed that after investigation police has found a prima facie case
against the accused and submitted charge sheet in the court below.
After investigation, the police has found a prima facie case for
commission of cognizable offence by the accused, which should have
been tried in a court of law. The Court further observed that at this
stage, there is no occasion to look into the question whether the
charge ultimately can be sustained or not since that would be subject
matter of the trial court. In view of the above, this Court has held that
no substantial ground has been made out which may justify
interference by this Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C. and there is no
error of law or perversity in the order dated 12.08.2015 by which the
application for exemption has been rejected. Accordingly, prayer no.1
of that petition has been rejected.
11.    So as to decide the second prayer of that petition, this Court has
held that since the accused has right to move an application for
discharge under Section 239 Cr.P.C. and if that application is rejected,
then certainly the Magistrate is empowered to frame the charge as
provided under Section 340 Cr.P.C., so the prayer no.(ii) is
12.    Deciding prayer no.(iii) of the said petition, this Court has held
that there is already specific provision of Section 239 Cr.P.C. to
decide the application for discharge and for that, the orders of this
Court are not required but certainly, before deciding the application
under Section 239 Cr.P.C., appearance of the accused in the court for
filing bond with or without sureties is necessary, therefore, that prayer
is also misconceived.
13.    Thereafter, learned counsel for the petitioner has given
undertaking that the present applicant is ready to appear personally in
the court and file the bail bonds, therefore, some protection may be
given to him. Considering that request, this Court granted four weeks’
time to the present applicant to surrender before the learned court
below and file application for bail and the same was directed to be
considered and disposed of strictly in accordance with law in terms of
the law laid down in the case of Smt. Amrawati and another vs.
State of U.P., 2005; Cr.L.J.755, which has been affirmed by Hon'ble
the Apex Court in Lal Kamlendra Pratap Singh vs. State of Uttar
Pradesh and Ors., (2009) 4 SCC 437.
14.    The aforesaid order dated 27.08.2015 has been assailed before
the Apex Court by filing Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.)
No.7989 of 2015; Arvind Kejriwal Vs. State of U.P. & Ors., and the
Hon’ble Apex Court passed the order dated 22.09.2015, which reads
“Taken on board.
The attendance of the petitioner before the trial
court is dispensed with until further orders.”
15.    By means of aforesaid order, the Hon’ble Apex Court issued
notices and directed that attendance of the petitioner before the trial
court is dispensed with until further orders. The petitioner has
challenged the order dated 04.08.2022 whereby the discharge
application of the present applicant has been rejected by the learned
trial court before the revisional court and the revisional court
dismissed the revision vide order dated 21.10.2022 upholding the
order dated 04.08.2022 passed by the learned trial court. Both the
aforesaid orders have been assailed in this application on the ground
that the applicant has not made any appeal for vote on the ground of
religion etc. and he has not promoted enmity between the classes of
the people, therefore, he may not be held liable for the offence under
Section 125 of the Act, 1951. In support of his aforesaid argument,
learned counsel for the applicant has placed reliance upon the
judgment of the Apex Court in re; Ramakant Mayekar v. Celine
D'Silva (Smt.), (1996) 1 SCC 399, citing para 27, which reads as
“27. What is forbidden by law is an appeal by a candidate
for votes on the ground of ‘his’ religion or promotion etc. of
hatred or enmity between groups of people, and not the
mere mention of religion. There can be no doubt that
mention made of any religion in the context of secularism
or for criticising the anti-secular stance of any political
party or candidate cannot amount to a corrupt practice
under sub-section (3) or (3-A) of Section 123. In other
words, it is a question of fact in each case and not a
proposition of law as understood and enunciated by the
16.    However, learned counsel for the applicant has informed the
Court that the present applicant being a law abiding citizen appeared
before the learned court of Magistrate on 25.10.2021 and has been
granted bail. Recital to this effect has been given in item no.13 of the
dates and events.
17.    In para-9 of the discharge application of the present applicant
(Annexure No.8), it has been stated that whatever statement was made
by the applicant during his speech, that was merely based upon his
personal opinion and such statement is protected under Article 19 of
the Constitution of India i.e. “Freedom of Speech and Expressions”.
In para-8 of the discharge application, he has stted that his statement
may not be considered as an offence under Section 125 of the Act,
18.    As per learned counsel for the applicant, learned trial court as
well as learned revisional court below has committed manifest error of
law and fact both while rejecting the discharge application and the
revision of the present applicant. Therefore, the aforesaid orders may
be set aside and quashed.
19.    Per contra, Sri Alok Saran, learned AGA, has opposed this
application filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. by submitting that this is
the third petition/application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. in the same
matter. He has also stated that as per the observation of this Court in
the second petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C., the police has
found prima facie case against the accused and submitted charge sheet
in the court below after completion of the investigation and the trial
court has taken cognizance of the offence, therefore, that charge could
be proved or disproved before the learned trial court and at this stage,
no interference would be required invoking inherent powers of the
High Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C., therefore, the trial of the
present case should be conducted and concluded strictly in accordance
with law.
20.    Sri Saran has further submitted that the Hon’ble Apex Court has
not stayed the trial pending against the present applicant; only his
presence before the learned trial court has been dispensed with,
therefore, the trial of the present case may not be stalled or stayed,
rather directions may be issued to conduct and conclude the trial with
expedition, strictly in accordance with law. He has further submitted
that the statement so given by the applicant is apparently violative of
Section 125 of the Act, 1951 inasmuch as his sentence that whosoever
would cast vote in favour of Congress, would be branded as Gaddar
and whosoever would cast vote in favour of Bhartiya Janta Party shall
not be pardoned by Khuda. As per Sri Saran, the applicant could have
used the word ‘Bhagwan’ but he deliberately and intentionally used
the word ‘Khuda’ for those voters, who cast their votes to the Bhartiya
Janta Party. During investigation, sufficient material has been
collected by the Investigating Officer in support of the allegation,
therefore, the intention of the present applicant to use the word
‘Khuda’ for those voters, who cast their votes to Bhartiya Janta Party
and also as to why the voters of Congress would be branded as
‘Gaddar of the country’ may be determined during the course of the
trial. Sri Saran has stated that both the learned court below i.e. learned
trial court as well as revisional court has considered the arguments of
the present applicant thoroughly and carefully and returned their
findings strictly in accordance with law, therefore, there is no
infirmity or illegality in those order, so the present petition may be
dismissed and the applicant may be directed to participate in the trial
proceedings so that the trial may be conducted and concluded with
expedition. Since he has already been protected by the Hon’ble Apex
Court, therefore, he has got no reasonable apprehension of his arrest
in any manner whatsoever.
21.     Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material
available on record.
22.     Article 19 of the Constitution of India gives all citizens the
rights regarding freedom of speech and expression but subject to
reasonable restrictions for preserving inter-alia public order, decency
or morality. This is trite that the extent of protection of speech would
depend on whether, such speech would constitute a propagation of
ideas or would have any social value. If the answer to the said
question is in affirmative, such speech would be protected under
Article 19 (1) (a); if the answer is in native, such speech would not be
protected under Article 19 (1) (a). Further, reasonable restrictions are
meant for preserving inter-alia public order, decency or morality.
Prima facie, it is not decent for a person, who is the Chief Minister of
one State, to utter any sentence or word which has any hidden
meaning. As per the contents of his speech, the voters of the Congress
would be termed as ‘Gaddar of the country’ whereas the voters of the
Bhartiya Janta Party would not be pardoned by ‘Khuda’. It is true that
Khuda, Bhagwan or God are one and the same but using the word
‘Khuda’ by one Hindu leader only for those voters, who cast their
votes to the Bhartiya Janta Party not to the Congress can only be
clarified by the applicant during the course of the trial about his intent
to use such word. I am unable to comprehend as to how such speech
would constitute a propagation of ideas or would have any social
value. Since credible evidences to that effect are said to have been
collected during investigation and charge sheet has been filed,
therefore, veracity of charge may not be examined or tested by this
Court by invoking its inherent power under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
23.     For the convenience, Section 125 of the Act, 1951 is being
reproduced herein below:-
connection with election. Any person who in connection
with an election under this Act promotes or attempts to
promote on grounds of religion, race, caste, community or
language, feelings of enmity or hatred, between different
classes of the citizens of India shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or
with fine, or with both.”
24.     From the perusal of Section 125 of the Act, 1951, it appears that
if the feelings of enmity or hatred between different classes of citizens
of India is promoted, that shall be treated as an offence under such
section and punishable under Section 125 of the Act, 1951. The
statement so given by the applicant is not so plain and simple
inasmuch as for one set of voters, he is uttering the term ‘Gaddar of
the country’ and for the other set of voters, he is saying that ‘Khuda
shall not pardon them’. Prima facie, it appears that he is threatening
the later voters in the name of Khuda knowing fully well that if he
uses the term ‘Khuda’, some set of voters belonging to different
religion might have severely been influenced.
25.     So far as the submission of learned counsel for the applicant is
that the speech of the applicant is based on his personal opinion,
therefore, no offence under Section 125 of the Act, 1951 may be
constituted as it lacks mens-rea, so he will have to clarify his opinion
before the trial court as to what is his source of knowledge that if any
one who believes in ‘Khuda’ casts votes to Bhartiya Janta Party, those
would not be pardoned by ‘Khuda’ and as to why this thing would not
be applicable for the voters, who cast vote to Congress. In certain
cases, the Courts have considered the ‘knowledge’ as an essential
element of offence, not the ‘mens rea’. Therefore, if during course of
investigation some credible evidences/materials have been collected,
charge sheet has been filed, cognizance has been taken, discharge
application has been rejected by the learned trial court by speaking
and reasoned order and that order has been upheld by the revisional
court, that too by speaking and reasoned order, then the applicant
must participate in the trial proceedings.
26.    Notably, the Hon’ble Apex Court has not stayed the
proceedings pending against the present applicant before the trial
court and only his presence has been dispensed with keeping the
appeal pending, therefore, the trial/proceedings of the present case
may not be stayed or quashed.
27.    The power of this Court enshrined under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is
an inherent power to secure the ends of justice or to prevent any abuse
of the process of any Court. This is an extra-ordinary power of the
High Court like Article 226 of the Constitution of India but at the
same time, this Court must be much careful and cautious before
invoking this power to ensure that if this power is not invoked, the
litigant would suffer irreparable loss and injury and it would be
manifest injustice and abuse of the process of the law. Therefore, the
Apex Court has observed in catena of cases that this power should be
invoked very sparingly and cautiously.
28.    The High Court of Uttarakhand at Nainital has considered
almost the similar and identical case in re; Rajendra Singh Bhandari
Vs. State of Uttarakhand and Another, 2020 SCC OnLine Utt 551,
and considering the relevant dictums of the Apex Court, that petition
was dismissed. Relevant paragraphs no.10 to 18 of the said judgment
are required to be reproduced hereunder:-
“10. The scope of Section 482 of the Code has been
considered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in various
judgments.
11.In Madhu Limaya v. State of Maharashtra,(1977) 4
SCC 551 : AIR 1978 SC 47, the Hon'ble Apex Court has held
that the following principles would govern the exercise of
inherent jurisdiction of the High Court -
(1) Power is not to be resorted to, if there is specific
provision in Code for redress of grievances of aggrieved
party.
(2) It should be exercised sparingly to prevent abuse of
process of any Court or otherwise to secure ends of
justice.
(3) It should not be exercised against the express bar of
the law engrafted in any other provision of the Code.
12. In Pepsi Food Limited v. Special Judicial Magistrate,
(1998) 36 ACC 20, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed
that the power conferred on the High Court under Article 226
and 227 of the Constitution of India, and under Section 482
of the Code have no limits, but more the power more due care
and caution is to be exercised in invoking these powers.
13. In Lee Kun Hee v. State of U.P., JT (2012) 2 SC 237,
the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the Court in exercise of
its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code cannot go into
the truth or otherwise of the allegations and appreciate
evidence, if any, available on record.
14. In State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal, 1992 Supp (1)
SCC 335, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India considered in
detail the provisions of Section 482 of the Code. The Hon'ble
Supreme Court summarized the legal position by laying the
following guidelines to be followed by High Courts in
exercise of their inherent jurisdiction:
“(1) Where the allegations made in the first
information report or the complaint, even if they are
taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety
do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out
a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information
report and other materials, if any, accompanying the
FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying
an investigation by police officers under Section
156(1) of the Code except under an order of a
Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the
FIR or complaint and the evidence collected in
support of the same do not disclose the commission of
any offence and make out a case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute
a cognizable offence but constitute only a non-
cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a
police officer without an order of a Magistrate as
contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or
complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable
on the basis of which no prudent person can ever
reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground
for proceeding against the accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in
any of the provisions of the Code or the concerned
Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted)
to the institution and continuance of the proceedings
and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code
or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress
for the grievance of the aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly
attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding
is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for
wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view
to spite him due to private and personal grudge.
15. In the instant case, cognizance has been taken in the
offence punishable under Section 125 of the Act, 1951. Section
125 of the Act, 1951 reads as under:—
“Section 125. Promoting enmity between classes in
connection with election.—Any person who in
connection with an election under this Act promotes or
attempts to promote on grounds of religion, race,
caste, community or language, feelings of enmity or
hatred, between different classes of the citizens of
India shall be punishable with imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or
with both.”
16. It is the fundamental duty of every citizen to promote
harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood and fraternity
amongst all the people of India transcending religious,
linguistic and regional or sectional diversities. For fair and
peaceful election, during the election campaign, party or
candidate should not indulge in any activity which may create
mutual hatred or cause tension between different classes of
the citizens of India on ground of religion, race, caste,
community or language.
17. In the present case, the learned Chief Judicial
Magistrate took the cognizance after considering the
evidences available on the record. It is well settled that at the
time of considering of the case for cognizance and
summoning, merits of the case cannot be tested and it is
wholly impermissible for this Court to enter into the factual
arena to adjudge the correctness of the allegations. This Court
would not also examine the genuineness of the allegations
since this Court does not function as a Court of Appeal or
Revision, while exercising its jurisdiction under Section 482 of
the Code. In this matter it cannot be said that there are no
allegations against the applicant. Apart this, learned counsel
for the applicant could not able to show at this stage that
allegations are so absurd and inherently improbable on the
basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just
conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding
against the applicant.
18. The use of expression “promotes or attempts to
promote” in Section 125 of the Act, 1951 shows that there has
to be mens rea on the part of the accused to commit the
offence of promoting disharmony amongst different religions
under Section 125, whereas, the case of the applicant is that
this matter is launched by the political opponents. These
allegations are required to be tested only at the time of trial.
This Court cannot hold a parallel trial in an application under
Section 482 of the Code.”
29.    In view of the trite law as settled by the Apex Court (supra),
facts and circumstances as considered above, the present case does not
fall in any category set out in the judgment of State of Haryana v.
Bhajan Lal, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335. Further, I find no infirmity,
illegality or perversity in the impugned orders dated 21.10.2022
passed by the revisional court and in the order dated 04.08.2022
passed by the learned trial court as both the impugned orders are well
considered, reasoned and speaking orders. Accordingly, the prayers
made in this application are refused.
30.    Since the case has to be tried, so I make it clear that the
observations made in the preceding paras of this order are only for the
disposal of this application, filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. These
observations will not influence the trial court while deciding the case.
31.    In the aforesaid terms, the application, filed under Section 482
Cr.P.C., is dismissed.
33.   Before parting with, I appreciate the hard work and research
done by my Law Intern Mr. Mudit Singh for finding out the case laws
applicable in the present issue.