PRAYER: Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, praying
for the issue of a Writ of Mandamus directing the respondents 1 to 5 to
ensure admission of the petitioner (Special Child with Mild Autism
Spectrum disorder) in the 6th respondent school for admission in the First
Standard based on the Psychological Assessment Report dated 24.09.2020
and in line with the provisions of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act,
2016 and the National Trust For Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral
Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999.
The Writ Petition had been filed in the nature of Mandamus by a
young child, who had been diagonised as a special child with mild Autism
Spectrum disorder, in extreme distress, seeking a direction to the first to fifth
respondents, namely, the State of Tamilnadu, represented by the Secretary to
Government, Department of School Education, the Tamilnadu State
Commission for Protection of Child Rights, Periyar E.V.R. Road,
Poonamallee High Road, Kilpauk, Chennai, the District Collector, Vellore,
the District Chief Educational Officer, Vellore and the Council for the Indian
School Certificate Examinations, New Delhi, to ensure her admission in the
6th respondent Educational Institution in Vellore, in the first Standard based
on her psychological assessment Report dated 24.09.2020 and in accordance
with the provisions of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 and
the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral palsy,
Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999.
2. In the affidavit filed by the mother on behalf of the child, it was
stated that the child was born on 09.11.2015 and was as good as any other
child. She however, had a speech delay which was diagnosed at the age of 2
½ years. She was taken to a speech therapist at Apollo Hospital. He advised
the mother to admit the child in a mainstream school                  – Gateway
International School (CBSE), Padur. The child completed her LKG before
Covid-19. During the Covid-19 lock down, the mother found that the child
was not at par with other children of her age. She took her daughter to the
National Institute for Empowerment of Persons with Multiple Disabilities
(NIEPMED) at Kovalam, Chennai.
3. The child was subjected to various assessments and evaluated.
By a Psychological assessment report dated 24.09.2020,             the child was
diagnosed with mild autism. Thereafter, the mother applied for transfer to
Vellore. She joined Government Law College as Assistant Officer. Her
husband resigned his job to extend full attention for the child. The child was
admitted to CMC Hospital on 08.11.2021 and was thoroughly assessed for
five days by the Head of Paediatrics Department along with a speech
therapist, occupational therapist and psychologist. They confirmed that she
was a special needs child. She was discharged on 12.11.2021. She was
diagnosed with 'Autism Spectrum Disorder'.            She is under periodic
assessment at CMC.
4. The mother further stated that they had originally approached
May Flower School at Vellore but the Principal there stated that they had no
special educators, the child was allowed to attend classes for UKG. Several
other schools were approached but they denied admission stating lack of
special educators and supporting teachers. She then approached the 6 th
respondent in March 2022 seeking admission. The 6th respondent sent an E-
mail calling upon the child to sit for a written examination to be held on
06.04.2022. The child wrote the exam for about an hour. Thereafter, when
the Principal was approached, she sought a letter from the Head of
Department who had assessed the child in CMC, Vellore. The letter was
also issued and produced. The child was then taken to the 6th respondent
school for an oral interview on 08.04.2022. She was interviewed by a
committee as the last candidate after she was made to wait for atleast three
hours.         The mother was not allowed to accompany the child.           The 6 th
respondent then took a stand that they had no special educators to admit the
child.
5.    It had been further stated in the affidavit that in the website of
the sixth respondent School, it had been very specifically stated that a few of
the teachers had joined hands to provide support to students with special
educational needs. It was further contended in the affidavit that the rules
relating to affiliation of schools state that the affiliation would be withdrawn
if it had been established that a school acted in contravention with the
Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full
Participation) Act, 1995 and denies admission to a child owing only to
disability.
6.    The petitioner then reported the issue to the second respondent,
who forwarded the representation to the fourth respondent/ District Chief
Educational Officer at Vellore. The fourth respondent addressed a
communication to the sixth respondent. The sixth respondent stated that the
child did poorly in her written examination and that they do not have any
special educators to cater to the special needs of the child.
7. Thereafter, the fourth respondent had formed a committee of
special educators in Vellore District to assess the condition of the child. A
two member committee had examined the child and a report had also been
submitted. It was stated that she has the ability to acquire education in an
inclusive school.
8. On the basis of the report, the fourth respondent had sent a
communication on 01.06.2022 to the sixth respondent with a request to
admit the child. The sixth respondent sent a further communication on
01.07.2022 reiterating their earlier stand. It was stated that the child did not
fare well either in the written test or in the interview. It was further stated
that the sixth respondent does not have infrastructure to cater to the
requirements of the child.
9.  Thereafter, the fourth respondent sent a communication dated
06.07.2022 to the second respondent / the Tamil Nadu State Commission
for Protection of Child Rights, who in turn addressed the third
respondent/District Collector, Vellore, to take steps to admit the child in the
6th respondent School.
10. It had been stated in the affidavit that right to education had
been recognised as a fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21 of the
Constitution. It had also been stated that the child was diagnosed only with
mild autism and is normal in all other respects. It was stated that the object
of the law relating to persons with disabilities have been violated by the sixth
respondent in refusing to admit the child. It was under those circumstances
that the Writ was filed in the nature of a mandamus seeking a direction to
ensure admission in the sixth respondent school in the first standard.
11. A counter affidavit had been filed on behalf of the sixth
respondent. The Principal, claimed that she was well acquainted with the
facts of the case. She was also authorised to file the counter affidavit on
behalf of the sixth respondent. She however stated that all the averments
made in the affidavit filed in support of the Writ Petition were false. She
stated that the sixth respondent was affiliated to the Council for the Indian
School Certificate Examinations / fifth respondent. She stated that all the
rules and regulations have been complied with by the sixth respondent. She
ironically stated that the sixth respondent was managed by an Association
said to have been started for charitable purposes. She also stated that the
school's mission and vision was to provide affordable and top quality
education. She stated that the teachers take initiative to undertake voluntary
special classes for children, who need special attention in limited subjects.
She was gracious enough to later admit that the petitioner had applied for
admission in the first standard though in the earlier paragraph, she had
stated that all the statements made in the affidavit filed in support of the
Writ Petition were false, vexatious and baseless.
12. She also stated that the child wrote the exam on 06.04.2022
but did not score reasonable marks and was still called for an interview
purely on compassionate grounds. She also stated that the child did not do
well in the interview. Therefore, taking into consideration the interest of the
child, a decision was made not to select the child for admission. It was very
specifically claimed that the school had never advertised they had special
educators to cater to the special needs of a child with disability.
13. She specifically stated that the petitioner was informed that
special educators/trainers and resources persons to take care of the special
needs of children were only to help the students to cope with difficulties in
English and Mathematics. She specifically denied that a fitness certificate
was sought from a Doctor at CMC Hospital. She stated that the letter of the
said Doctor neither indicated nor suggested anything regarding the fitness of
the child. She stated that the child was not discriminated. She reiterated
that the child did not do well in the written examination and also in the
interview. She further reiterated that the sixth respondent cannot and was
not able to facilitate the request of the petitioner for admission.
14. During the course of hearing, taking into consideration the
denial of the sixth respondent to admit the child into school, the learned
Additional Government Pleader was requested to find out the schools in
Vellore District which offer education for special children. It was also made
clear that if the sixth respondent had deliberately withheld admission to the
child strictures would be passed. This was by a noting dated 22.12.2022.
15. Thereafter, when the matter came up again on 20.01.2023, the
sixth respondent was called upon to file a counter affidavit to clarify whether
they had, at any point of time held out in their website, that they offered
education through educators for special children.
16. An additional counter affidavit was then filed by the Principal
of the sixth respondent school. She stated that the statement made in the
website only meant that whenever a child is found to lag in studies or in co-
curricular activities, they were attended to by teachers after the regular
school hours and given special education. She specifically stated that it does
not mean / interpreted that the school provides training for children with
disability like that of the petitioner. She stated that the sixth respondent
cannot admit the child and it was also emphasised that they had never held
out that they would offer admission to the child.
17. The learned Additional Government Pleader had forwarded
instructions from the District Chief Educational Officer at Vellore / the
fourth respondent wherein it was stated that though an enquiry was made
with the sixth respondent, the School Management did not extend co-
operation. It was stated that three schools, have been identified in Vellore
and that the child can be admitted in anyone of the three schools.
18.    Heard arguments advance by Mr.N.Manokaran, learned
counsel        for  the  petitioner, Mr.U.Baranitharan,   learned  Additional
Government Pleader, appearing for the first, third and fourth respondents,
Mr.David Sunder Singh, learned counsel for the second respondent and
Mr.Krishna Srinivas, learned Senior Counsel for M/s. S.Ramasubramaniam
& Associates for the sixth respondent.
19.    Even before could commence, Mr.Krishna Srinivas wanted to
inform the Court about a few steps taken by the sixth respondent, but it was
felt audience to the learned Senior Counsel can be advanced after hearing
the learned counsels for the petitioner and the other respondents.
20.    Mr.N.Manokaran, learned counsel for the petitioner first
pointed out the explanation given by the sixth respondent for not taking the
child for admission. They had stated that they had no special educators to
cater children with significant learning needs.     The learned counsel then
pointed out to the assessment report given by the two member committee by
the fourth respondent wherein they had stated that after 45 minutes of
assessment, the communication skill of the child was good and she
responded to appropriate questions and her speech and language was good.
She was also able to communicate both in Tamil and in English. Her eye
contact was good. Her reading and writing skills were good. She was able to
write her name as well as the names of her parents without any prompt or
support. She was able to recite tables in Maths. She expected rewards after
every activity. She had no sensory issues. She enjoyed playing with her age
group children and loved eating all kinds of food. She was able to name
foods, she remembered names and the places she had visited. It was finally
concluded that she had the ability to cope up with education in an inclusive
school.
21. The learned counsel then drew the attention of the Court to the
communications between the fourth and sixth respondents and the
responses wherein again the sixth respondent had stated that the child did
not do well either in the written examination or in her interview and that
therefore, they are not able to take her in their fold. The learned counsel
then pointed out the communication between the second and third
respondents dated 01.08.2022 wherein it had been stated that the District
Collector was requested to ensure that the child was admitted to the School.
22. The learned counsel then took the Court through the provisions
of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act 2016 and with the provisions
of the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy,
Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999 and also with the
rules for affiliation of the Council for Indian School Certificate Examinations
under which the sixth respondent had been affiliated.
23. The learned counsel then took the Court through the
Psychological Assessment Report – NIEPMD dated 24.09.2020 wherein
they had stated that the child had a corresponding SQ of 72 indicating
borderline socio-adaptive functioning and that the score had been attributed
to understands poor communication and social skills. It had been further
stated that she understands the form concepts and could place shapes in
appropriate position. It was however stated that she had poor attention
while doing the test and needed repeated persuasion and instructions. Her
score was given as 98 indicating mild autism. It was finally stated that she
has mild autism with borderline socio-adpative functioning.             It was
recommended that she should continue education in an inclusive school
setting with adequate motivation and support.
24. The learned counsel also took the Court through the certificate
issued by the Doctor at CMC dated 08.04.2022, wherein he had opined that
it would be beneficial for the child to join school to improve communication
skills.
25. Placing all these facts, Mr.N.Manokaran lamented that the
sixth respondent school had taken an aggressive stand and had refused to
admit the child. He stated that the parents have been running from pillar to
post keeping in mind the welfare of the child. He also pointed out that they
belonged to the same community and religion as that of the administrations
of the sixth respondent school, but still they were treated poorly and rejected
at the threshold itself. The learned counsel reiterated that the statement in
the website of the sixth respondent projected and indicated that they would
offer education to a child with special needs and did not accept the
explanation that the words special needs would indicate a child with poor
learning capacity and not a child with special needs as is indicated in the
normal sense, namely, a child with disability. The learned counsel stated
that it was quite distressing to observe the attitude of the sixth respondent
and therefore, was insistent that a Mandamus must be issued.
26. Mr.U.Baranidharan, learned Additional Government Pleader
appearing for the respondents 1, 3 and 4 stated that the State Government
has no direct control over the sixth respondent which was affiliated under
the fifth respondent. He stated that every effort had been taken by the
District Educational Officer to persuade the sixth respondent to admit the
child. He also pointed out that a separate assessment of the child was also
made. He pointed out that options to admit the child in three separate
schools had been given and stated that the State Educational Authorities
would take every step to ensure that the child is given good education in
any one of the three schools as chosen by the petitioner/mother. He stated
that the intention of the State Government was to provide education to
special children in an inclusive atmosphere and there was never intention to
exclude such children from main stream education.
27. Mr. Krishna Srinivas, learned Senior Counsel was then heard.
I must admit that there was a heated exchange with the learned Senior
Counsel. The learned Senior Counsel remonstrated that he should have been
heard first since he wanted to place on record the instruction that the sixth
respondent had change in attitude and had conducted interview for special
educators and would be appointing them on the role of the school. He also
stated that they would admit the child in their school. He expressed grief
that opportunity to place that fact was not granted in the first instance and
that information was not stated on the earlier hearing dates because he was
not instructed to state so. The learned Senior Counsel stated that he was
now instructed to state that the sixth respondent had indeed take steps and
shall take further steps to ensure that there are special educators placed in
the school. He also stated that an affidavit in that regard shall also be filed.
However, the said affidavit was not filed by the closure of the arguments
and the matter was then reserved for orders.
28. I have carefully considered the arguments advanced and
perused the materials available on record.
29.    The child was born on 09.11.2015. She had speech delay at
the age of 2 ½ years. She was taken to a speech in Pathologist and
Therapist. She was given speech therapy. She was advised to join in an
inclusive school. She joined LKG in Gateway International School (CBSE),
Padur. She completed her LKG before the onslaught of covid-19 pandemic.
30.    During covid-19 pandemic lock down, her mother found that
she was not on par with other children of her age. Her mother took her to
the National Institute for Empowerment of Persons with Multiple
Disabilities (NIEPMED) at Kovalam, Chennai. The child was subjected to
various assessments and evaluations and an assessment report dated
24.09.2020 was given. In that report, it was stated that she had mild autism
with borderline socio-adpative functioning. The recommendations were:-
* To provide adequate stimulation to
improve her communication and social skills.
* To increase her play time in natural
environment and decrease her gadget exposure;
* To involve her in group play activities
* To offer therapeutic interventions to
improve her communication and social skills.
* To continue education in an inclusive
school setting with adequate motivation and
support.
31.    Thereafter, the parents denied that their child could be referred
to Christian Medical College and Hospital at CMC at Vellore. The mother
obtained a transfer to Vellore Government Law College. The father resigned
his job to extend help for the child. It is seen that the parents took not just a
small step but deeply appreciable decisions keeping in mind the welfare of
their daughter.        The mother had taken a decision to change her work
environment. The father had resigned his job to be with child.
32.    The child was then admitted to CMC Hospital on 08.11.2021.
She was assessed for 5 days. She was assessed by a team of specialist
including the Head of Paediatrics Department along with a Speech Therapist
and Occupational therapist and a Psychologist. She was discharged on
12.11.2021. A discharge summary was given. It was stated as follows:-
“Childhood Autism rating Scale – Second
Edition (CARS-2) was scored based on the
observation during the session and report from
the parents. The score of 35.5 obtained from the
score was classified under having mild to
moderate symptoms of Autism.”
33.    Suggestions were also given. They were:-
“- structure her day
- use visuals for scheduling, social skills, learning, safety and
- sensory play activities
- Imaginary play with real life scenarios
- Peer group interaction – adult mediated – with purposeful
games.”
34.    The recommendations included the medicines to be given and
more importantly recommendations 4 and 5 were as follows:-
“4. Training as suggested
35.    Thus it was recommended that she should be encouraged to
have interactions with other children and receive education.         The final
diagnosis was given as Autism Spectrum Disorder.
36.     In the National Trust For Welfare of Persons with Autism,
Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999,
autism has been defined as follows:-
skill   development     primarily   affecting   the
communication and social abilities of a person,
marked by repetitive and ritualistic behaviour.”
37.     In the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, the
following terms had been defined as under:-
“2(m) “inclusive education” means a
system of education wherein students with and
without disability learn together and the
system of teaching and learning is suitably
adapted to meet the learning needs of
different types of students with disabilities.”
38.     The Schedule to Section 2(zc) defines 'autism spectrum
“Autism Spectrum disorder means a neuro
– developmental condition typically appearing in
the first three years of life that significantly
affects a person's ability to communicate,
understand relationships and relate to others,
and is frequently associated with unusal or
stereotupical rituals or behaviours.”
39.     Section 16(i) – Duty of Educational Institutions -
“The appropriate Government and the
local authorities     shall   endeavour    that    all
educational institutions funded or recognised by
them provide inclusive education to the children
with disabilities and towards that end shall:
(i) admit them without discrimination and
provide education and opportunities for sports
and recreation activities equally with others.”
40.   Discrimination was explained as follows:-
2(h)     “discrimination' in relation to
disability, means any distinction, exclusion,
restriction on the basis of disability which is the
purpose or effect of impairing or nullifying the
recognition, enjoyment or exercise on an equal
basis with others of all human rights and
fundamental freedoms in the political, economic,
social, cultural, civil or any other field and
includes all forms of discrimination and denial of
reasonable accommodation.
41.    The further definitions are as follows:-
2(s) person with disability means a person
with long term physical, mental, intellectual or
sensory impairment which, in interaction with
barriers,    hinders    his   full   and    effective
participation in society equally with others.
2(y)    reasonable accommodation means
necessary and appropriate modification and
adjustments, without imposing a disproportionate
or undue burden in a particular case, to ensure
to persons with disabilities the enjoyment or
exercise of rights equally with others. ”
42.    Section 3 is as follows:-
“3. Equality and non-discrimination –
(1) The appropriate Government shall ensure
that the persons with disabilities enjoy the
right to equality, life with dignity and respect
for his or her integrity equally with others.
(2) The appropriate Government shall
take steps to utilise the capacity of persons
with disabilities by providing appropriate
environment.
(3) No person with disability shall be
discriminated on the ground of disability,
unless it is shown that the impugned act or
omission     is  a   proportionate    means   of
(4) No person shall be deprived of his or
her personal liberty only on the ground of
“16. Duty of educational institutions – The
appropriate Government and the local authorities
shall endeavour that all educational institutions
funded or recognised by them provide inclusive
education to the children with disabilities and
towards that end shall -
(i) admit them without discrimination and
provide education and opportunities for sports and
recreation activities equally with others;
(ii)  make building, campus and various
facilities accessible;
according to the individual's requirements;
(iv)        provide     necessary     support
individualised or otherwise in environments that
maximise      academic    and    social  development
consistent with the goal of full inclusion;
(v) ensure that the education to persons who
are blind or deaf or both is imparted in the most
appropriate languages and modes and means of
(vi) detect specific learning disabilities in
children     at  the   earliest   and  take   suitable
pedagogical and other measures to overcome
(vii)    monitor participation, progress in
terms of attainment levels and completion of
education in respect of every student with
(viii) provide transportation facilities to the
children with disabilities and also the attendant of
the children with disabilities having high support
needs.”
44.    In the schedule to Section 2, Intellectual disability has been
“ a condition characterised by significant
limitation    both   in   intellectual  functioning
(reasoning, learning, problem solving) and in
adaptive behaviour which covers a range of
every day, social and practical skills, including -
(a) Specific spectrum disability means a
heterogeneous group of conditions wherein there
is a deficit in processing language, spoken or
written, that may manifest itself as a difficulty to
comprehend, speak, read, write, spell, or to do
mathematical calculations and includes such
conditions as perceptual disabilities, dyslexia,
dysgraphia,      dyscalculia,      dyspraxia      and
developmental aphasia;
appearing in the first three years of life that
significantly   affects   a   person's    ability  to
communicate,     understand      relationships    and
relate to others and is frequently associated with
unusal or stereotypical rituals or behaviours.
45.    It is an admitted fact that in the website of the sixth respondent
as stated in their counter affidavit, it had been held out as follows:-
“The teaching methodology adopted by the
teachers prepare our children to excel both
intellectually and      emotionally. Few of the
teachers have also joined hands to provide
support from students with special educational
46.    The issue now before this Court is whether the Court can call
upon the sixth respondent consequent to the aforementioned statement in
their website to comply with their statutory obligation to admit the child
with the aforementioned disabilities.
47.    The sixth respondent had refused to do so. They claimed that
she did not do well in her written exam and did not impress them in
personal interview. They washed their hands off her. This stand was
reiterated atleast two hearing dates and in the counter affidavit and in the
additional affidavit. This stand was quite distressing.
48.    The sixth respondent is quite pathetically and ironically named
after a third-generation American Medical Missionary in India. It makes me
wonder whether those in administration today are riding on that name
without following her principles or the core conduct which the noble lady
adhered to.
49.    I hope my apprehensions are not correct and that some
remedial steps would be undertaken by those in administration . This is
required not to improve their outlook of children but not to defame the name
of the noble Missionary.
50. The Noble Missionary lived between 1870 and 1960, and had
dedicated her life to assuage the plight of Indian women and worked
tirelessly helping those afflicted with bubonic plague, cholera and leprosy.
All three are infectious diseases, but those unfortunate persons, who were so
afflicted by such terrible infectious diseases, were embraced by her who
worked to alleviate their grievances. She scarified herself in the true spirit of
her Mission and kept her vow.
51.  Very very unfortunately, her name is used by an institution
which had taken a conscious decision to drive away a child and her parents,
who had sought refuge and admission. Even though, the learned Senior
Counsel remonstrated that the sixth respondent had taken steps to interview
prospective teachers, who were trained to impart education to children with
special needs, there was a touch of hollowness in the said submission. It had
come a little too late in the day. Such an offer should have given voluntarily.
It should be from the heart. It should be in spirit and not in mere expression
of words alone. I hold that the statement about willingness to appoint
teachers trained to teach children with special needs had been stated only to
brush under the carpet the earlier stand of refusal to look after those
children. It is just white washing. There was no real intent.          Such a
statement could have been appreciated if in the interregnum days between
the hearing dates the sixth respondent had reached out to the mother and
offered to take the child in the roll of the school. They had not done so.
They only stated in the Court to project a false impression that they actually
intend to admit the child. The question which begs an answer is how the
sixth respondent would treat the child and how they would wipe away the
trauma in the minds of the mother and in the child, who had already been
rejected. I hold the said statement by the school is a materialistic statement
as a last gasp to justify using the name of the noble Missionary.
52. In W.P.(MD).No. 10707 of 2021 [K.R.Raja Vs. Union of
India and others] dated 29.06.2021, the Division Bench of the Madurai
Bench of Madras High Court, while examining a writ under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India to issue a Mandamus to ensure inclusion of
differently abled children under the Right of Children to free and
Compulsory Education (RTE) Act 2009, had observed as follows:-
“5.Learned Counsel for the petitioner
pointed out that there is a specific mandate
under Section 16 of the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities Act, 2016, ['the Act' for brevity],
wherein the appropriate Government and the
local authorities should endeavour that all
educational institutions funded or recognised by
them provide inclusive education to the children
who are differently abled. It is pointed out that
from the information secured under RTI, the
petitioner has come to know that in several
districts, number of differently abled students
admitted in private schools is very low and in
most cases it is nil. Therefore, it is submitted that
the    Court    should     intervene     and    issue
6. Though we appreciate the cause and the
concern shown by the petitioner to ensure strict
implementation of the provisions of the Act, more
particularly, Section 16 of the Act, we are unable
to infer from the statistics provided in the
affidavit filed in support of this writ petition that
in the schools whether aided or recognized by
the Government are refusing to admit students
who are differently abled. Therefore, if the
petitioner seeks for such relief, atleast sample
instances of denial of admission should be
placed before this Court and more particularly,
the concerned institution should be made as
parties. In such circumstances, there will also be
interest of the candidate involved apart from the
larger interest.
8. Thus, the Government has taken serious
note of the mandate under Section 16 of the Act
and issued guidelines and the guidelines state
that before random selection is made for
admission in such schools, the persons who have
been identified as disadvantaged group category
should be given admission first. Therefore, the
endeavour of the petitioner is to focus on the
aspect as to whether there has been any denial
of the admission and his pursuit should be in
that angle. Hence, at this juncture, we cannot
issue a Writ of Mandamus, as sought for.
However, we preserve the liberty to the
petitioner to conduct further research in the
matter for ascertaining the matter that the
Government Orders are strictly implemented
and whether disadvantaged group have not
reaped the benefit of the Government Order or
there has been any nonfulfillment of the
obligation cast upon the authorities and the
institutions under Section 16 of the Act. ”
53.    The Delhi High Court in W.P.(C).No. 4618 of 2011 [ Social
Jurist, A Civil Rights Group Vs. Government of NCT of Delhi, had
observed as follows:-
“This Petition filed in public interest
highlights the deficiency of requisite teaching
aids for children with disability and non-
availability of special teachers, in the unaided
and aided private schools of Delhi and seeks a
direction in this regard including to the
Government of NCT of Delhi (GNCTD) and
MCD.       It is pleaded that owing to non-
availability of Special Educators and the
requisite teaching aids, children with disability
admitted to the said schools, suffer.”
Testing Agency and Others], the Hon'ble Supreme Court had observed as
“D.2.2.     Right     to     Inclusive
effective participation in society. Inclusive
education is indispensable for ensuring
universal and non-discriminatory access to
education. The Convention on Rights of
Persons with Disabilities recognises that
inclusive education systems must be put in
place for a meaningful realisation of the
right to education for PwD. Thus, a right to
education is essentially a right to inclusive
education. In India, the RPwD Act 2016
provides statutory backing to the principle
of   inclusive   education.    Section  2(m)
defines inclusive education as:
system of education wherein students with
and without disability learn together and
the system of teaching and learning is
suitably adapted to meet the learning
needs of different types of students with
48. Above all, the RPwD Act 2016
contains provisions mandating reasonable
accommodation.          The      expression
“reasonable accommodation” is defined in
Section 2(y), which reads as under:
“2(y)reasonable accommodation” means
necessary and appropriate modification
and    adjustments, without imposing      a
disproportionate or undue burden in a
particular case, to ensure to persons with
disabilities the enjoyment or exercise of
rights equally with others;
matter, as the first respondent would have
the Court do, is to accept that in a
competitive entrance examination such as
the NEET, a large body of candidates
appears across the country. According to
respondent, individual cases of prejudice
caused by an improper application of the
norms       governing      the    examination
unfortunate, consequence. The other way
of looking at the problem is that while the
first respondent must utilise the experience
gained in conducting the NEET process to
proactively     take    steps    to  fill   up
deficiencies, the examination process must
continue to account for the need to rectify
injustice caused to a student, who played
no role in causing such injustice. The
number of cases where such injustices take
place maybe a few or more than that (the
Court has not been apprised of the
statistical figure); but it cannot be ignored
that for a student who is made to suffer,
the consequence is indeed serious. The
entire course of a career depends upon the
proper conduct of the NEET and, as in the
present case, the application of a binding
norm prescribed by the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment for the benefit of
students suffering from disabilities. It is no
answer for an authority bound by the dicta
of law and the Constitution, to throw up its
hands in despair, instead of attempting to
remedy the injustice which is caused to a
student. A judge cannot ignore that behind
the statistics is a human face, reflecting the
aspirations, joy and tears of a student and
her family.
55. In the present case, the appellant
does not claim misfeasance on the part of
the first respondent but plain and simple
negligence in complying with the rights
and entitlements provided to PwDs under
the   RPwD       Act   2016.    For   effective
undoubtedly is the salutary object of the
legislation, the safeguards which are
provided by the law must be duly enforced
and any breach of entitlement must be
answerable at law. Responsibility and
55.   It is thus seen that the Courts have always been sensitive to
children with special needs. They have expressed hope that educational
institutions would not betray children with special needs. They have called
upon educational institutions to rise to the occasion and extend their arms to
those children. Education signifies pulling up from the depth a child and
motivate him or her to achieve his or her dream. The sixth respondent has
failed not only in this duty but also betrayed the name of the noble
Missionary and extremely, extremely distressingly their Christian faith.
56.   In view of the above reasons, I would rest the issue to the
conscience of the sixth respondent. The mother has been offered a helping
hand by the State Government. They have identified three separate schools
wherein the child can be admitted. The sixth respondent has now stated that
they are also prepared to admit the child.
57. Let me not stand in the way of any decision making by the
mother as she would have to assess the best educational environment for her
child. If at all the mother decides to admit the child in the sixth respondent, I
hope and I pray that the sixth respondent would not hold out against the
child for this litigation and the burden which this litigation has cast on the
sixth respondent in appointing special educators which is a financial strain
on the sixth respondent administrators and would not hold against the child
during her years of study. I hope that if at all the mother takes a decision to
admit the child in the sixth respondent, they would prove false my words
expressed above and if they do so, I shall be the most satisfied person. The
entire issue is in their hands.
58. The Court can only express it views. The Court cannot thrust
any child on any school but can only open the hearts of those, who project to
impart education, an education which is inclusive in nature. I would leave
the options open.
59. I must express distress that there has been no representation on
behalf of the fifth respondent. Let a copy of this order be forwarded to the
fifth respondent and that if they seek to justify the salary paid to the officials
in their department they must take necessary correcting steps.
60. In the course of this order, the name of the petitioner had not
been stated to protect the identity of the child. The name of the sixth
respondent had also not been stated, certainly not out of any consideration to
the administrators of the school, but only bowing down to the noble
Missionary, whose name has been defiled by the sixth respondent, but shall
not be done so by this Court.
61. Registry may therefore issue the order copy but in the cause
title they may only state “The child, represented by her mother” so far as the
petitioner is concerned and as 'The Educational Institution” represented by
its Principal' so far as the sixth respondent is concerned.
62. The Writ Petition stands disposed. No costs. Consequently,
connected Civil Miscellaneous Petition is closed.
2.          The Tamilnadu State Commission for
Protection of Child Rights