4.     The learned advocate for the petitioner – original defendant
No. 2 submitted that the respondent No. 1 – original plaintiff has
filed a suit being Regular Civil Suit No. 50 of 2018 before the
concerned Civil Court at Bodeli for declaration and permanent
injunction and partition in respect of the suit property being
agricultural land bearing survey Nos. 123, 127, 196, 240, 244 and
others, situated at Village: Nava Timberva, Taluka: Bodeli,
District: Chhotaudepur.      In the said suit, the petitioner –
defendant No. 2 was duly served with the summons, however,
could not file his written statement in time and hence, the
learned Civil Court concerned, closed the right of the petitioner to
file the written statement. Against which, an application Exh. 18
was preferred by the petitioner, which came to be rejected vide
order dated 21.08.2019, observing therein that, filing of written
statement after a period of 120 days is not permissible. Against
the said order, the petitioner preferred Misc. Civil Appeal No. 27
of 2019, which also came to be rejected by the learned Additional
District Judge, Chhotaudepur vide order dated 13.01.2020 on the
ground of maintainability of the said appeal as well as on merits.
4.1    The learned advocate for the petitioner submitted that the
learned trial Judge has wrongly applied the decisions of the Apex
Court.    The learned advocate, relying upon the decision of the
Apex Court in Salem Advocate Bar Association, Tamil Nadu
v. Respondent:Union of India (UOI), MANU/SC/0450/2005,
he submitted that, as directed by the Apex Court, the period of
120 days is directory and not mandatory.
4.2    The learned advocate for the petitioner further submitted
that the trial of the suit is yet to be commenced and the suit is at
the stage of deciding the Exh. 5 application only and in the
circumstance, allowing to file the written statement per se would
not affect the right of the plaintiff in any way.        The learned
advocate for the petitioner, referring to the copies of death
certificates produced on record, submitted that out of all the
defendants, the defendant Nos. 1 and 3 have expired and their
legal heirs are also required to be brought on record of the suit
and in the circumstance, rejection of the said application would
certainly jeopardize the right of the defendants. Besides, due to
prevalent pandemic situation and the restriction therefor also,
the petitioner could not pursue the matter.
4.3    The learned advocate for the petitioner, on instructions,
submitted that the petitioner – defendant is ready and willing to
pay the cost as may be imposed by the Court and accordingly,
making such submissions, it is urged that this writ petition may
be allowed, setting aside the impugned orders and the petitioner
may be permitted to file the written statement in the pending
5.     It may be reiterated that though served and although
sufficient opportunity is given to the respondents, no one has put
in appearance.
6.     Regard being had to the submissions advanced and
perusing the material placed on record, it appears that against
the orders passed by two learned Courts below, rejecting to open
the right of the defendant to file the written statement in the
pending suit, present writ petition has been filed.
6.1    In this regard, if the relevant provisions as regards the
written statement is referred to in the CPC under O. VIII, the
“Written Statement.—The Defendant shall, within thirty
days from the date of service of summons on him, present
Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written
statement within the said period of thirty days, he shall be
allowed to file the same on such other day, as may be
specified by the Court, for reasons to be recorded in
writing, but which shall not be later than ninety days from
the date of service of summons.
Provided that where the defendant fails to file the written
statement within the said period of thirty days, he shall be
allowed to file the written statement on such other day, as
may be specified by the Court, for reasons to be recorded
in writing and on payment of such costs as the Court
deems fit, but which shall not be later than one hundred
twenty days from the date of service of summons and on
expiry of one hundred twenty days from the date of service
of summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right to file the
written statement and the Court shall not allow the written
statement to be taken on record.”
6.2    Thus, by virtue of the aforesaid provision, the Court may,
for the reasons to be recorded in writing, and on payment of such
costs as the Court deems fit, allow the defendant to file the
written statement on such other day, but which shall not be later
than one hundred twenty days from the date of service of
summons and on expiry of one hundred twenty days from the
date of service of summons, the defendant shall forfeit the right
to file the written statement and the Court shall not allow the
written statement to be taken on record. The learned advocate
for the petitioner has relied upon the decision of the Apex Court
“(d) Order VIII, Rule 1--Amendment by Act 46 of 1999
providing that defendant shall within 30 days from date of
service of summons on him, present written statement of
his defence--Court can extend time for filing written
statement upto 90 days--Whether Court has power or
jurisdiction to extend period beyond 90 days?--Held,
"yes"--Provision providing for maximum period of 90
days is not mandatory but only directory.
The use of the word 'shall' in Order VIII, Rule 1 by itself is
not conclusive to determine whether the provision is
mandatory or directory. We have to ascertain the object
which is required to be served by this provision and its
design and context in which it is enacted. The use of the
word 'shall' is ordinarily indicative of mandatory nature of
the provision but having regard to the context in which it is
used or having regard to the intention of the legislation, the
same can be construed as directory. The rule in question
has to advance the cause of justice and not to defeat it.
The rules of procedure are made to advance the cause of
justice and not to defeat it. Construction of the rule or
procedure which promotes justice and prevents miscarriage
has to be preferred. The rules or procedure are hand-maid
of justice and not its mistress. In the present context, the
strict interpretation would defeat justice.
The maximum period of 90 days to file written statement
has been provided but the consequences on failure to file
written statement within the said period have not been
provided for in Order VIII, Rule 1.
In construing this provision, support can also be had from
Order VIII, Rule 10 which provides that where any party
from whom a written statement is required under Rule 1 or
Rule 9, fails to present the same within the time permitted
or fixed by the Court, the Court shall pronounce judgment
against him, or make such other order in relation to the suit
as it thinks fit. On failure to file written statement under
this provision, the Court has been given the discretion
either to pronounce judgment against the defendant or
make such other order in relation to suit as it thinks fit. In
the context of the provision, despite use of the word 'shall',
the Court has been given the discretion to pronounce or not
to pronounce the judgment against the defendant even if
written statement is not filed and instead pass such order
as it may think fit in relation to the suit. In construing the
provision of Order VIII, Rule 1 and Rule 10, the doctrine of
harmonious construction is required to be applied. The
effect would be that under Rule 10 of Order VIII, the Court
in its discretion would have power to allow the defendant to
file written statement even after expiry of period of 90 days
provided in Order VIII, Rule 1. There is no restriction in
Order VIII, Rule 10 that after expiry of ninety days, further
time cannot be granted. The Court has wide power to
'make such order in relation to the suit as it thinks fit'.
Clearly, therefore, the provision of Order VIII, Rule 1
providing for upper limit of 90 days to file written
statement is directory.
However, the order extending time to file written statement
cannot be made in routine. The time can be extended only
in exceptionally hard cases. While extending time, it has to
be borne in mind that the Legislature has fixed the upper
time limit of 90 days. The discretion of the Court to extend
the time shall not be so frequently and routinely exercised
so as to nullify the period fixed by Order VIII, Rule 1.”
6.3   Thus, the provision providing for maximum period of 90
days is not mandatory but only directory, however, exercise of
discretion should not be a routine course and such powers should
be exercised sparingly and in appropriate cases.
6.4   Further, as the facts go, the trial in the suit is yet to be
commenced and the suit is pending at the stage of deciding
application Exh. 5 and accordingly, considering the submissions
made by the learned advocate for the petitioner so also
considering the extant pandemic situation and the fact that
allowing the petitioner to file the written statement may not
prejudiciously affect to the other side and also with a view to see
that the suit in question be decided on merits and in the interest
of  justice,     the  petition deserves      favourable    consideration,
however, with exemplary cost.
7.    In view of the above, this writ petition is allowed. The order
dated dated 21.08.2019 passed by the learned Additional Civil
Judge, Bodeli in the application Exh. 18 in Regular Civil Suit No.
50 of 2018 and the order dated 13.01.2020 passed by the
learned Additional District Judge, Chhotaudepur below Exh. 6 in
Misc. Civil Appeal No. 27 of 2019 are hereby set aside.                 The
petitioner is permitted to file the written statement, which shall
be filed within a period of 15 days and subject to payment of cost
of Rs.10,000/- (Rupees Ten Thousand only), which shall be
deposited before the trial Court concerned within 10 days and the
trial Court concerned shall permit the original plaintiff to
withdraw the same, on due verification and following due
procedure. Rule is made absolute accordingly.
7.1    It is made clear that this order is passed in the peculiar
facts and circumstances of the case and shall not be treated as
precedent in any other case.