1.       The present petition has been filed in public interest praying for
the following reliefs:
"(i) Issue a writ order or direction in the nature of mandamus
commanding/directing the respondents to construct the Ram
Ban Gaman Marg as per the history and evidence of Ram Ban
Gaman Marg which is Annexure No. 20 to the present writ
(ii) Issue a writ order or direction in the nature of mandamus
directing the respondents to modify the route which is
published in newspaper as per the evidence of record;
(iii) Issue a writ order or direction in the nature of mandamus
directing the respondents that if the 4 lane construction is not
possible everywhere of Ram Ban Gaman Marg then the
Authority concern construct proper connectivity marg of Ram
Ban Gaman Marg from all places of Ram Ban Gaman Marg.
(iv) Issue a writ order or direction in the nature of mandamus
2                  WPIL No. 887 of 2022
commanding/directing the respondents to connect all places
where the Lord Ram was take rest at night during the Travel
of Forest (Ban Gaman).
(v) Issue a writ order or direction in the nature of mandamus
commanding the respondents to take proper action and not
disobey the Route of the Lord Ram Ban Gaman and connect
all the places where Lord Ram Ban Gaman way."
2.          Firstly, there is non-compliance of the provisions of Rule 1(3-A),
Chapter XXII of the Allahabad High Court Rules, 1952 as the petitioner
has not mentioned his credentials to comply with the aforesaid
requirements. In the petition, it is only stated that the petitioner is a
social worker. However, at the time of hearing, learned counsel for the
petitioner was fair enough stating that the petitioner is a political person,
as he is an Ex-Member of Zila Panchayat, District-Kaushambi about ten
years back. Even now, he is involved in political activities.
3.            The issue sought to be raised, in our view, cannot be decided in
the writ petition filed by the petitioner as he himself does not know
anything about it being a political person. Apparently, the writ petition
has been filed for some ulterior motive. The State must have conducted
thorough research before taking decision to execute the project in
question. No direction can be issued for modification of the route of
4.               The petition is, accordingly, dismissed.
Whether the order is reportable : Yes/No
Digitally signed by PUNEET
Location: High Court of Judicature at