1.      The Petition is arising out of an order dated 26.08.2022 passed by the
Ld. Central Administration Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as “CAT”) in O.
A. No. 2635/ 2002 decided on 07.08.2003.
2.      The undisputed facts of the case reveal that the Petitioner before this
Court was an employee serving on the post of Head Constable in the
services of Delhi Police, and was posted at Terminal 2 of the Indira Gandhi
W.P.(C.) No. 7245/2003                                                   Page 1 of 16
International (IGI) Airport, and on 24.03.1996, the Deputy Commissioner of
Police (DCP)/ IGI Airport conducted a surprise visit from 03:30 Hours to
04:00 Hours and was informed that ASI Jagmal Singh and Head Constable
Suresh Kumar who were checking Passports of passengers were collecting
money from the passengers and, in those circumstances, a search was carried
out by the DCP/IGI Airport at 0405 Hours on 24.03.1996. It is an admitted
fact that from the pocket of the Petitioner Head Constable Suresh Kumar, 75
Dirhams were recovered and ASI Jagmal Singh was also present on duty at
the same point of time.
3.             The facts further reveal that based upon the aforesaid incident, a
seizure memo was prepared. Recovered amount was deposited in Malkhana
of PS/IGI Airport, Delhi, and an action was initiated under the Delhi Police
(Punishment and Appeal) Rules, 1990 (hereinafter referred to as “the
Rules”) read with Section 21 of the Delhi Police Act, 1978.
4.             A joint enquiry was ordered in the matter against ASI Jagmal Singh
and Head Constable Suresh Kumar – the present Petitioner. The summary
of allegations leveled against the Petitioner are reproduced as under:
“You ASI Jagmal Singh, 3096/D and HC Suresh Kumar, 220/A
when detailed at Arrival Exit, Gate Shift "B" NITC Airport on
the night intervening 23/24.3.96, were checked by DCP/IGI
Airport during his surprise visit at Terminal-II from 3.30 hrs. to
4.00 hrs. Your activities were suspicious and were found
checking passports of selected persons. Besides, on questioning
passengers, passing/exiting through that gate, it was confirmed
that police officials at that gate were extorting and taking
money. At 4.05 hrs., DCP/IGI Airport, Delhi searched the
pockets of HC Suresh Kumar No.220/A and 75 Dirhams (5x5 +
5x10 Dirhams) were recovered from the left side pocket of his
W.P.(C.) No. 7245/2003                                                        Page 2 of 16
pant whereas ASI Jagmal Singh 3096/D was also present at
that time at the same point of duty. The seizure memo, was
prepared and the recovered amount was deposited in Malkhana
PS IGI Airport, Delhi. The above act of ASI Jagmal Singh,
3096/D and HC Suresh Kumar, 220/A amounts to gross-
misconduct of indulging into corrupt practice in discharge of
their official duties which renders them liable for departmental
action in accordance with DP (P&A) Rules-1980 as envisaged
under Section 21 of DP Act, 1978.”
5.      An Enquiry Officer was appointed in the matter and after meticulous
examination of the witnesses, it was held that the charges stood established.
Finally an order was passed on 20.09.1999 by the Disciplinary Authority
dismissing the Petitioner as well as ASI Jagmal Singh from service.
6.      An Appeal was preferred in the matter and the Commissioner of
Police by an order dated 26.08.2002 dismissed the Appeal by a detailed and
exhaustive speaking order.
7.      The Petitioner being aggrieved by the order of punishment dated
20.09.1999 and the order passed by the Disciplinary Authority dated
26.08.2002 preferred an Original Application being O.A. No. 2635/2002
before the Ld. CAT.          The Ld. CAT vide order dated 07.08.2002 has
dismissed the Original Application. Paragraphs 6 to 10 of the order passed
by the Ld. CAT dismissing the O.A. read as under:
“6. Confronted with that position, the learned counsel for the
applicant had highlighted that it was a case of no evidence. He
also argued that the inquiry officer had not examined any of
those passengers and on the sole testimony of the concerned
Deputy Commissioner of Police, the findings have been so
arrived at. Resultantly, the same deserve to quashed.
W.P.(C.) No. 7245/2003                                               Page 3 of 16
7.     We know from a decision of the Supreme Court in the
case of Bank of India & Anr. v. Degala Suryanarayana, JT
1999 (4) SC 489 that scope for interference in disciplinary
proceedings while judicially reviewing the same is limited. The
I findings recorded by the disciplinary authority would be
ordinarily immune from interference unless it is case of no
evidence or no reasonable person can come to such a finding.
The Supreme Court in the facts of that case held that the High
Court clearly exceeded the bounds of power of judicial review
available to it while exercising writ Jurisdiction over a
departmental disciplinary enquiry proceeding.
8. The learned counsel for the applicant relied upon a decision
of the Supreme Court in the case Of Hardwari Lai v. State of
U.P. and others, (1999) 8 SCC 582. In the cited case, Hardwari
Lal was Police Constable. He was charged of having abused
his colleague while he was under the influence of liquor. In the
enquiry that ensued neither the complainant nor the other
employee who accompanied the said person was examined. The
Supreme Court held that it was a case of no evidence. Similarly
reliance was further placed on a decision of this Tribunal in the
case of Lalit Prasad v. Govt.of HCT of Delhi and Others in
OA No.1693/2000 rendered on 11.7.2001. Herein also the
assertion was the same that the relevant material witness had
not been examined. Thus Tribunal on appreciation of the facts
of the case concluded that the order would not withstand
scrutiny.
9. There is indeed no controversy that can be raised pertaining
to the said plea. If material witnesses had not been examined,
necessarily, the effect would be not favourable to the
department. However while scrutinizing the same, the facts of
each case cannot be ignored and they take pre-dominance. In
the present case in hand, to insist that those passengers who
were due to leave the country for certain destinations must also
have been examined would be improper. At the relevant time,
certain passengers were passing through the gate. The
applicant is alleged to be extorting some amount from them.
The departmental enquiry is not like a criminal trial where
W.P.(C.) No. 7245/2003                                                        Page 4 of 16
proof beyond reasonable doubt is required. The findings can
be arrived at on preponderance of probabilities.             The
complainant happened to be the Deputy Commissioner of
Police at the Indira Gandhi International Airport. He had
conducted surprise check. He himself had seen that the
applicant was checking the passports of the selected passengers
and acting suspiciously. On inquiry, it was found that he was
extorting money and on personal check, 75 Dirhams were
recovered from him. To state that the money recovered from
the applicant belonged to someone else would be an
afterthought and cannot be believed. What was witnessed by
the Deputy Commissioner of Police who had appeared as a
witness and was the complainant was supported by the
abovesaid facts. In that view of the matter, the defence was
rightly rejected that it cannot be termed that it was case where
there was no evidence on the record. Therefore, it would be
improper for this Tribunal to interfere.
10. For these reasons, the present application being without
merit must fail and is dismissed. No costs.”
8.      The present Writ Petition has been filed challenging the Order of
Commissioner of Police, the Disciplinary Authority and the order passed by
the Ld. Central Administrative Tribunal.
9.      Learned Counsel for the Petitioner has vehemently argued before this
Court that the present case is a case where no evidence has been adduced.
There was no evidence of demanding and accepting bribe, and in absence of
an eyewitness to the demand and acceptance of a bribe, and absence of
evidence from the person from whom the money was allegedly extorted, it
cannot be said that any misconduct occurred at the behest of the Petitioner.
It was a case of no evidence, and the findings arrived at by the Enquiry
Officer are perverse findings. Therefore, the order passed the Disciplinary
W.P.(C.) No. 7245/2003                                                Page 5 of 16
Authority, the Appellate Authority as well as the Ld. CAT deserves to be set
aside. Accordingly, the Petitioner is entitled to be reinstated back in service.
10.            The Petitioner has also argued before this Court that the most material
witness in the present case was the person from whom the money was
allegedly extorted. If the person who has been allegedly extorted has not
been called by the Enquiry Officer, the entire procedure adopted in the
matter is bad in law.
11.            Learned Counsel for the Petitioner has also drawn the attention of this
Court towards the statements of DW-2 and DW-3. It has been stated that the
statements of defence witnesses have not been looked into, and, therefore,
the findings arrived at by the Enquiry Officer are perverse findings. Thus,
Petitioner is entitled to reinstatement with back wages.
12.            It has also been argued by the Petitioner before this Court that the
Enquiry Officer has cross-examined PW-3, and, therefore, the cross-
examination by the Enquiry Officer is impermissible in law. Therefore, the
findings stand vitiated.
13.            This Court has taken into account all the grounds raised by the
Petitioner and by no stretch of imagination can it be said that the present
case is a case of no evidence. It is an undisputed fact that 75 Dirhams were
recovered from the Petitioner at the time when the search took place and the
Petitioner was certainly not a traveler who came from some foreign country,
thereby being in possession of Dirhams.
W.P.(C.) No. 7245/2003                                                       Page 6 of 16
14.     The Police Official who is present at the Airport to check the travelers
was found with foreign currency and no satisfactory explanation was
provided by him for possession of the same at the time of search and seizure.
The Enquiry Report is on record and the statements of PW-1, PW-2 and
PW-3 are reproduced as under:
He deposed that on 24.3.96, he was posted as
Insp./Vigilance at NITC Airport. At about 4.00 hrs. on 24.3.96,
DCP/IGI Airport, Sh. Rajesh Kumar called him outside the
arrival exit and told that the ASI and HC posted at arrival exit
gate were checking the passports of selected passengers and
extorting money from them. The DCP/IGI Airport had also told
him that he had made quarries from some passengers who told
him that policemen were taking money at the exit gage. At
about, 4.50 hrs. the DCP/IGI Airport himself took the search of
HC Suresh Kumar No.220/A and 75 Dirhams were recovered
from the left side pocket of his trouser. He (PW) prepared the
seizure memo of the recovered foreign currency on which he
(PW). ASI Jagmal Singh and HC Suresh Kumar signed which is
Exh. PW-1/A. the ASI and HC were placed under suspension on
the orders of DCP/IGI Airport, NITC/Shift "B" was lodged to
this effect, which is Exh. PW-1/B. The foreign currency i.e. 75
Dirhams, recovered from the possession of HC Suresh Kumar
were deposited in the Malkhana of PS IGI Airport vide DD
No.4 dt.25.3.96 which is Ex.h. PW-1/C.
On cross-examination by delinquents the PW deposed
that he did not remember as to who was sent to call him by the
DCP/IGI Airport. He had information of extortion by policemen
2/4 days earlier and he was verifying it. No one signal o the
seizure memo as witness and he prepared the same in his office
in the presence of both the delinquents. Place of occurrence
was at a distance of 60/70' yards from office and DCP/IGI
Airport had gone when he prepared the seizure memo, he was
not with DCP/IGI Airport while the DCP/questioned the
W.P.(C.) No. 7245/2003                                                Page 7 of 16
passengers but the personal search of the HC was taken in his
presence. The DCP/IGI Airport also took the personal search
of other policemen present there but nothing was recovered
from them. The ASI and HC were present inside the exit gate at
right and left side respectively. He did not know as to which
country's currency the Dirhams were.
He deposed that on 24.3.96, he was posted as I/C Control
Room Shift "B" IGI Airport, ASI Jagmal Singh and HC Suresh
Kumar were detailed for duty at arrival exit gate as per the
fortnight duty roster. At about 4 hrs on 24.3.96, the DCP/IGI
Airport visited the airport and took the personal search of staff
posted at arrival exit gate. Thereafter the DCP/IGI Airport
directed Insp./Vig. R.C. Garg to complete further formalities
who wrote down suspension report of both the officers i.e. ASI
Jagmal Singh and HC Suresh Kumar.
On cross-examination by the delinquents, he deposed
that on that night the entry gate was closed and when the
employees/staff of airport were entering the building through
the exit gate, their passes were being checked. In case of
emergency, passengers were also allowed to enter by showing
their travel documents. The delinquents were detailed in proper
uniform and with Identity Cards. He did net know the exact
time of reliving of delinquents from their duties but they were
relieved half and hour after the incident.
PW-3 Sh. Rajesh Kumar the then DCP/IGI Airport
He deposed that during March. 1996, he was posted as
DCP/'i<K Airport. On the night of 23/24.3.96, he made a
surprise check at arrival exit gate and saw that two policemen
were checking the passports of some passengers and were
extorting money from them. He made enquiries from the
passengers who told him that policemen on duty were taking
money. He called for the Insp./Vig. And searched the police
personal on duty. Both the policemen who were seen accosting
the passengers and were keeping the money in their pockets,
W.P.(C.) No. 7245/2003                                                       Page 8 of 16
identified as ASI Jagmal Singh and HO Suresh Kumar. On
taking their personal search, foreign currency i.e. 75 Dirhams
were recovered from HC Suresh Kumar's pocket. He directed
Insp./Vig. To seize the money and deposit it with the PS IGI
During cross-examination, he deposed that the search
was carried out in the presence of Insp./Vig. Initially the HC
was search and subsequently the ASI. Seizure memo was
prepared only for the recovered currency fro the possession of
HC after watching for half an hour, be observed record this in
Roznamcha and also to prepare seizure memo, which was not
signed by him (PW). The HC taking money and the money was
recovered from the possession of HC I the presence of
Insp./Vig. Who prepared the seizure memo, entry from arrival
exit gate for the staff of airport is not allowed but if someone
enters, he will be given entry only, after proper checking.
On further cross-examination by the EG, he deposed that
the HC was taking money from the passengers after checking
their documents in the presence of the ASI whereas the police
personnel are not supposed to check the documents at arrival
exit gate. The ASI was standing nearby and was ushering the
passengers towards the HC. The ASI and HC were checking the
documents of very selected passengers to the ASI, he simply
ushered him towards the HC.”
15.     The aforesaid statements of the witnesses make it very clear that
based upon certain allegations regarding extortion of money, a surprise
check was carried out and 75 Dirhams were recovered from the Petitioner.
16.     It is nobody’s case that the Enquiry Officer has acted as a prosecutor
and the Ld. Tribunal has certainly considered the grounds raised by the
Petitioner. The Ld. Tribunal has rightly held that Rule 16V of the Rules
empower the Enquiry Officer to frame questions which he wishes to put to
the witnesses in order to clear ambiguities.
W.P.(C.) No. 7245/2003                                                Page 9 of 16
17.            In the present case, the Enquiry Officer has not even suggested
leading questions as argued before this Court. Further in a Departmental
Enquiry, misconduct has to be proved on the basis of preponderance of
probability.
18.            The present case is certainly not a case of no evidence. It is an open
and shut case, wherein, a Head Constable was found with 75 Dirhams. He
was posted on a very sensitive duty, to check the passports of passengers.
Possession of foreign currency in his pocket at the time of a surprise check
read with statements of other witnesses clearly establishes the misconduct
committed by him.
19.            It has also been argued before this Court that the punishment levied is
extensively harsh and disproportionate to the guilt of the delinquent.
20.            In the present case, this Court is dealing with Police personnel who is
supposed to be the custodian of law and whose duty is to ensure that people
are following the law of the land. If such a person himself breaks the law,
he has to be dealt with iron hands, and, therefore, in the considered opinion
of this Court no other punishment except dismissal could have been inflicted
upon him in the facts and circumstances of the case. Therefore, this Court
does not find any reason to interfere with the order passed by the Ld. CAT.
21.            The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of R. Mahalingam v. T.N.
Public Service Commission, (2013) 14 SCC 379, has provided guidance on
the scope of judicial interference in matters challenging disciplinary action.
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid case, in paragraph 11 has held
W.P.(C.) No. 7245/2003                                                      Page 10 of 16
“11. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties. The
scope of judicial review in matters involving challenge to the
disciplinary action taken by the employer is very limited. The
courts are primarily concerned with the question whether the
enquiry has been held by the competent authority in accordance
with the prescribed procedure and whether the rules of natural
justice have been followed. The court can also consider
whether there was some tangible evidence for proving the
charge against the delinquent and such evidence reasonably
supports the conclusions recorded by the competent authority.
If the court comes to the conclusion that the enquiry was held in
consonance with the prescribed procedure and the rules of
natural justice and the conclusion recorded by the disciplinary
authority is supported by some tangible evidence, then there is
no scope for interference with the discretion exercised by the
disciplinary authority to impose the particular punishment
except when the same is found to be wholly disproportionate to
the misconduct found proved or shocks the conscience of the
court.”
22.     The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Apparel Export Promotion
Council Vs. A.K. Chopra, (1999) 1 SCC 759, in paragraphs 16 & 17 has
“16. The High Court appears to have overlooked the settled
position that in departmental proceedings, the disciplinary
authority is the sole judge of facts and in case an appeal is
presented to the appellate authority, the appellate authority has
also the power/and jurisdiction to reappreciate the evidence
and come to its own conclusion, on facts, being the sole fact-
finding authorities. Once findings of fact, based on
appreciation of evidence are recorded, the High Court in writ
jurisdiction may not normally interfere with those factual
findings unless it finds that the recorded findings were based
either on no evidence or that the findings were wholly perverse
and/or legally untenable. The adequacy or inadequacy of the
evidence is not permitted to be canvassed before the High
W.P.(C.) No. 7245/2003                                                Page 11 of 16
Court. Since the High Court does not sit as an appellate
authority over the factual findings recorded during
departmental proceedings, while exercising the power of
judicial review, the High Court cannot, normally speaking,
substitute its own conclusion, with regard to the guilt of the
delinquent, for that of the departmental authorities. Even
insofar as imposition of penalty or punishment is concerned,
unless the punishment or penalty imposed by the disciplinary or
the departmental appellate authority, is either impermissible or
such that it shocks the conscience of the High Court, it should
not normally substitute its own opinion and impose some other
punishment or penalty. Both the learned Single Judge and the
Division Bench of the High Court, it appears, ignored the well-
settled principle that even though judicial review of
administrative action must remain flexible and its dimension
not closed, yet the court, in exercise of the power of judicial
review, is not concerned with the correctness of the findings of
fact on the basis of which the orders are made so long as those
findings are reasonably supported by evidence and have been
arrived at through proceedings which cannot be faulted with
for procedural illegalities or irregularities which vitiate the
process by which the decision was arrived at. Judicial review, it
must be remembered, is directed not against the decision, but is
confined to the examination of the decision-making process.
Lord Hailsham in Chief Constable of the North Wales
Police v. Evans [(1982) 3 All ER 141 HL] observed:
“The purpose of judicial review is to ensure that
the individual receives fair treatment, and not to
ensure that the authority, after according fair
treatment, reaches, on a matter which it is
authorized or enjoined by law to decide for itself, a
conclusion which is correct in the eyes of the
court.”
17. Judicial review, not being an appeal from a decision, but a
review of the manner in which the decision was arrived at, the
court, while exercising the power of judicial review, must
remain conscious of the fact that if the decision has been
W.P.(C.) No. 7245/2003                                                      Page 12 of 16
arrived at by the administrative authority after following the
principles established by law and the rules of natural justice
and the individual has received a fair treatment to meet the
case against him, the court cannot substitute its judgment for
that of the administrative authority on a matter which fell
squarely within the sphere of jurisdiction of that authority.”
23.     The Hon’ble Supreme Court has held that in exercise of review
jurisdiction, normally, there should be no interference with the factual
findings in a departmental enquiry unless the Court finds that the recorded
findings were based either on no evidence or that the findings were wholly
perverse and/ or legally untenable.
24.     The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of State of A.P. Vs. S. Sree
Rama Rao, (1964) 3 SCR 25, in paragraph 7 has held as under:
“7. There is no warrant for the view expressed by the High
Court that in considering whether a public officer is guilty of
the misconduct charged against him, the rule followed in
criminal trials that an offence is not established unless proved
by evidence beyond reasonable doubt to the satisfaction of the
Court, must be applied, and if that rule be not applied, the High
Court in a petition I … under Article 226 of the Constitution is
competent to declare the order of the authorities holding a
departmental enquiry invalid. The High Court is not constituted
in a proceeding under Article 226 of the Constitution a court of
appeal over the decision of the authorities holding a
departmental enquiry against a public servant: it is concerned
to determine whether the enquiry is held by an authority
competent in that behalf, and according to the procedure
prescribed in that behalf, and whether the rules of natural
justice are not violated. Where there is some evidence, which
the authority entrusted with the duty to hold the enquiry has
accepted and which evidence may reasonably support the
conclusion that the delinquent officer is guilty of the charge, it
is not the function of the High Court in a petition for a writ
W.P.(C.) No. 7245/2003                                                 Page 13 of 16
under Article 226 to review the evidence and to arrive at an
independent finding on the evidence. The High Court may
undoubtedly interfere where the departmental authorities have
held the proceedings against the delinquent in a manner
inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in violation of
the statutory rules prescribing the mode of enquiry or where the
authorities have disabled themselves from reaching a fair
decision by some considerations extraneous to the evidence and
the merits of the case or by allowing themselves to be
influenced by irrelevant considerations or where the conclusion
on the very face of it is so wholly arbitrary and capricious that
no reasonable person could ever have arrived at that
conclusion, or on similar grounds. But the departmental
authorities are, if the enquiry is otherwise properly held, the
sole judges of facts and if there be some legal evidence on
which their findings can be based, the adequacy or reliability of
that evidence is not a matter which can be permitted to be
canvassed before the High Court in a proceeding for a writ
under Article 226 of the Constitution.”
25.            In the aforesaid case, the scope of judicial scrutiny has been looked
into by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in exercise of writ jurisdiction under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
26.            The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Union of India Vs. P.
Gunasekaran, (2015) 2 SCC 610, in paragraphs 12 & 13 has held as under:
“12. Despite the well-settled position, it is painfully disturbing
to note that the High Court has acted as an appellate authority
in the disciplinary proceedings, reappreciating even the
evidence before the enquiry officer. The finding on Charge I
was accepted by the disciplinary authority and was also
endorsed by the Central Administrative Tribunal. In
disciplinary proceedings, the High Court is not and cannot act
as a second court of first appeal. The High Court, in exercise of
its powers under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India,
W.P.(C.) No. 7245/2003                                                        Page 14 of 16
shall not venture into reappreciation of the evidence. The High
Court can only see whether:
(a) the enquiry is held by a competent authority;
(b) the enquiry is held according to the procedure
prescribed in that behalf;
(c) there is violation of the principles of natural justice in
conducting the proceedings;
(d) the authorities have disabled themselves from
reaching a fair conclusion by some considerations
extraneous to the evidence and merits of the case;
(e) the authorities have allowed themselves to be
influenced by irrelevant or extraneous considerations;
(f) the conclusion, on the very face of it, is so wholly
arbitrary and capricious that no reasonable person could
ever have arrived at such conclusion;
(g) the disciplinary authority had erroneously failed to
admit the admissible and material evidence;
(h) the disciplinary authority had erroneously admitted
inadmissible evidence which influenced the finding;
(i) the finding of fact is based on no evidence.
13. Under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the
High Court shall not:
(ii) interfere with the conclusions in the enquiry, in case
the same has been conducted in accordance with law;
(iii) go into the adequacy of the evidence;
(iv) go into the reliability of the evidence;
W.P.(C.) No. 7245/2003                                                    Page 15 of 16
(v) interfere, if there be some legal evidence on which
findings can be based.
(vi) correct the error of fact however grave it may appear
(vii) go into the proportionality of punishment unless it
shocks its conscience.”
27.            The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Karnataka Vs. N.
Gangaraj, (2020) 3 SCC423, has taken into account the earlier judgments
delivered on the subject and has reiterated that the scope of interference in
departmental enquiry is quite limited. Interference in disciplinary
proceedings can be done in case there is violation of principles of natural
justice and fairplay or if the findings arrived at are based on no evidence/
perverse findings.
28.            In light of the aforesaid judgments and in absence of any procedural
irregularity or violation of principle of natural justice and fair play, this
Court does not find any reason to interfere with the order passed by the
Disciplinary Authority, the Appellate Authority as well as the order passed
by the CAT.
29.            The Writ Petition stands dismissed.