District Sonipat       324 & 325 IPC added later on)
1.     The petitioner, incarcerating upon his arrest in the FIR captioned above, came up
before this Court under Section 439 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (CrPC) seeking
2.     In Para 12 of the bail application, the petitioner declares no criminal history.
3.     Ld. Counsel for the petitioner contends that the custodial investigation would
serve no purpose whatsoever, and the pre-trial incarceration would cause an
irreversible injustice to the petitioner and family.
4.     The contention on behalf of the State on instructions from ASI Devender is that
the challan has been presented and the charges have been framed.
5.     All the other accused, who were similarly placed, were granted anticipatory bails
by Sessions Judge, Sonipat, vide order dated 21-3-2020. The role attributed to the
accused, primafacie is not more serious than the role attributed to the other four
accused who were granted benefit of bail under section 438 CrPC. and one was granted
regular bail under Section 439 Cr.P.C. The petitioner is a first offender and thus deserves
an opportunity to course correct. Given this, he makes out a case for bail.
6.     During the trial's pendency, if the petitioner repeats this offence or commits any
offence under NDPS Act, Arms Act, or where the sentence prescribed is more than
seven years or violates any condition as stipulated in this order, then State should
consider applying for cancellation of this bail. It shall further be open for any
investigating agency to bring it to the notice of the Court seized of the subsequent
application that the accused was earlier cautioned not to indulge in criminal activities.
Otherwise, the bail bonds shall continue to remain in force throughout the trial and
after that in terms of Section 437-A of the Cr.P.C.
7.     In Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v State of Punjab, 1980 (2) SCC 565, (Para 30), a
Constitutional Bench of Supreme Court held that the bail decision must enter the
cumulative effect of the variety of circumstances justifying the grant or refusal of bail. In
Kalyan Chandra Sarkar v Rajesh Ranjan @ Pappu Yadav, 2005 (2) SCC 42, (Para 18) a
three-member Bench of Supreme Court held that the persons accused of non-bailable
offences are entitled to bail if the Court concerned concludes that the prosecution has
failed to establish a prima facie case against him, or despite the existence of a prima
facie case, the Court records reasons for its satisfaction for the need to release such
person on bail, in the given fact situations. The rejection of bail does not preclude filing
a subsequent application. The courts can release on bail, provided the circumstances
then prevailing requires, and a change in the fact situation. In State of Rajasthan v
Balchand, AIR 1977 SC 2447, (Para 2 & 3), Supreme Court noticeably illustrated that the
basic rule might perhaps be tersely put as bail, not jail, except where there are
circumstances suggestive of fleeing from justice or thwarting the course of justice or
creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or intimidating witnesses and
the like by the petitioner who seeks enlargement on bail from the Court. It is true that
the gravity of the offence involved is likely to induce the petitioner to avoid the course
of justice and must weigh when considering the question of jail. So also, the
heinousness of the crime. In GudikantiNarasimhulu v Public Prosecutor, (1978) 1 SCC
240, (Para 16), Supreme Court held that the delicate light of the law favors release
unless countered by the negative criteria necessitating that course. In Prahlad Singh
Bhati v NCT, Delhi, (2001) 4 SCC 280, Supreme Court highlighted one of the factors for
bail to be the public or the State's immense interest and similar other considerations. In
Dataram Singh v State of Uttar Pradesh, (2018) 3 SCC 22, (Para 6), Supreme Court held
that the grant or refusal of bail is entirely within the discretion of the judge hearing the
matter and though that discretion is unfettered, it must be exercised judiciously,
compassionately, and in a humane manner. Also, conditions for the grant of bail ought
not to be so strict as to be incapable of compliance, thereby making the grant of bail
8.     The possibility of the accused influencing the investigation, tampering with
evidence, intimidating witnesses, and the likelihood of fleeing justice, can be taken care
of by imposing elaborative and stringent conditions. In Sushila Aggarwal, (2020) 5 SCC 1,
Para 92, the Constitutional Bench held that unusually, subject to the evidence
produced, the Courts can impose restrictive conditions.
9.    Without commenting on the case's merits, in the facts and circumstances peculiar
to this case, and for the reasons mentioned above, the petitioner makes a case for bail,
subject to the following terms and conditions, which shall be over and above and
irrespective of the contents of the form of bail bonds in chapter XXXIII of CrPC, 1973.
10.     Provided the accused is not required in any other case, the petitioner shall be
released on bail in the FIR mentioned above, subject to furnishing a personal bond of
Rs. Ten thousand (INR 10,000/-), and shall furnish one surety of Rs. Twenty-five
thousand (INR 25,000/-), to the satisfaction of the concerned Court/ Judicial Magistrate
having the jurisdiction over the Police Station conducting the investigation, and in case
of non-availability, any nearest Ilaqa Magistrate/duty Magistrate. Before accepting the
sureties, the concerned Court must satisfy that in case the petitioners-accused fail to
appear in Court, then such sureties are capable to produce the petitioners-accused
before the Court, keeping in mind the Jurisprudence behind the sureties, which is to
secure the presence of the accused.
11.   The furnishing of the personal bonds shall be deemed acceptance of the following
and all other stipulations, terms, and conditions of this bail order.
12.   On the reverse page of personal bonds, the attesting officer shall mention the
permanent address of the petitioner along with the phone number linked with the
AADHAR card, the other phone numbers (if any), and e-mail (if any). In case of any
change in the above particulars, the petitioner shall immediately and not later than 30
days from such modification, intimate about the change to the concerned Police Station
and the concerned Court.
13.   The petitioner to also execute a bond for attendance in the concerned Court(s), as
and when asked to do so. The presentation of the personal bond shall be deemed
acceptance of the following and all other stipulations, terms, and conditions of this bail
14.   The petitioner shall not influence, browbeat, pressurize, make any inducement,
threat, or promise, directly or indirectly, to the witnesses, the Police officials, or any
other person acquainted with the facts and the circumstances of the case, to dissuade
them from disclosing such facts to the Police, or the Court, or to tamper with the
15.    Till the completion of the trial, the petitioner shall not contact, call, text, message,
remark, stare, stalk, make any gestures or express any unusual or inappropriate, verbal
or otherwise objectionable behavior towards the victim and victim's family, either
physically, or through phone call or any other social media, through any other mode,
nor shall unnecessarily roam around the victim's home.
16.    Given the nature of allegations and the other circumstances peculiar to this case,
the petitioner shall surrender all weapons, firearms, ammunition, if any, along with the
arms license to the concerned authority within 30 days from his release from prison
and inform the Investigator about the compliance. However, subject to the Indian Arms
Act, 1959, the petitioner shall be entitled to renew and take it back in case of acquittal
in this case.
17.     Any Advocate for the petitioner and the Officer in whose presence the petitioner
puts signatures on personal bonds shall explain all conditions of this bail order in any
language that the petitioner understands.
18.     In case the petitioner finds the bail condition(s) as violating fundamental, human,
or other rights, or causing difficulty due to any situation, then for modification of such
term(s), the petitioner may file a reasoned application before this Court, and after
taking cognizance, even to the Court taking cognizance or the trial Court, as the case
may be, and such Court shall also be competent to modify or delete any condition.
19.     This order does not, in any manner, limit or restrict the rights of the Police or the
investigating agency from further investigation as per law.
20.    In case the Investigator/Officer-In-Charge of the concerned Police Station arraigns
another section of any penal offence in this FIR, and if the new section prescribes
maximum sentence which is not greater than the sections mentioned above, then this
bail order shall be deemed to have also been passed for the newly added section(s).
However, suppose the newly inserted sections prescribe a sentence exceeding the
maximum sentence prescribed in the sections mentioned above, then in that case, the
Investigator/Officer-In-Charge shall give the petitioner notice of a minimum of seven
days, providing an opportunity to avail the remedies available in law.
21.    Any observation made hereinabove is neither an expression of opinion on the
merits of the case, nor shall the trial Court advert to these comments.
22.    In return for the protection from incarceration, the Court believes that the
accused shall also reciprocate through desirable behavior.
23.    This bail is subject to the petitioner joining investigation and fully cooperating
with the investigating agencies. Failure to do so shall ipso facto result in its withdrawal.
24. There would be no need for a certified copy of this order for furnishing bonds, and
any Advocate for the Petitioner can download this order along with case status from the
official web page of this Court and attest it to be a true copy. In case the attesting officer
wants to verify the authenticity, such an officer can also verify its authenticity and may
download and use the downloaded copy for attesting bonds.
Petition allowed in aforesaid terms. All pending applications, if any, stand disposed.
Whether speaking/reasoned              Yes/No