1.    Heard Sri Anand Kumar Sinha, learned counsel for the
appellant- National Insurance Company, Sri S. Shekhar, learned
counsel for respondent nos.1 & 2 and Ms. Nirja Singh, learned
counsel for the respondent no.3.
2.    This appeal under Section 173 of Motor Vehicle Act has been
filed   by   the  National    Insurance    Company/opposite      party
no.2/appellant   challenging    the  judgment     and   order   dated
28.09.2009 passed by Additional District Judge/Special Judge
(SC/ST)/M.A.C.T., Ghaziabad by which a sum of Rs.12,70,406/-
alongwith 6 % interest has been awarded as compensation on
account of death of deceased against the appellant.
3.    Facts in brief are that an application u/s 166 & 140 M. V. Act
was    filed  by  the   claimant/respondent    no.1   &   2   seeking
compensation to the tune of Rs.42,66,000/- alongwith 18% interest
alleging that on 09.03.2005 deceased Vikas Arora S/o claimant
was returning to his home from his office by motorcycle and when
he reached near Mohan Nagar police outpost, Ghaziabad at 7:00
P.M. a truck bearing no. AS 01 F 4749 driven by its driver rashly
and negligently dashed him from behind causing injuries to him as
a result he died on the same day in the hospital. F.I.R. in this
regard was lodged by the brother of deceased on the same day at
police station concerned against unknown driver of the said truck
bearing no. AS 01 F 4749 as Case Crime No.189 of 2005, under
4.    Deceased was aged about 26 years and was earning
Rs.9500/- from Kamdhenu Inspat Ltd. and Rs.3000/- from
accountancy in Agarwarl Timber and Bans Company. Truck owner
as well as insurance company contested the proceedings by filing
written statement and denying the allegations made by the
claimant/respondent nos.1 & 2.
5.    Learned tribunal on the basis of pleadings and after
appreciating the evidence brought on record by the parties, both
oral and documentary determined that incident took place due to
rash and negligent driving of the driver of offending vehicle. It
recorded finding on the basis of oral testimony of eye-witness PW-
2 Kamal Arora who proved the manner and mode of accident. It
was stated by him that he was waiting for his brother at the police
outpost Mohan Nagar and accident took place in his presence on
09.03.2005 at about 7:00 P.M. A truck bearing no.AS 01 F 4749
was coming from the opposite direction and driver of the truck was
driving it rashly and negligently which dashed the motorcycle of
deceased from behind in which deceased got injuries and was
taken to the hospital where he died. He informed to the police
station and lodged F.I.R. PW-1 Kewal Krishna Arora is father of
deceased who had not seen the incident. The testimony of PW-2
was found to be unshakable in cross-examination. F.I.R. was
lodged by PW-2 who had seen the incident and this was also taken
into account by the learned tribunal.
6.    On the question of quantum, learned tribunal found that
deceased who was working as accountant in Kamdhenu Ispat Ltd.
from where he was earning Rs.9500/- per month as salary and was
also working in Agarwal Timber and Bans Company from where he
earned Rs.26,500/- per year. In this regard statements of PW-3
Puneet Agarwal care taker of his father's business were recorded
and relied on. Deceased filed I.T.R. in assessment year 2004-05 in
which he showed his income as Rs.1,05,700/- on the basis of
which his income was assumed to be Rs.1,05,700/- out of which
1/3 of the annual income was deducted as personal expenses of
deceased and after applying multiplier of 18 on the age of the
deceased        determined     the   compensation      to  the  tune   of
Rs.12,68,406/- and further awarded a sum of Rs.2000/- for funeral
expenses. In this way, a total sum of Rs.12,70,406 was determined
as compensation payable to the claimant/respondent nos.1 & 2.
7.      Learned tribunal found that at the time of accident driver of
the truck causing accident, had no valid driving license, even
though liability was fastened against the insurance company the
8.      Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the learned
tribunal has wrongly assessed the income of deceased on the
basis of income as shown in the I.T.R. filed by the deceased in
Income Tax Department and assessed the compensation on higher
9.      Learned counsel for respondent nos.1 & 2 urged that the
argument made by learned counsel for the appellant is not tenable
regarding income of deceased and amount of compensation as
determined by the learned tribunal but said nothing about the
liability for payment of compensation.
10.     In this regard it is to note that learned tribunal has not added
any amount under the head of future prospects and conventional
head as provided in the case of Sarla Verma and Pranay Sethi, so it
cannot be said that the amount of award is on higher side. Since
learned counsel for claimant/respondent nos.1 & 2 has made no
any objection relating to the awarded amount, therefore, this Court
is not inclined to disturb the assessment of amount of
compensation as determined by the learned triubnal.
11.    It is further submitted that driver of the offending vehicle had
no valid license at the time of accident, therefore, liability for
payment of compensation cannot be fastened with the insurance
company and compensation was payable by the owner of the
offending vehicle. In this regard, learned tribunal has recorded its
finding while deciding issue no.3 & 4. that owner of the vehicle has
committed breach of conditions of insurance policy, therefore,
insurance company is not liable for making payment of
compensation but fastened the liability on the insurance company
which is illegal. Learned tribunal has also mentioned in the
judgment that if owner of the vehicle makes breach of conditions of
insurance policy, insurance company is entitled to recover the
amount of compensation from owner of the vehicle even though in
the operative portion liability has been fastened on the insurance
company without giving it right to recovery.
12.   Learned counsel for the respondent no.3 (owner of the
vehicle) has contended that in this case driver of the vehicle held
driving license at the time of accident which was issued from
Transport Authority, Muzaffarpur but during investigation by the
insurance company it was found to be fake which was not in his
knowledge. The driving license was valid at the time of accident
and he employed the driver with due care and caution as having
valid driving license, therefore, he cannot be held liable for making
payment of compensation.
13.   The main question involved in this appeal is whether the
M.A.C.T. was not right in holding that insurer was liable even
though the driver had a fake license.
14.   To understand the correct legal position regarding liability of
the insurance company where the driver of the offending vehicle
possessed a fake driving license, I have to go through the
provisions u/s 149(2)(a) & 149(2)(a)(ii) Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 and
various pronouncements made by Hon'ble the Apex Court in this
15.   Section 149(2)(a) and Section 149(2)(a)(ii) are as under:-
“(2) No sum shall be payable by an insurer under Section (1)
in respect of any judgment or award unless, before the
commencement of the proceedings in which the judgment or
award is given the insurer had notice through the Court, or in
respect of such judgment or award so long as execution is
stayed thereon pending an appeal; and an insurer to whom
notice of the bringing of any such proceedings is so given
shall be entitled to be made a party thereto and to defend the
action on any of the following grounds, namely:-
(a) that there has been a breach of a specific condition of the
policy, being one of the following conditions, namely:-
(i) a condition excluding the use of the vehicle-
(a) for hire or reward, where the vehicle is on the date of the
contract of insurance a vehicle not covered by a permit to ply
(b) for organised racing and speed testing, or
(c) for a purpose not allowed by the permit under which the
vehicle is used, where the vehicle is a transport vehicle, or
(d) without side-car being attached where the vehicle is a
(ii) a condition excluding driving by a named person or
persons or by any person who is not duly licenced, or by any
person who has been disqualified for holding or obtaining a
driving licence during the period of disqualification;”
16.   Breach of conditions under Section 149(2)(a) of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 absolves the insurer of its liability to the insured.
Section 149(2)(a)(ii) deals with the conditions regarding driving
licence. In case the vehicle at the time of accident is driven by a
person who is not duly licensed or by a person who has been
disqualified from holding or obtaining a driving licence during the
period of disqualification, the insurer is not liable for the
compensation. In the instant case, we are called upon to deal with
a situation where the driver allegedly possessing only a fake
driving licence.
17.    In United India Insurance Company Limited vs. Lehru
and others (2003) 3 SCC 338, a two-Judge Bench of Hon'ble The
Apex Court has taken the view that the insurance company cannot
be permitted to avoid its liability only on the ground that the person
driving the vehicle at the time of accident was not duly licensed. It
was further held that the willful breach of the conditions of the
policy should be established. Still further it was held that it was not
expected of the employer to verify the genuineness of a driving
licence from the issuing authority at the time of employment. The
employer needs to only test the capacity of the driver and if after
such test, he has been appointed, there cannot be any liability on
the employer. The situation would be different when the employer
was told that the driving licence of its employee is fake or false and
yet the employer not taking appropriate action to get the same duly
verified from the issuing authority. We may extract the relevant
“18. Now let us consider Section149(2). Reliance has been placed
on Section149(2)(a)(ii). As seen in order to avoid liability under
this provision it must be shown that there is a "breach". As held in
Skandia and Sohan Lal Passi cases the breach must be on part of
the insured. We are in full agreement with that. To hold otherwise
would lead to absurd results. Just to take an example, suppose a
vehicle is stolen. Whilst it is being driven by the thief there is an
accident. The thief is caught and it is ascertained that he had no
licence. Can the Insurance Company disown liability? The answer
has to be an emphatic "No". To hold otherwise would be to negate
the very purpose of compulsory insurance. The injured or relatives
of the person killed in the accident may find that the decree
obtained by them is only a paper decree as the owner is a man of
straw. The owner himself would be an innocent sufferer. It is for
this reason that the Legislature, in its wisdom, has made insurance,
at least third party insurance, compulsory. The aim and purpose
being that an insurance company would be available to pay. The
business of the company is insurance. In all businesses there is an
element of risk. All persons carrying on business must take risks
associated with that business. Thus it is equitable that the business
which is run for making profits also bears the risk associated with
it. At the same time innocent parties must not be made to suffer or
loss. These provisions meet these requirements. We are thus in
agreement with what is laid down in aforementioned cases viz that
in order to avoid liability it is not sufficient to show that the person
driving at the time of accident was not duly licensed. The insurance
company must establish that the breach was on the part of the
insured.”
“20. When an owner is hiring a driver he will therefore have to
check whether the driver has a driving licence. If the driver
produces a driving licence which on the face of it looks genuine,
the owner is not expected to find out whether the licence has in fact
been issued by a competent authority or not. The owner would then
take the test of the driver. If he finds that the driver is competent to
drive the vehicle, he will hire the driver. We find it rather strange
that insurance companies expect owners to make enquiries with
RTOs, which are spread all over the country, whether the driving
licence shown to them is valid or not. Thus where the owner has
satisfied himself that the driver has a licence and is driving
competently there would be no breach of Section149(2)(a)(ii). The
Insurance Company would not then be absolved of liability. If it
ultimately turns out that the licence was fake, the insurance
company would continue to remain liable unless they prove that the
owner/insured was aware or had noticed that the licence was fake
and still permitted that person to drive. More importantly, even in
such a case the insurance company would remain liable to the
innocent third party, but it may be able to recover from the insured.
This is the law which has been laid down in Skandia, Sohan Lal
Passi and Kamla cases. We are in full agreement with the views
expressed therein and see no reason to take a different view.”
18.   The matter was subsequently considered by a three-Judge
Bench of Hon'ble the Apex Court in National Insurance Company
Limited vs. Swaran Singh and others (2004) 3 SCC 297. The
said Bench was of the view that in case the insured did not take
reasonable and adequate care and caution to verify the
genuineness or otherwise of the licence, the liability would still be
open-ended and will have to be determined on the basis of facts of
each case. The relevant discussions are available at paragraphs
92, 99, 100 and 101, which are extracted below:
“92. It may be true as has been contended on behalf of the
petitioner that a fake or forged licence is as good as no licence but
the question herein, as noticed hereinbefore, is whether the insurer
must prove that the owner was guilty of the wilful breach of the
conditions of the insurance policy or the contract of insurance. In
Lehru case, the matter has been considered in some detail. We are
in general agreement with the approach of the Bench but we intend
to point out that the observations made therein must be understood
to have been made in the light of the requirements of the law in
terms whereof the insurer is to establish wilful breach on the part
of the insured and not for the purpose of its disentitlement from
raising any defence or for the owners to be absolved from any
liability whatsoever.”
“99. So far as the purported conflict in the judgments of Kamla
and Lehru is concerned, we may wish to point out that the defence
to the effect that the licence held by the person driving the vehicle
was a fake one, would be available to the insurance companies, but
whether despite the same, the plea of default on the part of the
owner has been established or not would be a question which will
have to be determined in each case.”
“100. This Court, however, in Lehru must not be read to mean that
an owner of a vehicle can under no circumstances have any duty to
make any enquiry in this respect. The same, however, would again
be a question which would arise for consideration in each
individual case.”
“101. The submission of Mr. Salve that in Lehru case, this Court
has, for all intent and purport, taken away the right of insurer to
raise a defence that the licence is fake does not appear to be
correct. Such defence can certainly be raised but it will be for the
insurer to prove that the insured did not take adequate care and
caution to verify the genuineness or otherwise of the licence held
by the driver.”
19.   Swaran Singh’s case (supra) was subsequently considered
by Hon'ble the Apex Court in National Insurance Company
Limited vs. Laxmi Narain Dhut 2007 (3) SCC 700. It was
“Mere absence, fake or invalid driving licence or disqualification
of the driver for driving at the relevant time are not in themselves
defences available to the insurer against either the insured or the
third parties. To avoid its liability towards the insured the insurer
has to prove that the insured was guilty of negligence and failed to
exercise reasonable care in the matter of fulfilling the condition of
the policy regarding use of vehicles by duly licensed driver or one
who was not disqualified to drive at the relevant time…”
20.   In the case of Pepsu Road Transport Corporation vs.
National Insurance Company (2013) 10 SCC 217 Honb'le the
Apex     Court     after    considering         the   law     as    laid   down in
aforementioned cases, has held in para 8 which is as under:-
8.In a claim for compensation, it is certainly open to the
insurer under Section 149(2)(a)(ii) to take a defence that the
driver of the vehicle involved in the accident was not duly
licensed. Once such a defence is taken, the onus is on the
insurer. But even after it is proved that the licence possessed
by the driver was a fake one, whether there is liability on the
insurer is the moot question. As far as the owner of the
vehicle is concerned, when he hires a driver, he has to check
whether the driver has a valid driving licence. Thereafter he
has to satisfy himself as to the competence of the driver. If
satisfied in that regard also, it can be said that the owner had
taken reasonable care in employing a person who is qualified
and competent to drive the vehicle. The owner cannot be
expected to go beyond that, to the extent of verifying the
genuineness of the driving licence with the licensing authority
before hiring the services of the driver. However, the situation
would be different if at the time of insurance of the vehicle or
thereafter the insurance company requires the owner of the
vehicle to have the licence duly verified from the licensing
authority or if the attention of the owner of the vehicle is
otherwise invited to the allegation that the licence issued to
the driver employed by him is a fake one and yet the owner
does not take appropriate action for verification of the matter
regarding the genuineness of the licence from the licensing
authority. That is what is explained in Swaran Singh’s case
(supra). If despite such information with the owner that the
licence possessed by his driver is fake, no action is taken by
the insured for appropriate verification, then the insured will
be at fault and, in such circumstances, the insurance
company is not liable for the compensation.
21.   In the case of Ram Chandra Singh vs. Rajaram & others,
A.I.R. 2018 SC 3789, Hon'ble the Apex Court by considering the
judicial precedents in the case of Pepsu Road Transport
Corporation (supra) & Premkumari vs. Prahlad Deo (2008) 3
SCC 193 ruled in para 11 which is given as under:-
11. Suffice it to observe that it is well established that if the
owner was aware of the fact that the licence was fake and still
permitted the driver to drive the vehicle, then the insurer would
stand absolved. However, the mere fact that the driving licence
is fake, per se, would not absolve the insurer. Indubitably, the
High Court noted that the counsel for the appellant did not
dispute that the driving licence was found to be fake, but that
concession by itself was not sufficient to absolve the insurer.
22.   Again in a recent case of Nirmala Kothari vs. United India
Insurance Company Ltd. 2020 (4) SCC 49 Hon'ble the Apex
Court considered the aforementioned position of law and explained
about the extent of care/diligence expected of the employer/insured
while employing a driver. The relevant para no.9, 10 & 11 are as
9. While the insurer can certainly take the defense that the
license of the driver of the car at the time of incident was
invalid/fake however the onus of the proving that the
insured did not take adequate care and caution to verify the
genuineness of the license or was guilty of willful breach of
the conditions of the insurance policy or the contract of
insurance lies on the insurer.
10.The view taken by the National Commission that the law
as settled in the Pepsu case (Supra) is not applicable in the
present matter as it related to third-party claim is erroneous.
It has been categorically held in the case of National
Insurance Co. Ltd vs. Swaran Singh & Ors.
“110. (iii).... Mere absence, fake or invalid driving
licence or disqualification of the driver for driving
defences available to the insurer against either the
insured or the third parties. To avoid its liability
towards the insured, the insurer has to prove that
the insured was guilty of negligence and failed to
exercise reasonable care in the matter of fulfilling
the condition of the policy regarding use of
vehicles by a duly licenced driver or one who was
not disqualified to drive at the relevant time.”
11. While hiring a driver the employer is expected to verify if
the driver has a driving license. If the driver produces a
licence which on the face of it looks genuine, the employer is
not expected to further investigate into the authenticity of the
licence unless there is cause to believe otherwise. If the
employer finds the driver to be competent to drive the
vehicle and has satisfied himself that the driver has a driving
licence there would be no breach of Section 149(2)(ii) and
the Insurance Company would be liable under the policy. It
would be unreasonable to place such a high onus on the
insured to make enquiries with RTOs all over the country to
ascertain the veracity of the driving licence. However, if the
Insurance Company is able to prove that the owner/insured
was aware or had notice that the licence was fake or invalid
and still permitted the person to drive, the insurance
company would no longer continue to be liable.
23.   In the present case opposite party no.1/respondent no.3
owner of the offending vehicle had stated in his written statement
that on the date of accident Ram Naresh was driver on his vehicle.
He had valid dirving licence. It was issued from the office of District
Transport Officer, Muzaffarpur. On investigation by the Insurance
company/appellant, this driving licence was found to be fake as per
report of Investigator Mr. Arvind Kumar Misra but he had not
entered into the witness box to prove the contents of his report
which was based on the observation of dealing assistant. Even the
dealing assistant of the office of District Transport Officer,
Muzaffarpur has also not been examined to prove that the seal and
signature of District Transport Officer in the xerox copy of driving
licence were not found to be correct.
24.   Further it was also not proved by the appellant that the
owner/respondent no.3 had not taken adequate care and caution to
verify the genuineness of the driving licence of the driver at the
time of his employment and that the owner was aware or had
notice that the licence was fake or invalid and still permitted him to
drive the offending vehicle. In such circumstances, it cannot be
said that the insured/owner is at fault in having employed a person
whose licence has been found to be fake by the insurance
company before the learned tribunal. Therefore, there exists no any
cause to disturb the findings recorded by learned tribunal in this
regard.
25.   In view of the above, this appeal is dismissed. The
appellant/Insurance    Company       is   liable to    indemnify   the
respondents. Claimants be given the same without keeping in the
fixed deposit as more than 16 years have elapsed.
26.   There is no order as to costs.