     Delay   in   filing   application     for  substitution   is
   condoned.
     Application for substitution is allowed.
     Leave granted.
     The review application filed by the appellants after
   dismissal of the Special Leave Petition in limine has
   been rejected by the learned Single Judge of the High
   Court  on   the   ground   that   there  is  no  satisfactory
   ground   to   condone   the   delay   in  filing  the   review
   petition. Thus, the only short question is whether the
   time spent before this Court can be good ground for
   condoning the delay.
     Learned   senior   counsel    for  the  appellants   submits
   that the appellants cannot be deprived of their right
   to seek a review of the order of the High Court since
   the  dismissal    of  the   Special   Leave  Petition   is  in
   limine    and    refers    to    the   judgment   in    Khoday
   Distilleries Ltd. (Now Known as Khoday India Ltd.) &
   Ors.  v.     Sri   Mahadeshwara     Sahakare  Karkhane   Ltd.,
Kollegal   (Under    Liquidation)      Represented    by   the
Liquidator -(2019) 4 SCC 376.
       Learned   counsel     for  the   respondents,   on  the
other hand, submits that the Special Leave Petition was
not pending for 722 days and he says so as there were
orders passed to remove objections in the Special Leave
Petition which the appellants failed to cure despite
peremptory nature of orders passed. It is thus, his
submission that this period cannot be said to be one
where “Special Leave Petition was pending”. In this
behalf, he has placed on record the office report and
the orders passed.
       On examination of the aforesaid, while what the
respondents  contend     on   facts   is  correct,   the  fact
remains that the delay was condoned and the Special
Leave Petition was numbered.        Thus, we are of the view
that it cannot be said that the time period spent in
prosecuting  the   Special     Leave  Petition,   albeit  some
delay on part of the appellants, will preclude the
appellants from seeking condonation of delay of this
period in filing the review application.
       We  thus,    deem    it   appropriate   to   allow  the
application  filed    by   the   appellants   before   learned
Single Judge seeking condonation of delay in filing the
review application without commenting one way or the
other on the issue of merits of the review application.
       The appeals accordingly stand allowed limited to
the aforesaid extent leaving parties to bear their own
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (C)    No(s).   3373-3374/2020
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 12-09-2019
in CMP No. 7531/2019 12-09-2019 in REV.A.SR. No. 38072/2019 passed
by the High Court Of Judicature At Madras)
Date : 22-11-2021 These matters were called on for hearing today.
R-1 to 4             Ms. Asmita Singh, Adv.
           UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
          Delay in filing application for substitution is
      condoned.
          Application for substitution is allowed.
          Leave granted.
          The appeals are allowed in terms of the signed order.
          Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.
                [Signed order is placed on the file]
