1.    The present appeal has been filed under Section 19(1) of the Family
Courts Act, 1984 read with Section 28 of Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
challenging the judgment and decree dated 14.08.2019 passed by the learned
Judge, Family Court, East District, Karkardooma Courts, Delhi in H.M.A.
No. 309/2017, whereby the petition seeking divorce under Sections 13(1)(ia)
and 13(1)(ib) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 filed by the appellant, was
dismissed.
2.    Briefly stated the facts are that marriage of the parties was solemnized
on 02.05.2008. On 30.06.2009, a son, was born out of the wedlock.
3.     The case of the appellant is that on 04.01.2010, the respondent
unilaterally left their matrimonial home with the child, without informing or
seeking the appellant’s consent. On the same day, the appellant along with
his brother and mother went to his in-law’s residence at Vaishali,
Ghaziabad, with the aim to bring the respondent back. However, she flatly
refused to come back to the matrimonial home. Following this, there was a
physical altercation between the appellant and his brother on one side, and
the respondent’s brothers on the other side. These experiences have led to
immense bitterness in the relationship between the parties.
4.     It has further been submitted that for more than one and a half years
from 04.01.2010, there was no direct communication or contact between the
appellant and the respondent, or even their families. On 06.07.2011, the
appellant sent a legal notice, demanding the respondent to rejoin her
matrimonial home, and resume their conjugal relationship. However, the
respondent neither rejoined her matrimonial home, nor responded to the
legal notice. Troubled by this, on 20.08.2011, the appellant filed a petition
under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, seeking restitution of
conjugal rights, in Karkardooma Courts, Delhi.
5.     The appellant further submitted that after receiving the notice of the
appellant’s petition seeking restitution of conjugal rights, rather than joining
the appellant back, the respondent filed a complaint dated 10.10.2011 before
the Crime Against Women (hereinafter referred to as CAW) Cell, Krishna
Nagar, Delhi alleging harassment due to dowry demand and domestic
violence, amongst others. As per the appellant, the complaint before the
CAW Cell was a counterblast to the appellant's petition under Section 9 of
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
6.       On 17.04.2012, the respondent filed a reply to the appellant’s petition
under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, wherein she had sought
dismissal of the said petition, and also filed a copy of her CAW Cell
complaint as an annexure to reiterate her allegations. On 13.07.2012, the
respondent filed a petition under Section 125 of Criminal Procedure Code,
1973 (hereinafter referred to as Cr. P.C.) seeking maintenance from the
7.      The appellant submits that after noting the conduct of the respondent
i.e. filing complaint before the CAW cell; opposing the appellant’s petition
filed under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, and; on account of
her adamance to not rejoin her matrimonial home, the appellant withdrew
his petition filed under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 on
13.12.2012. On 27.02.2013, the appellant filed a divorce petition under
Sections 13(1)(ia) and 13(1)(ib) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 on
grounds of cruelty and desertion.
8.      On 07.10.2013, the respondent filed her written statement, reiterating
her stand in her complaint filed before the CAW Cell. Another application
under Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 was also filed by the
respondent on the same day, seeking maintenance from the appellant.
9.      On 09.01.2014, an order of interim maintenance under Section 24 of
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 was passed, directing the payment of Rs.
21,000/- per month for respondent and her minor son, along with the
litigation expenses of Rs. 11,000/-. The said amount was later enhanced to
Rs. 30,000 per month, which the appellant continues to regularly pay.
10.     The parties led their evidence before the Family Court, and after
hearing the arguments on both sides, the Family Court dismissed the
Appellant’s petition. Aggrieved thereby, the appellant has preferred the
present appeal.
11.    This Court issued notice to the Respondent-wife on 23.09.2019.
Further, vide order dated 27.02.2020, this Court, referred the parties to the
Delhi High Court Mediation and Conciliation Centre to explore the
possibility of reaching a settlement. Thereafter on 22.10.2021, the Court
ordered both parties to remain present in Court to explore the possibility of a
mediated settlement. On 13.12.2021, the Court noted that the respondent
was not present, and presumably she was not interested in a settlement.
Accordingly, we listed the appeal for hearing on 05.01.2022.
12.    Counsel for the appellant, Mr. Sumeet Verma, has argued that on
04.01.2010 the respondent left her matrimonial home with the newborn son.
Since the appellant was interested in making their marriage work, he filed a
petition under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 for restitution of
conjugal rights. However, the respondent not only vehemently opposed the
petition, but as a counterblast against the same, the respondent on
10.10.2011 filed a complaint before the CAW Cell.           According to the
appellant, the allegations made before the CAW Cell were not only false,
baseless and malicious, but also of a degree which has caused much mental
agony to the Appellant tantamounting to cruelty.
13.    In the complaint before CAW Cell, the respondent had stated that she
was harassed for dowry by the appellant and his family members. However,
during her cross-examination in these proceedings, the statement made was
totally contrary i.e. no dowry demand was made, either prior to, or at the
time of marriage by the appellant or his family members.The Respondent in
her cross - examination had stated :-
“………I have stated in my reply as well as my affidavit which
is correct that, the petitioner & his family were not Happy with
the articles given to them by my parents. There was no
demand made to me of any nature by the family members of
the petitioner before or at the time of marriage in the name
of dowry. My parents didn't inform me of any demand made by
the petitioner & his family. After the marriage, I didn't lodge
any complaint with regard to the complaints of my in laws
qua the substandard dowry articles. I only lodged a complaint
with CAW cell.
I filed the complaint with CAW cell only after filing of the
petition under Sec.9 of HMA. I don't remember whether I
filed my reply to See.9 petition subsequent to my filing of the
complaint. The complaint in the CAW Cell was lodged against
the petitioner, his mother & his elder brother only. There was
no complaint lodged by me prior to complaint at CAW Cell,
2012, against my in Laws”                   (emphasis supplied)
14.    Learned counsel for the appellant has further submitted that the
complaint in CAW Cell had been made more than two and a half years after
the marriage, which points to the mal-intent on behalf of the Respondent-
wife. The appellant has further submitted that before the said filing of the
complaint before the CAW Cell, the entire focus of the appellant was to
make his marriage work. It was for this reason that the appellant, along with
his brother and mother, went to the house of the Respondent to bring her
back on the same night i.e. 04.01.2010. The appellant has further submitted
that after filing of the CAW Cell complaint, the appellant has visited the
CAW Cell, at least, fifteen to twenty times and had to face acute harassment,
mental and physical torture of the litigation process before the CAW Cell.
Additionally, the appellant contended that making such false and frivolous
complaints of dowry demands amounted to mental cruelty to him.
15.    The appellant submits that, had he and his family members indeed
thrown the Respondent out of her matrimonial home, why would they – the
very same evening, go to the respondent’s house and request her to come
16.    Lastly, the counsel for the appellant contended that the parties had
been living separately for more than a decade now, and that the entire
substratum of the marriage had irrevocably been destroyed and that there
was no chance of reconciliation.
17.    In support of his submissions, learned counsel for the appellant has
relied upon the following judgments: Nishi vs. Jagdish Ram [2016(6) LRC
180 (Del)], K Srinivas Rao vs. D.A. Deepa [1 (2013) DMC 458 (SC)],
Sanjay Choudhary @ Sanjay Jaiswal vs. Anjali Devi &Ors. [1 (2017) DMC
355 (DB) (Pat.)], Raj Talreja vs. Kavita Talreja[2013 (2) LRC 349 (SC)],
Swati vs. Arvind Mudgal [2015(2) LRC 301(Del)] and Renu Yadav vs. Arun
18.    Per contra, Mr. Pratyush Chirantam, learned counsel for the
respondent has argued that the respondent has always been ready and willing
to join the appellant’s company and restore their matrimonial relationship.
The said fact has duly been recorded in the order dated 13.12.2012 passed
by the learned Additional District Judge, East District, Karkardooma Courts.
The learned Additional District Judge recorded that the respondent has
always been ready and willing to stay with the appellant, and it was for this
reason, at the time of permitting the appellant to withdraw his petition filed
under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, that the Petitioner
(Appellant herein) was subjected to a cost of Rs. 2,500/- to be paid to the
Respondent-wife. It has further been submitted by the learned counsel for
the appellant, that from the date of that order, till the filing of the impugned
order, the respondent has always been ready and willing to stay with the
appellant, and the said fact has also been recorded in the impugned judgment
dated 14.08.2019.
19.    We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have gone through
the documents and judgments relied upon.
20.    The conduct of the appellant shows that, at least, till the time he filed
the petition under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, he wanted to
make his marriage work. It is for this reason that on 04.01.2010, he along
with his brother and mother went to the house of the respondent. It is for this
very reason the appellant sent a legal notice dated 06.07.2011, requisitioning
the respondent to rejoin her matrimonial home and to resume conjugal
relationship. It is for this reason that on 20.08.2011, the appellant filed a
petition under section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 seeking restitution
of conjugal rights. However, the respondent did not resume cohabitation or
join the appellant in the matrimonial relationship. Rather, the respondent
filed a complaint before the CAW cell alleging dowry demand, threat to life,
and harassment at the hands of the appellant and his family members. The
same allegations were reiterated in the reply to the section 9 petition, where
the CAW cell complaint was also annexed. The respondent prayed for
dismissal of the petition under section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
21.    The affidavit by way of evidence of the respondent, and her cross
examination, have serious contradictions. At one stage, in her deposition the
respondent stated:-
“9. I say that neither the Petitioner nor his relatives had
visited the Deponent after throwing the Deponent and her
minor son out of the matrimonial home or made any efforts to
bring back the Deponent and her minor son at the matrimonial
home…….”
22.   However, during her cross examination she stated:
“It is correct that Ritesh & his mother came to my parent’s
house in the evening of 4th January 2010. It is wrong to suggest
that Ritesh & his mother requested me to return back to my
matrimonial home, however, it is not denied that there was a
quarrel. It is incorrect to suggest that the petitioner & his
mother insisted for my return to the matrimonial home & I had
refused the same. They both came of their own volition. The
police had come to our residence on the said quarrel, but I
didn't lodge any complaint.”
23.   The Respondent further reiterated in her reply before us that :
“It is wrong and denied that on 4th of January, 2010 appellant
and his mother and brother visited the house of his in law to
bring back the respondent.”
24.   Despite the appellant and his mother visiting the house of the
respondent – which fact was completely denied by the respondent at one
stage, and admitted at another stage, the respondent did not join the
matrimonial home of the appellant. Her subsequent statement that they had
not requested her to return to the matrimonial home cannot be believed,
since she even denied the said visit, which she admitted later. Even
otherwise, it does not stand to reason as to why the appellant would go to the
respondent’s parental home with his mother and brother later in the day,
when the respondent had left the matrimonial home. Pertinently, she had the
child with her, and in this context, the appellant and his mother and brother
must have been driven to bring her back. This is also probabalised by the
subsequent contemporaneous conduct of the appellant in issuing a notice to
her to rejoin his company, and in filing a petition for restitution of conjugal
rights. Further, even after sending the legal notice and the petition under
Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 – which was filed as early as
20.08.2011, the respondent still did not join the matrimonial home of the
appellant.
25.    This conduct of the respondent not only demonstrated a clear
intention on her part to desert the appellant, but also her lack of sensitivity to
the physical and emotional needs of the appellant. After nearly two years of
leaving the matrimonial home, and three years of the marriage, the
respondent filed a complaint on 10.10.2011 before the CAW Cell, Krishna
Nagar, Delhi against the Appellant and his family members, alleging dowry
demands, abuse, physical and mental torture and harassment, amongst other
cruelties. These allegations remained unsubstantiated.
26.    The reply to petition under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
was filed on 17.04.2012, where again the respondent categorically sought
dismissal of the petition under Section 9 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955
and also levelled the same allegations, as stated in CAW Cell complaint.
27.    The above acts clearly show that the respondent, throughout, has been
adamant and unwilling to resume her matrimonial relationship with the
appellant. The statement made by her before the learned Additional District
Judge on 13.12.2012 in an isolated statement, which is totally belied by her
complaint in CAW Cell, as well as the reply to petition under Section 9 of
the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
28.    It was admitted by the respondent in her cross examination, that her
brother-in-law was not staying with the couple and had, in fact, moved in
with his wife at IP Extension upon the marriage of the parties. Yet she made
allegations against him of harassment and dowry demand, none of which
were ever substantiated.
29.    A bare perusal of cross examination of the respondent shows that she
could not establish any demand of dowry, either prior to the marriage, or at
the time of marriage by the appellant. It was only two years after leaving the
matrimonial home, did the Respondent file the CAW cell complaint. This
itself puts the credibility of the said complaint in doubt. It is, in fact,
admitted that the Respondent only filed the CAW Cell complaint after the
Section 9 petition was filed, and there were no complaints lodged by the
Respondent-wife prior to that. Pertinently, even her parents/ brother never
filed any complaints in that respect at any earlier point of time.
30.    The Appellant, in his cross examination, regarding the CAW Cell
“We stayed as husband and wife together till 4 th January 2010
at our matrimonial home. I had not filed any complaint with
the police from the date of marriage till 4th January 2010
against the Respondent. Neither did my wife lodge any
complaint against me or my family. It was in
September/October 2011 that my wife lodged a complaint
against me and my family before the CAW Cell. I used to
attend the proceedings before the CAW cell about 15-20
times either when I as summoned or I visited on my own
volition. I had suggested to my wife to accompany me to our
matrimonial house during the proceedings before the CAW
Cell. Despite the allegations levelled against me and my family
I had still suggested my wife to accompany me to our
matrimonial home. My wife refused to accompany me at both
places i.e. before the CAW cell as well as the court.
I had endeavoured to reconcile with my wife using good
offices of my relatives and friends but despite the effort my
wife did not join me. I do not remember the date or time, but it
was 8 to 10 times that I made an effort for my wife to join me. I
had made this effort before the court and also outside the
premises of the court.”                     (emphasis supplied)
31.   As regards, the falsity of the allegations in the CAW Cell is
concerned, the Family Court has stated :
“31. It is also the contention of the petitioner that the
respondent had Filed a criminal complaint (Ex.PWl/F)
alleging matrimonial cruelty and the demand of dowry and
harassment on non fulfilment thereof against the petitioner, his
mother and elder brother and this by itself is a sufficient
ground for passing a decree of divorce against the respondent.
This complaint was filed by the respondent on or around in
32. It is not the case of the petitioner that an FIR was
registered onthis complaint and a trial was held in pursuance
of that complaint. Itappears that though this complaint was
filed by the respondent andsome proceedings took place
before the Crime Against Women Cell in an attempt of
reconciliation between the parties, the respondent did not
pursue her complaint. In the facts of this case, mere filing of
the complaint by itself cannot be considered an act of cruelty
by the respondent. The allegations levelled by, the respondent
in that complaint were not found incorrect by any court.
Insofar as the present proceedings are concerned, it was for
the petitioner to prove that the allegations levelled by the
respondent were false in that complaint and were made
without a reasonable cause but the petitioner has failed to do
so. This contention of the petitioner must also fail.”
(emphasis supplied)
32.    We are unable to agree with this view of the Family Court. The
approach of the Family Court that it was for the appellant to prove in
negative – that he and his family had not subjected the respondent to
harassment or cruelty the dowry, is palpably wrong and against all cannons
of justice and fairplay. Unless there is a statutory presumption created in
respect of a state of affairs, the initial onus to prove ones case cannot be
shifted by requiring the other party to prove the reverse. We may also rely
upon the decision of this court in KB v SS (2016 SCC Online Del 3288)
“46. It is not only when such allegations are made in judicial
proceedings that the person – against whom they are made
may have valid grievance. The damage to the matrimonial
bond had been done by the appellant when she made such
serious and scandalous allegations against the respondent in
her complaint to the CAW cell vide Ex. RW-1/5.
47. It is a settled position that leveling of unsubstantiated
allegations in the pleadings or otherwise amount to mental
cruelty under Section 13(1)(ia) of the Act (See AS v. SNS 226
(2016) DLT 565 Manisha Sandeep Gade v. Sandeep Vinayak
Kumar Sharma (supra) and Jayanta Nandi (supra).
48. Thus the writing of the complaint to the CAW cell (Ex. RW-
1/5) tantamounted to causing grave mental agony and cruelty
to the respondent as it contained serious and baseless
allegations against the respondent and his family members of
demanding dowry from the appellant and her parents and also
of the respondent maintaining illicit relations with other
women. The said allegations were nothing short of character
assassination of the respondent. The making of such serious
allegations must have caused grave mental agony to the
respondent and his claim that the matrimonial bond has been
destroyed on that account cannot be negated. The respondent
has a reasonable ground to believe that living with the
appellant may again lead to serious injury to his name and
reputation and to that of his family. The finding of the learned
ADJ on this aspect is therefore affirmed.
49. Turning to the aspect of desertion the appellant did not
deny the fact that the parties remained separated from one
another for a period of two years from March 2004 to March
2006. She sought to put the blame for the same at the door of
the respondent by alleging that she had to leave the
matrimonial home on account of cruelty caused by the
respondent.
50. However other than her averments in the pleadings and
her own examination in chief there is not a shred of evidence
to suggest that the respondent had treated her with cruelty. In
fact the respondent in his cross examination had specifically
denied the suggestions alleging harassment and cruelty by him
upon the appellant.
52. The parties have lived apart for approximately 10 years.
Various police complaints/CAW Cell complaints were filed by
the appellant and the family members of the respondent. There
appears to be no possibility of the revival of the matrimonial
relationship between the parties and the relationship between
the parties has irretrievably broken down. The marriage is as
good as dead. The irretrievable breakdown is the result of the
conduct of the appellant and the respondent/husband is
entitled to a decree of divorce under Sections 13(1)(ia) and
(ib) of the Act.”
33.   It has been held by the Supreme Court in Mangayakarasi v. M.
“14. It cannot be in doubt that in an appropriate case the
unsubstantiated allegation of dowry demand or such other
allegation has been made and the husband and his family
members are exposed to criminal litigation and ultimately if it
is found that such allegation is unwarranted and without basis
and if that act of the wife itself forms the basis for the husband
to allege that mental cruelty has been inflicted on him,
certainly, in such circumstance, if a petition for dissolution of
marriage is filed on that ground and evidence is tendered
before the original court to allege mental cruelty it could well
be appreciated for the purpose of dissolving the marriage on
that ground….”
34.   The Supreme Court in the case of K. Srinivas Rao v. D.A. Deepa
(2013) 5 SCC 226 has held that making unfounded allegations against the
spouse or his relatives in the pleadings, filing of complaints etc. which may
have adverse impact on the job of the spouse in the facts of a case, amounts
to causing mental cruelty to the other spouse. The same view was expressed
by the Supreme Court in the case of K. Srinivas v. K. Suneetha (2014) 16
35.   The allegations made in the CAW Cell, reiterated in the reply to the
section 9 petition are of a serious nature, and in contradiction to the cross-
examination and evidence by way of affidavit of the Respondent-wife.
These allegations were as follows:-
“3. That my parents financial status is not much sound yet the
gifts that were given as much of good value as possible but my
in-laws side seemed to be all cheap and often I had to listen
from my husband, mother-in-law, and brother-in-law that "the
sloppy girl from the slum colony should tell her parents that
we are respectable people that such inferior goods are not
even given to beggars here and come with branded gifts. Does
anyone marry like this; bring at least 10 lakh rupees or die
somewhere otherwise no need to come to this house.
4. That after the marriage of my first month when I have been
harassing and beaten up by the my in- laws, I had objected to
use abusing language and indecent words against my parents
and my brothers then my brother-in -law said to me that if you
have problem then tell your family come with 10 lakh rupees
we will treat you like princes otherwise it will remain as it is.
If you want to stay here then stay here otherwise go
somewhere else and darken your face, if you said something
upside down to the family members or even mention these
things to any one we will burn you alive. I was too scared
about the threat of my life that I have never told or mention
these things or incidents to my parents. I was quietly tolerated
their oppression and torture to maintain peace in my
matrimonial home.
7. That I and my child became ill after coming to my mother's
home, entire expenses of the treatment were borne by my
father and my brothers. My in-laws even did not turn up to ask
about us. My in-laws remained adamant about demanding 10
lakhs rupees even after my parents request and brothers
apologized for holding their feet. After much persuasion, I
came back to my in-laws, but all went vain and they continue
to misbehave, using abusing language and beaten up me and
also disrespecting my parents. I am not given enough food nor
is any attention given to raising my child.
9. That on 4.01.2010 my husband, brother -in-law and mother
in law came along with other 3-4 persons at my parents home
and during the talking suddenly my mother- in- law and
brother-in-law started abusing me, my husband and brother-
in-law have fought with my parents , during this incident my
father got some injuries by my in-laws.
11. That by this complaint against my husband Sh. Ritesh
Babbar brother-in-law Sh. Manish Babbar S/o Late Sunil
Babbar and Mother-in-law Smt. Chandra Mani w/o Late. Sunil
Babbar illegally demanding 10 lakh rupees in the name of
dowry and not meeting the demand abused me, beaten up, and
threat to kill to me, complainant facing physical and mental
torture by this. This complaint being given with the intention of
taking legal action against the culprits.”
36.   The allegations have not been established and amount to a clear and
categorical character assassination of the appellant as well as his family
members. The Family Court has ignored the said aspect of the matter.
Moreover, the appellant had to make 30-40 visits to the police station in
connection with the said complaint. A police station is not the best of places
for anyone to visit. It must have caused mental harassment and trauma each
time he was required to visit the police station, with the Damocles Sword
hanging over his head, and he not knowing when a case would be registered
against him and he would be arrested. So far as the respondent is concerned,
she had done everything to get the appellant and his family entrapped in the
criminal case. That was also her prayer in her complaint.
37.   As regard to the ground of desertion is concerned, the Family Court
“38. Record would show that the parties separated on
04.01.2010. The petitioner has not given any specific reason
or circumstance in which the respondent went to her parental
house. The respondent has alleged that she was driven out of
her matrimonial house on that day with the child in her
wearing clothes and all her belongings remained in the house
of the petitioner. Separation by itself would not constitute
desertion. Separation would transform into desertion only
from the date of formation of animus deserendi by the
respondent. It cannot be assumed that on the day, the
respondent left her home, she did so with an intention to bring
cohabitation permanently to an end.
40. In view of above facts and circumstances, I am of the
opinion that the petitioner has failed to establish that the
separation between the parties was accompanied by animus
deserendi on the part of the respondent for two years prior to
the date of filing of the present petition. Thus, the statutory
condition for applicability of section 13(l)(ib) is not satisfied.”
38.    On the said aspect of desertion under section 13(1)(ib) of the Hindu
Marriage Act, we note that the while there is a debate as to whether the
Respondent-wife left her on her own volition, or whether she was thrown
out of the matrimonial home, it is an admitted fact that she did not return to
the matrimonial home despite the appellant going to bring her back with his
brother and mother, despite the notice requisitioning the respondent to rejoin
the appellant, and; despite the petition under section 9 being filed by the
appellant.
39.    The respondent could not justify not returning to the matrimonial
home, and her refusal to cohabitate with the Appellant, to us, is sufficient to
establish desertion by her.
40.    In this view of the matter, we are of the view that the appellant has
been able to make out a case of being subjected to cruelty and desertion at
the hands of the respondent. We are unable to agree with the findings of the
Family Court. That the appellant is entitled to succeed on both the grounds
i.e. Sections 13(1)(ia) and 13(1)(ib). The facts and circumstances that lead
us to the following conclusion are:-
i. The respondent-wife filed an unsubstantiated criminal complaint
against the Appellant and his family members which caused them
immense mental cruelty and agony.
ii.    The      Respondent-wife     made     several   contradictory         and
unsubstantiated allegations in her written statements, complaint
before the CAW Cell, and her evidence by way of affidavit. The
Respondent failed to prove and establish the averments she made,
which itself amounts to mental cruelty. In respect of her testimony,
she stood discredited in the light of the said contradictions.
iii. As far as the relations between the parties are concerned, they are
sufficiently beyond repair. Both the Appellant and the Respondent
allege acts of cruelty against each other.
41.     It is an admitted fact that the parties have not lived together since
04.01.2010 i.e. a period of 12 years. It has been already noted time and
again in the judgments of the Supreme Court that continuous separation
between the parties for a long period should itself be a ground for divorce
itself.
42.     It has held in Naveen Kohli v. Neelu Kohli (2006) 4 SCC 558 :
“72. Once the parties have separated and the separation has
continued for a sufficient length of time and one of them has
presented a petition for divorce, it can well be presumed that
the marriage has broken down. The court, no doubt, should
seriously make an endeavour to reconcile the parties; yet, if it
is found that the breakdown is irreparable, then divorce
should not be withheld. The consequences of preservation in
law of the unworkable marriage which has long ceased to be
effective are bound to be a source of greater misery for the
parties.
73. A law of divorce based mainly on fault is inadequate to
deal with a broken marriage. Under the fault theory, guilt has
to be proved; divorce courts are presented with concrete
instances of human behaviour as they bring the institution of
marriage into disrepute.
74. We have been principally impressed by the consideration
that once the marriage has broken down beyond repair, it
would be unrealistic for the law not to take notice of the fact,
and it would be harmful to society and injurious to the
interests of the parties. Where there has been a long period
continuous separation, it may be fairly surmised that the
matrimonial bond is beyond repair. The marriage becomes a
fiction, though supported by a legal tie. By refusing to sever
that tie the law in such cases does not serve the sanctity of
marriage; on the contrary, it shows scant regard for the
feelings and emotions of the parties.
87. The High Court ought to have visualised that preservation
of such a marriage is totally unworkable which has ceased to
be effective and would be a greater source of misery for the
parties.
88. The High Court ought to have considered that a human
problem can be properly resolved by adopting a human
approach. In the instant case, not to grant a decree of divorce
would be disastrous for the parties. Otherwise, there may be a
ray of hope for the parties that after a passage of time (after
obtaining a decree of divorce) the parties may psychologically
and emotionally settle down and start a new chapter in life.”
43.   In Samar Ghosh v. Jaya Ghosh (2007) 4 SCC 511, the Supreme
“No uniform standard can ever be laid down for guidance, yet
we deem it appropriate to enumerate some instances of human
behaviour which may be relevant in dealing with the cases of
'mental cruelty'. The instances indicated in the succeeding
paragraphs are only illustrative and not exhaustive.
……..(iv) Mental cruelty is a state of mind. The feeling of deep
anguish, disappointment, frustration in one spouse caused by
the conduct of other for a long time may lead to mental
cruelty.
……..(xiv) When there has been a long period of continuous
separation, it may be fairly concluded that the matrimonial
bond is beyond repair. The marriage becomes a fiction
though supported by a legal tie. By refusing to sever that tie
the law in such cases does not serve the sanctity of the
marriage; on the contrary, it shows scant regard for the
feelings and emotions of the parties, it may lead to mental
44.   We have also in our judgment in MAT. APP. (F.C) 5/2020 titled
„Laxmi v. Kanhaiya Lal‟ held that:
“22. The fact of the matter is that the parties stayed together
only for a period of 8 - 9 months, and have been staying
separately for the last 15 - 16 years. Keeping them bonded by
the bond of marriage would in itself tantamount to cruelty. If
not both, at least one party would be living in hell-day in and
day out, feeling caged in an unwanted and, possibly, a
repulsive relationship. When a man and a woman get married,
they do so with the intent of finding love; happiness; mental,
physical and psychological satisfaction; progress; and;
procreation. The dream of the parties is to jointly face the
challenges that life has to throw, and to grow and progress
financially, socially, spiritually, etc.
23. When the marriage sours, the vows that the couple takes at
the time of marriage are a casualty. We take it that neither of
the parties to a marriage enters into the matrimonial bond,
only to break it later. For the said bond to breach, there are
bound to be some underlying reasons. In some cases, those
reasons may come to the surface and the court may be able to
see them. In others, they may remain latent for myriad
reasons. Those reasons would, invariably, be attributable to
both the parties, as it takes two to fight. And when the fight
goes to the point of them filing cases against each other, the
situation becomes messy and bitter for both of them. Unless
the situation is diffused early and the parties decide to
reconcile and call a truce, with passage of time, the void
between them only increases, and the feeling of love and
warmth in their relationship begins to fade. What is left is only
a feeling of hurt, hatred, disrespect, disregard and bitterness
for the other. These negative feelings and thoughts are bound
to give rise to mental trauma, harassment and cause immense
cruelty to one-if not both the parties……….
24……………….In such situations, the mere continuation of
the relationship between the warring spouses causes immense
emotional and psychological trauma to the parties which
would, in itself, tantamount to cruelty by both parties, upon the
other.”
i.        The parties have lived separately for 12 years now.
ii.       There is no chance of reconciliation between the parties and the
marriage has irretrievably broken down.
iii.      No useful purpose would be served by maintaining this
matrimonial bond. The insistence to continue this relationship
would only be inflicting further cruelty upon both the parties.
iv.       The marital discord between the parties at present is such that
there is a complete loss of faith, trust, understanding and love
between the parties. The conduct of the Respondent has been
such as to cause great mental anguish to the Appellant, and the
parties cannot be reasonably expected to live with each other
anymore.
46.      For the above reasons, the appeal is accordingly allowed, the marriage
between the appellant and the respondent is dissolved by decree of divorce
under Sections 13(1)(ia) and 13(1)(ib) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
Parties to bear their own costs.