These   appeals   take   exception   to  the  judgment  and
orders dated 11.02.2022 and 27.04.2022 passed by the High
Court               of   Judicature   at   Patna   Allahabad   in  CRLM  No.
By these orders, the High Court while entertaining
the application for grant of anticipatory bail filed by
one               Pramod   Kumar  Saini   and  other   co-accused  named   in
Complaint Case No. 1761 of 2016 went on to inquire into
matters unrelated to the facts relevant for deciding the
anticipatory bail application.
This   Court    vide   order     dated   13.05.2022,      whilst
issuing notice, observed thus: -
“Permission    to     file    special     leave
petition(s) is granted.
It is urged that the private complaint
filed by one Naresh Kumar Das, being Complaint
Case No.1761/2016, is against accused persons
named therein. The petitioner has not been
named as an accused.
Further, the impugned order has been
passed    against    the     petitioner     on    an
application for anticipatory bail filed by
Pramod Kumar Saini, who has been named as
accused no.4.
Issue notice, returnable on 19.05.2022.
Dasti, in addition, is permitted.
Stay   of   operation     of   the    impugned
judgment and order qua the petitioner herein.
We are informed that pursuant to the
impugned order, the High Court has issued
further orders today, i.e. 13.05.2022, which
has the effect of directing the concerned
authority in Patna (police) to produce the
petitioner before the Court.
In terms of this order, we stay the
operation of the direction given by the High
Court qua the petitioner till 2 the next date
of hearing.
All concerned to act on this order
forthwith until further hearing of this
matter.”
Needless    to   observe    that    the   application      under
Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is limited
to the cause of the concerned applicant, applying for
grant  of  anticipatory    bail    in  connection    with   offence
already  registered     against    him  and  apprehending   his
arrest  in  connection    with   such  a  case  for  extraneous
reasons or otherwise. In such proceedings, the inquiry
must be limited to the facts relevant and applicable to
the concerned applicant who has come before the Court.
No  attempt   should    be   made   to  inquire   into  matters
pertaining to some third party much less beyond the scope
of the complaint/FIR in question.
Even if the application is entertained by the High
Court, the High Court should exercise circumspection in
dealing with the application only in respect of matters
which are relevant to decide the application and not to
over-state   facts   or    other   matters  unrelated   to  the
applicant before the Court.
In the present case, we have noticed that the High
Court kept the application for grant of anticipatory bail
pending and issued directions, including to issue notice
to third parties to appear before the Court. That, in our
opinion, is impermissible and cannot be countenanced.
The High Court has clearly exceeded its jurisdiction
in that regard.
Accordingly, all the observations or notings made by
the High Court in respect of matters unrelated to the
case of the applicant before the High Court must stand
effaced from the record, in law.         The same cannot be
looked  at  or  relied   upon   in  some   other   proceedings
against the third parties.
Learned  counsel   for   the   State   was  at   pains  to
persuade us that since the High Court is taking a broader
view of the matter and wants to inquire into certain
aspects, it was open to the High Court to do so.
We do not agree with this submission at all.
Such a plea, if accepted, is fraught with the danger
of allowing Sessions Court/High Court to transcend beyond
the scope of application under Section 438 Cr.P.C. and
the matters relevant to be decided by the Court.
We hold that it is not open to the High Court in
exercise of powers under Section 438 Cr.P.C. to add third
parties to the proceedings, as if it is invoking powers
under Order 1 Rule 10 of Code of Civil Procedure much
less those parties who are neither necessary nor proper
parties to the application under consideration.
Accordingly, we set aside the impugned judgment and
order.   However, we clarify that we are not expressing
any  opinion   either  way  on   the   correctness   of  the
observations  made  by  the  High   Court  in  the  impugned
judgment and order with regard to matters unrelated to
the applicant before the High Court.      The State is free
to take recourse to such remedy as may be permissible in
law in regard to stated matters.
The appeals are disposed of in the above terms.
Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.)           No(s).    4877-
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 11-02-2022
in CRLM No. 8063/2021 27-04-2022 in CRLM No. 8063/2021 passed by
Date : 14-07-2022 These matters were called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Leave granted.
The appeals are disposed of in terms of the signed reportable
Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
[Signed order is placed on the file]