passed by the High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in Crl.A. No. 1145/2011. Through the
said judgment, the High Court has confirmed the conviction and sentence rendered
by the trial court through its judgment dated 19.04.2011. At the outset, it is necessary
to take note that when this Court directed notice to the respondent on 19.07.2009 an
opinion was formed that insofar as the conviction, the trial court as well as the High
Court were justified. The notice was limited to the question of considering the nature
of offence and the quantum of punishment. What was at that stage taken note was as
to whether the conviction awarded to the appellant under section 302 of IPC in the
facts and circumstances was justified or as to whether such conviction ought to have
been under Section 304 Part II of IPC.
In order to consider this aspect of the matter, a perusal of the appeal papers
would indicate that the appellant who is the husband of the deceased was charged of
assaulting his wife Kaushalya Yadav in the matrimonial house on 14th July, 2010 at
10.30 P.M.. The sole eyewitness account which was recorded was of the seven years
old daughter Khushi who was examined as PW-3. The said witness on noticing her
father assaulting the mother had shouted out and it is at that stage two other
witnesses, namely, Sanjay and Sunil who are neighbours of the family had come to
the spot. Insofar as the incident having occurred and the veracity of the evidence
tendered by the child witness, there is detailed consideration made by the trial court
as also the High Court and had believed the statement given by the child. Therefore
the only aspect which arises for consideration herein is as to whether even if the
incident is accepted in the manner in which it had occurred, was it at the spur of the
moment requires further consideration in the matter.
In that regard a perusal of the evidence of PW-3 would indicate that in her cross
examination she had stated with regard to the incident where her mother is said to
have said something to her father on which the father started beating her mother. She
also stated that she was not able to open the latch of the door to her house and she
thereafter went there. Further she has stated that immediately her father had dressed
up and moved her mother to the Hospital where the other family members are also
stated to have gone. These aspects of the matter would indicate that there was no
pre-mediation to cause the death and the incident had occurred at the spur of the
moment and the appellant having realised his mistake had thereafter taken immediate
steps to shift his wife to the hospital but unfortunately she breathed her last.
Therefore, if these aspects are kept in view as mitigating circumstances, we are
of the opinion that the conviction under Section 302 IPC would not be justified. Hence,
we modify the judgment to hold the appellant guilty of the offence under Section 304
Part II of IPC. Insofar as the sentence we notice that the appellant has already
undergone more 12 years of sentence and as such we hold that the period undergone
will be sufficient punishment. Hence, to that extent the sentence is also modified and
we direct that the appellant be set at liberty forthwith if he is not required in any other