1.  The petitioners have alleged that some persons –
names and other particulars of whom have been given
in the writ application and in the supplementary
affidavit affirmed on 9th June, 2022 filed today before
this court - have been given appointment though they
have not qualified in TET, 2014. For getting a service in
a primary school as a teacher a candidate must have
passed in Teacher Eligibility Test (TET in short). The
petitioners have further alleged that 23 lacs candidates
appeared in TET, 2014 and one panel was published
for   giving   appointment      of  more   or   less 42,000
candidates as primary teachers. The petitioners have
expressed serious suspicion about the legality and
correctness of publication of such panel.
2.    By filing the supplementary affidavit as aforesaid
it has been submitted that though the panel was
published in 2016 a further panel named - additional
panel   -   was   published   on  04.12.2017    and   the
document annexed in the supplementary affidavit is
only in respect of the said additional panel District
Hooghly wherein not only one candidate Supriyo Sarkar
who was not a qualified candidate in TET was named in
the second panel and got appointment but also other
candidates totaling to 68 candidates in the district of
Hooghly have been given appointment by publishing
the second panel or the additional panel.
3.   In reply to a question asked by this court, learned
advocate for the West Bengal Board of Primary
Education (‘the Board’, for short) has submitted that
though there is no provision in the relevant law for
publishing another panel but if situation arises and if it
is found necessary by the Board, it can publish a
second panel and such necessity was felt because of
demand of large number of candidates demonstrating
before the Board’s office and the Board decided to send
the question and answers of TET, 2014 to some expert
and the expert found that one question and its answer
in TET, 2014 was wrong. Therefore, the Board decided
to give one mark to the agitating candidates who filed
applications for reconsideration of their marks in TET
2014 with their testimonials including their training
qualifications. This submission of training qualification
is also a doubtful question keeping in mind the other
TET qualified candidates.
It is an admitted position that there was no
public announcement either in the website of the
Board or in any newspaper that such application with
testimonials can be made to the Board and the Board
would consider such testimonials.
4.     Therefore, I find that in the first place there was
no provision in the relevant law for publication of a
second panel and secondly the entire procedure for
accepting the testimonials of the persons who filed their
applications before the Board for reconsideration of
their TET, 2014 examination paper, is wholly illegal and
a surreptitious and clandestine exercise by the Board
as there was no public announcement for other
similarly situated candidates. There is no reply on the
part of the Board as to why other similarly situated
candidates were discriminated against in filing similar
5.      Learned advocate for the Board has submitted
that after receiving such applications from the agitating
candidates    only   269   candidates    out  of  23   lacs
candidates found eligible for getting one mark each in
TET, 2014 and such mark was given to them and thus
they qualified and were given appointment. As the
exercise of giving appointment in such a manner as
aforesaid which is wholly illegal for want of any public
notice wherefor other similarly situated candidates
could not file similar applications and the second panel
published in respect of every district (may be by similar
letter bearing memo no. 2884(40)/BPE/2017 dated
04.12.2017) is declared as wholly illegal and void ab
initio for want of any such provisions of publishing a
second panel these 269 candidates who have been
given appointment through the said illegal and void
second panel are to be immediately terminated by the
Board by issuing letters intimating that they shall cease
to be teachers of primary schools with immediate effect
and    the  concerned    District Inspector   of Schools
(Primary Education) shall not pay any salary to them
from tomorrow onwards. Those 269 candidates shall
not be allowed to enter into their respective school
premises from tomorrow and shall not interfere in any
manner whatsoever in running of the primary school
concerned. The salary they have received in the
meantime is to be refunded by them but for that
separate order will be passed at a subsequent stage.
6.     Learned advocate for the petitioners has raised a
point that because of such illegalities and other
irregularities of the Board they have no faith upon the
West Bengal Board of Primary Education and they have
prayed that the result of the TET, 2014 was sent to
National Informatics Center (‘NIC’, for short) by the
Board is to be kept in fully secured manner and it shall
not be interfered or tampered with or altered in any
manner whatsoever.
I hold that if such prayer is allowed none of the
parties will be adversely affected and accordingly such
prayer is allowed and NIC is directed to keep the
database    as  referred   above    untouched   and    fully
I direct the petitioner to add NIC as a party
respondent in this proceeding in course of the day and
to communicate this order to them.
7.      Though the police force of this city and of this
State    is  competent    enough     to investigate   such
corruption and though I am satisfied about their
capability    I  cannot     give   the  responsibility    of
investigation of this corruption, prima facie case of
which has been established, upon Kolkata Police or
State Police as because they are controlled by some
politically and otherwise influential persons and it is
impossible for them to investigate the corruption in this
matter in a fair and unbiased manner. This police force
is under a department of the State government and as
they do not have any free hand in the investigation of
the corruption but their hands are tied by politically
influenced persons of this State. I have to give the
responsibility of investigation and interrogation of the
related persons to such corrupt appointments to some
other investigating agency and I decide to give this
responsibility to Central Bureau of Investigation. Here
the President of the West Bengal Board of Primary
Education is an elected member of West Bengal
Legislative Assembly who has returned from his
constituency as a candidate of the political party which
is the ruling party of this State.
8.      In view of the illegality committed in respect of
the second panel (termed as Additional Panel, by the
Secretary of the Board), which is wholly illegal and
giving illegal appointment to 269 candidates by a queer
method unknown to law, I direct the Central Bureau of
Investigation (‘CBI’, for short) to start investigation by
registering a case immediately against the Board and
start interrogating the President of the West Bengal
Board of Primary Education, Dr. Manik Bhattacharya,
and the Secretary of the said Board Dr. Ratna
Chakraborty Bagchi, which shall start today itself. I
direct the petitioners to add Dr. Manik Bhattacharya,
the President of the West Bengal Board of Primary
Education and Dr. Ratna Chakraborty Bagchi, the
Secretary of the said Board as party respondents and
they are to go to the CBI office at Nizam Palace by 5:30
p.m. today to face interrogation.
9. It is made clear that if they do not co-operate with
CBI, CBI shall have every liberty to interrogate them
after taking them into custody.
10.  CBI shall contact NIC immediately to seize the
database of the TET, 2014 candidates published by the
West Bengal Board of Primary Education by tomorrow
(14.06.2022) and to submit a short report in this court
about the registration of the case, initiation of the
interrogation of the two persons added today in this
proceeding (named above) and taking into custody of
the database of the TET, 2014 candidates day after
tomorrow at 2 p.m.
11.   If CBI feels that in respect of this matter an
independent case is not required to be registered apart
from the other case involving the Board which has
already been registered, as has been told by the
petitioners, CBI need not register a new case.
12.   I grant liberty to the petitioners to communicate
this order immediately to the Joint Director of CBI
having his office at Kolkata by email, over telephone
and other modes of communication and I direct the
learned advocate for the Board to communicate the
President of the Board and the Secretary of the Board
to present themselves before CBI by 5:30 p.m. today.
The matter is adjourned till 15th June, 2022
when it will be taken up at 2 p.m.