Case :- HABEAS CORPUS WRIT PETITION No. - 716 of 2020
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.,Ajay Kumar Singh,Rajeev Kumar
1.     Case is taken up through video conferencing.
2.     This habeas corpus writ petition has been filed by seeking following
i. Issue a writ order or direction in the nature of mandamus directing
and commanding the respondent no.2 and 3 to appear personally
before this Hon'ble Court and to produce corpus child namely
Shradha Kannaujia (Minor) from the custody of the respondent no.4
to 6.
ii. Issue a writ order or direction in the nature of mandamus directing
the respondents to handover in the custody of minor child (corpus) to
her mother/petitioner no.2 and ensure the life of corpus (minor child).
iii. Issue such other further writ order or direction which this Hon'ble
Court may deem fit and proper in the nature and circumstances of the
present case.
iv. Award the costs of the petition to the petitioners.
3.     Heard learned counsel for the petitioners, learned counsel for the
private respondents and learned A.G.A. for the State.
4.     It has been argued by the learned counsel for the petitioners that
petitioner No.2 is mother of corpus/minor girl, aged four years. The marriage
of petitioner No.2 with respondent No.4 has taken place in the year 2014 and
they were blessed with a girl child on 18.11.2016. Learned counsel argued
that petitioner No.2 was harassed by her husband and other private
respondents and on 26.09.2020 they have driven her out from the
and her minor girl (corpus) was snatched by the private
respondents. It was submitted that the respondent No.4 is not treating the
petitioner No.1well and that she has been illegally detained by the
respondent No. 4 to 6. In this connection the petitioner No.2 has
approached police authorities but of no avail. No information is being
given to the petitioner No.2 regarding petitioner No.1. It was submitted
that the custody of petitioner No.1 be handed over to the petitioner No.2.
5.     Learned counsel for the private respondents has opposed.
6.     Perusal of record shows that in pursuance to earlier order, the
petitioner No.1/ corpus was produced before this Court by the respondent
No.4, however as she is a minor child of four years age, thus, it was found
difficult to ascertain her wishes. The petitioner No.2 is mother of
petitioner No.1 and respondent No.4 is her father. It appears that there has
been some matrimonial dispute between petitioner No.2 and respondent
No.4 and that a petition under Section 13B Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 for
divorce has already been filed.
7.     It is well settled that writ of habeas corpus is a prerogative writ and
an extraordinary remedy. The object and scope of a writ of habeas corpus
in the context of a claim relating to custody of a minor child fell for
consideration in case of Sayed Saleemuddin vs. Dr. Rukhsana and others
(2001)5 SCC 247 and it was held that in a habeas corpus petition seeking
transfer of custody of a child from one parent to the other, the principal
consideration for the court would be to ascertain whether the custody of
the child can be said to be unlawful or illegal and whether the welfare of
the child requires that the present custody should be changed. In said case
"11. ...it is clear that in an application seeking a writ of Habeas Corpus for
custody of minor children the principal consideration for the Court is to
ascertain whether the custody of the children can be said to be unlawful or
illegal and whether the welfare of the children requires that present custody
should be changed and the children should be left in care and custody of
somebody else. The principle is well settled that in a matter of custody of a
child the welfare of the child is of paramount consideration of the Court..."
Delhi) and another 2017 8 SCC 454, it was held that the principal duty of
the court in such matters is to ascertain whether the custody of the child is
unlawful and illegal and whether the welfare of the child requires that his
present custody should be changed and the child be handed over to the
care and custody of any other person. The relevant observations made in
"44. The present appeal emanates from a petition seeking a writ of habeas
corpus for the production and custody of a minor child. This Court in Kanu
Sanyal v. District Magistrate, Darjeeling, (1973) 2 SCC 674, has held that
habeas corpus was essentially a procedural writ dealing with machinery of
justice. The object underlying the writ was to secure the release of a person
who is illegally deprived of his liberty. The writ of habeas corpus is a
command addressed to the person who is alleged to have another in
unlawful custody, requiring him to produce the body of such person before
the court. On production of the person before the court, the circumstances
in which the custody of the person concerned has been detained can be
inquired into by the court and upon due inquiry into the alleged unlawful
restraint pass appropriate direction as may be deemed just and proper. The
High Court in such proceedings conducts an inquiry for immediate
determination of the right of the person's freedom and his release when the
detention is found to be unlawful.
45. In a petition for issuance of a writ of habeas corpus in relation to the
custody of a minor child, this Court in Sayed Saleemuddin v. Rukhsana,
(2001) 5 SCC 247, has held that the principal duty of the court is to
ascertain whether the custody of child is unlawful or illegal and whether the
welfare of the child requires that his present custody should be changed and
the child be handed over to the care and custody of any other person. While
doing so, the paramount consideration must be about the welfare of the
child. In Elizabeth Dinshaw v. Arvand M. Dinshaw, (1987) 1 SCC 42, it is
held that in such cases the matter must be decided not by reference to the
legal rights of the parties but on the sole and predominant criterion of what
would best serve the interests and welfare of the minor. The role of the
High Court in examining the cases of custody of a minor is on the
touchstone of principle of parens patriae jurisdiction, as the minor is within
the jurisdiction of the Court [see Paul Mohinder Gahun Vs. State (NCT of
Delhi), 2004 SCC OnLine Del 699, relied upon by the appellant]. It is not
necessary to multiply the authorities on this proposition.
46. The High Court while dealing with the petition for issuance of a writ of
habeas corpus concerning a minor child, in a given case, may direct return
of the child or decline to change the custody of the child keeping in mind
all the attending facts and circumstances including the settled legal position
referred to above. Once again, we may hasten to add that the decision of the
court, in each case, must depend on the totality of the facts and
circumstances of the case brought before it whilst considering the welfare
of the child which is of paramount consideration. The order of the foreign
court must yield to the welfare of the child. Further, the remedy of writ of
habeas corpus cannot be used for mere enforcement of the directions given
by the foreign court against a person within its jurisdiction and convert that
jurisdiction into that of an executing court. Indubitably, the writ petitioner
can take recourse to such other remedy as may be permissible in law for
enforcement of the order passed by the foreign court or to resort to any
other proceedings as may be permissible in law before the Indian Court for
the      custody      of      the      child,     if     so       advised.
47. In a habeas corpus petition as aforesaid, the High Court must examine
at the threshold whether the minor is in lawful or unlawful custody of
another person (private respondent named in the writ petition). For
considering that issue, in a case such as the present one, it is enough to note
that the private respondent was none other than the natural guardian of the
minor being her biological mother. Once that fact is ascertained, it can be
presumed that the custody of the minor with his/her mother is lawful. In
such a case, only in exceptionable situation, the custody of the minor (girl
child) may be ordered to be taken away from her mother for being given to
any other person including the husband (father of the child), in exercise of
writ jurisdiction. Instead, the other parent can be asked to resort to a
substantive prescribed remedy for getting custody of the child."
9.    The issue of maintainability of a habeas corpus petition under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India in matters of custody of minor
was also considered in case of Tejaswini Gaud and others vs. Shekhar
Jagdish Prasad Tewari and others (2019) 7 SCC 42, and it was held that
the petition would be maintainable where detention by parents or others is
found to be illegal and without any authority of law and the extraordinary
remedy of a prerogative writ of habeas corpus can be availed in
exceptional cases where ordinary remedy provided by the law is either
unavailable or ineffective. The observations made in the judgment in this
"14. Writ of habeas corpus is a prerogative process for securing the liberty
of the subject by affording an effective means of immediate release from
an illegal or improper detention. The writ also extends its influence to
restore the custody of a minor to his guardian when wrongfully deprived
of it. The detention of a minor by a person who is not entitled to his legal
custody is treated as equivalent to illegal detention for the purpose of
granting writ, directing custody of the minor child. For restoration of the
custody of a minor from a person who according to the personal law, is not
his legal or natural guardian, in appropriate cases, the writ court has
jurisdiction.
19. Habeas corpus proceedings is not to justify or examine the legality of
the custody. Habeas corpus proceedings is a medium through which the
custody of the child is addressed to the discretion of the court. Habeas
corpus is a prerogative writ which is an extraordinary remedy and the writ
is issued where in the circumstances of the particular case, ordinary
remedy provided by the law is either not available or is ineffective;
otherwise a writ will not be issued. In child custody matters, the power of
the High Court in granting the writ is qualified only in cases where the
detention of a minor by a person who is not entitled to his legal custody.
In view of the pronouncement on the issue in question by the Supreme
Court and the High Courts, in our view, in child custody matters, the writ
of habeas corpus is maintainable where it is proved that the detention of a
minor child by a parent or others was illegal and without any authority of
20. In child custody matters, the ordinary remedy lies only under the
Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act or the Guardians and Wards Act as
the case may be. In cases arising out of the proceedings under the
Guardians and Wards Act, the jurisdiction of the court is determined by
whether the minor ordinarily resides within the area on which the court
exercises such jurisdiction. There are significant differences between the
enquiry under the Guardians and Wards Act and the exercise of powers by
a writ court which is of summary in nature. What is important is the
welfare of the child. In the writ court, rights are determined only on the
basis of affidavits. Where the court is of the view that a detailed enquiry
is required, the court may decline to exercise the extraordinary
jurisdiction and direct the parties to approach the civil court. It is only in
exceptional cases, the rights of the parties to the custody of the minor will
be determined in exercise of extraordinary jurisdiction on a petition for
10.    What emerges from above stated authorities is that the
exercise of the extraordinary jurisdiction for issuance of a writ of
habeas corpus would, therefore, be considered to be dependent
on the jurisdictional fact, where the applicant establishes a prima
facie case that the detention is unlawful. It is only where the
aforementioned jurisdictional fact is established that the
applicant would become entitled to the writ. In an application
seeking a writ of habeas corpus for custody of minor child, as is
the case herein, the principal consideration for the court would be
to ascertain whether the custody of the child can be said to be
unlawful and illegal and whether his/her welfare requires that the
present custody should be changed and the child should be
handed over in the care and custody of someone else.
Proceedings in the of habeas corpus may not be used to examine
the question of the custody of a child. The prerogative writ of
habeas corpus, is in the nature of extraordinary remedy and the
writ is issued, where in the circumstances of a particular case, the
ordinary remedy provided under law is either not available or is
ineffective. The power of the High Court, in granting a writ, in
child custody matters, may be invoked only in cases where the
legal custody.
11.    In the instant case it is not disputed that the petitioner No.
1 is aged about four years and she is stated to be under the care
and custody of her father / respondent No.4, who living with his
parents (respondent No. 5 & 6). It is also admitted position that
the petitioner No. 2 and the respondent No. 4 are living
separately, as the petitioner No. 2 has alleged that she was driven
out from the matrimonial home. It is also clear from the
averments of the petition that a petition under section 13-B
Hindu Marriage Act has already been filed in the court. Thus, the
matter relating to custody of child during the pendency of the
proceedings under the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 HMA is
governed in terms of the provisions contained under Section 26
thereof. The aforesaid section applies to "any proceeding" under
the HMA and it gives power to the court to make provisions in
regard to: (i) custody, (ii) maintenance, and (iii) education of
minor children. For this purpose the court may make such
provisions in the decree as it may deem just and proper and it
may also pass interim orders during the pendency of the
proceedings and all such orders even after passing of the decree.
Section 26 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 provides for custody
of children and declares that in any proceeding under the said
Act, the Court could make, from time to time, such interim
orders as it might deem just and proper with respect to custody,
maintenance and education of minor children, consistently with
their wishes, wherever possible. As observed earlier, a petition
for a writ of habeas corpus concerning a minor child, the Court,
in a given case, may direct to change the custody of the child or
decline the same keeping in view the attending facts and
circumstances. For the said purpose the main consideration is
whether the custody of the minor with the private respondent,
who is named in the petition, is lawful or unlawful. In the present
case, the private respondents are none other than the biological
father and grand parents of the minor child. This being the
position, it can not be said that the custody of the child with
private respondents is unlawful. However, it is open to the
mother / petitioner No. 2 to take resort to the substantive
statutory remedy in respect of his claim regarding custody of the
child. As stated earlier, in matter of custody of a child, a writ of
habeas corpus would be entertainable, where it is established that
the detention of the minor child by the parent or others is illegal
and without authority of law. In a writ court, where rights are
determined on the basis of affidavits and that in a case where the
court is of a view that a detailed enquiry would be required, it
may decline to exercise the extraordinary jurisdiction and direct
the parties to approach the appropriate forum.
12.    Considering the facts of the matter as well as the aforesaid
position of law, it is apparent that the remedy in such matters would
lie under the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 or
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 GWA, as the case may be. In view
of aforesaid, this Court is not inclined to exercise its extraordinary
jurisdiction to entertain the present petition seeking a writ of habeas
13.    The petition lacks merit and it is hereby dismissed.