1.      Present matters have been placed before this Court in pursuance to the
communication dated 23.09.2022 received from the Officiating Principal
District & Sessions Judge (Hqs.), Delhi.               These are the appeals under
Section 9 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants) Act,
1971.      The present appeals were taken up for hearing by the learned
Principal District & Sessions Judge (Hqs.), Delhi. During the course of
hearing, vide order dated 22.12.2021, the learned Principal District &
Sessions Judge (Hqs.), Delhi passed the following order:-
Present:           Sh. R.Y. Kalia, counsel for appellant
Sh. Ashutosh Gupta, counsel for
After last adjournment, appellant filed an application
dated 09.12.2021 under Section 151 CPC. Copy supplied.
At this stage, due to certain uncharitable remarks, I
consider it appropriate that this appeal be dealt with by
some other court. Under Section 9 of the Public Premises
(Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, this appeal can
be heard either by this court or by such other Judicial
Officer in Central district of not less than 10 years
standing as this court may designate.
Therefore, this appeal is transferred to the court of Sh.
Mukesh Kumar Gupta, learned ADJ (Central), Tis Hazari
Courts, Delhi for proceeding further in accordance with
Parties to appear before the learned transferee court
today itself i.e. 22.12.2021 at.03:00 pm.
TR.P.(C.) 80/2022                                                         Page 2 of 6
File be sent immediately to the learned transferee
court.
2.      In view of this order, the matter was transferred to the learned ADJ-11
Gupta, the learned Judge presiding over the Court of ADJ, Central Delhi
was transferred and Sh. Praveen Singh joined as learned ADJ-11 (Central),
3.      On 21.09.2022, the learned counsel for the petitioner raised an
objection that in view of Section 9 of the PP Act, the present appeal can be
heard either by the District Judge or by a judicial officer in that district
having not less than 10 years service as Additional District Judge.
4.      Order dated 21.09.2022 reads as under:-
Present: Sh. R.Y Kalia, Id. Counsel for appellant.
Sh. Abhinav Shokeen, Ld. Counsel for
respondent/MCD.
It is submitted by Id. Counsel for appellant that in view
of section 9 of the PP Act, the present appeal can be heard
either by the District Judge or by a judicial officer in that
district having not less than 10 years service as Addl.
Considering this submission, this court has no powers
to hear the present appeal. In these circumstances, the file
be placed before Ld. Principal District & Sessions Judge,
TR.P.(C.) 80/2022                                                         Page 3 of 6
Central District with a request to assign this case to some
other court of competent jurisdiction. Parties are directed
to appear before Ld. Principal District & Sessions Judge,
Central District on 22.09.2022. Ahlmad is directed to send
the file complete in all respects to the court of Ld. District
5.      Section 9 of the Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised
Occupants) Act, 1971 reads as under:-
(1) An appeal shall lie from every order of the estate
officer made in respect of any public premises
under [section 5 or section 5B] [or section 5C]] or
section 7 to an appellate officer who shall be the district
judge of the district in which the public premises are
situate or such other judicial officer in that district of not
less than ten years’ standing as the district judge may
designate in this behalf.
(2) An appeal under sub-section (1) shall be preferred,—
(a) in the case of an appeal from an order under
section 5. [within twelve days] from the date of
publication of the order under sub-section (1) of that
section; 30 [***]
(b) in the case of an appeal from an order 5[under
section 5B or section 7, within twelve days] from the
date on which the order is communicated to the
appellant; 31 [and]
[(c) in the case of an appeal from an order under
section 5C, within twelve days from the date of such
order:] Provided that the appellate officer may
entertain the appeal after the expiry of the 32 [said
period], if he is satisfied that the appellant was
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in
(3) Where an appeal is preferred from an order of the
estate officer, the appellate officer may stay the
enforcement of that order for such period and on such
conditions as he deems fit: [Provided that where the
construction or erection of any building or other structure
or fixture or execution of any other work was not
completed on the day on which an order was made under
section 5B for the demolition or removal of such building
or other structure or fixture, the appellate officer shall not
make any order for the stay of enforcement of such order,
unless such security, as may be sufficient in the opinion of
the appellate officer, has been given by the appellant for
not proceeding with such construction, erection or work
pending the disposal of the appeal;]
(4) Every appeal under this section shall be disposed of by
the appellate officer as expeditiously as possible.
(5) The costs of any appeal under this section shall be in
the discretion of the appellate officer.
(6) For the purposes of this section, a presidency-town
shall be deemed to be a district and the chief judge or the
principal judge of the city civil court therein shall be
deemed to be the district judge of the district.
6.      The bare perusal of Section 9 of the Public Premises (Eviction of
TR.P.(C.) 80/2022                                                         Page 5 of 6
Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971 provides that the Appellate Officer shall
be the District Judge of the district in which the public premises is situated
or such other judicial officer in that district of not less than 10 years
standing. Reading of this provision nowhere provides that a judicial officer
to be competent to hear the appeal must have a standing of 10 years or more
than 10 years in service as an Additional District Judge. Similarly, there is
nothing as such in the provision that states that the judicial officer should
have a service of 10 years or more than 10 years in the Higher Judicial
Service. Had the legislature intended so, it could have mentioned it in the
provision itself.
7.      Thus, the appeals are relegated back to the Court of Sh. Praveen Singh
joined as learned ADJ-11 (Central), Tis Hazari Courts, Delhi with a
direction to entertain and dispose of the same as expeditiously as possible in
accordance with law.
8.      Accordingly, the present petitions stand disposed of.