1. Shri Shyam Divan, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner,
relies upon the documents produced by way of additional documents which is part of
Volume-III. Unfortunately, the papers of Volume-III are not circulated and therefore,
this Court has had no opportunity to go through the documents containing Volume-III.
It is reported by the Advocate-on-Record that it has been e-filed two days back and
due to paucity of time it might not have been circulated.
2. We have come across many matters in which the Advocates-on-Record are filing
the applications for additional documents only at the time of hearing of the Special
Leave Petition(s) though the Special Leave Petitions are filed much earlier.
3. Normally, all documents if any, which, according to the counsel for the petitioner,
are relevant and/or material and which are part of the proceedings before the Court,
shall have to be filed along with the Special Leave Petition itself particularly when
reliance is placed on the said documents. Even additional documents which were not
filed before the High Court on which the counsel for the petitioner proposes to rely, in
that case also, a proper application is to be filed well in advance seeking permission
to file additional documents which can be considered after considering Order 41 Rule
27 of the CPC when applicable. By not filing the application for additional documents
at the time of filing the Special Leave Petition but filing the same at the last moment
and on the previous day of the posting of the Special Leave Petition and many a time
late in the evening causes great inconvenience to the Court. It is also found that, many
a time, application for additional documents reach late in the night of the previous day
of the hearing of the Special Leave Petition although those documents were part of
the record of the impugned judgment and which should have been filed along with the
4. Therefore, we impress upon all the learned Advocates-on-Record to take note of
this order and ensure that whenever documents/ additional documents are to be relied
upon are to be produced and as far as possible, they must be filed along with the
Special Leave Petition. If for any reason the same have not been filed along with the
Special Leave Petition then in that case the same shall be filed well in advance before
the Special Leave Petitions are heard by the Courts. This will avoid inconvenience to
the Court and Hon’ble Judges can have sufficient time to go through the same.
5. The Registry is directed to send a copy of this order to the President, Supreme
Court Advocates-on-Record Association to convey this order to the respective
Advocates-on-Record. A copy of the order shall also be placed before learned
Registrar (Judicial) for taking necessary steps in the matter.
6. On merits of the impugned judgment and order passed by the High Court, Shri
Shyam Divan, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner, has
vehemently submitted that, in the grounds of appeal before the High Court it was
specifically pointed out in para 45 that it had already executed deeds for Agreement
for Sale for all the remaining 91 nos. of residential flats and 2 nos. of commercial
spaces and handed over possession to all the flat/space owners. It was further stated
that it had already executed registered sale deeds in respect of 57 nos. of residential
flat owners whose names have already been mutated in the record of rights in respect
of their proportionate undivided share of land to the plot of land of the respondents
even before application under Section 9 of the Arbitration Act was filed. It is further
stated that the sale permissions to execute the registered sale deed from the
possession of the Deputy Commissioner, Kamrup (Metro) have already been obtained
in respect of other flat owners who have already paid almost 80% of the sale
consideration but in view of the grant of interim protection by the learned District
Judge, the registered sale deeds could not be executed in view of other flat owners.
Therefore, it is submitted that, as such, the injunction would operate against those
third parties.
7. Having heard Shri Shyam Divan, learned Senior Advocate for the petitioner and
noting the above submissions, we permit the petitioner to approach the High Court to
file a review application and point out and make submissions on the aforesaid and
request the High Court to vacate the injunction and/or modify the injunction. As and
when such review application is filed, the High Court is requested to consider the
same in accordance with law and on its own merits and true perspective. Such a
review application to be filed within a period of two weeks from today and the High
Court to consider the review application thereafter within a period of four weeks from
the date of filing of the review application.
8. With this, the present Special Leave Petitions stand disposed of. Pending
application also stands disposed of.