1. By means of this application under Section 439 Cr.P.C.,
applicant-Anand    Giri alias   Ashok   Kumar   Chotiya  seeks
enlargement on bail in FIR No. RC-8(S)/2021/SC-III/ND, under
Section 306 IPC, PS SC-III/ND, New Delhi lodged by C.B.I,
Special Crime-III, New Delhi (earlier registered as Case Crime
No. 322 of 2021, under Section 306 IPC at Police Station
2. The facts that formed the bedrock of the instant bail
application moved by accused-applicant Anand Giri alias Ashok
Kumar Chotiya are that Mahant Narendra Giri (deceased) was
Adyaksh, of “Akhil Bhartiya Akhada Parishad, Mahant/Head of
Shri Math “Baghambari Gaddi”, Allahpur, Prayagraj and “Shri
3. On 20.09.2021 at 05:30 PM, Station House Officer, police
station-George Town, Prayagraj received an information on his
CUG Mobile No. 9454402825 from Mobile No. 7905160834 of
Sarvesh Kumar Dwivedi that Mahant Narendra Giri Maharaj has
committed suicide in his room by hanging himself inside the
Math. Acting on the aforesaid information, he immediately
rushed to the place of incident. Meanwhile other senior
officers were also informed, who also reached there. The said
information was recorded in General Diary No. 51 dated
20.09.2021 of police station-George Town, Prayagraj. On
arriving at the place of incident, he found that dead body of
Mahant Narendra Giri Maharaj was lying on floor of the room.
Information was also given to field Unit / Crime Branch team.
Prayagraj         also     reached     there        for   conducting        inquest
proceeding on cadaver, which commenced at 22:30 hours on
20.09.2021 and completed at 23:45 hours on the same day.
4. A hand written suicide note containing seven pages of
Mahant Narendra Giri, which was kept in two open envelops,
two mobile phones of the deceased, knife, bloodstained rope,
four packets Sulphas (sulphate) and three DVR of CCTV
camera installed at the             Math etc. were recovered from the
spot in the presence of witnesses, officers and forensic team
by the Station House Officer, police station-George Town,
Prayagraj. After perusing the suicide note, recovery memos
(fard) of recovered items were prepared. Finger prints and
chance prints of deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri were also
taken. Recovered items were sealed at the spot. The site plan
was prepared by the police and photography was also done.
5. Mahant Narendra Giri in his suicide note, has categorically
held accused Anand Giri, Adhya Prasad Tiwari and Sandeep
Tiwari responsible for taking extreme step to end his life. For
better appreciation of the facts, the contents of suicide note
are being reproduced herein below:-
6. A video clip titled as “20210920-132921” also recovered
from the mobile phone of Mahant Narendra Giri, which was
made by deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri himself just before
his death on 20.09.2021 whereby he held Anand Giri, Adya
Prasad Tiwari and Sandeep Tiwari responsible for committing
suicide by him. The transcription of the video clip is
reproduced herein under:-
7.           First Information Report of this case was registered on
21.09.2021 at 00:54 hour under Section 306 I.P.C. at Case
Crime No. 322/2021, Police Station George-town, district
Prayagraj against Anand Giri on the basis of oral complaint /
information of informants-Amar Giri and Pawan Maharaj. It has
been mentioned in the F.I.R. that on 20.09.2021 as usual at
about 12.30 PM, deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri after taking
lunch went for rest in his room at “Baghambari Gaddi”. He
used to take tea at 3.00 PM, but on that date Mahant
Narendra Giri had told that he will not take tea and he informs
them in case he wishes to have tea. When no information was
received from Mahant Narendra Giri by 5.00 PM, complainant
telephoned him, but his mobile was switched off. The FIR
further alleges that on knocking the door, when no response
was noticed, the door was forcefully opened by Sumit Tiwari,
Sarvesh Kumar Dwivedi, Dhananjay and other disciples and
Mahant Narendra Giri was found hanging from the ceiling fan
of the room. To explore the possibility of his life, he was
brought down by the disciples by cutting the rope, but by that
time Mahant Narendra Giri has left for his heavenly abode. It
was also mentioned in the FIR that Mahant Narendra Giri was
disturbed for the last few months due to Anand Giri. Some
times he himself used to say that Anand Giri keeps troubling
and harassing him a lot.
8. On the basis of suicide note and video of Mahant Narendra
Giri (deceased), which have been quoted above, involvement
of Adya Prasad Tiwari and his son Sandeep Tiwari also came
into light along with Anand Giri, therefore, they have also been
made accused in this case. After the said incident, Crime
Branch of district Prayagraj received an information that Anand
Giri surrendered at police station-Galheri, district Saharanpur,
thereafter he was brought to Prayagraj and his statement was
recorded by the investigating officer of the police. The
applicant-Anand Giri and Adya Prasad Tiwari were arrested on
21.09.2021 at 8.15 PM and Sandeep Tiwari was arrested on
22.09.2021 at 19.30 hours from Roadways Bus Stand, Civil
9. The statements under section 161 Cr.P.C of the informants
Amar Giri and Pawan Maharaj were recorded by the
investigating officer of the police on 21.09.2021. Amar Giri
supported the contents of F.I.R. and Pawan Maharaj has also
supported the F.I.R stating inter alia that Mahant Narendra Giri
was disturbed for the last few months due to the behaviour of
Anand Giri. He used to say that he has been disturbed by
Anand Giri who is making effort to defame him. Suicide note is
in the hand writing of Mahant Narendra Giri, wherein he has
mentioned that accused Anand Giri, Adya Prasad Tiwari and
Sandeep Tiwari under a conspiracy, harassed and trying to
defame him by making his obscene morphed video with a girl
through computer. The statement of co-accused Sandeep
Tiwari was also recorded on 22.09.2021.
10. Post–Mortem of the dead body of the deceased (Mahant
Narendra Giri) was conducted by the Medical Board of five
doctors on 22.09.2021 from 07:45 AM to 08:50 AM.
Videography of the Post-Mortem was also done by Prayagraj
police. The cause of death, as per Post-Mortem report is due
to “asphyxia as a result of ante-mortem hanging”.
11. Thereafter vide notification dated 23.09.2021 of Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievances and Pension (Department of
personnel and Training), Government of India, investigation of
this case was transferred to Central Bureau of Investigation,
hereinafter referred to as “CBI”. Thereafter, CBI re-registered
the case at RC8(S)/2021/CBI/SC-III/New Delhi. Investigation
of the case has been done by Mr. K.S. Negi, Additional
Superintendent of Police CB/SC-III/ New Delhi.
12. Apart from aforesaid suicide note of deceased-Mahant
Narendra Giri, details of other relevant audios and videos were
recovered during investigation, which have been brought on
record of this case and referred during the course of the
argument by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of C.B.I.
(i)   Video clip dated 19.09.2021 recovered from mobile phone Annexure
of Mahant Narendra Giri     of deceased Mahant Narendra no.09    to
titled as 20210919_192345   Giri                        the   paper
(ii)   Video clip dated 19.09.2021    recovered from mobile phone  Annexure
of Mahant Narendra Giri        of deceased Mahant Narendra  no.21    to
titled as 20210919_201452      Giri                         the   paper
(iii)  Video clip dated 20.09.2021    recovered from mobile phone  Annexure
of Mahant Narendra Giri        of deceased Mahant Narendra  no.21    to
titled as 20210920_132907      Giri                         the   paper
(iv)   Video clip dated 20.09.2021    Recovered    from    Samsung Annexure
titled as 20210920_132921      mobile phone of deceased     no.   9  to
(made by the deceased          Mahant Narendra Giri         the   paper
Mahant Narendra Giri                                        book
(v)    Audio clip (conversation       Recovered from mobile phone  Annexure
between Purrushotam            of Purrushotam Mishra        no. 17 to
Mishra and Ashish Mishra @                                  the   paper
(vi)   Audio clip (conversation       Recovered from mobile phone  Annexure
between Mahant Narendra        of accused Anand Giri        no. 19 to
Giri and Anand Giri) titled as                              the   paper
(vii)  Audio clip (conversation       Recovered from mobile phone  Annexure
between Mahant Narendra        of accused Anand Giri        no. 19 to
Giri and Anand Giri) titled as                              the   paper
(viii) Audio clip (conversation       Recovered from mobile phone  Annexure
between Mahant Narendra        of accused Anand Giri        no. 19 to
Giri, Anand Giri and                                        the   paper
(ix)   Audio clip (conversation      Recovered from mobile phone  Annexure
between Anand Giri with       of accused Anand Giri        no. 19 to
two others A& B) titled as                                 the  paper
(x)    Audio clip (conversation      Recovered     from    mobile Annexure
between Anand Giri, Shri      phones of accused Anand Giri no. 20 to
Indu Prakash Mishra and                                    the  paper
(xi)   Audio clip (conversation      Recovered     from    mobile Annexure
between Anand Giri, Shri      phones of accused Anand Giri no. 20 to
Indu Prakash Mishra and                                    the  paper
(xii)  Audio clip (conversation      Recovered     from    mobile Annexure
between Anand Giri, Shri      phones of accused Anand Giri no. 20 to
Indu Prakash Mishra and                                    the  paper
(xiii) Audio clip (conversation      Recovered     from    mobile Annexure
between Anand Giri, Shri      phones of accused Anand Giri no. 20 to
Indu Prakash and Shri Sushil                               the  paper
(xiv)  Video clip (conversation      Recovered     from    mobile Annexure
between Anand Giri and Shri   phones of accused Anand Giri no. 20 to
Om Prakash Pandey) titled                                  the  paper
(xv)   Audio clip (conversation      Recovered     from    mobile Annexure
between anand Giri and Shri   phones of accused Anand Giri no. 20 to
Sushil Kumar Mishra) titled                                the  paper
13. During investigation, statements of about 120 persons
were recorded by the investigating officer, out of which
relevant statements of Manish Shukla, Sarvesh Kumar Dwivedi,
Shailesh Modi and Hasim Ali have been brought on record
along with the bail application.
14. Bail application of the applicant-Anand Giri was rejected on
11.11.2021 by learned Special Judge (EC Act), Allahabad.
15. Investigating officer after recording the statement of the
witnesses and collecting other material evidences submitted
charge sheet dated 20.11.2021 against       accused Anand Giri
(applicant), Adhya Prasad Tiwari and Sandeep Tiwari for the
offence under sections 120 B and 306 IPC with the observation
in para 16.40 of the charge sheet that further investigation in
respect of other aspects of the case is in progress. Further
investigation report, if necessary, along with the opinion of
experts shall be filed in due course. Hence investigation in this
regard is kept open u/s 173(8) Cr.P.C.
16. Heard Mr. Gopal Swaroop Chaturvedi, learned Senior
Counsel assisted by Mr. Vineet Vikram and Mr. Imran Ullah,
learned counsel for the applicant, Mr. Shiv Kumar Pal, learned
Government Advocate for the State of U.P., Mr. Anurag Kumar
Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the CBI and Mr.
Niraj Tiwari, learned counsel for the informants/complainants
at length.
Submissions on behalf of accused-applicant
17. Mr. G.S. Chaturvedi learned Senior Counsel appearing on
behalf of the applicant made the following submissions:
17.1. Applicant on account of dispute with deceased-Mahant
Narendra Giri had left Prayagraj in March, 2021 and shifted to
Haridwar and thereafter, he was neither concerned with the
deceased nor with the Math “Baghambari Gaddi”, at Prayagraj,
rather was concentrating at Haridwar with his disciples.
17.2. The last interaction between the applicant and the
deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri was on 26 May 2021 in
Lucknow, when compromise took place between them and
after compromise all the issues were buried, as such there is
no proximity between the interaction of the applicant with the
deceased and the suicide committed by the deceased on 20
17.3. After 26 May, 2021, there was no conversation between
Anand Giri and the deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri. Even on
the day of “Guru Purnima” on 24.07.2021 also Anand Giri did
not come to Prayagraj to meet Mahant Narendra Giri.
17.4. The Investigating Officer in the most superficial manner
filed charge-sheet against the applicant only on the basis of
suicide note and video made by the deceased before his death,
in which no source of information has been disclosed by the
deceased that who gave information to him that “tomorrow
applicant-Anand Giri, in order to defame him, will viral his
morphed obscene video with a girl in an objectionable
17.5. Mr.Chaturvedi referring the statement of Mahant Santosh
Dass @ Satua Baba emphasized a lot that deceased-Mahant
Narendra Giri during his conversation with Mahant Santosh
Dass @ Satua Baba also did not disclose the source of
aforesaid information received to him against the applicant
Anand Giri, therefore, there is no direct evidence against the
applicant regarding abetment to commit suicide by the
deceased. It is also submitted that in the suicide note and
video of Mahant Narendra Giri, imaginary allegations have
been levelled against the applicant-Anand Giri.
17.6. It is next submitted that at no point of time the applicant
had ever asked Ravindra Puri or any other person to play or
show any disputed audio or video in front of the deceased.
The applicant had forwarded the audio clip of conversation
between Purrushotam Mishra and Ashish Mishra @ Lavkush
Mishra titled as “AUD-2021-0522-WA0012” to Ravindra Puri
only to demonstrate that the disciples who were living in
“Baghambari Math” with deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri were
talking in such an indecent language behind him and the
persons who were closely associated with Math are not
17.7. The applicant who is presently aged about 41 years is a
Religious and Spiritual Guru and a Saint by profession. Earlier,
he was a member of “Bade/Lete Hanuman Mandir” in
Prayagraj and was also a member of Math “Baghambari
Gaddi”. He has also been actively espousing a series of public
causes including 'Ganga Seva Campaign’ and has also formed
"Ganga Sena" for rejuvenation of river Ganga which has no
concern with Math “Baghambari Gaddi”.
17.8. In May, 2019, when the applicant went to Sydney,
Australia for a religious program, he was falsely implicated
there under conspiracy in two molestation cases and was
arrested on 07.05.2019 in order to malign his image and
reputation. Referring the letter dated 11.09.2019 of Solicitor of
legal firm-“Christopher Levingston & Associates Pty Ltd,
Sydney” (filed as Annexure no. 1 to the second supplementary
affidavit ), it is submitted that charges of molestation against
applicant had been dropped and applicant was acquitted by
the local court in Parramatta, Australia. Here it is relevant to
mention that order of alleged acquittal of the applicant has not
been filed by the applicant.
17.9. The prosecution has come-up with a case that applicant
was blackmailing the deceased due to which he has committed
suicide, however, the CBI has failed to bring on record any
audio, video or documentary or electronic evidence which can
substantiate the prosecution case.
17.10. There is no direct evidence against the applicant that he
got a fake / morphed obscene videos of the deceased with a
women prepared through computer and was going to viral the
17.11. The deceased has committed suicide due to some other
reason, but applicant has been falsely implicated in this case
only because of internal rivalry and politics going on in the
17.12. Referring the statement dated 21.10.2021 of one
Hashim Ali, it is pointed out that Hashim Ali in his statement
has stated that on 12.09.2021 Mahant Narendra Giri called him
and asked to format the CCTV camera. Accordingly he
formatted the CCTV camera on the direction of deceased-
Mahant Narendra Giri. On the strength of said statement, it is
argued that deceased deliberately got the CCTV camera
formatted, so that after his death anyone else could not know
his activities/misdeed.
17.13. Lastly, it submitted that no offence of instigation and
abetment is made out against the applicant-Anand Giri, who is
languishing in jail since 21.09.2021, therefore he is liable to be
released on bail.
18. Here it is relevant to mention that though several other
grounds have been taken in the bail application but except the
aforesaid submissions, no other point has been pressed by Mr.
Chaturvedi, learned counsel for the applicant.
19. In support of his submissions, Mr. Chaturvedi, learned
Senior Counsel for the applicant placed reliance upon the
following judgments:-
i. Arnab Manoranjan Goswami vs. State of Maharashtra and
ii. M.Ravindran vs. Intelligence Officer, Directorate of Revenue
iii. Geo Varghese vs. The State of Rajasthan & Anr. 2021 SCC
iv. Gurcharan Singh vs. The State of Punjab 2020 SCC OnLine
v. The State of West Bengal vs. Indrajit Kundu & Ors. 2019
Submissions on behalf of C.B.I.
20. Mr. Anurag Kumar Singh, learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the C.B.I, by refuting the aforesaid submissions of
Mr. Chaturvedi, learned counsel for the applicant, argued that
the facts and circumstances of the case as revealed from the
investigation including the suicide note and dying declaration
of Mahant Narendra Giri as reflected from the contents of his
video     titled  as   “20210920_132921”     dated    20.09.2021
irresistibly established that accused persons namely Anand Giri
(applicant), Adhya Prasad Tiwari and Sandeep Tiwari hatched
a criminal conspiracy to create circumstances with a motive to
compel/force the deceased-Mahant Narander Giri to commit
suicide so that they may be able to achieve their ill object. Mr.
Anurag Kumar Singh stretching his argument referred several
facts and materials collected by the investigating officer as
mentioned in the charge-sheet and other documents on
record, which are as follows:-
20.1. The applicant is named accused in the FIR lodged by
Amar Giri and Pawan Maharaj, who have stated in the FIR that
the deceased was disturbed due to harassment caused by the
applicant, and he (deceased) had himself said this number of
times. The first informant Amar Giri has reiterated in his
statement recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C that deceased-
Mahant Narendra Giri used to say that the applicant-Anand Giri
was persistently harassing him.
20.2. The suicide note of deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri was
recovered from the spot of crime by the police which
mentioned in details the harassment, false allegation and
character assassination by the applicant and his associates due
to which deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri was under acute
mental agony and committed suicide. Hand writing of
deceased on the suicide note has been established by
witnesses as well as by Central Forensic Science Laboratory
20.3. In the suicide note of the deceased-Mahant Narendra
Giri, it is mentioned that on the date of incident, he received
information from Haridwar that his morphed photographs with
a woman in compromising position is going to be circulated by
the applicant-Anand Giri. Realizing that his reputation would be
tarnished by the time the falsity of the allegations and such
photographs would be established, he committed suicide.
20.4. After the incident a self-made video clip of the deceased
was also recovered from his mobile phone in which also he has
clearly mentioned that his image has been tarnished due to
false allegations made previously by the applicant and he has
also received information recently that the applicant is going to
circulate his morphed photographs with a woman in order to
malign his image. Mahant Narendra Giri has also stated in the
video clip that the truth would come to            surface after
investigation, but during this period his image would be
tarnished due to which he thought of taking this extreme step
to commit suicide to avoid loss of his reputation in the society
and held Anand Giri (applicant), Adya Prasad Tiwari and
Sandeep Tiwari responsible for this extreme step. In the
above-mentioned video, Mahant Narendra Giri and his voice
was also got identified by various witnesses who had met /
talked to the deceased.
20.5.    During     investigation   a    conversation      between
Purushottam Mishra and Lav Kush has been recovered by the
investigation officer. In the said conversation, allegations have
been made that the deceased had illicit relations with a
woman. This conversation was shared by Purshottum Mishra
with co-accused Sandeep Tiwari, who forwarded it to the
applicant- Anand Giri and thereafter Anand Giri forwarded it to
Mahant Ravindra Puri, the Secretary of Niranjani Akhada
knowing fully well that he would bring it to the notice of
deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri. This act of the applicant-
Anand Giri established that he compelled Mahant Narendra Giri
to commit suicide using the conversation as a tool that could
tarnish his image. Mahant Ravindra Puri in his statement
recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C has admitted that on
23.05.2021, the applicant forwarded an audio clip of the
conversation between Purshottum Mishra and Ashish Mishra @
Lav Kush to him, which he had forwarded to Sumit Tiwari, the
Sewadar/disciple of deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri.
20.6.   The    said   conversation    had   been    prepared    by
Purushottam Mishra, who is a close associate of Sandeep
Tiwari, who was appointed as the District president of “Ganga
Sena”    Prayagraj     by   the   applicant-Anand    Giri,   which
demonstrates that he is a very close confidant of applicant-
20.7. Purushottam Mishra in his statement under Section 161
CrPC has stated that he had prepared the recording of the
conversation with Lav Kush Mishra on the instructions of
Sandeep Tiwari. Referring the statement of Ashish Mishra @
Lav Kush Mishra, it is pointed out that he in his statement
clearly stated that the allegations made against deceased-
Mahant Narendra Giri in his conversation with Purushottam
Mishra are totally false.
20.8. The false allegations were circulated by the applicant and
his associates which establish the fact that the applicant
intended to pressurize Mahant Narendra Giri so that he may
succumb to the pressure.
20.9. During investigation, several comments, chats, texts and
malicious allegations against deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri
which were put on social media by the associates/supporters
of Anand Giri on his directions were also collected/recovered
by the investigating officer, which are clearly suggestive of ill
motive of Anand Giri.
20.10. During triangular conversations between the applicant,
Mahant Narendra Giri and Mahant Ravindra Puri of Niranjani
Akhada, threat was also extended by the applicant to
deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri saying that he was in
possession of audio and video clips which, in case, are seen by
deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri, he would be shocked. The
transcript of this conversation was recovered from the mobile
phone of the applicant-Anand Giri. During said conversation,
deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri realized that by levelling false
allegations against him on social media, the applicant was
making an attempt to grab the seat of Head of ‘Bagambhari
20.11. There is sufficient crystal clear evidence against Anand
Giri   to establish that he has committed the offence in
question. It is also evident on record that earlier also Mahant
Narendra Giri made an attempt to commit suicide.
20.12. During May, 2019, Anand Giri visited Australia and he
was arrested on 5th May 2019 in a molestation case, for which
he remained in police custody. Mahant Narendra Giri sent huge
amount and also used his political connections, as a result
thereof, Anand Giri was released from custody and returned to
India safely.
20.13. It is further submitted that during pendency of this bail
application, the informants filed affidavit dated 03.07.2022
mentioning inter alia that they do not want to make any
comment in the matter and want to take F.I.R. back, which
clearly indicates that they have been won over from the side of
accused persons. It is also pointed out that in similar manner
molestation cases against the applicant-Anand Giri were
dropped in Australia on account of withdrawal of complaint by
the complainants.
20.14. Lastly, on the strength of aforesaid facts, it is prayed
that considering the gravity of the offence where a Head of a
Religious Monastic Order has been compelled to commit
suicide by the applicant-Anand Giri in order to satisfy his lust
for power, the applicant is not entitled to be released on bail.
The charge sheet has been submitted in this case and
19.09.2022 is the date fixed before the trial court for framing
the charges. The bail application of the applicant is liable to be
20.15. Anand Giri has put the pious relationship of “ guru” and
“chela” on shame because in this case, unfortunately, a guru
had to commit suicide because of his disciple, which is a very
rare case.
21. Learned counsel for the CBI placed reliance upon the
following judgments:
i- Kalyan Chandra Sarkar vs. Rajesh Ranjan Alias Pappu
Yadav and another (2004) 7 SCC 528
ii-   Chenna     Boyanna    Krishna     Yadav vs.       State   of
Maharashtra and Another (2007) 1 SCC 242
iii- Praveen Pradhan vs. State of Uttranchal and Another
iv- State of Kerala and Others vs. S.Unnikrishnana Nair
v- Ude Singh and Others vs. State of Harayana (2019) 17
Much emphasis has been given by the learned counsel
for the CBI in paragraph 18 of the case of State of Kerala
and Others vs. S. Unnikrishnana Nair and Others
(Supra), , which is reproduced herein below:-
“18…………………..we are compelled to recapitulate the saying
that suicide reflects a “species of fear”. It is a sense of defeat
that corrodes the inner sould and destroys the will power and
forces one to abandon one’s own responsibility. To think of
self-annililation because of something which is disagrreable or
intolerable or unbearable, especially in a situation where one is
required to perform public duty, has to be regarded as a non-
valiant attitude that is scared of the immediate calamity or
self-perceived consequence…………………..”
22. Mr. Niraj Tiwari, learned counsel, who has been
subsequently engaged by the informants submits that now
previous counsels who were earlier appearing in this matter on
behalf of informants have no instruction. He next submits that
now both the informants do not want to oppose the prayer for
bail of the applicant- Anand Giri. It is pointed out that
informant-Amar Giri has filed affidavit dated 03.07.2022 in this
case on his behalf as well as on behalf of another informant-
Pawan Maharaj mentioning in paragraph no. 7 that they had
not lodged F.I.R against any particular person. Only Bade
Maharaj Ji’s death was reported. They do not want any action
on the First Information Report and want to take it back. They
are also ready to give such affidavit before the Trial Court.
They also do not want to give reply or make any comment on
contents of Paragraph no.1 to 112 of the bail application of
23. Here it would be apposite to quote the contents of
paragraph 7 of the affidavit dated 03.7.2022 filed by the
informants, which are reproduced herein under:
“7- ;g fd ge 'kiFkdrkZx.k@izFke lwpukdrkZ ¼vejfxjh
,oa iou egkjkt½ us fdlh O;fDr fo’ks"k ds fo:) ;k uke
fo’ks"k ls izFke lwpuk fjiksVZ ¼,Q-vkbZ-vkj-½ ntZ ugha djk;h Fkh]
ek= cM+s egkjkt ds 'kjhj iwjs gksus dh lwpuk ek= nh Fkh vkSj
mDr ?kVuk fnukad 20-09-2021 dh tks Hkh okLrfodrk gks mls
ge 'kiFkdrkZx.k Jh ysVs gq, guqeku th egkjkt dks lqiqnZ
djrs gS fd ogh U;k; djsaxs dkj.k fd ge 'kiFkdrkZx.k us
fdlh Hkh O;fDr fo’ks"k dks ?kVuk esa lfEefyr ;k ?kVuk dkfjr
djrs ugha ns[kk gSA blfy, ge 'kiFkdrkZx.k mDr izFke lwpuk
fjiksVZ ds vk/kkj ij dksbZ dk;Zokgh ugha pkgrs vkSj bls okil
ysuk pkgrs gSa] lkFk gh bl vk’k; dk gyQukek@’kiFki=
lEcfU/kr ijh{k.k U;k;ky; esa Hkh nsus dks rS;kj gSA ”
Submissions on behalf of State of U.P.
24. Mr. S.K. Pal, learned Government Advocate for the State of
U.P. submits that First information Report of this case was
lodged on 21.09.2021 on the oral complaint / information of
informants Amar Giri and Pawan Maharaj. Thereafter both of
them supported the prosecution case in their Statement under
Section 161 CrPC before the police as well before the C.B.I. In
reply to the contents of paragraph no.7 of the affidavit dated
03.07.2022 of the informants, it is argued that same has been
filed for the first time before this Court after submission of
charge sheet dated 20.11.2021 against the applicant-Anand
Giri and other co-accused, which shows that informants are
either under any threat or they have been won over by the
accused side. It is also submitted that this is a state case on
the basis of F.I.R., which does not depend upon the mercy of
the informant, whose status is not more than a witness.
25. Lastly it is vehemently argued that the manner in which
affidavit dated 03.07.2022 has been filed by the informants in
this case, there is every likelihood of tampering of the
evidences and witnesses, in case applicant is released on bail.
The basic principles for considering bail prayer
26. The Apex Court in a plethora of decisions has setteled the
factors to be borne in the mind while considering an
application for bail are:-
(i)    Whether there is any prima facie or reasonable
ground to believe that the accused had committed the
(ii)   Nature and gravity of the accusation;
(iii)  Severity of the punishment in the event of conviction;
(iv)   Danger of the accused absconding or fleeing, if
(v)    Character, behaviour, means, position and standing of
(vi)   Likelihood of the offence being repeated;
(vii) Reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being
(viii) Danger, of course, of justice being thwarted by grant
of bail.
27. “Abetment” and “abetment of suicide” has been defined
under Section 107 and 306 of IPC respectively. Before delving
into the matter, I deem is appropriate to reproduce Section
107 and 306 of IPC, which reads as under:-
First — Instigates any person to do that thing; or
Secondly —        Engages with one or more other person or
persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an act
or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that conspiracy,
and in order to the doing of that thing; or
Thirdly — Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission, the
doing of that thing.
Explanation 1.—A person who, by wilful misrepresentation, or
by wilful concealment of a material fact which he is bound to
disclose, voluntarily causes or procures, or attempts to cause
or procure, a thing to be done, is said to instigate the doing of
Explanation 2.—Whoever, either prior to or at the time of the
commission of an act, does anything in order to facilitate the
commission of that act, and thereby facilitate the commission
thereof, is said to aid the doing of that act.
306. Abetment of suicide.
If any person commits suicide, whoever abets the commission
of such suicide, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to ten years, and
shall alsobe liable to fine.
28. Having heard the submissions of learned counsel for the
parties and examined the materials on record in its entirety as
well as case diary of this case produced by the counsel for the
State and CBI, this Court finds that:-
28.1. Mahant Narendra Giri had taken over as Head of
Baghambari Gaddi, Allahpur, Prayagraj in the year 2004, after
the death of Mahant Bhagwan Giri who had nominated Mahant
Narendra Giri as his successor.
28.2. In the year 2005, accused-applicant Anand Giri joined
Baghambari Gaddi as disciple of Mahant Narendra Giri and
started living there. Initially applicant Anand Giri was most
trusted and favourite disciple of Mahant Narendra Giri.
28.3. From the Kumbh Mela 2008, accused Anand Giri had
raised a separate entity namely “Ganga Sena” and started
organizing a camp at Magh Mela. Since there was no
connection of this Ganga Sena with “Baghambari Gaddi” and
no permission for the same was obtained by Anand Giri from
Mahant Narendra Giri, therefore, Mahant Narendra Giri was
little annoyed with Anand Giri on this count.
28.4. Mahant Narendra Giri vide his will deed dated 07.01.2010
had nominated Swami Balbir Giri as his successor. Later on
Mahant Narendra Giri executed another will deed dated
29.08.2011, whereby he nominated Anand Giri (applicant) as
his successor in place of Swami Balbir Giri cancelling his first
will deed dated 07.01.2010.
28.5. Mahant Narendra Giri had also executed a lease deed
dated 12.12.2018 of 744 Sqr. Mtrs. of land of “Baghambari
Gaddi” in favour of accused Anand Giri for installation of a
petrol pump of HPCL. Having been completed all formalities by
means of the application dated 15.12.2018 of Anand Giri, letter
of Intent (LOI) was issued in favour of Anand Giri on
28.6. In April 2019 applicant-Anand Giri had gone to Sydney,
Australia for a period of five weeks. His program was arranged
and hosted by Hindu Cosmos Mandir, Oxley Park. During his
stay Anand Giri has also been invited by devotees to their
home for performing various kind of religious ceremonies /
rituals Bhagwad reading. On 5th May 2019 he was arrested
there in two molestation cases on the complaint lodged by two
Fiji origin Australian women on the charge of indecent
behaviour and remained in police custody for some time.
Correspondence made between Government of India, Ministry
of Home Affairs, New Delhi and Consul General, Congendia
Sydney, Australia reveal that bail was granted to Anand Giri by
Mt Druitt Court on certain conditions. As per email dated
15.03.2022 (filed at page No. 21 of the second supplementary
counter affidavit dated 05.4.2022 filed by CBI) received to
OIA-II Division, MEA, New Delhi from Consul General,
Congendia Sydney, Australia, both the complainants made
complaint to police that Anand Giri touched them on their
private parts in bedroom whereas Anand Giri denied these
allegations. Later on complainant submitted application for
withdrawal of their complaints against Anand Giri. Thereafter
he returned to India. I also find that Ravindra Puri, Balbir Giri
and Sarvesh Kumar Dwivedi in their statements have stated
that deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri helped a lot for the
return of Anand Giri in India. Sarvesh Kumar Dwivedi also
stated that Mahant Narendra Giri had sent huge amount to
Australia, whereas there is denial of this fact from the side of
the applicant. Here it is relevant to note that applicant has
neither filed copy of complaint nor withdrawal application of
the complainants nor the judgement of the alleged acquittal of
28.7. After arrest of Anand Giri in molestation case in Australia,
Mahant Narendra Giri was very upset and he realized that on
account of the act and conduct of Anand Giri, the reputation of
“Math” “Baghambari Gaddi” had been deteriorating on
international level, therefore on 04.06.2020, Mahant Narendra
Giri had executed a third will deed vide which he again
nominated Swami Balbir Giri as his successor mentioning that
Anand Giri has frequently visiting to foreign countries for
participating in different programs. He had raised a separate
entity namely “Ganga Sena” which has a different motive than
that of “Baghambari Gaddi”. Mahant Narendra Giri had also
mentioned in his will deed that Anand Giri had involved himself
in anti-religious activities in foreign countries due to which the
reputation of Math “Baghambari Gaddi”, “Shri Bade/Lete
Hanuman Temple” and that of Mahant Narendra Giri had been
deteriorating on international level.
28.8. Anand Giri had started construction of his own Ashram at
Shyampur, Haridwar in the name & style of "Vikram Yog
Peeth" and he being a member of “Baghambari Gaddi”, had
not taken permission of Mahant Narendra Giri. On 01.04.2021,
Anand Giri had fixed the date of inauguration of his Ashram at
Haridwar. He came to Niranjani Akhada and invited all the
saints available there, but did not invite Mahant Narendra Giri.
Due to non-invitation from accused Anand Giri, Mahant
Narendra Giri was so disappointed that he had warned all the
saints who were present there that if anyone would go to
attend the said function, they need not return to Niranjani
28.9. In the first week of April, 2021, Mahant Narendra Giri
was diagnosed with CORONA and he was admitted to AIIMS,
Rishikesh for treatment on 12.04.2021. On 13.04.2021, Anand
Giri visited AllMS, Rishikesh to see Mahant Narendra Giri but
Mahant Narendra Giri was so annoyed with him that he
declined to meet Anand Giri. While accused Anand Giri was
leaving the Hospital, he told Sumit Tiwari, who was attending
the ailing Mahant Narendra Giri at that time that he had seen
Mahant Ji who would not survive and would die in few days.
Thus, before his death, Mahant Ji should nominate him as his
successor of “Baghambari Gaddi”, Prayagraj.
28.10. After recovery from CORONA, Mahant Narendra Giri
returned to Prayagraj on 24.04.2021. After a few days of
quarantine, Mahant Narendra Giri had started meeting to his
followers. During one such meeting Mr. Indu Prakash Mishra,
Sushil Mishra and Om Prakash Pandey met Mahant Narendra
Giri. During their discussion, Mahant Narendra Giri had
disclosed that relations between him and Anand Giri had gone
bad to worse and Anand Giri is disturbing him a lot.
28.11. On 12.05.2021, Mahant Narendra Giri wrote a letter to
the Panch Parmeshwar of Niranjani Akhada, Haridwar,
mentioning therein the ill-deeds are being committed by
accused Anand Giri as well as allegation of misappropriating
the funds of Gaddi and temple and requested them to expel
Anand Giri from “Niranjani Akhaa” alleging that he had already
expelled accused Anand Giri from “Baghambari Gaddi”,
Prayagraj as well as from “Shri Bade/Lete Hanuman Ji
28.12. Thereafter on 13.05.2021 accused Anand Giri was
expelled from Niranjani Akhada, Haridwar for a period of three
years, which was formally announced on 14.05.2021.
28.13. After expulsion of accused Anand Giri from Niranjani
Akhada, a war of words started by Anand Giri           and his
associates through print/electronic/social media etc. making
allegations against deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri. Thereafter
relation of Anand Giri with Mahant Narendra Giri further
worsen. Investigating officer has collected those materials
during investigation.
28.14. During that period Purushottam Mishra on 22.05.2021
having talked to his relative Ashish Mishra @ Lav Kush, over
phone recorded the said conversation and sent the same to
co-accused    Sandeep   Tiwari,  who   transmitted   the  said
conversation on 22.05.2021 to applicant- Anand Giri. On
23.05.2021, Anand Giri forwarded the said conversation to
stating that the said conversation had been received by him
from the disciple of Mahant Narendra Giri and further told
Mahant Ravindra Puri that he may bring the same to the
knowledge of Mahant Narendra Giri. As told by applicant-
Anand Giri, Mahant Ravindra Puri forwarded the said
conversation to Sumit Tiwari with the direction to play the
same before deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri. Accordingly
Sumit Tiwari did the same. During investigation of the case on
02.10.2021, the data of mobile phone of Purshottam Mishra
was extracted in a Hard Disk and during scrutiny, aforesaid
audio clip “AUD-20210522-WA0012-sizing 1.63 MB” pertaining
to conversation between Purshottam Mishra and Ashish Mishra
@ Lav Kush Mishra was noticed. Transcription of this audio
was prepared, which has been filed as Annexure No. 17 to the
bail application. Perusal of the same reveals that vulgar, filthy
and abusing language have been used for the deceased-
Mahant Narendra Giri and his character was also assassinated
making allegations inter alia that Mahant Narendra Giri has
illicit relation with the mother of his disciple Manish Shukla,
that is why Manish Shukla became very rich with Mahant
Narendra Giri’s money. The aforesaid conversation also
indicates the conspiracy against Mahant Narendra Giri. Both
Purushottam Mishra and Ashish Mishra @ Lav Kush, have
admitted the aforesaid conversation between them in their
statement before the C.B.I. when statement of Ashish Mishra
alias Lav Kush Mishra was recorded, he stated that aforesaid
allegation against Mahant Narendra Giri was false.
28.15. Co-accused Sandeep Tiwari after sending the recorded
conversation between Purushottam Mishra and Ashish Mishra
@ Lav Kush on 22.05.2021 to Anand Giri, having guilty mind
and fear against him left Prayagraj in the night of 23.05.2021
for Dewas, Madhya Pradesh along with Shri Ved Prakash
Pandey and Shri Manoj Dwivedi. While leaving Prayagraj,
accused Sandeep Tiwari took a bag of accused Anand Giri
which was kept with him. On 24.05.2021, they reached at
Dewas, Madhya Pradesh in the noon. From the residence of
Rajmata Gayatri Raje Panwar, MLA, Dewas, accused Sandeep
Tiwari collected a parcel for handing over the same to Anand
Giri. Thereafter, accused Sandeep Tiwari alongwith his above
two friends left Dewas and they reached Haridwar in the
morning of 25.05.2021 and met accused Anand Giri because
the date of compromise between Mahant Narendra Giri and
accused Anand Giri had already fixed for 26.05.2021. The
above act of co-accused Sandeep Tiwari reflects that he was in
guilty mind and was afraid of legal action against him if
Mahant Narendra Giri would have reported about the
conversation to police.
28.16. In the evening of 23.05.2021, accused Anand Giri came
to Mahant Ravindra Puri at Niranjani Akhada, Haridwar and
asked him to convince Mahant Narendra Giri to revoke his
expulsion from Niranjani Akhada. Thereafter on 23.05.2021 on
insistence of accused applicant Anand Giri, Mahant Ravindra
Puri from his mobile number 9548565816 talked to Mahant
Narendra Giri on his Mob. No. 9415340862 at around 16:24
hours for revocation of expulsion of accused Anand Giri. This
conversation was recorded by accused Anand Giri in the
Niranjani Akhada at Haridwar from his I-phone mobile keeping
the mobile phone of Mahant Ravindra Puri on speaker mode.
During triangular conversation which held on 23.5.2021
amongst accused Anand Giri, Mahant Ravindra Puri and
deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri, accused Anand Giri mounted
pressure on Mahant Narendra Giri to revoke his expulsion
immediately and threatened Mahant Narendra Giri to defame
him by circulating his objectionable videos and audios, which
are in his possession. Anand Giri also said that if he sends
those videos and audios to him, he would be stupefied. The
wordings of Anand Giri were 'MAI AAPKO BHEJUGA TO AAPKE
MERE PASS HAI’. The said conversion indicates that Anand
Giri had expressed his intention that in case of non revocation
of his expulsion immediately, he will not sit silent. During the
said conversation, it was settled that a decision to revoke
expulsion of Anand Giri from Niranjani Akhada would be taken
in next ten days. The said audio recordings containing the
conversation between Mahant Narendra Giri, Mahant Ravindra
Puri and accused Anand Giri were also recovered from the
mobile of accused Anand Giri during investigation. Here it is
relevant to mention that Mahant Ravindra Puri in his statement
during investigation has also disclosed inter alia that Mahant
Narendra Giri used to tell him time and again during the
conversation that Anand Giri used to harass him.
28.17. On going through the transcript of audios titled as
“20200117-191026, 20200117-192332, 20200117-192648 and
20200117-193449”      of triangular conversation between the
accused-Anand Giri and his two associates namely Indu
Prakash Mishra and Sushil Kumar Mishra, which have been
filed at page No. 247 to 260 of paper-book, I find that Indu
Prakash Mishra and Sushil Kumar Mishra were also deeply
concerned with the dispute between the accused-Anand Giri
and deceased Mahant Narendra Giri. Indu Prakash Mishra and
Sushil Kumar Mishra were in touch with both Anand Giri as
well as in Mahant Narendra Giri and they were working as a
middleman/liaisoner between Anand Giri and Mahant Narendra
Giri. Unhealthy conversations between them indicate that there
was dispute / exasperation for supremacy and post as well as
power and management relating to property of “Baghambari
28.18. On 26.05.2021 a meeting between Mahant Narendra
Giri and Anand Giri was arranged by Indu Prakash Mishra and
Sushil Kumar Mishra at Lucknow. Anand Giri along with co-
Prashant Shukla, and Aviral Tiwari @ Shibu reached Lucknow
from Haridwar. Mahant Narendra Giri along with Sushil Mishra
and O.P. Panday also reached Lucknow from Prayagraj. A
compromise took place between Mahant Narendra Giri and
Anand Giri in the house of Indu Prakash Mishra at Lucknow
and compromise note was also prepared by Sushil Kumar
Mishra. In the said compromise note, accused Anand Giri had
taken back all the allegations raised against Mahant Narendra
Giri in the print/electronic media and Mahant Narendra Giri had
forgiven his disciple keeping in view the relations between
Guru and Chela. Indu Prakash Mishra and Sushil Kumar Mishra
played a pivotal role in this regard. A video of said compromise
was recorded by Sushil Kumar Mishra and thereafter it was
circulated on social media.
28.19. On 30.05.2021, Purushottam Mishra alongwith Adhya
Prasad Tiwari visited Shri Bade/Lete Hanuman Mandir for
tendering apology from Mahant Narendra Giri, but due to
sudden provocation, abusive arguments took place between
Mahant Narendra Giri and co-accused Adhya Prasad Tiwari.
Thereafter Mahant Narendra Giri removed him and his elder
son Dilip Tiwari from the post of priest of “Shri Bade/Lete
Hanuman Mandir”. He had also taken back flower-garland
shop from Adhya Prasad Tiwari, which was being run by his
son co-accused Sandeep Tiwari.
28.20. Due to vacation of flower shop which was allotted to
co-accused Adhya Prasad Tiwari, he was so frustrated that
accused Adhya Prasad Tiwari talked to Indu Prakash Mishra to
persuade Mahant Narendra Giri to return the said shop to him,
but he advised Adhya Prasad Tiwari to remain silent for the
time being.
28.21. On 24.07.2021, on the occasion of “Guru Purnima”
Anand Giri did not turn up. Due to absence of accused Anand
Giri even after compromise, the differences further widened up
between Mahant Narendra Giri and accused Anand Giri.
28.22. On 11.09.2021, Mahant Narendra Giri asked Sarvesh
Dwivedi @ Bablu to bring Sulphate “Sulphas” from the market
for use in food grains which Sarvesh Dwivedi had purchased
from a shop namely M/s New Agro Seeds Company, Alopibagh,
28.23. Between 10.09.2021 and 12.09.2021, Mahant Narendra
Giri had held a discussion with his disciple Vasudev Shukla and
Abhyuday Tiwari about the effects of consumption of sulphate
and the time taken in death when someone consumes
sulphate. He also enquired from them, if the medical treatment
is received by the person who consume sulphate, can he
28.24. On 12.09.2021, Mahant Narendra Giri had again
planned to visit Haridwar. He had to meet to several property
dealers such as Mr. Shailendra Singh, Mr. Shailesh Modi, Mr.
Arvind Kumar @ Babli, etc., but due to bad weather he could
not go there. On the same day, Mahant Narendra Giri had
asked one Mr. Hashim Ali, who had installed CCTV at
Baghambari Gaddi, to come at “Baghambari Gaddi” to
format/delete the CCTV footages stored in DVR. Hashim Ali did
the same accordingly, however, due to some technical issue,
CCTV footages of one DVR could not be deleted.
28.25. On 18.9.2021, Mahant Narendra Giri had enquired from
few persons whether the video/photo of one person could be
edited showing face of other person with the help of computer.
28.26. On 19.09.2021, Mahant Narendra Giri asked Sarvesh
Dwivedi @ Bablu to bring nylon rope from the market for fixing
the same on the roof of first floor of his living room for drying
the clothes. Accordingly, Sarvesh Dwivedi went to market and
purchased 50 metre nylon rope of 08 Gauge from M/s Indira
Traders, Tularambagh, Prayagraj. In the evening, when
Mahant Narendra Giri was sitting outside the guest room, he
told Sarvesh Kumar Dwivedi to bring a piece of rope after
cutting the same from the bundle of nylon rope. Mahant
Narendra Giri had also briefed him about the length of rope to
be cut from the bundle.
28.27. In the evening of 19.09.2021, Mahant Narendra Giri
had surprisingly asked one Suraj Pandey regarding process of
recording video in the mobile phone. Suraj Pandey taught
Mahant Narendra Giri about the same and also taught him how
videos are deleted from mobile phone. The video in which
Mahant Narendra Giri was seen learning how to make videos,
was also recovered from his mobile phone.
28.28. On 20.09.2021, Mahant Narendra Giri also told Manish
Kumar Shukla and Abhishek Mishra that he is very disturbed as
he had received reliable information that Anand Giri is going to
release his edited video showing him (Mahant Narendra Giri)
with some female in objectionable position.
28.29. Record reveals that on the day of incident, Mahant
Narendra Giri, on 20.09.2021 at around 7.00 AM, before
committing suicide, lastly talked to Mahant Santosh Dass @
Satua Baba of Varanasi and also informed him that he had
received a reliable information that Anand Giri had made a
video by computer and in that video he has shown him
(Mahant Narendra Giri) doing wrong with a woman and Anand
Giri says that he will make that video circulate/viral. Mahant
Narendra Giri further told Mahant Santosh Dass alias Satua
Baba that Anand Giri had shown the said video to two persons
of Haridwar and one person of Prayagraj.
28.30. Here it would be relevant to reproduce the statement of
Mahant Santosh Dass alias Satua Baba which are as under:-
बयान महन्त सन्तोष दास @ सतुआ s/o महन्त जमुना दास जन्म
28.31. A suicide note as mentioned above was recovered from
the place of incident. During investigation the handwriting of
Mahant Narendra Giri on the suicide note was also identified
by witnesses namely Amar Giri, Pawan ji Maharaj, Manish
Shukla and Sumit Tiwari and others. As per CFSL report dated
03.01.2022 also the said suicide note was written by Mahant
Narendra Giri. In the suicide note Mahant Narendra Giri had
categorically held applicant- Anand Giri, co-accused Adhya
Prasad Tiwari and Sandeep Tiwari responsible for taking
extreme step to end his life.
28.32.    The   videos   titled   as  “20210920_132907”     and
“20210920_132921" made by Mahant Narendra Giri have also
been recovered from his Samsung Mobile phone. These two
videos were made by deceased just before his death. First
video of the deceased titled as “20210920_132907” is
regarding learning of making video. In second video titled as
"20210920_132921", Mahant Narendra Giri was seen holding
Anand Giri, Adhya Prasad          Tiwari and Sandeep Tiwari
responsible for his suicide as Anand Giri was going to release
an edited video showing him (Mahant Narendra Giri) with
some female in objectionable position.
28.33. Here it is relevant to mention that on going through the
transcript of audio titled as “20210618-195140” of triangular
conversation” between the accused-Anand Giri and his two
associates A & B, which has been filed at page no. 242 to 245
of paper-book, I find that during said conversations they used
vulgar language related to debauchery, womanizing and sex
also. Such conversations and using vulgar language do not suit
to “religious gurus”, his close associates and “sages”. Such
vulgar conversations cannot be expected from a man who
claims himself to be a sage or religious/spiritual guru in real
sense. This reflect his dual personality in the guise of wearing
a religious cloak. This Court is of the view that the conduct of
any person should be in accordance with dignity of his
position. The higher is the position, the grater is the
responsibility. A man is also known by the company he keeps
in the society.
28.34. In any religion, “religious gurus” have a special position
and respect in the eyes of the people, because of their special
spiritual knowledge about the religion concerned, scriptures,
purity, grace and other virtuous qualities. Most of the people
touch their feet in their honor due to spiritual preceptor and
vibrant. They must have a pure and pious mind with ethical
perfection and must be intensely virtuous, because in a
civilized society, generally it is presumed that spiritual guru is
free from greed, fraud and lust and the people who have blind
faith in them are spiritually inspired from them extending their
full faith and devotion and in their company they feel
themselves spiritually elevated. A real “guru” inspires spiritual
devotion in others and it is presumed that their presence
purifies all, ergo high responsibility lies upon them towards the
society in order to maintain the public confidence.
29. After analyzing the case in hand, I find that the crux of
the case is that Mahant Narendra Giri vide his will deed dated
29.08.2011 had nominated Anand Giri (applicant) as his
successor, but after arrest and involvement of Anand Giri in
molestation cases in Australia as mentioned above, Mahant
Narendra      Giri had   executed a fresh will deed         dated
04.06.2020, vide which he removed the accused-applicant
Anand Giri from his successor and again nominated Swami
Balbir Giri as his successor. Thereafter Mahant Narendra Giri
making     several   allegations, expelled   Anand    Giri from
“Baghambari Gaddi”, Prayagraj as well as from “Shri Bade/Lete
Hanuman Ji Temple”, Prayagraj and subsequently Anand Giri
was also expelled from “Niranjani Akhada” for a period of three
years on the persuasion of Mahant Narendra Giri. Co-accused
Adhya Prasad Tiwari was head priest at “ Shri Bade/Lete
Hanuman Mandir” and is closely associated with Anand Giri.
Other priest including informant Pawan Shukla and Dileep
Tiwari, elder son of Adhya Prasad Tiwari were also kept for
worship and they were also given monthly salary. There are
shops of flower-garland, Prashad, Sweet, Rudraksha etc. in the
premises of “Shri Bade/Lete Hanuman Ji temple”. Temple is
managed by the Mahant of “Baghambari Gaddi”, Prayagraj.
There are thirteenth Akhadas of saints in India. Niranjani
Akhada is also one of them. According to old customs and
traditions, as per will of late Mahant of “Bhaghambari Gaddi”,
his successor is declared by Niranjani Akhada. Mahant
Narendra Giri had given the flower-garland shop on rent to co-
accused Adhya Prasad Tiwari, whose management was looked
after by his younger son co-accused Sandeep Tiwari. From the
said shop, co-accused Adya Prasad Tiwari and Sandeep Tiwari
made a lot of money. Mahant Narendra Giri had removed
Adhya Prasad Tiwari and his son Dileep Tiwari from the post of
Priest and flower-garland shop was also taken back from
Adhya    Prasad    Tiwari   because  of  their  involvement   in
conspiracy and raising voice against him and given flower-
garland shop to his another disciple Sumit Tiwari. Therefore,
accused persons namely Anand Giri, Adhya Prasad Tiwari and
Sandeep Tiwari along with their other associates in collusion
with each other adopting different modus–oparandi hatched a
criminal conspiracy and mounted pressure upon Mahant
Narendra Giri making his character assassination etc. and
created in-conducive circumstances with a motive to compel
Mahant Narendra Giri to revoke expulsion of accused Anand
Giri from Niranjani Akhada, to return the shop of accused
Adhya Prasad Tiwari and his son accused Sandeep Tiwari and
to restore their position back. In furtherance of the same, they
got the objectionable audio dated 22.05.2021 prepared by
Purshottam Mishra on the direction of Sandeep Tiwari and
further got it circulated with an oblique motive to tarnish the
reputation   of   Mahant    Narendra    Giri. During   triangular
conversation which held on 23.5.2021 amongst accused Anand
Giri, Mahant Ravindra Puri and Mahant Narendra Giri
(deceased), accused Anand Giri mounted pressure on Mahant
Narendra Giri to revoke his expulsion immediately and
threatened Mahant Narendra Giri to defame him by circulating
his objectionable videos and audios which are in his
possession, which mounted immense mental pressure on him
and compelled him to think about committing suicide.
30. Here it would be apposite to mention that the meaning of
suicide requires no explanation. It is an act of self-killing.
Suicidal ideation and behaviour in human beings are complex
and multifaceted. Every human has different concept and
perspective about his life. No standard or straightjacket
formula can be laid down with regard to sensitivity of each
individuals, because different people behave differently in
same situation. Each person has his own idea of self esteem
and self respect. Sometime a comment passed against a
person on lighter side are taken very seriously by such
persons, who are hyper-sensitive while other persons, who are
not so sensitive, behave differently, they ignore even serious
comment made against them and try their best to face the
situation. Each individual’s suicide-ability pattern depends on
his inner consciousness of mental pain, fear and loss of self
respect. These factors are crucial and exacerbating contributor
to an individual’s vulnerability to end his life, which may either
be an attempt for self-protection or escapism from intolerable
self. Therefore in the matters of suicide each case has to be
decided on the basis of its own facts and circumstances. If the
accused kept on mental torture the deceased by words, deeds
or conduct, which may provoke, urge or encourage the
deceased to commit suicide is an abetment. It is the basic
principle of criminal jurisprudence that a man may tell a lie,
but circumstances do not. Even an indirect act of incitement to
the commission of suicide would constitute the offence of
abetment of suicide under Section 306 of the IPC. The factum
of abetment/instigation differs from case to case. Even
spectrum of harassment is quite varied as it can be ranged
from physical, verbal, mental or even emotional. Where the
accused by his acts or continued course of conduct creates
such circumstances that deceased was left with no other
option except to commit suicide, an instigation may be
31. Under the facts of the case as mentioned above, I find that
there was a proximate between the unfortunate incident of
suicide of Mahant Narendra Giri and acts of the accused
persons and their other concerned associates. The test of
proximity cannot be too literally construed and practically
reduced to a cut-and-dried formula of universal application so
as to be confined in a straitjacket. Where the death by suicide
is a logical culmination of a continuous harassment or mental
pain, each step directly or indirectly connected with the end of
life of the deceased are relevant. The facts having a bearing
in this case cannot be ignored particularly suicide note and
video made by the deceased just before committing suicide
and, therefore, I am not inclined to accept the submission of
Mr. G.S. Chaturvedi, learned senior counsel for the applicant
that there was no proximate link between the suicide of the
deceased and acts of the accused persons.
32. Though Mahant Narendra Giri has died because of
hanging, but facts of the case reflect that he was hyper-
sensitive man and considering his post and position in the
society that he was President of “All India Akhada Parishad”,
Mahant / Head of Shri Math “Baghambari Gaddi” and “Shri
Bade/Lete Hanuman Ji Temple, Prayagraj” was very much
depressed on account of the reason that if Anand Giri makes
his edited obscene video with a girl viral, then he will not be
able to show his face in the society and feels himself
humiliated among his known persons and in the society on
account of his character assassination by the accused persons
and to avoid defamation and insult in the eyes of society, his
followers and devotees, he has committed suicide. The said
facts are corroborated by the suicide note written by the
deceased and video made by the deceased just before his
death as well as other attending circumstances mentioned
above. The deceased in his suicide note and video has
disclosed the reasons and other compelling circumstances
implicating   Anand   Giri, which     prevailed upon   him    for
committing suicide. At this stage, there is no reason to
disbelieve the suicide note and video made by the deceased
just before his death. Normally it is presumed that no one tells
a lie while dying by committing suicide. Thus, abetment of
suicide by Anand Giri and his associates, cannot be ruled out
at this stage. The submission of Mr. G.S. Chaturvedi that no
offence for abetment against Anand Giri is made out, is not
liable to be accepted. Further, the contention of Shri
Chaturvedi that Mahant Narendra Giri called Mr. Hashim Ali
and asked to format the CCTV camera so that after his death
anyone else could not know about his activities/misdeed, has
no leg to stand inasmuch as there may have been various
reasons including technical one for getting the CCTV camera
formatted, which does not have any bearing on the fact of the
case at this stage.
33. The next submission of Mr. G.S. Chaturvedi that deceased-
Mahant Narendra Giri, neither in the suicide note nor during
his conversation with Mahant Santosh Das @ Satua Baba
disclosed that as to who gave information to him that
tomorrow applicant-Anand Giri will viral his edited obscene
video with a girl, is concerned, the same is immaterial and
submission of Mr. Chaturvedi in this regard is also not liable to
be accepted, because suicide note cannot be taken to be
encyclopedia of each and every minute details. Merely by non-
disclosure of the source of information by the deceased in the
suicide note, the same cannot be disbelieved, because the
contents of suicide note depend upon the mental balance of
the person concerned at the time of writing the suicide note.
Deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri during his last conversation
dated 20.09.2021 at about 07:00 AM with Mahant Santosh Das
@ Satua Baba also clearly made allegation against Anand Giri.
It is also possible that deceased-Mahant Narendra Giri may not
have intentionally disclosed the name of the informer, who
gave information to him about the act and intention of
accused-Anand Giri so that after his death the informer may
not be harassed by the accused and his associates in future.
34. The materials collected by the C.B.I. during investigation,
tend to show that on account of acts of the applicant and co-
accused, the deceased was put under tremendous pressure to
do something which he was perhaps not willing to do. The
conduct of the applicant and his accomplices was such that the
deceased because of fear of his slander was left with no other
option, but to end his life. The manner in which the deceased
committed suicide, prima facie, indicates that the same is the
outcome of cumulative effect of series of acts of accused
persons as mentioned above. So far as information gathered
by deceased from Haridwar that tomorrow Anand Giri will
make his edited obscene video with a girl viral, as mentioned
in the suicide note and video made by him just before his
death also appear that the same was of definite nature (not
imaginary or inferential one), therefore, Mahant Narendra Giri
committed suicide. As such, prima-facie case for abetment and
instigation is made out against the applicant Anand Giri, hence
the provisions of Section 107 IPC are attracted.
35. On the basis of aforesaid analysis of the case, the
submission of Mr. G.S.Chaturvedi, learned senior counsel that
the applicant is innocent is not liable to be accepted at this
pre-trial stage.
36. The further detailed discussion relating to the incident
need not be referred to herein since the allegations and the
defence thereto is still open to be urged by the parties in the
37. So far as judgments relied upon by the learned counsel for
the applicant are concerned, there is no dispute about the
proposition of law laid down therein, but the same are not
helpful to the applicant because the same are distinguishable
on facts of this case. It is well settled that every case turns on
its own facts. Even one additional or different fact may make a
big difference between the conclusion in two cases, because
even a single significant detail may alter the entire aspect.
38. So far as affidavit dated 03.07.2022 of the informants is
concerned, I find that first information report of this case was
lodged on 21.09.2021 on the oral complaint / information of
informants Amar Giri and Pawan Maharaj, who are also
witnesses, out of five witnesses of the inquest proceeding.
Statement under Section 161 CrPC of Amar Giri and Pawan
Maharaj were recorded by the then investigating officer of
police on 21.09.2021 and both of them supported the contents
of F.I.R. During investigation by CBI, their statements were
again recorded in which also they did not dispute their
statements recorded by the police. Perusal of order-sheet of
this case shows that without issuing any notice to informants
namely Amar Giri and Pawan Maharaj, four counsel namely
and Vinay Prakash Shukla filed their Vakalatnama dated
21.03.2022 on behalf of the informant Amar Giri and they have
appeared on several dates to oppose the prayer for bail of the
applicant, but on 25.07.2022, when matter was taken up, it
was informed by those learned counsel that now they have no
instruction to appear in the matter because the informants
have engaged new counsel Mr. Niraj Tiwari on 02.07.2022 and
got an affidavit dated 03.07.2022 filed through him stating
inter-alia that they do not want to oppose the bail application
and to say anything. On perusal of the same, I find that the
said affidavit dated 03.07.2022 has been filed after six months
eleven days of submission of charge sheet dated 20.11.2021
against the applicant-Anand Giri without any explanation of
delay. In the affidavit informants taking U-turn stated inter alia
that they had not lodged F.I.R. against any particular person.
Only Bade Maharaj Ji’s death was reported. They do not want
any action on the First Information Report and want to take it
back, which itself indicates that something is fishy in the
matter and possibility of winning over the informants from the
accused side cannot be ruled out.
39. In view of the above, this Court is prima-facie satisfied and
finds force in the submission of learned counsel for the State
and C.B.I. that in case, applicant is released on bail, there is
every likelihood of winning over the other witnesses and
tampering the evidences.
40. As a fallout and consequence of aforesaid discussion,
considering the facts, materials on record and other attending
circumstances of the case, which are relevant for the purpose
of deciding this bail application, submissions advanced on
behalf of parties, complicity of the applicant, gravity of the
offence and severity of the punishment as well as possibility of
tampering the evidences and winning over the witnesses as
noted above, I do not find any good ground to grant bail to
the applicant at this stage.
41. The bail application lacks merit and is accordingly
rejected.
42. It is clarified that the observations, if any, made herein
above are strictly confined to the disposal of the bail
application and shall not be construed to have any reflection
on the ultimate merits of the case.
43. However, considering the detention period of the
applicant-Anand Giri alias Ashok Kumar Chotiya in jail since
21.09.2022, it is directed that the trial Court shall make all
endavour to conclude the trial of the applicant expeditiously
without granting unnecessary adjournment to either of the
parties. Applicant-Anand Giri shall co-operate with the trial and
either of the parties shall not seek unnecessary adjournment.
44. Office is directed to send a copy of this order forthwith to
the concerned court below for compliance.