Date : 19-05-2022 This appeal was called on for hearing today.
For the parties:            Jail Petition
Mr. Sanjay kumar Tyagi, Adv.
Ms. Sakshi kakkar, Adv.
Ms. Shakshi kakkar. Adv.
Mr. Rajesh singh chauhan Adv.
Ms. Shakshi kakkar. Adv.
Mr. Sarad kr. Singhania, Adv.
Mr. Jitender Hooda adv.
Mr. Shafik Ahmed adv.
Mr. Ajay Sharma adv.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Human   rights    jurisprudence    in   India  has
acquired a constitutional status and sweep, owing to the
full potential breathed by this Court into Articles 14,
19 and 21 of the Constitution of India since                  Maneka
Gandhi v. Union of India1.         The constitutional regard for
human      decency     and    dignity      has    been    explicitly
incorporated       into   Article    21   by   this   Court.   While
expounding      on   the  scope  of    the   right  to   life  under
Article     21,   this   Court  in   Francis    Coralie   Mullin  v.
Administrator,       Union  Territory    of   Delhi2   extended  the
meaning of the right to life beyond the protection of
limb or faculty to include the right to live with human
dignity and all that goes along with it, namely, the bare
necessities of life such as adequate nutrition, clothing
and shelter and also the right to carry on such functions
and activities as constitute the bare minimum expression
of the human-self. Needless to say, this basic protection
of human decency and dignity extends to sex workers and
their children, who, bearing the brunt of social stigma
attached to their work, are removed to the fringes of the
society, deprived of their right to live with dignity and
opportunities to provide the same to their children.
Pursuant to an order passed by this Court on
19.07.2011, a Panel was constituted with Mr. Pradip Ghosh
as the Chairman of the Panel, Mr. Jayant Bhushan, Senior
counsel, Usha Multipurpose Co-operative Society through
Committee    through  its  President/Secretary,   and  Roshni
The terms of reference made to the panel are:
(1) Prevention of trafficking,
(2) Rehabilitation of sex workers who wish to
(3) Conditions conducive for sex workers who wish
to continue working as sex workers with dignity.
By an order dt. 26.07.2012, this Court modified
the third term of reference to conditions conducive to
sex workers to live with dignity in accordance with the
provisions of Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
After conducting a detailed discussion with all
the  concerned     stakeholders,   the   Panel  submitted   a
comprehensive report on the terms of reference.      When the
matter   was   listed  in the   year  2016,  this  Court  was
informed that the recommendations made by the panel were
considered   by   the  Government   of   India   and  a  draft
legislation      was     published       incorporating     the
recommendations     made   by     the    panel.    Thereafter,
periodically   adjournments   were   taken  by   the Union  of
India on the ground that the Bill is on the anvil.          As
the legislation has not been made till date even though
the recommendations were made by the Panel in the year
2016 and the said recommendations have to be implemented,
we are exercising our powers conferred under Article 142
of the Constitution of India, to issue the following
directions which will hold the field till a legislation
is made by the Union of India.      In a catena of decisions
of  this   Court,   this  power   has   been   recognised  and
exercised, if need be, by issuing necessary directions to
fill the vacuum till such time the legislature steps in
to cover the gap or the executive discharges its role.
The directions that are issued today relate only
to the rehabilitation measures in respect of sex workers
and other connected issues.     The panel has recommended in
respect of the third term of reference in the following
(i)      Sex workers are entitled to equal
protection of the law. Criminal law must apply
equally in all cases, on the basis of ‘age’ and
‘consent’.    When it is clear that the sex worker
is an adult and is participating with consent,
the  police   must   refrain    from    interfering   or
taking any criminal action.
There have been concerns that police view
sex workers differently from others.         When a sex
worker makes a complaint of criminal/sexual/any
other type of offence, the police must take it
seriously and act in accordance with law.
ii) Any sex worker who is a victim of
sexual   assault   should    be   provided     with  all
facilities   available   to   a  survivor     of  sexual
assault, including immediate medical assistance,
in accordance with Section 357C of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 read with “Guidelines
and     Protocols:      Medico-legal        care     for
survivor/victims of sexual violence”, Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare (March, 2014).
iii)   Whenever   there    is   a   raid   on  any
brothel, since voluntary sex work is not illegal
and only running the brothel is unlawful, the sex
workers   concerned   should    not   be   arrested   or
penalised or harassed or victimised.
iv) The State Governments may be directed
to do a survey of all ITPA Protective Homes so
that  cases   of  adult   women,    who   are   detained
against their will can be reviewed and processed
for release in a time-bound manner.
v)    It has been noticed that the attitude
of the police to sex workers is often brutal and
violent.      It is as if they are a class whose
rights are not recognised.        The police and other
law enforcement agencies should be sensitised to
the rights of sex workers who also enjoy all
basic human rights and other rights guaranteed in
the Constitution to all citizens. Police should
treat all sex workers with dignity and should not
abuse them, both verbally and physically, subject
them to violence or coe4rce them into any sexual
vi) The Press Council of India should be
urged to issue appropriate guidelines for the
media  to   take   utmost   care   not  to   reveal  the
identities of sex workers, during arrest, raid
and  rescue    operations,    whether   as   victims  or
accused and not to publish or telecast any photos
that   would     result    in    disclosure    of   such
identities. Besides, the newly introduced Section
354C,   IPC   which    makes   voyeurism     a  criminal
offence,   should    be   strictly    enforced   against
electronic      media,    in     order    to    prohibit
telecasting    photos   of   sex   workers   with  their
clients   in   the  garb   of   capturing    the  rescue
Vii) Measures that sex workers employ for
their health and safety (e.g., use of condoms,
etc.)must neither be construed as offences nor
seen as evidence of commission of an offence.
Viii) The Central Government and the State
Governments must involve the sex workers and/or
their  representatives     in  all   decision-making
processes,    including  planning,    designing  and
implementing any policy or programme for the sex
workers or formulating any change/reform in the
laws relating to sex work.       This can be done,
either by including them in the decision-making
authorities/panel and/or by taking their views on
any decision affecting them.
ix) The Central Government and the State
Governments,    through  National    Legal  Services
Authority,   State  Legal   Services  Authority  and
District Legal Services Authority, should carry
out workshops for educating the sex workers abut
their rights vis-a-vis the legality of sex work,
rights and obligations of the police and what is
permitted/prohibited under the law.      Sex workers
can also be informed as to how they can get
access to the judicial system to enforce their
rights and prevent unnecessary harassment at the
hands of traffickers or police.
x)   As   already   recommended   in   the  6th
interim Report dated 22.03.2012, no child of a
sex worker should be separated from the mother
merely on the ground that she is in the sex
trade.   Further, if a minor is found living in a
brothel or with sex workers, it should not be
presumed that he/she has been trafficked.            In
case the sex worker claims that he/she is her
son/daughter, tests can be done to determine if
the claim is correct and if so, the minor should
not be forcibly separated.”
We  have  heard  Mr.   Jayant   Sud,  learned   ASG   who
submitted  that   the  Government    of   India   has  certain
reservations in respect of the recommendations that are
made by the panel except those in paras 2,4,5,6,7 and 9.
The State Governments/ UTs are directed to act in strict
compliance   of   the   recommendations      made   in    paras
2,4,5,6,7,9, in addition to the implementation of the
recommendations made by the panel as mentioned above,
the  competent   authorities    under  the   Immoral   Traffic
(Prevention) Act, 1956 are directed to comply with the
provisions of the Act. It need not be gainsaid that
notwithstanding the profession, every individual in this
country has a right to a dignified life under Article 21
of  the   Constitution    of   India.    The   Constitutional
protection  that   is given   to   all  individuals   in   this
country shall be kept in mind by the authorities who
have a duty under Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act,1956.
The other recommendations that are made by the panel
shall be taken up after summer vacation.
List this matter on 27.07.2022.
In the meanwhile, the Union of India is directed
to file its response to the recommendations made by the
panel within a period of six weeks from today.
Mr.    Anand    Grover,    learned    senior      counsel,
brought to the notice of this Court that Aadhar Cards
are not being issued to sex workers as they were unable
to  produce    proof   of   their   residence.     We   had   issued
notice to UIDAI and sought its suggestions in respect of
waiving the requirement of proof of residence for the
sex workers, to enable them to get an identity by the
issuance of Aadhar cards. In the affidavit filed by the
UIDAI,   it   was  proposed    that   sex   workers    who   are   on
NACO’s list and who apply for Aadhar card but cannot
submit proof of residence, can be issued Aadhar Cards
provided    a  ‘proforma    certificate’     is  submitted      by  a
Gazetted Officer at NACO or the State Health Department
certifying     the   particulars     of    the    applicant.      The
organisations     representing    sex   workers    have    made   the
following suggestions for the procedure to be followed
3.1         The Gazetted Officer of the State Health
Department,     who   is   authorized     to   submit     the
proforma certificate for a sex worker who applies
for   an   Aadhar   Card   but  is   unhable    to  furnish
proof     of    residence     should     be    pecifically
designated     as:-   “The   Project    Director     of   the
State AIDS Cotrol Society, or her/his nominee.”
3.2      The name and designation of the Gazette
Officers  who  will  be   authorised  to  submit  the
‘proforma certificate’ for sex workers desirous
of applying for an Aadhar Card on behalf of NACO
must be publicized on its website.
3.3 NACO    and the State AIDS Control Societies
should publicize the procedure for sex workers
who wish to apply for an Aadhar Card but who
cannot furnish proof of residence through their
websites as well as through outreach under the
Targetted   Intervention     Programmes   that   they
3.4 The sample ‘proforma certificate’ submitted
by  UIDAI   in   its  Additional    affidavit   dated
09.02.2022 in terms of the order dated 10.01.2022
as “Annexure R-1’ on pages 5 and 6 of the said
affidavit may be made readily available on the
websites of UIDAI, NACO and State Aids Control
3.5. There should be no breach of confidentiality
in the process, including assignment of any code
in the Aadhar enrolment numbers that identity the
applicant/holder of the card as a sex worker.
3.6     The procedure proposed by the UIDAI in its
Additional affidavit dated 09.02.2011 may not be
restricted to sex workers on the NACO list but
also extended to those who are identified by CBOs
after verification by the State Legal Services
Authority    or   the   State     AIDS   control     Society.
This    is   in    line    with    the    Hon’ble     Court’s
directions    to   State    Governments     to   extend    dry
ration    support   and   access    to  ration     cards   and
voter ID cards to sex workers who are not on
NACO’s    list,   vide   orders    dated    10.01.2022     and
UIDAI has examined the suggestions and accepted
that the procedure as proposed, can be followed.
In   view   of   the   aforementioned,       Aadhar    Cards
shall be issued to sex workers on the basis of a proforma
certificate which is issued by UIDAI and submitted by the
Gazetted Officer at NACO or the Project Director of the
State Aids Control Society, along with Aadhar enrolment
form/application.       There      shall    be    no     breach     of
confidentiality in the process, including assignment of
any code in the Aadhar enrolment numbers that identify
the card holder as a sex worker.
We   appreciate    the     cooperation     of    Mr.   Zoheb
Hossain,   learned   counsel     appearing    for    the   UIDAI,   in
providing    relief   to   sex    workers   who    will    have   some
identity in the society.