1.     The present appeal has been filed by the appellant/State being
aggrieved by the order on sentence passed by the learned Additional
Sessions Judge whereby pursuant to the conviction of the respondent for
offences punishable under Section 363 IPC and Section 10 of Protection
of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (‘POCSO Act’), vide order
on sentence dated 10th February, 2015, the respondent was released on
the period undergone. In this regard, it would be relevant to note the
concluding paragraphs of the order on sentence passed by the learned
“6. I have considered the rival submissions made by the
Ld.APP and of counsel for convict. It is an admitted case
that this is the first offence of the convict u/s 363 IPC and
Section 10 of POCSO Act which is punishable with
maximum imprisonment for five years with fine. Convict is
By:MANISH KUMAR         CRL.A. 584/2015                                                       Page 1 of 8
stated to be having responsibility of his family. In the facts,
and circumstances, having regard to the fact that this is
the first offence of the convict, that offence u/s 363 IPC
and 10 of POCSO Act is punishable with maximum five
years imprisonment, to the economic condition of the
convict’s family and recommendation for probation made
by the Probation Officer, Rohini, therefore, convict
deserves to be given a chance for reformation by taking a
lenient view. Accordingly, prayer of counsel for convict is
accepted. Instead of sentencing the convict to punishment,
convict is given the benefit of probation and is directed to
file a personal bond of good behaviour and conduct in the
sum of Rs.10,000/- with one surety in the like amount for a
period of one year with the condition that he shall remain
under the supervision of Probation Officer, Rohini Court
for one year and shall report before the Probation Officer
once every month and shall not commit similar offence
during this period of one year and if any such offence is
brought to the notice of this court during this period of one
year, then this court will be at liberty to impose
appropriate sentence upon the convict u/s 363 IPC and
Section 10 of POCSO Act.
7.       Copy of order be also sent to Probation Officer,
Rohini Court for compliance.
8.       Coming now to the aspect of compensation to the
victim, who is a minor girl aged about 4 years, the Hon’ble
Apex Court has time and again observed that that
subordinate Courts trying the offences of sexual assault
have the jurisdiction to award the compensation to the
victims being an offence against the basic human right and
violative of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. In a
case tided as Bodhisattwa Gautam vs. Subhra
Chdkraborty, AIR 1996 SC 922, it has been held by
Hon'ble Supreme Court that the jurisdiction to pay
compensation (interim and final) has to be treated to be a
part of the overall jurisdiction of the Courts trying the
By:MANISH KUMAR         CRL.A. 584/2015                                                     Page 2 of 8
offences of rape, which is an offence against basic human
rights as also the Fundamental Rights of Personal Liberty
and Life.
9.       Even otherwise, the concept of welfare and well
being of children is basic for any civilized society and this
has a direct bearing on the state of health and well being
of the entire community, its growth and development. It
has been time and again emphasized in various
legislations, international declarations as well as the
judicial pronouncements that the Children are a
“supremely important national asset” and the future well
being of the nation depends on how its children grow and
develop. In this regard reference is made to the following
observations of Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of Laxmi
Kant Pandey Vs. Union of India (1984) 2 SCC, 244, that:
“The child is a soul with a being, a nature and
capacities of its own, who must be helped to find
them, to grow into their maturity, into fullness of
physical and vital energy and the utmost breath,
depth and height of its emotional intellectual and
spiritual being; otherwise there cannot be a healthy
growth of the nation. Now obviously children need
special protection because of their tender age and
physique, mental immaturity and incapacity to look
after themselves. That is why there is a growing
realization in every part of the globe that children
must be brought up in an atmosphere of love and
affection and under the tender care and attention of
parents so that they may be able to attain full
emotional, intellectual and spiritual stability and
maturity and acquire self-confidence and self-
respect and a balance view of life with full
appreciation and realization of the role which they
have to play in the nation building process without
which the nation cannot develop and attain real
prosperity because a large segment of the society
By:MANISH KUMAR         CRL.A. 584/2015                                                    Page 3 of 8
would then be left out of the developmental process.
In India this consciousness is reflected in the
provisions enacted in the Constitution. Clause (3) of
Article 15 enables the State to make special
provisions inter alia for children and Article 24
provides that no child below the age of fourteen
years shall be employed to work in any factory or
mine or engaged in any other hazardous
employment. Clauses (e) and (f) of Article 39
provide that the State shall direct its policy towards
securing inter alia that the tender age of children is
not abused, that citizens are not forced by economic
necessity to enter avocations unsuited to their age
and strength and that children are given facility to
develop in a healthy manner and in conditions of
freedom and dignity and that childhood and youth
are protected against exploitation and against moral
and material abandonment. These constitutional
provisions reflect the great anxiety of the
constitution makers to protect and safeguard the
interest and welfare of children in the country. The
Government of India has also in pursuance of these
constitutional provisions evolved a National Policy
for the Welfare of Children. This Policy starts with a
goal-oriented perambulatory introduction.”
10. Therefore, in order to provide Restorative and
Compensatory Justice to the victim girl, I hereby direct
learned Secretary, D.L.S.A, North West Distt. to grant
compensation of Rs. 50,000/- (Rs. Fifty thousand only) to
the victim. The said amount shall be used for her welfare
and rehabilitation, under the supervision of Welfare
Officer, so nominated by the Government of NCT of Delhi.
11. A copy of this order be sent to learned Secretary,
D.L.S.A, North West Distt., Rohini Courts, Delhi and
Director, Department of Woman and Child Development,
By:MANISH KUMAR         CRL.A. 584/2015                                                      Page 4 of 8
GNCT of Delhi, for information and necessary action
under intimation to this Court.
12. The convict is informed that he has a right to prefer
an appeal against this judgment. He has been apprised
that if he cannot afford to engage an advocate, he can
approach the Legal Aid Cell, functioning in Tihar Jail or
write to Secretary, Delhi High Court, Legal Services
Committee, 34-37, Lawyers Chamber Block, High Court of
2.     It is apparent that the learned Special Court grossly erred in noting
the fundamental fact that the conviction under Section 10 of POCSO Act
entails a maximum punishment of imprisonment for five years with fine
whereas as per the Section 10 of POCSO Act, it entails a minimum
punishment of imprisonment for five years with fine and a maximum
punishment of imprisonment for seven years with fine.
3.     Section 10 of the POCSO Act reads as under :
“10. Whoever, commits aggravated sexual assault shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which shall not be less than five years but which may
extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.”
4.     The respondent has not challenged the conviction for offences
punishable under Section 363 IPC and Section 10 of POCSO Act.
However, still to satisfy ourselves, this Court has gone through the
deposition of the minor victim who was aged 4 years at the time of
alleged incident which was duly proved and not disputed by the defence.
In her testimony, the prosecutrix/victim stated as under :
“Q. - Aap batao kaya hua tha ?
Ans. Pappu meri chadi me haath dal raha tha. Chus raha
tha. Nalke ka paani daal raha tha. Keh raha tha kisiko mat
bataio.
By:MANISH KUMAR         CRL.A. 584/2015                                                    Page 5 of 8
Court question: Beta batau Pappu kaha chus raha tha?
Ans. The witness has touched her private part with her
hand and stated yaha par.
Court question: Pappu konse nal se ganda pani daal raha
Ans. Wo nal bathroom ke bagal me tha.
Court Question: Wo ganda pani kaha par daal raha tha?
Ans. The witness has touched her private part with her
hand and stated yaha par.
Ans. Main tuition se akar chej lene ja rahi thi tab Pappu
mila tha.
Ans. Usne meri saheli Prachi ke saath bhi aisa kiya tha,
meri nani ne dekh liya to usne jhuth bola ki ice cream
dilane le ja raha h., Bathroom ke pass Prachi ke saath aisa
kiya.
Q. Pappu ne Prachi ke saath aisa kab kiya tha?
Ans. Bahut din pahle meri nani ne mummy Ko bataya tha
Q. Pappu kaha rehta hai ?
Ans. Hamare ghar ke pass gali mai jahapar chij ki dukan
Q. Kya aap Pappu ko pehchan sakte ho?
At this stage, the witness has identified the accused
Pappu, present in the court today in police custody. The
accused is sitting behind the wooden partition in last row
of chairs in the courtyard.
By:MANISH KUMAR         CRL.A. 584/2015                                                     Page 6 of 8
Q. Kya aap pehle bhi court mai ayethe?
Ans. Ha, Mummy, nana aur nani ke saath ayi thi. Upar
court mai madam mili thi, uhko sab bataya tha (the
statement of the witness u/s 164 Cr. PC has been recorded
by Ms. Shefali Barnala Tandon, Ld. MM).
XXXXXX by Ms. Sharda Garg, Adv. Ld, Counsel for the
accused.
Question: Kya aap apni nani ke ghar rehte ho?
Ans. Mummy ke ghar bhi rehte hai aur nani ke ghar bhi
rehte hai. Jab nani bulati hai tab aajate hai phir chale jate
hai. Papa dadi ke saath rehte hai. Dadi he ghar bhi rehte
Question: Aap Pappu ko kaise bulate the?
Ans. Main kuch nahi kehti thi. Pappu mujhe bulata tha
'idhar aa'.
Question: Aapki saheli Prachi kaha par rehti hai?
Ans. Meri nani ke ghar ke bagal wale ghar ke waha par
rehti hai.
Question: Kya aap aaj mummy ke kehne se sab bol rahe
Ans. Nahi. Pappu ne aisa kiya tha.”
5.     Even in the cross-examination of this child victim, nothing has
been elucidated to show that the respondent did not commit the offence
punishable under Section 10 of the POCSO Act.
6.     As noted above, Section 10 of the POCSO Act provides for a
minimum punishment of five years imprisonment. The learned Special
Court grossly erred in releasing the respondent on the period already
undergone which as per the nominal roll was 9 months 26 days on 11th
February, 2015, when he was released from custody.
7.     The appeal filed by the State is therefore, liable to be allowed.
Considering the mitigating factors that the respondent has to look after
the family, during the period from 11th February, 2015, the respondent is
By:MANISH KUMAR         CRL.A. 584/2015                                                    Page 7 of 8
not involved in any other offence, the sentence of the respondent is
modified from the period already undergone to sentence of rigorous
imprisonment for a period of five years and to pay a fine of ₹25,000/- in
default whereof to undergo simple imprisonment for three months. The
compensation amount as directed by the learned Special Court for a sum
of ₹50,000/- to be paid by the Secretary, DLSA North-West District
would remain the same.
8.     The appeal is accordingly disposed of.
9.     SI Nakul and Constable Bhanwar Lal Verma, P.S. Subhash Palace,
present in Court, are directed to hand over the custody of
respondent/Pappu, who is also present in Court, to the Superintendent,
Central Jail, Tihar to serve the remaining sentence.
10.    The Registry is directed to prepare the necessary warrants
expeditiously.
11.    Copy of this judgment be uploaded on website and be given dasti
under signature of Court Master to the Investigating Officer.
By:MANISH KUMAR         CRL.A. 584/2015                                                 Page 8 of 8