(hereinafter referred to as “the Respondent”), who was charged
with the offence punishable under Section 135 of The Indian
Electricity Act 2003 (hereinafter referred to as “the Electricity Act”).
2.     The facts of the case briefly as summarized are that the
Complainant – Dy. Engineer – Namanbhai Vestabhai Chaudhari of
South Gujarat Vij Company Ltd. Sub Division Vagrama has filed a
complaint against the Respondent Accused before the GEB Police
Station, South Zone, Surat vide CR.No. II-17/2005 for the alleged
offence under Section 135 of the Electricity Act. According to the
Complainant, it is the case of the prosecution that on 22.12.2004,
Junior Engineer Shri N.V.Chaudhari, along with other staff members
has carried out inspection at the premises of the Respondent
Accused situated at village Vegni, Taluka Vagara and during
inspection, it was noticed that though the Respondent Accused was
not having any regular connection, he has obtained illegal direct
connection       from low transmission      line of  GEB and thereby
committed theft of electricity.        It is further the case of the
prosecution that an average bill of Rs.2,19,817.83 p was prepared
and issued to the Respondent Accused, which was not paid by him
and accordingly, a complaint was filed before GEB Police Station,
South Zone, Surat, vide CR No. II-17/2005 for the alleged offence
under Section 135 of the Indian Electricity Act, 2003.
3.     Upon such FIR being filed, investigation started and the
Investigating Officer has recorded statements of the witnesses and
produced number of documentary evidences.          After completion of
the investigation, charge sheet was filed against the Respondent for
the offence in question, since the I.O. found a prima facie case
against the Respondent, charge sheet came to be filed before the
learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Bharuch for the offence under
Section 135 of the Electricity Act.
4.      As the case was exclusively triable by the Court of learned
Special Judge, the learned Magistrate was pleased to commit the
case to the Court of learned Additional Sessions Judge & Special
Judge, Bharuch, which was numbered as Special (Electricity) Case
No. 58 of 2007.
5.      On committal, the case was transferred and placed for trial
before the learned Special Judge (Electricity),     Bharuch, who had
initially framed charge against the Respondent for the alleged
offence. The charge was read over to the Respondent and the plea
of the Respondent came to be recorded, wherein the Respondent
pleaded not guilty to the charge and claimed to be tried.
6.      In order to bring home the charge leveled against the
Respondent, the prosecution has examined as many as 9 witnesses
and relied upon their oral testimonies.      The prosecution has also
produced number of documentary evidences.
7.      Thereafter the Court below explained to the Respondent the
circumstances appearing against him in the evidence of the
prosecution witnesses and recorded his further statement under
Section 313 of the Criminal Procedure Code.               In his further
statement, the Respondent denied the case of the prosecution in
entirety and submitted that he has been roped in a false case.
8.      At the end of the trial, on appreciation, evaluation, analysis
and scrutiny of the evidence on record, the learned Special Judge
(Electricity), Bharuch, vide judgment and order dated 25.8.2009
was pleased to acquit the Respondent for the offence under Section
135 of the Electricity Act holding inter alia that the prosecution has
failed to prove the charge against the Respondent beyond
reasonable doubt.
9.      Being aggrieved and dissatisfied by the judgment and order
dated 25.8.2009 passed by the learned Special Judge (Electricity),
Bharuch in Special Case No. (Electricity) 58 of 2007, the Appellant –
State of Gujarat has preferred the present appeal.
10.     Heard, learned APP Ms. Jirga Jhaveri for the appellant – State
and learned Advocate Mr. M.M. Saiyed for the Respondent – Original
11.     The      learned Additional    Public Prosecutor     has       mainly
contended that the learned trial Judge has erred in holding that the
prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt.
The learned APP submitted that the impugned judgment of the trial
Court is based on presumptions and inferences and thereby, it is
against the facts and the evidence on record. The learned APP
further submitted that the learned trial Judge has failed to
appreciate the evidence on record in its true and proper perspective
and thereby, has erred in recording the acquittal of the Respondent.
12.    Learned APP Ms. Jirga Jhaveri referred to the judgment and
order as well as the testimony of number of witnesses and also the
documentary evidence.         Learned APP has submitted that the
judgment and order of acquittal passed by the learned Judge is
contrary to law, evidence on record and principles of justice, hence
the same deserves to be quashed and set aside by this Hon’ble
Court.     It is further contended that the judgment and order of
acquittal passed by the learned Special Judge is based on inference
not warranted by facts of the case and also on presumption not
permitted by law and that the learned Special Judge ought to have
seen that there are direct and indirect evidence connecting
Respondent with crime produced in this case. In spite of the fact,
learned Judge without appreciating oral as well as documentary
evidence on record of the case, straight way arrived at the
conclusion that the prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond
reasonable doubt for the alleged offence under Section 135 of the
13.    Learned APP has placed reliance upon the depositions of the
prosecution witnesses and has also placed reliance upon number of
documentary evidences.       So far as evidence of complainant is
concerned, he has fully supported the prosecution case, then in that
case learned Judge has no reason to disbelieve the prosecution
case.     Learned APP has submitted that the learned Special Judge
has not properly appreciated evidence of PW-1 complainant
Namanbhai V. Chaudhari at Exh.17, PW-2 Babubhai Bhagwanbhai
Vasava at Exh.25, PW-3 Ashabhai Somabhai Valand at Exh.27, PW-6
Prabhakar Damubhai Kalank at Exh.33, PW-7 Chandreshlal Patel at
Exh.40, PW-8 Ramchandra Natthubhai Patil at Exh.41, PW-9
Narendrasinh Ajitsinh Chudasma at Exh.43. Learned APP has
submitted that all these witnesses have supported the case of the
prosecution to prove the offence committed by the Respondent.
However, the learned Special Judge without properly appreciating
the evidence of this witness has committed grave error in
disbelieving and discarding the evidence of this witness.
14.    Learned APP Ms. Jirga Jhaveri has also submitted that the
learned Special Judge has not properly considered the oral as well
as documentary evidence produced on record and therefore has
committed a grave error in acquitting the Respondent for the
Officen under the Electricity Act. Learned APP has further submitted
that the learned Special Judge ought to have held that the
prosecution has proved the guilt of the Respondent in a conclusive
way and therefore ought to have convicted and sentenced the
Respondent in consonance with law.            Learned APP has submitted
that the learned Special Judge ought to have appreciated the fact
that there are direct and indirect evidence available on record
connecting the Respondent with the crime in question. Learned APP
has further submitted that the learned Special Judge ought to have
taken into consideration the evidence of the prosecution witnesses.
Learned APP has submitted that in the present case though the
evidence of all the witnesses are reliable and trustworthy, without
any cogent reason, the learned Special Judge has committed grave
error by disbelieving and discarding the evidence of these witnesses
and acquitting the Respondent for the offence charged against him.
Learned APP has further submitted that the learned Special Judge
has failed to appreciate the seriousness and the gravity of the
offences and should not have adopted a casual and routine
approach and thus the impugned judgment and order of acquittal
passed by the learned Judge has resulted into serious miscarriage of
justice. Learned APP has further submitted that the learned Special
Judge has not given cogent and convincing reasons for acquitting
the Respondent.     Learned APP has therefore submitted that the
order of acquittal is illegal, improper and bad in law and the same
deserves to be quashed and set aside by this Hon’ble Court. On all
such grounds, learned APP has contended that the learned Special
Judge has committed error in appreciating the evidence. Therefore,
this Court may reverse the judgment of the learned Special Judge
from acquittal into conviction.         Learned APP has also taken this
Court to the judgment and order passed by the learned Special
Judge coupled with appreciation of evidence and contended that the
learned Special Judge has committed error in appreciation of
15.     Per contra, learned Advocate Mr. M.M.Saiyed for the Respondent /
Original Accused has contended that in the present case, the captioned
muddamal is not able to be proved by the prosecution.                Further, the
ownership of the place of occurrence is equally important which is not proved
by the prosecution and therefore the learned Advocate Mr. Saiyed has urged
that the learned Special Judge (Electricity), Bharuch has rightly awarded
acquittal to the Respondent Accused vide judgment and order dated
25.8.2009, and therefore, there is no requirement to interfere in the judgment
and order passed by the learned Special Judge (Electricity), Bharuch and the
present Criminal Appeal filed by the Appellant – State of Gujarat is required to
be dismissed.
16.     In view of the rival submissions made by the learned APP for
the Appellant State and learned Advocate Mr. M.M.Saiyed for the
Respondent / Original Accused, it is required to be considered
whether the impugned judgment and order can be sustained.
17.     Having heard the arguments advanced by the learned APP
and the learned Advocate for the Respondent / Original Accused,
before this Court advert to the merits of the case, it would be
worthwhile to refer to the scope of this Appeal.
17.1 Before adverting to the facts of the case, it would be
worthwhile to refer to the scope of interference in acquittal appeals.
It is well settled by catena of decisions that an appellate Court has
full power to review, re-appreciate and consider the evidence upon
which the order of acquittal is founded.      However, the Appellate
Court must bear in mind that in case of acquittal, there is prejudice
in favour of the accused, firstly, the presumption of innocence is
available to him under the fundamental principle of criminal
jurisprudence that every person shall be presumed to be innocent
unless he is proved guilty by a competent court of law. Secondly,
the accused having secured his acquittal, the presumption of his
innocence is further reaffirmed and strengthened by the trial Court.
17.2 Further, if two reasonable conclusions are possible on the
basis of the evidence on record, the appellate Court should not
disturb the finding of acquittal recorded by the trial Court. Further,
while exercising the powers in appeal against the order of acquittal,
the Court of appeal would not ordinarily interfere with the order of
acquittal unless the approach of the lower Court is vitiated by some
manifest illegality and the conclusion arrive at would not be arrived
at by any reasonable person, and therefore, the decision is to be
characterized as perverse.
17.3 Merely because two views are possible, the Court of appeal
would not take the view which would upset the judgment delivered
by the Court below. However, the appellate Court has a power to
review the evidence if it is of the view that the conclusion arrived at
by the Court below is perverse and the court has committed a
manifest error of law and ignored the material evidence on record.
That    the     duty is cast  upon     the    appellate   Court,        in   such
circumstances, to re-appreciate the evidence to arrive to just
decision on the basis of material placed on record to find out
whether the accused is connected with the commission of the crime
with which he is charged.
18.    In Mallikarjun Kodagali (Dead) represented through
Legal Representatives v. State of Karnataka and Others,
(2019) 2 SCC 752, the Apex Court has observed that:
“The presumption of innocence which is attached to every
accused gets fortified and strengthened when the said
accused is acquitted by the trial Court. Probably, for this
reason, the law makers felt that when the appeal is to be filed
in the High Court it should not be filed as a matter of course
or as matter of right but leave of the High Court must be
obtained before the appeal is entertained. This would not only
prevent the High Court from being flooded with appeals but
more importantly would ensure that innocent persons who
have already faced the tribulation of a long drawn out criminal
trial are not again unnecessarily dragged to the High Court”.
10.5 Yet in another decision in Chaman Lal v. The State of
Himachal Pradesh, rendered in Criminal Appeal No.
1229 of 2017 on 03.12.2020, 2020 SCC OnLine SC 988
the Apex Court has observed as under:
“9.1       In the case of Babu v. State of Kerala,
(2010) 9 SCC 189), this Court had reiterated the
principles to be followed in an appeal against
acquittal under Section 378 Cr.P.C. In paragraphs 12
to 19, it is observed and held as under:
12.    This Court time and again has laid down the
guidelines for the High Court to interfere with the
judgment and order of acquittal passed by the trial
court. The appellate court should not ordinarily set aside
a judgment of acquittal in a case where two views are
possible, though the view of the appellate court may be
the more probable one. While dealing with a judgment
of acquittal, the appellate court has to consider the
entire evidence on record, so as to arrive at a finding as
to whether the views of the trial court were perverse or
otherwise unsustainable. The appellate court is entitled
to consider whether in arriving at a finding of fact, the
trial  court     had  failed      to take   into    consideration
admissible evidence and/or had taken into consideration
the evidence brought on record contrary to law.
Similarly, wrong placing of burden of proof may also be
a subject-matter of scrutiny by the appellate court. (Vide
Balak Ram v. State of U.P (1975) 3 SCC 219, Shambhoo
Missir v. State of Bihar (1990) 4 SCC 17, Shailendra
Pratap v. State of U.P (2003) 1 SCC 761, Narendra Singh
v. State of M.P (2004) 10 SCC 699, Budh Singh v. State
of U.P (2006) 9 SCC 731, State of U.P. v. Ram Veer Singh
(2007) 13 SCC 102, S. Rama Krishna v. S. Rami Reddy
(2008) 5 SCC 535, Arulvelu v. State (2009) 10 SCC 206,
Perla Somasekhara Reddy v. State of A.P (2009) 16 SCC
98 and Ram Singh v. State of H.P (2010) 2 SCC 445)
13.    In Sheo Swarup v. King Emperor AIR 1934 PC 227,
the Privy Council observed as under: (IA p. 404) “… the
High Court should and will always give proper weight
and consideration to such matters as (1) the views of
the trial Judge as to the credibility of the witnesses; (2)
the presumption of innocence in favour of the accused,
a presumption certainly not weakened by the fact that
he has been acquitted at his trial; (3) the right of the
accused to the benefit of any doubt; and (4) the
slowness of an appellate court in disturbing a finding of
fact arrived at by a Judge who had the advantage of
seeing the witnesses.”
14. The aforesaid principle of law has consistently been
followed by this Court. (See Tulsiram Kanu v. State AIR
1954 SC 1, Balbir Singh v. State of Punjab AIR 1957 SC
216, M.G. Agarwal v. State of Maharashtra AIR 1963 SC
200, Khedu Mohton v. State of Bihar (1970) 2 SCC 450,
Sambasivan v. State of Kerala (1998) 5 SCC 412,
Bhagwan Singh v. State of M.P(2002) 4 SCC 85 and
State of Goa v. Sanjay Thakran (2007) 3 SCC 755)
15.    In Chandrappa v. State of Karnataka (2007) 4 SCC
415, this Court reiterated the legal position as under:
(SCC p. 432, para 42)
“(1) An appellate court has full power to review,
reappreciate and reconsider the evidence upon
which the order of acquittal is founded.
(2)    The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 puts
no limitation, restriction or condition on exercise
of such power and an appellate court on the
evidence before it may reach its own conclusion,
both on questions of fact and of law.
(3)    Various expressions, such as, ‘substantial
and compelling reasons’, ‘good and sufficient
grounds’, ‘very strong circumstances’, ‘distorted
conclusions’,    ‘glaring   mistakes’,     etc.     are    not
intended    to   curtail   extensive    powers         of    an
appellate court in an appeal against acquittal.
Such phraseologies are more in the nature of
‘flourishes   of    language’     to   emphasise           the
reluctance of an appellate court to interfere with
acquittal than to curtail the power of the court to
review the evidence and to come to its own
(4)    An appellate court, however, must bear in
mind that in case of acquittal, there is double
presumption in favour of the accused. Firstly, the
presumption of innocence is available to him
under    the   fundamental      principle     of     criminal
jurisprudence      that    every    person       shall       be
presumed to be innocent unless he is proved
guilty by a competent court of law. Secondly, the
accused     having      secured    his   acquittal,        the
presumption of his innocence is further reinforced,
reaffirmed and strengthened by the trial court.
(5)    If two reasonable conclusions are possible
on the basis of the evidence on record, the
appellate court should not disturb the finding of
acquittal recorded by the trial court.”
16.    In Ghurey Lal v. State of U.P (2008) 10 SCC 450,
this Court reiterated the said view, observing that the
appellate court in dealing with the cases in which the
trial courts have acquitted the accused, should bear in
mind that the trial court’s            acquittal bolsters          the
presumption that he is innocent. The appellate court
must give due weight and consideration to the decision
of the trial court as the trial court had the distinct
advantage of watching the demeanour of the witnesses,
and was in a better position to evaluate the credibility of
the witnesses.
17.    In State of Rajasthan v. Naresh (2009) 9 SCC 368,
the Court again examined the earlier judgments of this
Court and laid down that: (SCC p. 374, para 20) “20. …
an order of acquittal should not be lightly interfered with
even if the court believes that there is some evidence
pointing out the finger towards the accused.”
18.    In State of U.P. v. Banne (2009) 4 SCC 271, this
Court gave certain illustrative circumstances in which
the Court would be justified in interfering with a
judgment      of   acquittal       by the   High      Court.       The
circumstances include: (SCC p. 286, para 28) “(i) The
High Court’s decision is based on totally erroneous view
of law by ignoring the settled legal position;
(ii)   The High Court’s conclusions are contrary to
evidence and documents on record;
(iii)  The entire approach of the High Court in
dealing with the evidence was patently illegal
leading to grave miscarriage of justice;
(iv) The High Court’s judgment is manifestly
unjust and unreasonable based on erroneous law
and facts on the record of the case;
(v)    This Court must always give proper weight
and consideration to the findings of the High
(vi) This Court would be extremely reluctant in
interfering with a case when both the Sessions
Court and the High Court have recorded an order
of acquittal.” A similar view has been reiterated by
this Court in Dhanapal v. State (2009) 10 SCC 401.
19.    Thus, the law on the issue can be summarised to
the effect that in exceptional cases where there are
compelling circumstances, and the judgment under
appeal is found to be perverse, the appellate court can
interfere with the order of acquittal. The appellate court
should bear in mind the presumption of innocence of the
accused and further that the trial court’s acquittal
bolsters the presumption of his innocence. Interference
in a routine manner where the other view is possible
should be avoided, unless there are good reasons for
interference.”
9.2      When the findings of fact recorded by a court can be
held to         be    perverse      has   been    dealt      with       and
considered in paragraph 20          of the aforesaid decision, which
“20. The findings of fact recorded by a court can be
held to be perverse if the findings have been arrived at
by ignoring or excluding relevant material or by taking
into consideration irrelevant/inadmissible material. The
finding may also be said to be perverse if it is “against
the    weight    of   evidence”,       or   if   the     finding       so
outrageously defies logic as to suffer from the vice of
irrationality. (Vide Rajinder Kumar Kindra v. Delhi Admn
(1984) 4 SCC 635, Excise and Taxation Officer-cum-
Assessing Authority v. Gopi Nath & Sons 1992 Supp (2)
SCC 312, Triveni Rubber & Plastics v. CCE 1994 Supp.
(3) SCC 665, Gaya Din v. Hanuman Prasad (2001) 1 SCC
501, Aruvelu v. State (2009) 10 SCC 206 and Gamini
Bala Koteswara Rao v. State of A.P (2009) 10 SCC 636).”
(emphasis supplied)
9.3    It is further observed, after following the decision
of   this   Court   in   the     case   of    Kuldeep       Singh       v.
Commissioner of Police (1999) 2 SCC 10, that if a
decision is arrived at on the basis of no evidence or
thoroughly     unreliable evidence and no reasonable
person would act upon it, the order would be perverse.
But if there is some evidence on record which is
acceptable     and    which      could   be    relied     upon,      the
conclusions would not be treated as perverse and the
findings would not be interfered with.
9.4    In the recent decision of Vijay Mohan Singh v.
State of Karnataka, (2019) 5 SCC 436, this Court again
had an occasion to consider the scope of Section 378
Cr.P.C. and the interference by the High Court in an
appeal against acquittal. This Court considered catena
of decisions of this Court right from 1952 onwards. In
paragraph 31, it is observed and held as under:
“31. An identical question came to be considered
before this Court in Umedbhai Jadavbhai (1978) 1 SCC
228. In the case before this Court, the High Court
interfered with the order of acquittal passed by the
learned trial court on reappreciation of the entire
evidence on record. However, the High Court, while
reversing the acquittal, did not consider the reasons
given by the learned trial court while acquitting the
accused. Confirming the judgment of the High Court,
this Court observed and held in para 10 as under: (SCC
“10.   Once the appeal was rightly entertained
against the order of acquittal, the High Court was
entitled  to   reappreciate   the   entire      evidence
independently and come to its own conclusion.
Ordinarily,  the     High  Court  would       give      due
importance to the opinion of the Sessions Judge if
the same were arrived at after proper appreciation
of the evidence. This rule will not be applicable in
the present case where the Sessions Judge has
made an absolutely wrong assumption of a very
material and clinching aspect in the peculiar
circumstances of the case.”
31.1. In Sambasivan v. State of Kerala (1998) 5 SCC
412, the High Court reversed the order of acquittal
passed by the learned trial court and held the accused
guilty on reappreciation of the entire evidence on
record, however, the High Court did not record its
conclusion on the question whether the approach of the
trial court in dealing with the evidence was patently
illegal or the conclusions arrived at by it were wholly
untenable. Confirming the order passed by the High
Court convicting the accused on reversal of the acquittal
passed by the learned trial court, after being satisfied
that the order of acquittal passed by the learned trial
court was perverse and suffered from infirmities, this
Court declined to interfere with the order of conviction
passed by the High Court.
While confirming the order of conviction passed by the
High Court, this Court observed in para 8 as under: (SCC
“8. We have perused the judgment under appeal
to   ascertain     whether      the   High      Court       has
conformed to the aforementioned principles. We
find that the High Court has not strictly proceeded
in the manner laid down by this Court in Ramesh
Babulal Doshi v. State of Gujarat (1996) 9 SCC 225
viz. first recording its conclusion on the question
whether the approach of the trial court in dealing
with the evidence was patently illegal or the
conclusions arrived at by it were wholly untenable,
which alone will justify interference in an order of
acquittal though the High Court has rendered a
well-considered judgment duly meeting all the
contentions raised before it. But then will this non-
compliance     per     se   justify  setting     aside      the
judgment under appeal? We think, not. In our
view, in such a case, the approach of the court
which is considering the validity of the judgment
of an appellate court which has reversed the order
of acquittal passed by the trial court, should be to
satisfy itself if the approach of the trial court in
dealing with the evidence was patently illegal or
conclusions arrived at by it are demonstrably
unsustainable and whether the judgment of the
appellate court is free from those infirmities; if so
to hold that the trial court judgment warranted
interference. In such a case, there is obviously no
reason why the appellate court’s judgment should
be disturbed. But if on the other hand the court
comes to the conclusion that the judgment of the
trial court does not suffer from any infirmity, it
cannot but be held that the interference by the
appellate court in the order of acquittal was not
justified; then in such a case the judgment of the
appellate court has to be set aside as of the two
reasonable views, the one in support of the
acquittal alone has to stand. Having regard to the
above discussion, we shall proceed to examine the
judgment of the trial court in this case.”
31.2. In K. Ramakrishnan Unnithan v. State of Kerala
(1999) 3 SCC 309, after observing that though there is
some substance in the grievance of the learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the accused that the High Court
has not adverted to all the reasons given by the trial
Judge for according an order of acquittal, this Court
refused to set aside the order of conviction passed by
the High Court after having found that the approach of
the Sessions Judge in recording the order of acquittal
was not proper and the conclusion arrived at by the
learned    Sessions    Judge      on several    aspects        was
unsustainable. This Court further observed that as the
Sessions Judge was not justified in discarding the
relevant/material evidence while acquitting the accused,
the   High   Court,    therefore,     was    fully    entitled        to
reappreciate     the    evidence      and     record       its    own
conclusion. This Court scrutinised the evidence of the
eyewitnesses and opined that reasons adduced by the
trial  court  for    discarding     the    testimony          of   the
eyewitnesses were not at all sound. This Court also
observed that as the evaluation of the evidence made
by the trial     court    was     manifestly erroneous             and
therefore it was the duty of the High Court to interfere
with an order of acquittal passed by the learned
31.3. In Atley v. State of U.P. AIR 1955 SC 807, in para
5, this Court observed and held as under: (AIR pp. 809-
10) “5. It has been argued by the learned counsel for
the appellant that the judgment of the trial court being
one of acquittal, the High Court should not have set it
aside on mere appreciation of the evidence led on
behalf of the prosecution unless it came to the
conclusion that the judgment of the trial Judge was
perverse. In our opinion, it is not correct to say that
unless the appellate court in an appeal under Section
417 Cr.P.C came to the conclusion that the judgment of
acquittal under appeal was perverse it could not set
aside that order.
It has been laid down by this Court that it is open to the
High Court on an appeal against an order of acquittal to
review the entire evidence and to come to its own
conclusion,   of   course,      keeping   in   view      the      well-
established rule that the presumption of innocence of
the accused is not weakened but strengthened by the
judgment of acquittal passed by the trial court which
had the advantage of observing the demeanour of
witnesses whose evidence have been recorded in its
presence.
It is also well settled that the court of appeal has as
wide powers of appreciation of evidence in an appeal
against an order of acquittal as in the case of an appeal
against an order of conviction, subject to the riders that
the presumption of innocence with which the accused
person starts in the trial court continues even up to the
appellate stage and that the appellate court should
attach due weight to the opinion of the trial court which
recorded the order of acquittal.
If the appellate court reviews the evidence, keeping
those principles in mind, and comes to a contrary
conclusion, the judgment cannot be said to have been
vitiated. (See in this connection the very cases cited at
the Bar, namely, Surajpal Singh v. State AIR 1952 SC 52;
Wilayat Khan v. State of U.P AIR 1953 SC 122) In our
opinion, there is no substance in the contention raised
on behalf of the appellant that the High Court was not
justified in reviewing the entire evidence and coming to
its own conclusions.
31.4. In K. Gopal Reddy v. State of A.P. (1979) 1 SCC
355, this Court has observed that where the trial court
allows itself to be beset with fanciful doubts, rejects
creditworthy evidence for slender reasons and takes a
view of the evidence which is but barely possible, it is
the obvious duty of the High Court to interfere in the
interest of justice, lest the administration of justice be
brought to ridicule.”
19.     In the aforesaid backdrop, as per the deposition of PW-1 –
Complainant – Namanbhai Vestabhai Chaudhari at Exh.17, who
appears to be the Deputy Engineer on 22.2.2004 has tried to depose
according to his official duties including tendering of relevant
document, especially, the Assessment Sheet at Exh.19 and the
Objection at Exh.20 and also Objection by the Advocate concerned
at Exh.21 and also the Complaint at Exh.22 and also the document
at Exh.21 regarding the representation by Raj Ranjeetsinh. But in
the cross-examination it is admitted that the captioned alleged wire
is easily available in the market. Further, it is also admitted that the
internal thin wires are not visible at both ends of the main wire. It is
also admitted that the pre-assessment for theft case is conditio
precedent before preparing the for theft of electric bill. Further, it is
also admitted that Exh.21 did not contain the local location of
village for Mr. Ranjitsinh. Upon such premises, it appears that the
learned Special Judge has rightly arrived at the conclusion that the
benefit of doubt is required to be given to the Respondent / Original
Accused for acquitting the Respondent / Accused.
19.1 The         prosecution has   also      testified   PW-2     –    Babubhai
Bhagavanbhai Vasava at Exh.25. He appears to be the Lineman at
Bharuch Circle Office at the respective time. He tendered Exh.26
which is true copy of the Checking Sheet and he was duly cross-
examined, wherein he has admitted that he has no knowledge
about the number of persons who were residing at the place.
Further, he has also admitted that the captioned wire as muddamal
did not contain any piece of paper (marking paper as kapli). He has
also admitted that he has not seen any open wire / PVC wiring at the
residential place of the Respondent / Original Accused.
19.2 The Prosecution has also testified PW-3 – Ashabhai Somabhai
Vanand at Exh.27. He appears to be the Panch-Witness. He has
tendered Panchnama at Exh.28.             In cross-examination he has
admitted that the captioned muddamal which contains the wires but
through that wires the theft was not possible since the internal thin
wires were not visible.
19.3 The Prosecution has also testified PW-4 – Arjunsinh Mavsinh
Raj at Exh.30.     He also appears to the Panch-Witness.               He has
turned hostile and thus not supported the prosecution case.
19.4 The Prosecution has also testified PW-5 – Indrasinh Pratapsinh
Raj at Exh. 32.    He also appears to the Panch-Witness.               He has
turned hostile and thus not supported the prosecution case.
19.5 The Prosecution has also testified PW-6 Prabhakar Damubhai
Kalanke at Exh.33. He appears to be In-Charge PSO at South Zone
GEB Police Station on 20.1.2005.            He admitted in the cross-
examination that except registration of offence he has done
19.6 The         Prosecution has    also      testified   PW-7       Chandresh
Champaklal Patel at Exh.40. He appears to be the Deputy Engineer
in Vigilance Department. In the cross-examination he has admitted
that the original Checking Sheet is not produced. Further, he has
also admitted that when the police has recorded the statement at
that time neither the Checking Sheet nor the muddamal wire was
shown to him.
19.7 The Prosecution has also testified PW-8 – Ramchandra
Naththubhai Patil at Exh.41.       He happens to be the PSI at the
respective time. He has identified the Respondent Accused in the
Court.     In his cross-examination he has admitted that he has not
produced any ownership certificate or possession certificate of the
place of occurrence from anybody, including from any Revenue
Officer nor has taken any statement to that effect.                    It is also
admitted that no local panchnama is carried out.
19.8 The Prosecution has also testified PW-9 – Narendrasinh
Ajitsinh Chudasama at Exh.43.        He appears to be the Talati-cum-
Mantri and in his cross-examination he has admitted that the Police
has not called for any certificate nor any documents for the
possession or ownership of Balvantsinh Amarsinh for the so-called
place of occurrence.
20.     On all such grounds, in the opinion of this Court, the learned
Special Judge has rightly acquitted the Respondent and in the
opinion of this Court, there is no need to interfere in the judgment
and order passed by the learned Special Judge (Electricity), Bharuch.
Further, it is observed that the captioned order which is under
challenge is neither perverse nor capricious and also not arbitrary
and illegal. Therefore, there is no need to interfere in the same and
the learned Special Judge (Electricity) Bharuch has rightly acquitted
the Respondent for the offence under Section 135 of the Indian
21.     Thus, on re-appreciation and reevaluation of the ocular and
the documentary evidence on record, as referred to herein above, it
transpires that there are contradictions and omissions in the
evidence of the prosecution witnesses. The learned Special Judge
has observed that on considering the evidence on record there
appears no trustworthy evidence on record to prove the charge
against the accused and the prosecution has failed to bring home
the charge against the accused inasmuch as the ingredients of the
offence alleged are not fulfilled. This Court has gone through in
detail the impugned judgment and order and found that the learned
Special Judge has meticulously considered the depositions of all the
witnesses and came to the conclusion that the prosecution has
failed to prove the case against the Respondent - Accused beyond
reasonable doubt and in the considered opinion of this Court, the
learned Special Judge has rightly come to such a conclusion, which
does not call for any interference at the hands of this Court.
22.       In view of the aforesaid discussion and observations, in the
considered opinion of this Court, the prosecution has failed to bring
home the charge against Respondent - Accused. The findings
recorded by the learned trial Judge do not call for any interference.
Resultantly, in fleri, the appeal fails and is dismissed accordingly.
Impugned judgment and order dated 25.8.2009, passed in Special
(Electricity) Case No. 58 of 2007 by the learned 2 nd Additional
Sessions Judge and Special Judge, Bharuch, recording acquittal is
confirmed. Bail bond, if any, shall stand cancelled. R&P, if received,
be transmitted back forthwith.