A copy of the written instruction be provided to the learned
counsel for the petitioner.
In the written instruction supplied by the learned Standing
Counsel received from the office of the Executive Engineer
it is categorically stated that Shahi Masjid situated on Prayagraj
to Handia stretch of State Highway 106 is constructed on the
Government land Gata No.402. As per the report submitted by
the Sub Divisional Officer Handia, Prayagraj complete with
performa 41/45, site plan and other revenue records which have
been submitted alongwith the written instruction supplied today.
It is then stated that Shahi Masjid is situated over the left side of
painted road but inside permanent land boundary of PWD State
Highway No.106 and a widening of painted road upto four lane
project of State Highway has been sanctioned vide Government
Order dated 05.08.2021 from Prayagaj to Handia.
It is then stated that the above widening of road has become
unavoidable in national interest due to increasing traffic and
accordingly, all the structures whether new or old lying within
State land boundary removal of which, for the widening of the
road is unavoidable and those are an encroachment on the
government land, accordingly has to be removed for the
government project of road widening.
To add to this categorical statement that the aforesaid Shahi
Masjid is also an encroachment upon the state land and has to
be removed for widening of the road. Process of marking of all
encroachment and public announcement for that purpose has
been carried out, it is further stated that the widening of road
has to be carried out within the limits of the state land and all
encroachment has to be removed without any acquisition or
compensation process for a larger national purpose.
Looking to the stand taken by the authorities in the written
instruction supplied today and the enclosure appended therein
and in view of the categorical stand of the respondents that the
existing construction of Shahi Masjid situated on Prayagraj to
Handia stretch of State Highway 106 is an encroachment on the
government land namely Gata no.402 as per the report of the
Sub Divisional Officer, Handia, Prayagraj, we are not in a
position to issue mandamus as claimed by the petitioner herein.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has invited our attention to
the report submitted by the revenue department stating therein
that the construction namely Shahi Masjid is existing for a long
time i.e. since before the independence. A perusal of the said
report indicates that the report is based on the statement made
by the people of the locality and there is no data or material
which was looked into by the reporting officer before making
the above statement with regard to the existence of Shahi
Be that as it may, from the averments made in the writ petition
and that of the written instruction supplied today, it seems that
the dispute is about the title to the property over which the
construction exists. For any claim of the petitioner with regard
to the land over which Shahi Masjid exists, it is open for it to
approach the civil court by filing the civil suit seeking
declaration or necessary relief in the same.
In any case, in view of the categorical stand of the respondent,
the issue raised herein cannot be entertained within the scope of
the writ petition.
The writ petition is, accordingly, dismissed.
In case, the petitioner approaches the civil court, it would be
under obligation to decide the matter independently without
being influenced by any of the observations made herein above.