Instant writ appeal is filed by the respondent in R.P. No.1220 of
2019 against the judgment dated 17.02.2020, by which, a learned single
Judge of this Court allowed the review petition filed by the respondents
“7. When this court rendered the judgment in exercise of the
extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, it is not necessary for the High Court which is court of record
under Article 215 of the Constitution of India to go in search of
another provision to recall its judgment, as contended by the learned
Counsel for the petitioner. When a similar contention was raised
before the Supreme Court that the High Court has no power to
review its own order under Article 226, the Apex Court in Shivdev
Singh's case (supra) held that there is nothing in Article 226 of the
Constitution to preclude a High Court from exercising the power of
review which inheres in every Court of plenary jurisdiction to prevent
miscarriage of justice or to correct grave and palpable errors
committed by it. The very same proposition was held in M.M.
Thomas v. State of Kerala: (2000)1 SCC 666.
8. It is also relevant to note that in the judgment in Municipal
Corpn. of Greater Mumbai v. Pratibha Industries Ltd. : (2019)
3 SCC 203, the Apex Court held as follows:
“10. Insofar as the High Courts’ jurisdiction to recall its own
order is concerned, the High Courts are courts of record, set
up under Article 215 of the Constitution of India. Article 215 of
the Constitution of India reads as under:
“215. High Courts to be courts of record.—Every
High Court shall be a court of record and shall have
all the powers of such a court including the power
to punish for contempt of itself.”
It is clear that these constitutional courts, being courts of
record, the jurisdiction to recall their own orders is inherent by
virtue of the fact that they are superior courts of record. This
has been recognised in several of our judgments.”
9. The petitioner filed the Writ Petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India. From the materials produced by the review
petitioner, I am of the view that the writ petitioner, has not
approached this Court with clean hands. It is seen that material facts
were suppressed in the Writ Petition. Therefore, I deem it
appropriate to review and recall the judgment. Therefore the
judgment dated 12.10.2018 in W.P.(C) No. 32652/2014 is recalled
and Review Petition is accordingly allowed and writ petition is
restored on file.”
2. Facts leading to the filing of instant appeal are that, appellant is
the respondent in R.P. No.1220 of 2019 and the respondents are the
review petitioners. Appellant has claimed that he along with his mother
and sisters got 13.51 Acres of land comprised in Sy. No.1 of Irumbiliyam
Village in Tirur Taluk, Malappuram district, as per Partition Deed
No.1325/1969 of SRO, Kuttippuram (Exhibit-P1). It was also stated that
except for an extent of 2 acres of land out of the said property covered by
Exhibit-P1 partition deed, 11.51 acres of land was in continued possession
of the appellant and his mother.
3. Appellant has further stated that on verification of the records, he
came to know that the basic tax in respect of the property was paid only
upto 1971. Thereafter, he could not pay the land tax regularly. Though
the    appellant/writ  petitioner  has   approached     the   Village  Officer,
Irimbiliyam with Exhibit-P3 representation in 1997 and thereafter with
Exhibit-P4 on 24.01.2014, tax was not accepted. Hence, he filed W.P.(C)
No.32652 of 2014 seeking for a direction to the Tahsildar, Tirur,
respondent No.1 herein to accept the tax in respect of the property in
4. After considering the rival submissions, writ court vide judgment
dated 12.10.2018 disposed of the writ petition by observing that since the
request of the appellant/writ petitioner is only to accept land tax and as it
is seen that there is a partition deed (Exhibit-P1), by which writ
petitioner's mother, as well as the petitioner claimed to have got property,
it is only appropriate that respondents shall accept the land tax from the
petitioner subject to the civil proceedings, if any, pending. In the said
judgment, the writ court has made it clear that acceptance of basic tax
would not provide any right to the petitioner, to claim title over the
property, and the respondents are free to accept tax from him,
accordingly. Since the respondents did not receive tax as directed by the
learned single Judge in W.P.(C) No.32562/2014, appellant filed Cont. Case
No.1422/2019. During the pendency of the contempt case, respondents
filed R.P. No.1220/2019, along with Annexures-A to I.
5. Appellant has further stated that in the writ petition, the
respondents filed a counter affidavit, in which, they have admitted that
appellant is the registered holder of the subject property, but they have
contended that the entire extent of land was not in the actual possession
of the appellant. The respondents have further contended that as per the
provisions of the Land Tax Act, 1961, the registered holders are not
entitled to pay tax unless their name is changed as per the Transfer of
Registry Rules, 1966. It was also contended that the land tax can be
collected only on the basis of sufficient documents.
6. Appellant has further stated that in the affidavit filed along with
the review petition, the respondents have stated the reason for review,
that major portion of land claimed by the appellant was with outsiders and
the respondents are receiving tax from them. This fact is already argued
in the writ petition.    Apart from that, no new grounds are stated. The
point raised in the review petition is, whether land tax can be accepted
from the appellant, who has no title or possession.
7. On the above pleadings, the appellant has filed this appeal raising
A. Learned single Judge has failed to understand what are
the parameters under Article 215 of the Constitution of
India, for entertaining a review of its order in the writ
petition.
B. The basic things to entertain a review petition have been
disregarded by the learned single Judge.
C. Learned single Judge has also failed to understand who is
entitled to file a review petition.
D. Learned single Judge ought to have found the mala fides
of the review petitioners in filing a review petition,
during the pendency of the contempt petition.
E. Learned single Judge ought to have dismissed the review
petition as it is delayed, failed to raise any legal grounds
and in not considering the law of Land Tax Act and
Transfer of Registry Rules regarding payment of land tax
and Constitutional provisions.
8. Based on the above, learned counsel for the appellant has made
9. Heard the learned counsel for the appellant and perused the
material on record.
10. Referring to Section 141 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908,
learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the procedure provided in
the Code in regard to suit shall be followed, as far as it can be made
applicable, in all proceedings in any Court of civil jurisdiction, excluding
any proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, and
therefore, review petition filed by the respondents is not maintainable.
11. Relying on the decision of a Hon'ble Division Bench of this Court
in Balan v. Shyamala reported in [2008 (1) KLT 112], learned counsel
for the appellant submitted that power of review is conferred by the
statute and court has no inherent power of review.
12. Further, placing reliance on a Full Bench judgment of the Patna
High Court in Ram Kinkar Das v. State of Bihar and Ors. reported in
AIR 2017 Pat 35, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 are not per se applicable to
the writ proceedings. On the said point, reliance is placed on the decision
of a Hon'ble Division Bench of this Court in George v. State of Kerala
reported in 2019 (3) KLT 319.
13. The tax receipts and the documents produced along with the
review petition by the respondents would be worthwhile to be extracted.
14. Annexure-A receipt No.KL10040503227/2018 dated 14.09.2018
issued by the Village Officer, Irumbiliyam, is extracted hereunder:
As described above, Rs.320/-(Rupees Three Hundred and Twenty
only) received on 14th September, 2018 and accounted for in the
village.
This receipt is prepared and made available through the e-payment
system of the Revenue Department and does not require the signature
and seal of the Village Officer. The authenticity of the receipt is
available       on        the       Revenue         Department         Portal
www.revenue.kerala.gov.in.
15. Annexure-B receipt No.KL10040501867/2018 dated 10.07.2018
issued by the Special Village Officer, Irumbiliyam is extracted hereunder:
As described above, Rs.80/- (Rupees Eighty only) received on 10 th
July, 2018 and accounted for in the village.
This receipt is prepared and made available through the e-payment
system of the Revenue Department and does not require the signature
and seal of the Village Officer. The authenticity of the receipt is
available       on        the        Revenue        Department           Portal
www.revenue.kerala.gov.in.
16. Annexure-C receipt No.KL10040501045/2018 dated 30.05.2018
issued by the Village Officer, Irumbiliyam is extracted hereunder:
As described above, Rs.315/-(Rupees Three Hundred and Fifteen only)
received on 30th May, 2018 and accounted for in the village.
This receipt is prepared and made available through the e-payment
system of the Revenue Department and does not require the signature
and seal of the Village Officer. The authenticity of the receipt is
available        on        the       Revenue         Department         Portal
www.revenue.kerala.gov.in.
17. Annexure-D receipt No.KL10040501055/2018 dated 30.05.2018
issued by the Village Officer, Irumbiliyam is extracted hereunder:
As described above, Rs.998/-(Rupees Nine Hundred and Ninety Eight
only) received on 30th May, 2018 and accounted for in the village.
This receipt is prepared and made available through the e-payment
system of the Revenue Department and does not require the signature
and seal of the Village Officer. The authenticity of the receipt is
available        on        the        Revenue       Department            Portal
www.revenue.kerala.gov.in.
18. Annexure-E Sale Deed No.2569/2004 executed by the mother of
the appellant herself in favour of the previous owner reads thus:
“In the Malayalam Era 1179 Karkkidakam 9th as per
English    Calender     July    24th  2004   from     Tirur    Taluk,
Kattipparuthi amsom, Vaikkathoor desom, Thorakkat Alavi
son agriculturist 74 years Mohammed 1 st numbers and his
son agriculturist 49 years.       2)  Thorakkat Abu, both these
persons together executed janman Sale Deed in favor of
Perinthalmanna       Taluk,    Kolathoor   amsom      desom      Post
Moorkkanad, Pin-679 338 Paingerri Moitheenkutty's son
working in the foreign country, aged 46 years Aboobacker.
In the below mentioned schedule of properties Vallat
Pottekkalathil Anandavalliyamma and others, Kuttippuram
Registered office as per No.1972/744 document Padathodiyil
Saithamu, janmam Sale Deed, and as per janmam right
being in the absolute possession, and the above mentioned
Saithamu, TA First Book 109 Volume 381. 382 pages in 1975
as per No. 1413 we got janmam Theer and hence, the
schedule property after remitting the Government dues and
in complete authority for all transactions and without
anybody's influence being enjoyed as a janmam right and is
in our joint possession.
As mentioned above, one numbered plot as per the
mediators Sale Price is fixed at Rs. 50,000/-, and hence it is
given to you as janmam sale and is given in your possession.
And accordingly, the reward of Rs. 50,000/- (Fifty
Thousand only) is received by us from you and it is recorded
and all our rights and interest in the schedule property is
given to you. Thus, schedule property as janmam sale deed
you can keep and enjoy in the possession and remit the
Government      dues    and   accordingly,   will  all rights of
transaction for which, from today onwards, you are the only
person who have got absolute right and possession and we
have got no possession and enjoyment. And nobody can
question you.
In the schedule property, there is no encumbrance, or
others possession and there is no defect in the right and
possession hence also, there is no court attachment and
there is no such liability. Property is in Irimbiliam Panchayat
and there is no construction. Jamathiri hargi submitted and
for that evident it is given to you. Plain schedule property is
not a government land or puramboke, this is informed you
under bona fide and good faith.
Prepared by Ad. T. Tamgopal K727/93 Valancherry
Written by E. Sreeja Sd/- L. No. MSA. 670
2nd Page blocked the 12th line by 2 letters.
19. Annexure-F is the tax receipt No.M8307177 dated 25.06.2015
issued by the Tahsildar, Irimbiliyam, and it reads thus:
As per the …....th number, Thandapper/Order Tax/Amount paid receipt.
As described above Rs.5,139/- (Rupees Five Thousand One Hundred
Thirty Nine only) on 25 th June, 2015 received and kept in the village
account.
20. Annexure-G is the Purchase Certificate No.459/1993 dated
30.12.1993 issued by the Land Tribunal, Tirur and it reads thus:
1993rd 459th number Certificate by which Property is assigned
As per 72 of the Kerala Land Reforms Act,                       Property is
vested in the Government and below scheduled property and
its owner and the mediators their rights, ownership and all
other related rights assigned to the cultivating tenant in this
property       Kalappalan        Eni   Hari,     S/o.    Veerankutty,    Post
Valancherry has been assigned and that is being witnessed
and verified herein.
1993 December 30, as per my handwriting and seal it is being
issued.
21. Annexure-H is the Purchase Certificate No.467/1993 dated
31.12.1993 issued by the Land Tribunal, Tirur and it reads thus:
(As per Rule 14 of Kerala Land Reforms Rules)
1993rd with No.467 Assignment Certificate
As per 72 of the Kerala Land Reforms Act, Property vested
in the government and to be mentioned in the below
schedule, owners of the property and intermediates and their
rights both ownership and possession is issued to Smt.
Thattarathoduvil Alu, S/o. Enikutty, Post Valanchery and this
property      is   assigned       and   it   is   verified   and  witnessed
accordingly.
1993 December 31, as per signature and seal is issued.
22. Annexure-I is the communication dated 19.07.2019 of the
Tahsildar (LR), Tirur to the Village Officer, Irumbiliyam dated 19.07.2019
Sub:- Regarding the implementation of Order of the Hon'ble
High Court of Kerala in W.P.(C) No.32652/14 dated 12-10-2018.
Ref:- 1. Sri. Ramakrishnan's application before the Tirur
Tahsildar dated 8-5-2019.
2. Your reports dated 11-7-19 and 16-7-19.
Please be careful about the reference. As per the order of the
Hon'ble High Court of Kerala in W.P.(C) No.32652/14 dated 12-
10-2018, Sri. Pottakkulathil Ramakrishnan's case, it is ordered
to accept the tax.
But, as per reference 2nd cited re-survey mentioned property
4.6611 hectare and at present there are a number of persons in
possession and property tax is accepted from them.           This is
reported by you.
In the above circumstances in Irimblium village, Valiyakunnu
desom, Survey 1/5.4.674 hectare land at present tax is being
accepted, deducting 4.6611 hectare land and the balance comes
to 0.8063 hectare, as per the order in W.P(C) No.32652/14
petitioner    Sri.    Pottakkulathil      Ramakrishnan's    mother
Anandavally Amma's legal heirs, in their name tax can be
accepted. This is informed accordingly.
23. Material on record shows that as per Annexures-E to G
documents, the appellant's mother had already entered into various
transactions alienating several parcels of properties covered by Exhibit-P1
partition deed. By Annexure-E document executed in 1972, an extent of
883/4 cents is alienated. The said document also shows that she was a
party to Document Nos.1290/2007 and 1291/2007, having an extent of
01.2141 hectares and 1.2780 hectares, for which, tax was paid by third
parties as per Annexure-F. Material on record further shows that
Annexures-G and H purchase certificates were issued to third parties in
respect of 3 acres of property and another extent of 3.1 acres, after notice
to the appellant's mother. These facts were suppressed by the appellant in
the writ petition, despite the fact that all the transactions have been done
by the appellant's mother. Therefore, it is clear that the material facts
required for adjudication of the issues raised by the appellant were not
placed by him in the writ petition, and if the above extracted documents
were produced in the writ petition, he would not have secured a direction
to receive the revenue tax since already the properties were transferred
and tax was being received from other persons, which thus means, there
was suppression of material facts, deliberately done to mislead the
learned Single judge to get an unmerited advantage to the appellant, no
doubt had to be dealt with properly.
24. On the aspect of suppression, equity and clean hands, we deem
it fit to consider the following decisions:
(i) In Arunima Baruah v. Union of India [(2007) 6 SCC 120], the
Hon'ble Supreme Court, at paragraphs 11 to 14, held as follows:
"11. The court's jurisdiction to determine the lis between the
parties, therefore, may be viewed from the human rights
concept of access to justice. The same, however, would not
mean that the court will have no jurisdiction to deny
equitable relief when the complainant does not approach the
court with a pair of clean hands; but to what extent such
relief should be denied is the question.
12. It is trite law that so as to enable the court to refuse to
exercise its discretionary jurisdiction suppression must be of
material fact. What would be a material fact, suppression
whereof     would    dis-entitle the   appellant  to  obtain  a
discretionary relief, would depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case. Material fact would mean
material for the purpose of determination of the lis, the
logical corollary whereof would be that whether the same
was material for grant or denial of the relief. If the fact
suppressed is not material for determination of the lis
between the parties, the court may not refuse to exercise its
discretionary jurisdiction. It is also trite that a person
invoking the discretionary jurisdiction of the court cannot be
allowed to approach it with a pair of dirty hands. But even if
the said dirt is removed and the hands become clean,
whether the relief would still be denied is the question.
13. In Moody v. Cox [(1917) 2 Ch. 71: (1916-17) All ER Rep
548 (CA)], it was held: (All ER pp. 555 I-556 D) It is
contended that the fact that Moody has given those bribes
prevents him from getting any relief in a court of equity. The
first consequence of his having offered the bribes is that the
vendors could have rescinded the contract. But they were
not bound to do so. They had the right to say ?no, we are
well satisfied with the contract; it is a very good one for us;
we affirm it”. The proposition put forward by counsel for the
defendants is: “It does not matter that the contract has been
affirmed; you still can claim no relief of any equitable
character in regard to that contract because you gave a bribe
in respect of it. If there is a mistake in the contract, you
cannot rectify it, if you desire to rescind the contract, you
cannot rescind it, for that is equitable relief.” With some
doubt they said: “We do not think you can get an injunction
to have the contract performed, though the other side have
affirmed it, because an injunction may be an equitable
remedy.” When one asks on what principle this is supposed
to be based, one receives in answer the maxim that anyone
coming to equity must come with clean hands. I think the
expression “clean hands” is used more often in the textbooks
than it is in the judgments, though it is occasionally used in
the judgments, but I was very much surprised to hear that
when a contract, obtained by the giving of a bribe, had been
affirmed by the person who had a primary right to affirm it,
not being an illegal contract, the courts of equity could be so
scrupulous that they would refuse any relief not connected at
all with the bribe. I was glad to find that it was not the case,
because I think it is quite clear that the passage in Dering v.
Earl of Winchelsea [(1787) 1 Cox Eq Cas 318: 2 Bos & P
270], which has been referred to, shows that equity will not
apply the principle about clean hands unless the depravity,
the dirt in question on the hand, has an immediate and
necessary relation to the equity sued for. In this case the
bribe has no immediate relation to rectification, if rectification
were asked, or to rescission in connection with a matter not
in any way connected with the bribe. Therefore that point,
which was argued with great strenuousness by counsel for
the defendant, Hatt, appears to me to fail, and we have to
consider the merits of the case.
14. In Halsbury's Laws of England, 4th Edn., Vol. 16, pp.
874-76, the law is stated in the following terms:
“1303. He who seeks equity must do equity. “In
granting relief peculiar to its own jurisdiction a court of
equity acts upon the rule that he who seeks equity must
do equity. By this it is not meant that the court can
impose arbitrary conditions upon a plaintiff simply
because he stands in that position on the record. The
rule means that a man who comes to seek the aid of a
court of equity to enforce a claim must be prepared to
submit in such proceedings to any directions which the
known principles of a court of equity may make it
proper to give; he must do justice as to the matters in
respect of which the assistance of equity is asked. In a
court of law it is otherwise: when the plaintiff is found
to be entitled to judgment, the law must take its
course; no terms can be imposed.
* * * 1305. He who comes into equity must come
with clean hands. “A court of equity refuses relief to a
plaintiff whose conduct in regard to the subject- matter
of the litigation has been improper. This was formerly
expressed by the maxim “he who has committed
iniquity shall not have equity”, and relief was refused
where a transaction was based on the plaintiff's fraud or
misrepresentation, or where the plaintiff sought to
enforce a security improperly obtained, or where he
claimed a remedy for a breach of trust which he had
himself procured and whereby he had obtained money.
Later it was said that the plaintiff in equity must come
with perfect propriety of conduct, or with clean hands.
In application of the principle a person will not be
allowed to assert his title to property which he has dealt
with so as to defeat his creditors or evade tax, for he
may not maintain an action by setting up his own
fraudulent design.
The maxim does not, however, mean that equity
strikes at depravity in a general way; the cleanliness
required is to be judged in relation to the relief sought,
and the conduct complained of must have an immediate
and necessary relation to the equity sued for; it must be
depravity in a legal as well as in a moral sense. Thus,
fraud on the part of a minor deprives him of his right to
equitable relief notwithstanding his disability. Where the
transaction is itself unlawful it is not necessary to have
recourse to this principle. In equity, just as at law, no
suit lies in general in respect of an illegal transaction,
but this is on the ground of its illegality, not by reason
of the plaintiff's demerits.”
(ii) In Prestige Lights Ltd., v. State Bank of India [(2007) 8 SCC 449],
at paragraphs 33, 34 and 35, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as follows:
“33. It is thus clear that though the appellant-
Company had approached the High Court under Article 226
of the Constitution, it had not candidly stated all the facts to
the Court. The High Court is exercising discretionary and
extraordinary     jurisdiction   under   Article  226   of   the
Constitution. Over and above, a Court of Law is also a Court
of Equity. It is, therefore, of utmost necessity that when a
party approaches a High Court, he must place all the facts
before the Court without any reservation. If there is
suppression of material facts on the part of the applicant or
twisted facts have been placed before the Court, the Writ
Court may refuse to entertain the petition and dismiss it
without entering into the merits of the matter.
34. The object underlying the above principle has
been succinctly stated by Scrutton, L.J., in R v. Kensington
: 116 LT 136], in the following words: "(I)t has been for
many years the rule of the Court, and one which it is of the
greatest importance to maintain, that when an applicant
comes to the Court to obtain relief on an ex parte statement
he should make a full and fair disclosure of all the material
facts, not law. He must not misstate the law if he can help
the Court is supposed to know the law. But it knows nothing
about the facts, and the applicant must state fully and fairly
the facts, and the penalty by which the Court enforces that
obligation is that if it finds out that the facts have not been
fully and fairly stated to it, the Court will set aside, any action
which it has taken on the faith of the imperfect statement".
35. It is well settled that a prerogative remedy is not
a matter of course. In exercising extraordinary power,
therefore, a Writ Court will indeed bear in mind the conduct
of the party who is invoking such jurisdiction. If the applicant
does not disclose full facts or suppresses relevant materials
or is otherwise guilty of misleading the Court, the Court may
dismiss the action without adjudicating the matter. The rule
has been evolved in larger public interest to deter
unscrupulous litigants from abusing the process of Court by
deceiving it. The very basis of the writ jurisdiction rests in
disclosure of true, complete and correct facts. If the material
facts are not candidly stated or are suppressed or are
distorted, the very functioning of the writ courts would
(iii) In Udyami Evam Khadi Gramodyog Welfare Sanstha and
another v. State of Uttar Pradesh [(2008) 1 SCC 560], at paragraphs
16 and 17, the Hon'ble Apex Court, held as follows:
"16. A writ remedy is an equitable one. A person approaching
a superior court must come with a pair of clean hands. It not
only should not suppress any material fact, but also should not
take recourse to the legal proceedings over and over again
which amounts to abuse of the process of law. In Advocate
General, State of Bihar v. M.P. Khair Industries[(1980) 3 SCC
311], this Court was of the opinion that such a repeated filing
of writ petitions amounts to criminal contempt.
17. For the reasons aforementioned, there is no merit in this
appeal which is dismissed accordingly with costs. Counsel's fee
(iv) In Amar Singh v. Union of India & Others reported in (2011) 7
SCC 69, on the aspect of a litigant approaching the court, with unclean
hands, at, paragraphs 53 to 57, and paragraphs 59 , considered several
judgments. Finally, at paragraph No.60, extracted a paragraph from Dalip
Singh v. State of U.P. and others, [(2010) 2 SCC 114]:
"53. Courts have, over the centuries, frowned upon litigants who,
with intent to deceive and mislead the courts, initiated
proceedings without full disclosure of facts. Courts held that such
litigants have come with "unclean hands" and are not entitled to
be heard on the merits of their case.
54. In Dalglish v. Jarvie [2 Mac. & G. 231, 238], the Court,
speaking through Lord Langdale and Rolfe B., laid down:
"It is the duty of a party asking for an injunction to bring
under the notice of the Court all facts material to the
determination of his right to that injunction; and it is no
excuse for him to say that he was not aware of the
importance of any fact which he has omitted to bring
55. In Castelli v. Cook [1849 (7) Hare, 89, 94], Vice Chancellor
Wigram, formulated the same principles as follows:
"A plaintiff applying ex parte comes under a contract with
the Court that he will state the whole case fully and fairly
to the Court. If he fails to do that, and the Court finds,
when the other party applies to dissolve the injunction,
that any material fact has been suppressed or not properly
brought forward, the plaintiff is told that the Court will not
decide on the merits, and that, as has broken faith with
56. In Republic of Peru v. Dreyfus Brothers & Company [55
L.T. 802,803], Justice Kay reminded us of the same position by
"...If there is an important misstatement, speaking for
myself, I have never hesitated, and never shall hesitate
until the rule is altered, to discharge the order at once, so
as to impress upon all persons who are suitors in this
Court the importance of dealing in good faith with the
Court when ex parte applications are made."
57. In one of the most celebrated cases upholding this principle,
in the Court of Appeal in R. v. Kensington Income Tax
"…........and it has been for many years the rule of the
Court, and one which it is of the greatest importance to
maintain, that when an applicant comes to the Court to
obtain relief on an ex parte statement he should make a
full and fair disclosure of all the material facts- facts, now
law. He must not misstate the law if he can help it - the
court is supposed to know the law. But it knows nothing
about the facts, and the applicant must state fully and
fairly the facts, and the penalty by which the Court
enforces that obligation is that if it finds out that the facts
have been fully and fairly stated to it, the Court will set
aside any action which it has taken on the faith of the
59. The aforesaid requirement of coming to Court with clean
hands has been repeatedly reiterated by this Court in a large
number of cases. Some of which may be noted, they are: Hari
Narain v. Badri Das - AIR 1963 SC 1558, Welcome Hotel and
others v. State of A.P. and others - (1983) 4 SCC 575, G.
Narayanaswamy        Reddy    (Dead)    by  LRs.   and   another   v.
Government of Karnatka and another - (1991) 3 SCC 261, S.P.
Chengalvaraya Naidu (Dead) by LRs. v. Jagannath (Dead) by LRs.
and others (1994) 1 SCC 1, A.V. Papayya Sastry and others v.
Government of A.P. and others - (2007) 4 SCC 221, Prestige
Lights Limited v. SBI - (2007) 8 SCC 449, Sunil Poddar and others
v. Union Bank of India - (2008) 2 SCC 326, K.D.Sharma v. SAIL
and others - (2008) 12 SCC 481, G. Jayashree and others v.
Bhagwandas S. Patel and others - (2009) 3 SCC 141, Dalip Singh
v. State of U.P. and others - (2010) 2 SCC 114.
60. In the last noted case of Dalip Singh (supra), this Court has
given this concept a new dimension which has a far reaching
effect. We, therefore, repeat those principles here again:
"For many centuries Indian society cherished two basic
values of life i.e. "satya"(truth) and "ahimsa (non-violence),
Mahavir, Gautam Budha and Mahatma Gandhi guided the
people to ingrain these values in their daily life. Truth
constituted an integral part of the justice-delivery system
which was in vogue in the pre- independence era and the
people used to feel proud to tell the truth in the courts
irrespective of the consequences. However, post-
Independence period has seen drastic changes in our value
system. The materialism has overshadowed the old ethos
and the quest for personal gain has become so intense that
those involved in litigation do not hesitate to take shelter of
falsehood, misrepresentation and suppression of facts in the
court proceedings.
In the last 40 years, a new creed of litigants has cropped
up. Those who belong to this creed do not have any respect
for truth. They shamelessly resort to falsehood and
unethical means for achieving their goals. In order to meet
the challenge posed by this new creed of litigants, the
courts have, from time to time, evolved new rules and it is
now well established that a litigant, who attempts to pollute
the stream of justice or who touches the pure fountain of
justice with tainted hands, is not entitled to any relief,
(v) In Kishore Samrite v. State of U.P. & Others [(2013) 2 SCC 398],
at paragraphs 32 to 36, the Hon'ble Apex Court held as follows:
"32. With the passage of time, it has been realised that
people used to feel proud to tell the truth in the Courts,
irrespective of the consequences but that practice no longer
proves true, in all cases. The Court does not sit simply as an
umpire in a contest between two parties and declare at the
end of the combat as to who has won and who has lost but it
has a legal duty of its own, independent of parties, to take
active role in the proceedings and reach at the truth, which is
the foundation of administration of justice. Therefore, the
truth should become the ideal to inspire the courts to pursue.
This can be achieved by statutorily mandating the Courts to
become active seekers of truth. To enable the courts to ward
off unjustified interference in their working, those who indulge
in immoral acts like perjury, prevarication and motivated
falsehood, must be appropriately dealt with. The parties must
state forthwith sufficient factual details to the extent that it
reduces the ability to put forward false and exaggerated
claims and a litigant must approach the Court with clean
hands. It is the bounden duty of the Court to ensure that
dishonesty and any attempt to surpass the legal process must
be effectively curbed and the Court must ensure that there is
no wrongful, unauthorised or unjust gain to anyone as a
result of abuse of the process of the Court. One way to curb
this tendency is to impose realistic or punitive costs.
33. The party not approaching the Court with clean
hands would be liable to be non-suited and such party, who
has also succeeded in polluting the stream of justice by
making patently false statements, cannot claim relief,
especially under Article 136 of the Constitution. While
approaching the court, a litigant must state correct facts and
come with clean hands. Where such statements of facts are
based on some information, the source of such information
must also be disclosed. Totally misconceived petition amounts
to abuse of the process of the court and such a litigant is not
required to be dealt with lightly, as a petition containing
misleading and inaccurate statement, if filed, to achieve an
ulterior purpose amounts to abuse of the process of the court.
A litigant is bound to make “full and true disclosure of facts”.
(Refer: Tilokchand H.B. Motichand & Ors. v. Munshi & Anr.
[(1969) 1 SCC 110]; A. Shanmugam v. Ariya Kshatriya
Sangam & Anr. [(2012) 6 SCC 430]; Chandra Shashi v. Anil
Kumar Verma [(1995) SCC 1 421]; Abhyudya Sanstha v.
Union of India & Ors. [(2011) 6 SCC 145]; State of Madhya
Pradesh v. Narmada Bachao Andolan & Anr. [(2011) 7
SCC 639]; Kalyaneshwari v. Union of India & Anr. [(2011) 3
34. The person seeking equity must do equity. It is not
just the clean hands, but also clean mind, clean heart and
clean objective that are the equi-fundamentals of judicious
litigation. The legal maxim jure naturae aequum est neminem
cum alterius detrimento et injuria fieri locupletiorem , which
means that it is a law of nature that one should not be
enriched by the loss or injury to another, is the percept for
Courts. Wide jurisdiction of the court should not become a
source of abuse of the process of law by the disgruntled
litigant. Careful exercise is also necessary to ensure that the
litigation   is   genuine,    not    motivated   by   extraneous
considerations and imposes an obligation upon the litigant to
disclose the true facts and approach the court with
clean hands.
35. No litigant can play “hide and seek” with the courts
or adopt “pick and choose”. True facts ought to be disclosed
as the Court knows law, but not facts. One, who does not
come with candid facts and clean breast cannot hold a writ of
the court with soiled hands. Suppression or concealment of
material facts is impermissible to a litigant or even as a
technique of advocacy. In such cases, the Court is duty bound
to discharge rule nisi and such applicant is required to be
dealt with for contempt of court for abusing the process of
the court. {K.D. Sharma v. Steel Authority of India Ltd. & Ors.
36. Another settled canon of administration of justice is
that no litigant should be permitted to misuse the judicial
process by filing frivolous petitions. No litigant has a right to
unlimited drought upon the court time and public money in
order to get his affairs settled in the manner as he wishes.
Easy access to justice should not be used as a licence to file
misconceived and frivolous petitions. [Buddhi Kota Subbarao
(Dr.) v. K. Parasaran, (1996) 5 SCC 530)]."
25. Discussion of facts made above would make it clear that while
rendering the impugned judgment, learned single Judge was under the
impression that the entire facts and circumstances were placed by the
appellant before the writ court, which only persuaded the learned single
Judge to direct the respondent to accept the basic tax from the appellant.
However, when a review petition was filed by the respondents in W.P.(C)
No.32652 of 2014, the learned single Judge realised that there was
material suppression on the part of the appellant while filing the writ
petition. It was accordingly, the learned single Judge reviewed the
judgment dated 12.10.2018 in W.P.(C) No.32652/2014, holding that the
learned single Judge had the power to review the judgment resorting to
Article 226 of the Constitution of India apart from other powers since the
High Court is a court of record as is adumbrated in Article 215 of the
Constitution of India which is an all inclusive power including the power to
review a Judgment of its own, if circumstances so warrant.
26. The honesty, fairness, purity of mind, and approaching the writ
court with clean hands should be of the highest order and is a sine qua
non to maintain a writ petition and secure orders, failing which the litigant
should be shown the exit door at the earliest point of time. Moreover,
suppression is a factor quite strange and alien, and an antithesis to rule of
law and fundamental governance of the country, and the tendency of the
litigant to suppress material aspects if not eradicated, the resultant
quotient would be lack of faith of the citizens in the legal system and the
courts of law, and if that is allowed to happen, it would ruin the
basic tenets of the democratic system and the rule of law prevailing in
this country.
27. Though various contentions were raised by the appellant to
substantiate that there is no power to review the judgment passed in a
writ petition, we are unable to accept the same, for the reason that it is
well settled proposition in law that being a Court of record, the High Court
is vested with powers to proceed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India itself and review a judgment, if it is found that there was material
suppression, and the Court was not right in granting a verdict in favour of
the writ petitioner due to suppression of material facts. The learned single
Judge has elaborately considered the issues raised by the appellant, by
relying upon the propositions of law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in its various judgments and had arrived at the right conclusion to
review the Judgment.
28. Taking into account the contentions put forth by the appellant,
the submissions made by the respondents in the appeal, and the settled
legal position, we have no reason to think that the learned single Judge
had committed any jurisdictional error or illegality in exercising the
discretion, to interfere with the impugned judgment, in this intra court
appeal filed under Section 5 of the Kerala High Court Act.
In the result, the writ appeal fails and accordingly, it is dismissed.