1)    This is an application filed by the prosecution seeking
recall of order dated 21.12.2011 passed by this Court in
Criminal Revision No.18/2011, whereby the aforesaid
criminal revision petition has been dismissed.
2)    It appears that FIR No.24/2003 for offences under
Arms Act and Section 30 Police Act came to be registered
with Police Station, Zainapora in connection with brutal
killing of 24 persons belonging to minority community at
Village Nadimarg in the year 2003. After investigation of the
case, the challan came to be filed against as many as seven
accused persons initially before the Court of Principal
Sessions Judge, Pulwama, that was later on transferred to
the Court of Principal Sessions Judge, Shopian, upon the
creation of the said court.
3)    It seems that during the pendency of the trial, the
prosecution moved an application before the trial court
seeking permission to examine material prosecution
witnesses on commission, as according to the prosecution,
these witnesses had migrated out of Kashmir Valley and
they were reluctant to depose before the trial court at
Shopian in view of the threat perception. The aforesaid
application came to be dismissed by the Principal Sessions
Judge, Shopian, vide his order dated 09.02.2011. The said
order was challenged by the prosecution by way of Criminal
Revision    Petition  No.18/2011.    On    21.12.2011,       the
aforesaid revision petition came to be dismissed by this
Court. It is this order which is sought to be recalled by the
petitioner by way of the instant application.
3)    I have heard learned counsel for the parties and
perused the material on record.
4)    Learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that
the order sought to be recalled has been passed without
hearing the petitioner and without adverting to the merits
of the case. According to the learned counsel, the said order
is non-est in the eyes of law as a criminal revision petition
cannot be dismissed for non-prosecution.
5)    On   the   other  hand,    learned   counsel      for   the
respondents has contended that a criminal court has no
jurisdiction to review its own order in view of the specific
bar contained in Section 369 of the J&K Cr.P.C, which is
applicable to the instant case.
6)    Before adverting to the rival contentions of the learned
counsel for the parties, it would be apt to notice certain
other developments that have taken place after the passing
of order dated 21.12.2011.
7)    It appears that the petitioner-State filed a petition
seeking Special Leave to Appeal against the judgment and
order dated 26.02.2014 passed by this Court in a petition
bearing 561-A No.243/2012. The said petition was filed by
the petitioner-State before this Court to challenge the
proceedings from the date of framing of charge by the trial
court and a direction was sought for fresh trial of the case
or in the alternative to transfer the case to any court of
competent jurisdiction at Jammu so that statements of all
the migrated witnesses available at Jammu are recorded in
the said case without any fear. The said petition came to be
dismissed by this Court in terms of order dated 26.02.2014
and the said order, as already noted was challenged by the
State before the Supreme Court by way of a Special Leave
8)    On 16.07.2015, the Supreme Court disposed of the
Special Leave to Appeal by observing as under:
“Looking at the facts of the case, in our opinion, it
would be proper if an application for recall is filed
before the High Court so that the order dated
21.12.2011 may be recalled.
Needless to say, if an application is filed for recall of
the order, the observations made in the impugned
order shall not be taken into account while deciding
the application.
In view of the above, the Special Leave Petition is
disposed of.”
9)    As is clear from the afore-quoted order of the Supreme
Court, the petitioner-State has been given liberty to file a
recall application before this Court so that order dated
21.12.2011 may be recalled.
10)   The contention of the learned counsel for the
respondents is that the impugned order cannot be recalled
as a Criminal Court including the High Court, in exercise
of its criminal jurisdiction, does not have power to review
its own order. There can be no dispute to the proposition of
law canvassed by learned counsel for the respondents but
it is equally a settled proposition of law that a criminal
revision petition cannot be dismissed for non-prosecution.
Though this Court, while dismissing the Criminal Revision
Petition No.18/2011, has observed that the order of the trial
court is well-reasoned and the same does not call for
interference but the fact of the matter remains that the
Court was persuaded to dismiss the revision petition,
primarily, because nobody had appeared on behalf of the
petitioner-State. The order dated 21.12.2011 does not
specify the reasons as to why the revision petition lacks
11)   The Supreme Court in the case of Madan Lal Kapoor
vs. Rajiv Thapar and others, (2007) 7 SCC 623, has held
that a criminal matter cannot be dismissed for default and
that it must be decided on merits because such matters
relate to administration of criminal justice. In the same
judgment, the Supreme Court has categorically held that a
criminal revision petition cannot be dismissed for non-
12)   In State of Punjab vs. Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar
and others, (2011) 14 SCC 770, the Supreme Court has,
while examining the bar to review/alteration of a judgment
in view of the provisions contained in Section 362 of the
Central Cr. P. C, which is in pari materia with Section 369
of the J&K Cr. P. C, observed as under:
“ If a judgment has been pronounced without jurisdiction
or in violation of principles of natural justice or where the
order has been pronounced without giving an opportunity
of being heard to a party affected by it or where an order
was obtained by abuse of the process of court which would
really amount to its being without jurisdiction, inherent
powers can be exercised to recall such order for the reason
that in such an eventuality the order becomes a nullity and
the provisions of Section 362 Cr.P.C. would not operate. In
such eventuality, the judgment is manifestly contrary to
the audi alteram partem rule of natural justice. The power
of recall is different from the power of altering/reviewing
the      judgment.      However,     the     party    seeking
recall/alteration has to establish that it was not at fault.
(Vide Chitawan & Ors. v. Mahboob Ilahi,; Deepak
Thanwardas Balwani v. State of Maharashtra, Habu v.
State of Rajasthan; Swarth Mahto v. Dharmdeo Narain
Singh;      Makkapati Nagaswara            Sastri v. S.S.
Satyanarayan, Asit Kumar Kar v. State of West Bengal &
Ors., and Vishnu Agarwal v. State of U.P. & Anr.”
13)    From the foregoing enunciation of law on the subject,
it is clear that the power of recall is different from the power
of review of the judgment. Therefore, this Court does have
jurisdiction to recall an order which is a nullity in the eyes
of law.
14)    As already noted, the criminal revision petition against
the impugned order passed by the learned Sessions Judge,
Shopian, has been dismissed by this Court without hearing
the petitioner and without giving reasons for its dismissal.
Therefore, the same can be recalled by this Court by
treating the said order as a nullity being against the settled
law that a criminal revision petition cannot be dismissed for
non-prosecution. Even otherwise, the observations of the
Supreme Court in the order dated 16.07.2015, as quoted
hereinbefore, clearly indicate that the order dismissing the
revision petition deserves to be recalled so that the legality
of the impugned order passed by the Principal Sessions
Judge, Shopian, are determined after hearing both the
15)     For the foregoing reasons, the application is allowed
and order dated 21.12.2011 passed by this Court is
recalled. The Registry is directed to post the revision
petition for rehearing on 15.09.2022.
16)     Instant application (CrlM No.4395/2022) stands
disposed of.
Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No