Ms. Priyanka Chowdhury …for the Appellants.
Mr. Kunal Vajani ……. For the respondent no. 1.
1. This intra-court appeal by the Chief Election
Commissioner and Others is filed challenging
the   order  of   the  learned   Single  Judge
interfering with the “noting of defects” on the
writ petitioner’s nomination for the election
notified by the Election Commission of India
on 02.03.2021 to the Constituent Assembly
in the State of West Bengal in terms of the
provision of the Representation of the People
Act, 1951; hereinafter, “RP Act”, for short.
2. The appeal is founded fundamentally on the
plea that the order of the learned Single
Judge was issued on the face of the bar to
interference by courts in electoral matters
imposed     under     Article   329(b)    of   the
Constitution of India. It is also the plea that
the order impugned in this appeal was issued
without notice to the statutory authorities
under the RP Act, including the Returning
3. Supporting     the    appeal,    learned   Senior
Counsel Rakesh Divedhi made reference to
the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of
India in Mohinder Singh Gill and another vs.
others   (1978)   1   SCC     405   and   Election
Commission of India Vs. Ashok Kumar &
others, (2000) 8 SCC 216 = AIR 2000 SC
2977.    Specific   reference     was   made    to
paragraphs 28 and 30 of the judgment in
Election Commission of India Vs. Ashok Kumar
as reported in AIR.
4. Per contra, learned Senior Advocate Kapil
Sibal supporting the impugned judgment
argued    that,   seeking    judicial  review   in
relation   to   the   defects   noted   regarding
nomination and the resultant decision will
not    have    the    effect    of    interrupting,
obstructing    or   protracting      the    election
proceedings    in  any     manner      when    such
question is raised before the time fixed for
withdrawal of the nominations; and thus,
judicial review is available. Reference was
also made to the material papers of the writ
petition to demonstrate that there was no
defect of a substantial nature or otherwise in
the   nomination     submitted      by    the   writ
petitioner.
5. Examining      Section     36(4)    and     Section
100(1)(c) of the RP Act, we note that scrutiny
of nomination papers is a stage in the
election process and the result of such
scrutiny would be available for adjudication
in terms of Section 100(1)(c) of the RP Act
which     makes      improper       rejection      of
nomination as a ground to declare the
election to be void; while clause 4 of Section
36 which relates to scrutiny of nomination
provides that the Returning Officer shall not
reject any nomination paper on the ground of
any defect which is not of a “substantial
character”. Trying to draw a line between the
phrase    ‘improperly     rejected’    in   Section
100(1)(c) of the RP Act and the rejection of
nomination paper on the ground of any defect
which is not of a “substantial character” as
occurring in Section 36(4) of the RP Act, it
would be so thin that it always swings in
favour    of   having  that    issue   open    for
consideration in the Election Petition. This is
also because, any rejection of the nomination
paper by the returning officer on the ground
of any defect and the question whether such
defect is of a ‘substantial character’ or not, as
well as the question whether such rejection
amounts      to  improper    rejection  for   the
purpose of Section 100(1)(c) of the RP Act are
essentially mixed questions of facts and law.
In the trial of Election Petition in terms of
Chapter III in Part VI of the RP Act, such
issue could be gone into comprehensively.
Such questions are not to be decided by the
writ court merely as if it is a jurisdictional
issue or an issue of law only.
6. Relying on the decision of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court of India referred in N.P.
Constituency, Namakkal, Salem Dist. & others
reported as AIR 1952 SC 64, Their Lordships
of the Apex Court, in Manda Jaganath Vs.
K.S. Rathnam and others reported in (2004) 7
SCC 492, held that the possible erroneous
actions of Returning Officer which could be
considered as amenable to correction in the
writ jurisdiction are only such errors which
would have the effect of interfering in the free
flow of the scheduled election or hinder the
progress of the election. It was held that if by
an erroneous order, conduct of the election is
not hindered, then the courts under Article
226 of the Constitution should not interfere
with the orders of the Returning Officer,
remedy for which lies in an Election Petition
only. The paramount consideration is and
ought to be the progress of the election.
7. For   the   aforesaid  reasons,    this  appeal
succeeds. It is accordingly allowed and the
order of the learned Single Judge is set aside.
The prayer for stay made by learned counsel
appearing for the respondent no. 1 is considered and