CrMP No. 508 of 2023 in Cr. Revision No. 332 of 2021
Decided on: March 1, 2023
Whether approved for reporting? 1Yes.
For the Petitioner                     :      Mr.   H
ou:    Mr. Kulbhushan Khajuria, Advocate.
By way of instant application filed under S.482 CrPC, prayer has
been made on behalf of the applicant/accused for compounding of the
offence under S.147 of the Negotiable Instruments Act (hereinafter,
‘Act’). No reply is intended to be filed on behalf of the Learned Counsel
appearing for the non-applicant.
2.         Precisely, the facts of the case, as emerge from the record, are
H   that the respondent/complainant (hereafter, ‘complainant’) instituted
complaint under S.138 of the Act against the accused in the competent
court of law alleging therein that the accused issued cheque bearing
283466 dated 25.8.2016 (Ex. CW-1/B) amounting to Rs.80,000/- in his
favour drawn at UCO Bank, Jubbal, District Shimla, however, fact
remains that the aforesaid cheque was dishonored on account
insufficient funds in the account of the accused vide memo dated
Whether the reporters of the local papers may be allowed to see the judgment?
17.11.2016, and resultantly, the complainant instituted proceedings
under S.138 of the Act in the competent Court of law. Learned trial
Court on the basis of evidence adduced on record by parties, held
accused guilty of having committed offence punishable under S.138 of
the Act and convicted and sentenced him to undergo simple
imprisonment for six months and to pay compensation to the tune of
Rs.1.20 Lakh to the complainant. Accused filed appeal but the same
was also dismissed, after which he approached this court under Ss.
397 and 401 CrPC by way of Cr. Revision No. 332 of 2021, but the
same was also dismissed on merit vide order dated 10.11.2022.
After passing of order dated 10.11.2022, accused compromised
the matter with the respondent, whereby he has paid Rs.50,000/- in
cash to the learned counsel for the respondent and qua Rs. 70,000/-
deposited with learned trial Court, accused has no objection, in case
said amount is released in favour of the respondent. On account of
aforesaid settlement, accused has approached this court in the instant
application filed under S.482 CrPC, praying therein for compounding of
H   the offence under S.147 of the Act. Learned counsel for the non-
applicant fairly states that since entire amount of compensation has
been deposited by the accused, respondent shall have no objection in
case prayer of the accused for compounding of the offence and
thereafter his acquittal is accepted.
4.     The question which requires consideration in the instant
application is that, whether after upholding the judgments of conviction
and order of sentence passed by learned courts below, this court can
proceed to compound the offence or not?
5.    This court vide judgment passed in CrMP No. 1197 of 2017 in
Cr. Revision No. 394 of 2015 titled Gulab Singh v. Vidya Sagar
Sharma, while relying upon judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court as well as
other Constitutional Courts has already held that court, while exercising
power under S.147 of Act can proceed to compound offence even in
those cases, where accused stands convicted. Relevant portion of the
order passed by this court in order supra is reproduced as under:
Before acceding to aforesaid joint request having been made by
learned counsel for the respective parties, moot question arise for
determination of this Court is whether it has power to review/recall its own
order/judgment passed in Criminal Revision No.394 of 2015, wherein
judgment of conviction recorded by both the Courts below came to be upheld.
9. Mr. Manohar Lal Sharma, learned counsel representing the petitioner, has
invited attention of this Court to the judgment passed by Hon’ble High Court
ig  h     of Rajasthan in Naresh Kumar Sharma versus State of Rajasthan & another,
Criminal Misc. Application No.371 of 2016 in Criminal Revision Petition
No.1267 of 2016, to suggests that in view of amicable settlement arrived inter
se the parties, this Court has power to recall its judgment in the light of the
provisions contained in Section 147 of the Act, which permits compounding of
H         the offence under Section 138 of the Act. At this stage, it would be profitable
to reproduce the judgment passed by Hon’ble High Court of Rajasthan
“The accused-petitioner has field this criminal misc. application under
section 482 Cr.P.C read with section 147 of Negotiable Instruments
Act( for short the ‘Act’) with a prayer to review/recall the order dated
6.10.2016 passed by this Court in SB Criminal Revision Petition
No.1267/2016 in the light of compromise dated 4.11.2016
subsequently entered between the parties and as a consequences
thereof to acquit the accused petitioner for the offence under Section
138 of N.I. Act.
Vide order dated 6.10.2016, the aforesaid revision petition filed by
the petitioner was dismissed by this Court while upholding and
affirming the judgment and order of conviction and sentence passed
by the trial Court as well as by the Appellate Court. It was jointly
submitted by the learned counsel for the parties that after the order
dated 6.10.2016 the parties have amicably settled their dispute and
entered into compromise and the amount in the dispute has been
paid by the petitioner to the respondent-complainant.
It was further submitted that although the revision petition has been
dismissed by this Court on merits vide order dated 6.10.2016, but
even then that order can be recalled in the light of provisions of
Section 147 of N.I.Act which permits compound of the offence under
Section 138 of the Act at any stage and the accused can be
acquitted.
In support of their submissions, they relied upon the case of K.
Subramanian Vs. R.Rajathi reported in (2010) 15 SCC 352 and order
dated 7.7.2015 passed by a Single Bench of Hon’ble Gujarat High
Court in S.B. Criminal Misc. Application (Recall) No.10232/2015 filed
in Special Criminal Application No.3026/2014.
On consideration of submissions jointly made on behalf of the
respective parties and the material including the compromise entered
into between the parties and the fact that the amount in dispute has
been paid by the accused-petitioner to the respondent- complainant
and the principles of law laid down in the aforesaid decisions, I find it
a fit case in the criminal misc. application is to be allowed and the
order dated 6.10.2016 is to be recalled.
Consequently, the criminal misc. application is allowed and the order
dated 6.10.2016 is recalled and all the orders whereby the accused-
petitioner was convicted and sentenced for the offence under Section
C       138 of N.I. Act are set aside and as a consequence thereof he is
acquitted therefrom.”
10. Reliance is also placed upon the judgment passed by Hon’ble Gujarat
ig  hHigh Court, wherein similar application came to be filed for recalling the
judgment passed by the Hon’ble High Court of Gujarat. In the aforesaid
judgment, Hon’ble Gujarat High Court, has reiterated that judgment passed
by the High Court affirming the judgment of conviction recorded under
H    Section 138 of the Act, can be recalled in view of the specific provisions
contained in Section 147 of the Act, which provides for compounding of
offence allegedly committed under Section 138 of the Act.
11. The Hon’ble Apex Court in K. Subramanian Vs. R.Rajathi; (2010)15
Supreme Court Cases 352, also in similar situation ordered for compounding
of offence after recording of conviction by the courts below, wherein it has
been held as under:-
“6. Thereafter a compromise was entered into and the petitioner
claims that he has paid Rs. 4,52,289 to the respondent. In support of
this claim, the petitioner has produced an affidavit sworn by him on
1.12.2008. The petitioner has also produced an affidavit sworn by P.
Kaliappan, Power of attorney holder of R. Rajathi on 1.12.2008
mentioning that he has received a sum of Rs. 4,52,289 due under the
dishonoured cheques in full discharge of the value of cheques and he
is not willing to prosecute the petitioner.
7. The learned counsel for the petitioner states at the Bar that the
petitioner was arrested on 30.7.2008 and has undergone the
sentence imposed on him by the trial Court and confirmed by the
Sessions Court, the High Court as well as by this Court. The two
affidavits sought to be produced by the petitioner as additional
documents would indicate that indeed a compromise has taken place
between the petitioner and the respondent and the respondent has
accepted the compromise offered by the petitioner pursuant to which
he has received a sum of Rs.4,52,289. In the affidavit filed by the
respondent a prayer is made to permit the petitioner to compound the
offence and close the proceedings.
8. Having regard to the salutary provisions of Section 147 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act read with Section 320 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, this Court is of the opinion that in view of the
compromise arrived at between the parties, the petitioner should be
permitted to compound the offence committed by him under Section
138 of the Code.”
12. The Hon’ble Apex Court in the aforesaid judgment has categorically held
that in view of the provisions contained under Section 147 of the Act, read
with Section 320 of Cr.P.C, compromise arrived inter se the parties, can be
accepted and offence committed under Section 138 of the Act, can be
ordered to be compounded.
13. Another question which arise for determination/ adjudication of this Court
ig  his with regard to maintainability of present review petition. Admittedly, instant
review petition has been filed after withdrawal of Special Leave Petition,
preferred by the applicant/ petitioner against the judgment passed by this
Court in Criminal Revision No.394 of 2015, wherein conviction/ sentence
awarded by the Court below came to be upheld. In the case at hand, Special
H    Leave to Appeal (Crl.) filed by the applicant/petitioner was dismissed as
withdrawn vide order dated 18.08.2017. Subsequent to passing of aforesaid
order by Hon’ble Apex Court, petitioner/applicant has approached this Court,
praying therein for modification/recalling of its judgment dated 10.3.2017,
passed in Criminal Revision No.394 of 2015 on the ground that parties have
amicably settled the matter and entire amount stands paid to the
respondent/complainant in terms of judgment passed by the learned trial
Court. Learned counsel representing the petitioner/applicant, contended that
once the Supreme Court permits withdrawal of a Special Leave Petition
without recording reasons, it is as if no appeal was ever filed or entertained,
since in the absence of grant of special leave, there is no appeal in existence.
Learned counsel further contended that where a Special Leave Petition is
permitted to be withdrawn and equally when it is dismissed in limine without
recording reasons, the High Court judgment neither merges into any
proceedings before the Supreme Court nor is it in any manner affected by the
filing and subsequent withdrawal or dismissal of the Special Leave Petition.
In support of aforesaid contentions, learned counsel representing the
applicant/ petitioner also invited attention of this Court to the judgment
passed by the three Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in Kunhayammed
Vs. State of Keral (2000) 6 SCC 359, wherein it has been held that after
dismissal of SLP in limine, review petition can be filed because at the stage
of dismissal of SLP, there exists no appeal in the eyes of law.
14. Before ascertaining the correctness of aforesaid submissions having
been made by learned counsel representing the applicant/petitioner, it would
be profitable to take note of judgment passed by Hon’ble Delhi High Court in
Kanoria Industries Limited & ors. Versus Union of India & Ors on 27th
February, 2017, wherein it has been held as under:-
“8. We are in the factual situation of the present case concerned not
with a case of dismissal in limine by a non-speaking order of an SLP
preferred against the judgment of which review is sought but with
C       dismissal as withdrawn of the SLP. Though the review petitioners,
while seeking to withdraw the SLP also sought liberty to move this
Court in review petition but the Supreme Court merely dismissed the
SLP as withdrawn and has not stated that the liberty sought had
been granted.
ig  h        9. The question which arises is, whether the dismissal as withdrawn
of the SLP, even in the absence of the words "with liberty sought" is
to be read as grant of liberty.
10. The review petitioners obviously were of the opinion that without
the aforesaid words, they did not have liberty to approach this Court
H            by way of review and claim to have made an application to the
Supreme Court in this regard but which application is stated to have
been refused to be listed.
11. In our opinion, it is not for us to venture into, whether the order,
notwithstanding having not provided that the review petitioners had
been granted liberty, grants liberty or not. It cannot be lost sight of
that it is not as if the counsel for the review petitioners, when the SLP
came up before the Court, stated that the filing of SLP was
misconceived and withdrew the same. The order records that it was
"after some arguments" that the counsel for the review petitioners
sought permission to withdraw the SLP. It is also not as if the
Supreme Court is not known to, while dismissing the SLP as
withdrawn, grant such liberty. The order thus has to be read as it is
i.e., of dismissal of SLP as withdrawn.
12. Rule 9 of Order XV titled "Petitions Generally" of the Supreme
Court Rules, 2013 provides for withdrawal of the petition. Once a
proceeding / petition is permitted to be withdrawn, the effect of such
withdrawal is as if, it had not been preferred. It is a different matter
that the Rules may prohibit the petitioner who so withdraws his
petition from re-filing the same or even in the absence of such Rules,
such re-filing may be treated as an abuse of the process or by way of
re-litigation. But in law a dismissal of the petition as withdrawn cannot
be at par with the dismissal of the petition.
13. Neither counsel has however addressed us on this aspect and
has proceeded on the premise as if dismissal as withdrawn is the
same as dismissal of the petition.
14. As far as the effects, if any, of dismissal in limine of a SLP on a
subsequent review petition before the High Court is concerned, which
arise for consideration are firstly whether, Abbai Maligai Partnership
Firm and Kunhayammed (supra), both of three Judges Bench hold
differently and secondly whether the two deal with different factual
situations i.e. of a review having been preferred before the dismissal
of SLP or after the dismissal of SLP. We have studied the two
judgments in this light.
15. We find that in Kunhayammed (supra) the review petition was
filed after the dismissal of SLP. The Supreme Court was approached
aggrieved from the order of the High Court overruling the preliminary
objection as to the maintainability of the review petition on the ground
of the SLP having been dismissed. Supreme Court held that where
the judgment of the High Court has come up to the Supreme Court
by SLP and the SLP is dismissed, the judgment of the High Court
does not merge in the order of dismissal of SLP and the aggrieved
party is not deprived of any statutory right of review, if it was available
C  and he can pursue it; it may be that the review Court may interfere or
it may not interfere depending upon the law and principles applicable
to interference in review; but the High Court, if it exercises a power of
review or deals with the review application on merits, cannot be said
to be wrong in exercising statutory jurisdiction or power vested in it. It
ig  h   was expressly held that review can be filed even after SLP is
dismissed and as also before special leave is granted but not after it
is granted. It was held that once special leave is granted, the
jurisdiction to consider the validity of the High Court’s order vested in
the Supreme Court and the High Court cannot entertain a review
thereafter unless such a review application was preferred in the High
H       Court before the SLP was granted. With respect to Abbai Maligai
Partnership Firm (supra) it was observed that the facts and
circumstances of the case persuaded the Supreme Court to form an
opinion that the tenants were abusing the process of the Court by
approaching the High Court and the very entertainment of review
petition and then reversing the earlier order was an affront of the
order of the Supreme Court. It was explained that the three Judges
Bench in Abbai Maligai Partnership Firm (supra) nowhere in the
course of judgment relied on the doctrine of merger for taking the
view they had taken and rather a careful reading of Abbai Maligai
Partnership Firm (supra) also fortified the view taken in
16. It would thus be seen that Kunhayammed (supra), though of a
Bench of the same strength as Abbai Maligai Partnership Firm
(supra), did not read Abbai Maligai Partnership Firm (supra) as laying
down anything to the contrary than what was held in Kunhayammed
(supra). The Supreme Court having expressly held so, it is not open
today to the respondent UOI to contend or for us to hold that there is
a conflict in the two.
17. We now proceed to analyze whether Sunil Kumar (supra) carves
out any different factual scenario in which Abbai Maligai Partnership
Firm and Kunhayammed (supra) operate.
18. Supreme Court in Sunil Kumar (supra) was concerned with a
petitioner who was held to be a blackmarketer exploiting
helplessness of the poor people of the society and capable of
engaging lawyers and found to be abusing the process of the Court
and wanting to use the Courts as a safe haven. The subject matter of
Sunil Kumar (supra) was a transaction under Section 7 of the
Essential Commodities Act, 1955. The petitioner therein was found to
have approached the High Court for modifying the order of his
conviction after the SLP against the order of conviction had been
dismissed and had again preferred the SLP to the Supreme Court
against the order of the High Court refusing to modify the order of
conviction. It was held that Section 362 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 puts a complete embargo on the Criminal Court to
reconsider after the delivery of judgment as the Court becomes
functus officio. In this background when the petitioner relied on
Kunhayammed (supra), it was observed that Kunhayammed (supra)
has been explained in various subsequent judgments as holding that
review petition filed before the High Court after approaching the
Supreme Court amounts to abuse of the process of the Court.
Reference in this regard was made to Meghmala (supra). However,
after holding so, it was further held that the ratio of Kunhayammed
(supra) has no application to Sunil Kumar (supra) as Kunhayammed
C      (supra) was dealing with civil cases.
19. We have already noticed above that in Kunhayammed (supra)
the review petition was filed after the order of dismissal of the SLP.
ig  h       20. What we find is that the observations, of preferring review petition
after the dismissal of SLP amounting to abuse of the process of the
Court, in Abbai Maligai Partnership Firm (supra) as well as in Sunil
Kumar (supra) are on a factual finding of the petitioners therein
abusing the process of the Court and not on the maintainability of the
review petition. Certainly, if we are to find the review petitioners
H           herein also to be abusing the process of the Court by preferring this
review petition after withdrawal of the SLP preferred against the
judgment of which review is sought, the review petition of the review
petitioners would also suffer the same fate. However it would not
make the review not maintainable.”
15. Reliance is also placed upon the judgment passed by Hon’ble Apex Court
in Kunha Yammed and others versus State of Kerala and others; (2000) 6
Supreme Court Cases 359, wherein it has been held as under:-
“22. We may refer to a recent decision, by Two-Judges
Bench, of this Court in V.M. Salgaocar & Bros. Pvt. Ltd. Vs.
Commissioner of Income Tax 2000 (3) Scale 240, holding
that when a special leave petition is dismissed, this Court
does not comment on the correctness or otherwise of the
order from which leave to appeal is sought. What the Court
means is that it does not consider it to be a fit case for
exercising its jurisdiction under Article 136 of the
Constitution. That certainly could not be so when appeal is
dismissed though by a nonspeaking order. Here the doctrine
of merger applies. In that case the Supreme Court upholds
the decision of the High Court or of the Tribunal. This
doctrine of merger does not apply in the case of dismissal of
special leave petition under Article 136. When appeal is
dismissed, order of the High Court is merged with that of the
Supreme Court. We find ourselves in entire agreement with
the law so stated. We are clear in our mind that an order
dismissing a special leave petition, more so when it is by a
non-speaking order, does not result in merger of the order
impugned into the order of the Supreme Court.
27.A petition for leave to appeal to this Court may be
dismissed by a non-speaking order or by a speaking order.
Whatever be the phraseology employed in the order of
dismissal, if it is a non-speaking order, i.e. it does not assign
reasons for dismissing the special leave petition, it would
neither attract the doctrine of merger so as to stand
substituted in place of the order put in issue before it nor
ou      would it be a declaration of law by the Supreme Court under
Article 141 of the Constitution for there is no law which has
been declared. If the order of dismissal be supported by
reasons then also the doctrine of merger would not be
rt    attracted because the jurisdiction exercised was not an
appellate jurisdiction but merely a discretionary jurisdiction
refusing to grant leave to appeal. We have already dealt with
this aspect earlier. Still the reasons stated by the Court would
attract applicability of Article 141 of the Constitution if there is
C               a law declared by the Supreme Court which obviously would
be binding on all the courts and tribunals in India and
certainly the parties thereto. The statement contained in the
order other than on points of law would be binding on the
parties and the court or tribunal, whose order was under
ig  h                challenge on the principle of judicial discipline, this Court
being the Apex court of the country. No court or tribunal or
parties would have the liberty of taking or canvassing any
view contrary to the one expressed by this Court. The order
of Supreme Court would mean that it has declared the law
and in that light the case was considered not fit for grant of
H                    leave. The declaration of law will be governed by Article 141
but still, the case not being one where leave was granted, the
doctrine of merger does not apply. The Court sometimes
leaves the question of law open. Or it sometimes briefly lays
down the principle, may be, contrary to the one laid down by
the High Court and yet would dismiss the special leave
petition. The reasons given are intended for purposes of
Article 141. This is so done because in the event of merely
dismissing the special leave petition, it is likely that an
argument could be advanced in the High Court that the
Supreme Court has to be understood as not to have differed
in law with the High Court.
16. It is quite apparent from the aforesaid exposition of law laid down by the
Hon’ble Apex Court that doctrine of merger does not apply in the case of
dismissal of special leave petition. In the case at hand, special leave to
appeal having been filed by the petitioner/applicant has been dismissed as
withdrawn by non-speaking order and as such, does not result in the merger
of impugned order in the order of the Hon’ble Supreme Court.
Consequently, in view of the detailed discussion made hereinabove
as well as law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, this Court holds that
review petition filed after dismissal of Special Leave Petition, praying therein
for recalling/modification of judgment dated 10.3.2017, passed by this Court
in Criminal Revision No.394 of 2015, is maintainable and as such, parties are
permitted to get the matter compounded in the light of the compromise
arrived inter se them. Accordingly, judgment of conviction and sentence
recorded by the learned trial court is quashed and set-aside and petitioner is
acquitted of the charge framed against him. His bail bonds are discharged.
Since, respondent/complainant is/was unnecessarily dragged into litigation
for realization of his own money, this Court deems it fit to direct the
petitioner/accused    to    pay      an   amount    of    `50,000/-    to
respondent/complainant in addition of the amount already paid. At this stage,
it may be noticed that learned counsel representing the petitioner has handed
over the demand draft of `50,000/- to the complainant in the Court towards
litigation charges. Needless to say, amount lying deposited with the learned
trial Court shall be released forthwith in favour of the respondent/complainant
on his making formal application.”
It has been categorically concluded in the aforesaid judgment
passed by this Court that court can proceed to compound the offence
punishable under S.138 of the Act, after recording of conviction and
sentence. No doubt, in the case at hand, judgment of conviction and
H   order of sentence recorded by learned trial Court has been further
upheld by this Court but since S.147 of the Act coupled with the
guidelines laid down in Damodar S. Prabhu v. Sayed Babalal H.
(2010) 5 SCC 663, empowers this Court to compound the offence after
recording of conviction, there appears to be no impediment in
accepting the prayer made in the application. Moreover, parties have
compromised the matter and respondent-complainant is no more
interested in sending the accused behind the bars in terms of judgment
of conviction and order of sentence recorded by learned Courts below.
Consequently in view of aforesaid, this court finds no
impediment in accepting the prayer made on behalf of the applicant
through instant application for compounding of the offence and same is
allowed. Order dated 10.11.2022 passed in Cr. Revision No. 332 of
2021 is recalled. Matter is ordered to be compounded inter se parties.
Impugned judgments of conviction and order of sentence passed by
both the learned Courts below are quashed and set aside. Accused is
acquitted of the offence punishable under S.138 of the Act. Amount of
Rs.70,000/- deposited with learned trial Court is ordered to be released
in favour of the respondent, on his making a formal application in this
behalf.
Since the accused is lodged in Model Central            Jail, Kanda,
Shimla, Registry is directed to prepare and send the release warrants
of the accused to the Superintendent of Jail, Kanda, forthwith, through
email.
H   9.        Application stands disposed of in the aforesaid terms.