1.            This is an appeal preferred by the appellant against the
judgment of conviction dated 20.05.2015 and the order of sentence
dated 21.05.2015 for commission of offence punishable under Sections
302 and 498-A of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short ‘the IPC’)
thereby awarding following sentence to the appellant:
Under Section 302 of the IPC       To undergo rigorous imprisonment for
life and to pay a fine of Rs.25,000/-.
Under Section 498-A of the To undergo rigorous imprisonment for
IPC.                                a period of two years and to pay a fine
2.            In brief, a sordid, terrible and tragic tale of murder of a
wife in the present case is that Rachna Devi, mother of deceased-Preeti,
made complaint/statement against the appellant/accused stating that she
has four children. They had performed the marriage of their eldest
daughter Preeti with the appellant/accused Vineet on 05.07.2006 as per
Hindu rites and ceremonies and they had given dowry articles beyond
their capacity but the appellant/accused was not happy with the said
articles. Out of the wedlock, two children were born- one daughter and
one son. The appellant/accused used to give beatings to her under the
greed of dowry and pressurized her to bring money from her house and
used to send her to their house for bringing money. They after giving
money to their daughter sent her back to her matrimonial home. About
10 days prior to the incident, the appellant/accused gave beatings to her
daughter-Preeti. On receiving information, she along with Chinki (her
another daughter) and Sushil Kumar (father-in-law of her daughter-
Chinki)    came     to  Pehowa     and     after  making    understand   the
appellant/accused, returned back. Her daughter-Preeti told her to take
her along with them or otherwise, the appellant/accused would kill her.
On 10.06.2014, the appellant/accused informed her on mobile phone
No.9896989293 that her daughter Preeti died and her dead body was
lying in Government Hospital, Pehowa. On this information, she along
with her husband Ramesh Kumar, her Samdhi-Sushil Kumar and
daughter Chinki reached Government Hospital, Pehowa, they saw dead
body of her daughter-Preeti was lying on a stretcher and there were
marks of injuries on her body. When they enquired, they came to know
that the appellant/accused murdered their daughter after giving beatings
and poison to her in greed of dowry. On the basis of said complaint
Ex.P2, FIR was registered. The matter was investigated by SI Darshan
Singh and SI Phool Singh. Site plan was prepared, statements of
witnesses were recorded, post mortem of the dead body was got
conducted, medical records were obtained, the appellant/accused was
arrested and after completion of investigation, he was challaned in due
course to face trial before the Court. On finding a prima-facie case,
punishable under Sections 498-A and 302 of the IPC, the
appellant/accused was charge-sheeted by the trial court to which he
pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.
3.           In order to prove its case, the prosecution examined as
many as 15 prosecution witnesses and produced material documents and
objects    which     were    exhibited.     In  his    defence     evidence,
appellant/accused examined DW-1 Pawan Kumar.
4.           Having appreciated the evidence on record, the learned
Additional Sessions Judge, (Exclusive Court for Heinous Crimes
against Women), Kurukshetra vide judgment of conviction dated
20.05.2015     and    order    of     sentence  dated      21.05.2015   held
appellant/accused-Vineet guilty under Sections 302 and 498-A of the
IPC and sentenced him to undergo the aforesaid imprisonment.
5.            Aggrieved against the above said judgment of conviction
and order of sentence, the appellant has filed the present appeal.
6.            Learned counsel for the appellant has vehemently
submitted that the appellant has been falsely implicated in the present
case. There is no eye witness in the present case. The case of the
prosecution is merely based upon the circumstantial evidence. In the
testimony of prosecution witnesses, there are so many material
contradictions and discrepancies. The allegations with regard to demand
of dowry as made in the complaint are bald, vague and general in
nature. Learned counsel for the appellant further submits that the trial
Court has failed to establish motive behind the murder by the appellant.
Furthermore, no specific date, year and month of demand of dowry have
been given and there is also no mention as to on which date, the
complainant went to the house of the appellant to settle the matrimonial
dispute and on which date the appellant has given beatings to his wife
for bringing more dowry. As such offence under Section 498-A of the
IPC is not made out and therefore, in the absence of any motive, offence
under Section 302 of the IPC is also not made out. The impugned
judgment of the Trial Court is based on surmises and conjectures. The
Trial Court wrongly relied upon the statement of PW-4 Rachna Devi
and PW-8 Chinki who are interested witness of the prosecution and
close relatives of the deceased.
7.            Per contra, learned State counsel has submitted that the
appellant has been rightly convicted and sentenced by the trial court.
There is cogent evidence on record to show that the appellant was
involved in the commission of the offence. The prosecution has
examined as many as 15 witnesses to prove its case. After appreciation
of the evidence on record, the Trial Court has rightly convicted and
sentenced the appellant.
8.           We have given our thoughtful consideration to the
submissions made by learned counsel for the appellant and learned State
Counsel and have gone through the lower court record.
9.           We find no substance in the submissions of the learned
counsel for the appellant.
10.          Merely because there is no eye witness in the present case,
is not enough to come to the conclusion that the appellant is not guilty
of the offence.
11.           In the present case, the prosecution has examined
complainant Rachna Rani (mother of the deceased) as PW-4 who in her
deposition before the trial court stated that she has four children, 03
daughters and 01 son. Her eldest daughter Preeti (since deceased) got
married on 05.07.2006 with accused Vineet resident of Pehowa. At the
time of marriage, they gave sufficient dowry articles to the accused and
his family members but later on the accused and his family members
were not happy with the dowry articles received at the time of marriage.
Her daughter Preeti was blessed with two children, one daughter and
one son. Accused Vineet always quarreled with her daughter, gave
beatings to her and pressurized her to bring money from her parental
house. One day accused Vineet gave beatings to her daughter and sent
her to their house to bring money. On this, they gave money to their
daughter and sent her to her matrimonial home with a hope that
everything will be settled one day. Thereafter, the accused kept her
daughter happy for few days and again after some days, he started
giving beatings to her daughter. The accused gave beatings to her
daughter 10 days prior to the date of incident. On this, she alongwith her
another daughter Chinki and Sushil Kumar (father-in-law of her
daughter-Chinki) had gone to the matrimonial house of her daughter
Preeti at Pehowa for advising them to settle their life peacefully. At that
time, her daughter Preeti told her to take her alongwith them otherwise
the accused would kill her. On which they advised the accused Vineet
not to quarrel with her daughter and live happily. On 10.06.2014 the
accused informed her on her mobile No.9896989293 that Preeti had
expired and her dead body was laying in Civil Hospital, Pehowa. On
which she along with her husband-Ramesh Kumar, her daughter-Chinki
and Sushil Kumar (father-in-law of her daughter-Chinki) reached Civil
Hospital, Pehowa and found that the dead body of Preeti was lying in
Hospital and her body having bluish coloured spots. Later on she found
that in the greed of more dowry, the accused-Vineet killed her daughter
by giving her beatings and poison. Thereafter, she had given written
application Ex.P2 to the police regarding the same. She had also given
supplementary statement to the police that her daughter Preeti was
working in Baba Man Singh Hospital, Pehowa and when she came back
from her duty, her husband had quarreled with her and asked her to
bring money from her parents. When she denied, thereupon, accused-
Vineet gave beatings to her daughter and gave poison with a motive to
kill her. The accused is habitual of consuming liquor and other drugs
and he is not working. For these reasons, her daughter was very much
disturbed. In her cross-examination PW-4 Rachna Rani also stated that
the information regarding the death of her daughter was conveyed by
the accused at 9:30 a.m. When they reached Civil Hospital, Pehowa
neither the accused nor any person from matrimonial home of her
daughter was present there. Nobody from the matrimonial home of her
daughter came in Civil Hospital, Pehowa on that date.
12.           The deposition of PW-4 Rachna Rani is further
strengthened by the deposition of PW-8 Chinki (sister of the deceased).
In her cross-examination she stated that after one year of marriage of
her sister, quarrel had started between her sister and accused Vineet.
Whenever her sister visited parental home, she told about atrocities
meted out to her at the hands of the accused. In sum and substance, she
deposed on the same lines as deposed by PW4, mother of the deceased.
13.           The aforesaid depositions of PW-4 and PW-8 are further
corroborated by the deposition of PW-14 Dr. Narinder Pruthi, Medical
Officer, LNJP Hospital who stated that the dead body had injuries on
right upper arm, right side of chest and just above the lateral
malleolous. He also proved the post mortem report Ex.P20 and
submitted that as per FSL report Ex.P-21, aluminium phosphide was
detected in stomach, parts of small and large intestines, part of lungs,
liver, spleen, kidney and blood and in his opinion, the cause of death in
this case was aluminium phosphide available in tablet form. In the
inquest proceedings Ex.P-12, injuries on the dead body of Preeti are
14.           Furthermore, PW-15 Dr. Manpreet Singh has tendered
affidavit Ex.P22 in evidence and deposed that on 10.06.2014 at 09:45
a.m. he sent ruqa Ex.P-23 to Police Station Pehowa regarding admission
of Preeti, with history of suspected poison and FSL report Ex.P21
shows that from gastic lavage (vomitus contents) aluminium phosphide
has been detected.
15.           PW-10 SI Darshan Singh, Investigating Officer of the case,
proved the various police proceedings and deposed that on 10.06.2014
he was posted at Police Post Saraswati Vihar Pehowa. On that day,
Rachna Rani got recorded her statement Ex.P-2 with regard to the
murder of her daughter-Preeti, who was married with accused-Vineet.
He conducted police proceedings Ex.P-11. He inspected the dead body,
conducted inquest proceedings, photographs of dead body Ex.P15 and
Ex.P16 were taken and statements of Rakesh Kumar and Sushil Kumar
under Section 175 Cr.P.C. were recorded. Ruqa Ex.P13 regarding
suspecting poison to Preeti and MLR Ex.P-14 was taken from CHC
Pehowa. Umed Singh, the then SHO of Police Station Pehowa also
verified the facts from witnesses. Thereafter, the dead body was taken to
LNJP Hospital, Kurukshetra for post mortem. When he reached police
station, HC Dalel Singh had given him one sealed parcel of vomiting of
Preeti and one sealed envelope which were taken into possession vide
recovery memo Ex.P1 in the presence of ASI Amrit Lal and HC Dalel
Singh. On 11.06.2014 post mortem was conducted and investigation of
the case was conducted by SI Phool Singh, Incharge, Police Post
Saraswati Vihar, Pehowa. After post mortem, sealed parcels were given
by the doctor and possession was taken vide recovery memo Ex.P-4.
The accused present in the Court suffered a disclosure statement Ex.P-5
to the effect that he could demarcate the place of occurrence where he
poured poison in the mouth of Preeti. Accused led the police party to the
disclosed place where he threw the vial and demarcated the place. In
this regard, a memo Ex.P-6 was prepared. Thereafter, accused led the
police party to the house of the accused, where he had given poison to
his wife.    Memo Ex.P-7 was prepared and signed by him. The
deposition of PW-10 SI Darshan Singh is also corroborated by the
deposition of PW-11 SI Phool Singh.
16.           From the sequence of events and depositions of the above
prosecution witnesses, the argument of learned counsel for the appellant
that no case under Section 498-A of the IPC is made out against the
appellant is demolished. It is well proved that the appellant/accused
under the greed of dowry mentally and physically harassed the deceased
and ultimately murdered her by giving poison which fact is corroborated
by the medical evidence. The appellant has totally failed to falsify the
depositions of PW4 and PW-8. The appellant has produced DW-1
Pawan Kumar, who is brother of the appellant. He has deposed before
the trial court, but his deposition cannot be relied upon as being real
brother of the appellant/accused he is likely to depose in favour of the
accused, moreover such type of defence witnesses can be easily
17.           Overall analysis of above said events, unimpeachable
evidence and the circumstances prove beyond doubt that the
appellant/accused     has    committed     murder    of    his   wife.   The
appellant/accused has failed to prove his innocence. The prosecution has
led cogent evidence to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. In fact,
the complete chain of link evidence stands established from the
testimonies of various witnesses produced by the prosecution. The
defence has not been able to elicit anything beneficial out of the cross-
examination of the prosecution witnesses. The evidence produced by the
prosecution proves the guilt of the appellant beyond reasonable doubt.
18.           Be that as it may that there is no eye-witness in the present
case, but the fact remains that murder has taken place in the house of the
appellant. The question then is who is the author of the murder? The
contention of learned counsel for the appellant that the appellant had no
motive and the evidence led before the trial court is not sufficient to
establish motive. As noticed above, it is well established that there was
motive of demand of dowry behind the murder of the deceased at the
hands of the appellant. Even for the sake of arguments, it is assumed
that there is no motive made out, but the fact remains that the case is
based    on   circumstantial    evidence.    Undoubtedly      in  cases   of
circumstantial evidences motive bears important significance. Motive
always locks up in the mind of the accused and some time it is difficult
to unlock. People do not act wholly without motive. The failure to
discover the motive of an offence does not signify its non-existence.
The failure to prove motive is not fatal as a matter of law. Proof of
motive is never an indispensable for conviction. Absence of proof of
motive does not break the link in the chain of circumstances connecting
the accused with the crime, nor militates against the prosecution case.
As noticed above, in the present case, facts are clear and even motive is
clear that there was persistent demand of dowry. Therefore, on analysis
of the entire prosecution evidence, we are of the considered view that
the appellant committed the offence of murder of his wife and thus the
trial court has rightly convicted and sentenced him.
19.           Moreover,        it  is     settled proposition of law    that
circumstantial evidence is in no way inferior to direct evidence and
circumstantial evidence can be the sole basis of conviction. In the
present case, there is sufficient evidence to establish the guilt of the
20.           It is well settled that circumstances howsoever strong
cannot take place of proof and that the guilt of the accused have to be
proved by the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt. At this juncture, it
will be apposite to refer to the golden principles laid down by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Sharad Birdhichand Sarda Vs. State of
Mahashtra : 1984 (4) SCC 116 which are reproduced as under :-
“153. A close analysis of this decision would show that
the following conditions must be fulfilled before a case
against an accused can be said to be fully established:
(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of
guilt is to be drawn should be fully established.
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that
the circumstances concerned “must or should” and
not “may be” established. There is not only a
grammatical but a legal distinction between “may
be proved” and “must be or should be proved” as
was held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade
v. State of Maharashtra [(1973) 2 SCC 793 : 1973
SCC (Cri) 1033 : 1973 Crl LJ 1783] where the
Certainly, it is a primary principle that the accused
must be and not merely may be guilty before a
court can convict and the mental distance between
‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is long and divides vague
conjectures from sure conclusions.
(2) the facts so established should be consistent only
with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused, that
is to say, they should not be explainable on any
other hypothesis except that the accused is guilty,
(3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis
except the one to be proved, and
(5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as
not to leave any reasonable ground for the
conclusion consistent with the innocence of the
accused and must show that in all human
probability the act must have been done by the
accused.
158. It may be necessary here to notice a very forceful
argument submitted by the Additional Solicitor
General relying on a decision of this Court in
Deonandan Mishra v. State of Bihar [AIR 1955 SC 801
: (1955) 2 SCR 570, 582 : 1955 Cri LJ 1647] to
supplement his argument that if the defence case is false
it would constitute an additional link so as to fortify the
prosecution case. With due respect to the learned
Additional Solicitor-General we are unable to agree
with the interpretation given by him of the aforesaid
case, the relevant portion of which may be extracted
“But in a case like this where the various links as
stated above have been satisfactorily made out and
the circumstances point to the appellant as the
probable assailant, with reasonable definiteness
and in proximity to the deceased as regards time
and situation, . . . such absence of explanation or
false explanation would itself be an additional link
which completes the chain.”
159. It will be seen that this Court while taking into
account the absence of explanation or a false
explanation did hold that it will amount to be an
additional link to complete the chain but these
observations must be read in the light of what this
Court said earlier viz. before a false explanation can be
used as additional link, the following essential
conditions must be satisfied:
(1) various links in the chain of evidence led by the
prosecution have been satisfactorily proved,
(2) the said circumstance points to the guilt of the
accused with reasonable definiteness, and
(3) the circumstance is in proximity to the time and
situation.”
21.           Again in Majendran Langeswaran Vs. State (NCT of
Delhi) & Another : (2013) 7 SCC 192, Hon’ble Supreme Court having
found the material relied upon by the prosecution inconsistent and the
infirmities in the case of the prosecution, considered number of earlier
decisions, and held that the conviction can be based solely on
circumstantial evidence but it should be tested on the touchstone of law
relating to the circumstantial evidence that all circumstances must lead
to the conclusion that the accused is the only one who has committed
the crime and none else.
22.           Apart from this, the presumption, as contemplated under
Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 goes against the accused.
This provision of law stipulates that when any fact is especially within
the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon
him. While aptly explaining the scope of Section 106 of the Evidence
Act in criminal trial, Hon’ble Supreme Court in Shambu Nath Mehra
Vs. State of Ajmer : AIR (1956) SC 404 observed as under:-
“9. This lays down the general rule that in a criminal
case the burden of proof is on the prosecution and
Section 106 is certainly not intended to relieve it of that
duty. On the contrary, it is designed to meet certain
exceptional cases in which it would be impossible, or at
any rate disproportionately difficult, for the
prosecution to establish facts which are “especially”
within the knowledge of the accused and which he could
prove without difficulty or inconvenience. The word
“especially” stresses that. It means facts that are pre-
eminently or exceptionally within his knowledge. If the
section were to be interpreted otherwise, it would lead
to the very startling conclusion that in a murder case
the burden lies on the accused to prove that he did not
commit the murder because who could know better
than he whether he did or did not. It is evident that
that cannot be the intention and the Privy Council has
twice refused to construe this section, as reproduced in
certain other Acts outside India, to mean that the
burden lies on an accused person to show that he did
not commit the crime for which he is tried.”
23.          Applying this principle to the facts and circumstances of
the present case, it was the bounden duty of the appellant/accused to
explain how the death of his wife Preeti occurred, as she was residing
with him in her matrimonial home. The post mortem report Ex.P20 and
FSL report Ex.P21 shows that aluminium phosphide was detected in
stomach, parts of small and large intestines, part of lungs, liver, spleen,
kidney and blood and it is also testified by PW-14 Dr. Narender Pruthi
that the cause of death of Preeti is because of consumption of
aluminium phosphide. In the inquest proceedings Ex.P-12 there was
mention of injuries on the dead body of Preeti. No reasonable
explanation has been given by the appellant/accused that under which
circumstances, his wife Preeti had consumed poison or why he should
not be responsible for her murder in peculiar facts of the case.
24.          In view of the above discussions, we are of the considered
view that there is no illegality in the judgment of conviction and order
of sentence passed by the Trial Court. Accordingly, the present appeal
stands dismissed and the judgment of conviction and order of sentence
passed by the trial court are upheld. Pending applications in this case, if
any, shall stand disposed of accordingly. Registry to return back the