1.      The two Applicants are seeking their release on bail being
arraigned as Accused Nos.4 and 5 in C.R. No.590 of 2021
registered with Igatpuri Police Station, District Nashik, invoking
Sections 20, 21, 25 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985 (“NDPS Act”). The offence is registered
on 27/06/2021, when it is alleged that in a surprise raid
conducted in a private bungalow located at Igatpuri, Nashik, the
accused persons were found to be in possession of cocaine,
ganja, charas and the supporting materials enabling its
consumption during the party, which was attended by 27
The contraband came to be seized and the investigation
revealed that the said bungalow was taken on rent for 3 days by
Accused No.5, who had arranged the party to celebrate his
birthday. Traces of cocaine were also found in the water in the
swimming pool, which is within the precincts of the bungalow
and, the blood and urine samples of the accused were also
obtained. The seized contraband was forwarded for chemical
analysis which confirmed that the substance seized was narcotic
drugs and psychotropic substance. This is the backdrop of the
case registered, in which the present Applicants are seeking their
2.      Heard Mr. Ponda, learned senior counsel along with Mr.
Rishi Bhuta. The Applications are vehemently opposed by Mr.
Kapadnis, learned A.P.P. for the State.
3.      Mr. Ponda, learned senior counsel for the Applicants would
argue that there is no compliance of the mandatory statutory
provisions being Sections 42 and 50 of the NDPS Act. It is
argued that the Applicants were never apprised of their right to
be searched in the presence of a gazetted officer or a Magistrate,
which is imperative by Section 50 of the NDPS Act and the non
compliance of statutory mandate would vitiate the entire
As far as the Applicant - Harsh is concerned, it is
submitted that even if accepting for the sake of argument that the
cocaine was seized from the bag, which was in his possession,
the quantity of the cocaine is 5.72 grams, which is a non-
commercial quantity and, therefore, the rigors of Section 37 of
the NDPS Act is not attracted while deciding the present
Applications.          Another submission is that the capsule was not
separated from the white substance, while ascertaining the
quantity and, assuming the case of the prosecution is true, it is
submitted that the Applicant - Harsh is purely an end user and
his case will have to be distinguished from that of a consumer or
an end purchaser.
4.      As far as Applicant - Niraj is concerned, it is argued that
the only allegation against him pertains to organizing the party
and there is no recovery from him on his personal search. It is
argued that in any case, the purchase of contraband was for self
consumption during the party and not meant for sale, trafficking,
distribution, etc., which would at the most bring the case within
the purview of Section 27.
On behalf of both the Applicants, learned senior counsel
would request the court to adopt a reformative approach as there
are no criminal antecedents to their credit. Mr. Ponda would
submit that this is a case where the Applicants, young in age,
could be lured by the temptation and their curiosity about the
prohibited substance has landed them in trouble. The young mob
gathered in the bungalow to celebrate an occasion and, even
assuming that the case of the prosecution as alleged is true, the
contraband was brought in the party for the purpose of
consumption being not a commercial quantity, which would not
warrant their further incarceration, since their arrest on
27/06/2021 and being incarcerated for nearly two months, they
have learnt a lesson of their life and, ultimately, the fate of their
alleged involvement will be determined on conclusion of the
trial, which they are ready to take. The submission is that their
further incarceration would have a deleterious effect on their
future prospect at this young age and, their languishing in jail in
the company of hardcore criminals, awaiting their trial, would
also be an important consideration.
5.      Opposing the Application, the learned A.P.P. would argue
that the offence, in which the Applicants are arraigned as
accused is a serious one, having an adverse impact on the society
and the role of the present Applicants has clearly surfaced in the
FIR, where the contraband is seized from Applicant - Harsh and,
Applicant - Niraj is the organizer of the party. According to him,
sufficient material being collated during investigation indict
them and, their participation is clearly evident. The consumption
of contraband by the accused persons, who were present in the
party, is fortified when the blood and urine samples of some of
the accused have tested positive with traces of ethanol alcohol
being found. The submission of learned A.P.P. is to the effect
that all the mandatory provisions of the NDPS Act stand
complied with.             Mr. Kapdanis would further submit that the
water collected from the swimming pool on being forwarded,
confirmed the presence of the cocaine in the colourless clear
liquid forwarded in glass bottle. Further, according to learned
A.P.P., the small pieces of polythene bag, which were seized
from the spot, lying around the swimming pool along with
whitish coloured ceramic saucer and saucer cup have also tested
positive for cocaine. This, according to learned A.P.P., clearly
establishes that in the party, the cocaine was consumed and some
of the contraband was thrown in the swimming pool.
It is the case of the prosecution that Applicant - Harsh had
purchased the contraband from one Nigerian citizen i.e. Accused
No.7, who is already booked under the NDPS Act with
Kashimira Police Station and the material collected during the
investigation revealed that the Applicant - Harsh was in contact
with Accused No.7 and from whom he had procured the
contraband for the party. The submission of learned A.P.P. is to
the effect that Applicant – Harsh is not only guilty of
consumption, but also possessing the contraband and taking into
account the social impact of the crime on the young generation,
the offence has to be viewed with great seriousness since it
establishes that the Applicant - Harsh had connection with the
drug mafia. In view of the report of the Forensic Laboratory,
which confirms presence of contraband in the pool water, the
submission is that if the bare minimum quantity of two liters,
which were drawn as sample for purpose of analysis reflects
presence of cocaine, considering that the swimming pool was
filled with 54,750 liters of water, the total quantum of the water
in the swimming pool with presence of cocaine all over would
surely amount to commercial quantity and, therefore, the rigors
of Section 37 of the NDPS Act would get invoked is the
submission of learned A.P.P. He, therefore, submits that both the
Applications deserve to be rejected.
6.      The C.R. invoking the relevant provisions under the NDPS
Act came to be registered on a raid being conducted in a private
bungalow located within the jurisdiction of the Igatpuri Police
Station. The raid was arranged and with the presence of panchas
the raiding team reached the identified place. When the team
entered in the hall, a black and green coloured sack was found
and, on its search, a packet wrapped in plastic cover containing
flower, stem, fruits and seeds of ganja tree were found.                  It
weighed around 6 grams and the substance came to be sealed
after drawing samples.
The two persons, who were present there, identified
themselves as Applicant - Harsh and Accused 3 - Piyush Sethia.
It was informed by the accused that the packet belonged to one
Naseen (Accused No.1), who had purchased the said contraband
from one Saif (Accused No.2). The two accused were subjected
to personal search and when search of Applicant - Harsh was
taken, he was apprised of his right to be searched, ensuring
compliance of Section 50 of the NDPS Act. On search of the
sack in his possession, a small packet was recovered, which
contained four yellow coloured capsules and, when one of the
capsules was opened, it contained white coloured powder and on
careful scrutiny, it was suspected to be cocaine. It was weighed
on the weighing scale, which was found to be 5.72 grams worth
Rs.28,600/-. When the sack in possession of the Applicant -
Harsh was further examined, it led to charas being packed in
transparent plastic cover, which was around 1 gram in weight,
worth Rs.3,000/-. Apart from this, one smoking pipe and one
small rectangular metal box and some brown coloured paper
strips, to be used as pipe for smoking of the contraband, were
also seized.
The panchanama further reveals that from the closet in the
room one packet containing 40 strips of paper and one plastic
pipe used for smoking of the substance also came to be
7.      On being taken into custody, Accused Piyush revealed that
he had taken the bungalow on hire for three days and Applicant -
Niraj was assigned the task of organizing the party by Accused
Piyush. The investigation further revealed that when enquiry
was made with Applicant - Harsh, he revealed that he had
obtained cocaine from one Nigerien citizen, whose mobile
number was also disclosed by him. The owner of the bungalow
is also arraigned as Accused No.6.
8.      Mr. Ponda has advanced his submission about violation of
Section 50 of the NDPS Act. My attention was invited to the
intimation issued to Applicant - Harsh by Sub-Divisional Police
Officer (“SDPO”) before his personal search. The intimation,
when carefully read, reveals that the SDPO informed the
Applicant that he himself is a gazetted officer and, during the
course of raid conducted on 27/06/2021, his personal search is to
be carried out in presence of panchas. He is further informed
that since, the officers conducting the raid themselves are
gazetted officers, he is entitled to get the search carried out
through any other gazetted officer and, if he is desirous of doing
so, the necessary arrangement shall be made. This intimation is
signed by the Applicant by scribing that he can be searched by
Mr. Bhosale and no other officer is required for carrying out the
9.      Section 50 of the NDPS Act, which contemplates that the
person, whose search is to be carried out shall be taken to the
nearest gazetted officer of any of the Department mentioned in
Section 42 or to the nearest Magistrate. The settled position of
law is that the person to be searched under the NDPS Act is
required to be apprised about his right under Section 50 of the
NDPS Act before he is searched and that is a mandatory
requirement. It is also well settled that in case of personal search
of the accused, Section 50 of the NDPS Act comes into play and
not when search is carried out in respect of some bag, article,
vehicle, or container, etc., which the accused at the relevant time
was carrying. Where searching officer fails to communicate the
same to the suspect, who was subjected to search, that he has a
right to be searched in presence of a gazetted officer or
Magistrate, there will be non compliance of requirement of
Section 50 of the NDPS Act. The requirement of compliance of
Section 50 of the NDPS Act also arises even if the search is
going to be made by an empowered officer, who happened to be
a gazetted officer. True, three is no specific form prescribed or
intended for conveying the information required to be given
under Section 50 of the NDPS Act, but what is necessary is that
the accused should be made aware of existence of his right to be
searched in presence of one of the officers named in the section
i.e. gazetted officer or the Magistrate. Since there is no specific
mode prescribed, the substance and not the form of intimation
would determine whether there is compliance of mandate of
Section 50 of the NDPS Act.
10.      The Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in Vijaysinh
Chandubha Jadeja v. State of Gujarat reported in (2011) 1
SCC 609 has clarified the position in the following words:
“The mandate of Section 50 is precise and clear, viz. if the
person intended to be searched expresses to the authorised
officer his desire to be taken to the nearest gazetted officer or
the Magistrate, he cannot be searched till the gazetted officer or
the Magistrate, as the case may be, directs the authorised
officer to do so … In view of the foregoing discussion, we are of
the firm opinion that the object with which right under Section
50(1) of the NDPS Act, by way of a safeguard, has been
conferred on the suspect, viz. to check the misuse of power, to
avoid harm to innocent persons and to minimise the allegations
of planting or foisting of false cases by the law enforcement
agencies, it would be imperative on the part of the empowered
officer to apprise the person intended to be searched of his right
to be searched before a gazetted officer or a Magistrate. We
have no hesitation in holding that in so far as the obligation of
the authorised officer under Sub-section (1) of Section 50 of the
NDPS Act is concerned, it is mandatory and requires a strict
compliance. Failure to comply with the provision would render
the recovery of the illicit article suspect and vitiate the
conviction if the same is recorded only on the basis of the
recovery of the illicit article from the person of the accused
during such search. Thereafter, the suspect may or may not
choose to exercise the right provided to him under the said
provision … We are of the opinion that the concept of
“substantial compliance” with the requirement of Section 50 of
the NDPS Act introduced and read into the mandate of the said
Section in Joseph Fernandez (supra) and Prabha Shankar
Dubey (supra) is neither borne out from the language of Sub-
section (1) of Section 50 nor it is in consonance with the dictum
laid down in Baldev Singh's case (supra).”
11.      This position has been reiterated by the Apex Court in the
case of S.K. Raju v. State of West Bengal reported in (2018) 9
SCC 708, which affirmed the view in Vijaysinh Jadeja (supra)
by holding that the ‘substantial compliance’ with requirement of
Section 50 of the NDPS Act is neither in accordance with law
laid down in Baldev Singh nor can it be construed from its
language and, therefore, strict compliance with Section 50(1) of
the NDPS Act by the empowered officer is mandatory.
12.      True it is, that Section 50 of the NDPS Act applies only in
case of search of a person. Merely if a bag carried by a person is
searched without there being a search of his person, Section 50
of the NDPS Act will have no application, but if the bag carried
by him is searched and his person is also searched, Section 50 of
the NDPS Act will come into play.
In the present case, the notice issued to the Applicant –
Harsh was specifically issued for carrying his personal search
and the bag/sack came to be searched and search was carried out
of his person also and, therefore, compliance of Section 50 of the
NDPS Act was imperative. Pertinent to note that the intimation
does not apprise the Applicant – Harsh about his right of being
searched in presence of a gazetted officer or the Magistrate,
which is a mandatory requirement, but what is sought to be
impressed upon him is that the searching officer himself is a
gazetted officer and whether the Applicant is desirous of being
searched by another gazetted officer. There is no mention of
another authority being the Magistrate, before whom he could
prefer to be searched.         The search before the Magistrate is
different than the search before the gazetted officer as the former
would inspire more confidence in a particular person knowing
well that he is a judicial functionary and, that is why, he may
impose faith in the Magistrate in comparison with another
gazetted officer, but this choice is not left to the Applicant, in the
intimation nor he is apprised that to be searched in the presence
of a gazetted officer is his right. Prima facie, the intimation thus
does not meet the requirement of Section 50 of the NDPS Act.
13.     The suspect may or may not exercise his right under
Section 50 of the NDPS Act of being searched by the Magistrate,
but an obligation is cast upon the raiding party to apprise him of
such a right. There is no strict compliance of Section 50 of the
NDPS Act as the section does not permit any ambiguity in
apprisal of the said provision. The suspect has to be clearly
informed that he has a right to be searched before either of the
authorities and, if he demands, he can be searched before them.
The present intimation, however, fails to meet the requirement of
Section 50 of the NDPS Act.
14.     As far as the quantity of the contraband, which has been
seized during the raid is clearly reflected in the panchanama,
which includes 5.72 grams of cocaine, and 1 gram of charas.
There is also seizure of a bag from the spot, which is alleged to
be belonging to Accused No.1 from which 6 grams of ganja is
also seized. The quantity of ganja and charas, which is seized is
small quantity whereas, the quantity of cocaine seized is
intermidiate quantity. Based on the said seizure, the submission
advanced on behalf of the Applicant is that the rigors of Section
37 of the NDPS Act are not liable to be invoked and the Sessions
Judge has rightly recorded that since the accused are not booked
for any offence under Sections 19, 24 and 24A of the NDPS Act
and the quantity involved is not a commercial quantity, the
hindrance created by Section 37 of the NDPS Act cannot be
15.     Learned A.P.P., however, has submitted that today, it is not
a case, where commercial quantity is involved, but there is a
likelihood of the same since traces of cocaine is found in the
swimming pool in which the accused persons are allegedly
thrown cocaine powder at the time of raid. The report of the
Chemical Analyzer records positive result for detection of
cocaine in the two samples (1 liter each) drawn from the water
from the swimming pool. However, the quantity of cocaine in
the water present in the swimming pool is not ascertained.
Moreover, the panchanama does not record that the cocaine has
been thrown by any of the Applicant in the swimming pool and
another moot question would be, even if it is so done, whether
the Applicant could be attributed with the charge of ‘possession’.
At this stage, when the samples collected from the pool, which
were sent for analysis and which records presence of cocaine
can, by no stretch of imagination, lead to a conclusion that the
contraband seized is of commercial quantity as learned A.P.P. is
trying to submit that since a letter is addressed to the Director of
Forensic on 16/07/2021 to find out the percentage of cocaine in
the entire swimming pool and the submission that the percentage
found in one liter of water to be multiplied by the number of
liters of water in the entire swimming pool, is an obscure and
outlandish submission, which is just referred to be rejected. At
this stage, there is no material with the prosecution to reflect that
the quantity of contraband seized is commercial quantity and,
therefore, the rigors of Section 37 of the NDPS Act does not get
attracted while considering the Applications for bail filed by the
16.     The prosecution relied upon another circumstance, being
contact established by the Applicant – Harsh with Accused No.7
and the CDRs collated during the investigation to establish that
the contraband was purchased by him from Accused No.7.
However, as regards, the said connection between the Applicant
- Harsh and Accused No.7, prima facie would lead to purchase
of the drug for the purpose of its consumption in the party and, at
this stage, there is no material to indicate that the operation was a
part of a crime syndicate, where drugs are sold and purchased
and that the Applicant - Harsh, who has brought the substance
and offered the same to other accused present in the party, by no
stretch of imagination, would assign him the role of a drug
17.     The material placed in the form of papers of investigation,
no doubt, reflects a group of young, well to do and affluent boys
and girls coming together and lavishly celebrating an occasion
and, no doubt, it is true that the youth of today leads a lifestyle,
where he believes in a cheerful present limiting to “NOW OR
NEVER”           without       thinking   of consequences       to     follow.
Adolescence and youth are the phases of lifetime, where making
of irrational and impulsive decisions may be favoured by some.
The challenge of today mainly focuses on the issue of drug
addiction in youth and how to tackle it. Experimentation with
alcohol and drugs is common. Unfortunately, the youths do not
foresee the link between their action today and its consequences
tomorrow. It is crucial to uncover the root of youths and young
adults, which necessarily would involve posing questions,
understanding the problems at hand and having an insight into if
and how badly this problem would be eradicated and its progress
stalled. It indeed is a harrowing reality.
18.     The NDPS Act imposes deterrent sentences upon those
who traffic in significant quantities of drugs and addicts, who are
addicted to its consumption. However, in the present case, the
Applicants are not attributed with any antecedents of being
involved previously in consumption or use of drugs and
psychotropic substance and considering their young age where
they are in a stage of reformation, they deserve one opportunity
by restoring their freedom, nevertheless with a forewarning that
if they indulge in such activity in future, the law will not spare
them and, in any case, at the outcome of the trial, if they are
found guilty, they shall undergo the prescribed penalty for
indulging in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substance as
prescribed under the NDPS Act.
19.     The Applicants are, therefore, entitled to be released on
bail subject to a condition that their involvement in drugs in any
manner in future would entail cancellation of the bail, on an
application being moved by the prosecution to that effect.
Needless to say that the observations made herein are prima
facie in nature and limited for the purpose of adjudication of the
application and will have no bearing on the trial by the Special
(a) The Applicants - Harsh Shailesh Shah and Niraj
@ Aarav Lalit Surana shall be released on bail in
C.R. No.590 of 2021 registered with the Igatpuri
Police Station, District Nashik, on furnishing P.R.
bond to the extent of Rs.50,000/- each with one or
two sureties of the like amount.
(b) The Applicants shall not directly or indirectly make
any inducement, threat or promise to any person
acquainted with facts of case so as to dissuade him
from disclosing the facts to Court or any Police
Officer and the Applicants should not tamper with
evidence.
(c) The Applicants shall attend to the Igatpuri Police
Station, District Nashik on every Monday and
Friday between 10.00 a.m. and 01.00 p.m. for a
period of six weeks and, thereafter, as and when
called by the Investigating Officer.
(d) The Applicants shall not leave the country without
prior permission of the Special Court under the
NDPS Act, where their case is pending.
20.     The Application is allowed in the aforestated terms.