2.          This appeal by special leave is directed against
the judgment and order dated 22.02.2018 passed by the
High          Court   of   Judicature    Allahabad    in  Criminal
Miscellaneous Writ Petition No. 21733 of 2008. The
unsuccessful petitioners are the appellants herein.
At the instance of the first appellant, for having
incidents described as ‘2007 Gorakhpur Riots’ and for
such          other   offences   related    to  the   same,    Crime
No.2776/2008     was     registered       against      Sh.    Yogi
Adityanath, who was then a Member of Parliament and
some others. After        registration of FIR No.764/2008
(Crime No.2776/2008), the State Government directed
investigation     by     the      Crime     Branch,      Criminal
Investigation    Department      (CB    CID)    of   UP    Police.
Raising    grievances    against     the   investigation,      the
appellants    filed   the   abovementioned       Writ    Petition
under    Article  226    of    the    Constitution      of   India
seeking, inter alia, the following reliefs:
“(i)     Issue   a   writ,    order    or  direction     the
nature of mandamus directing and commanding the
respondents to investigate case crime no. 2776
of   2008  in  fair    and    impartial     manner    by  an
independent    investigating       agency     and   not   by
Crime     Branch      of      Criminal       Investigation
Department as per Order dt. 3.11.2008.
(ii)     Issue a writ, order or direction in the
nature of mandamus directing and commanding the
respondents   to    include    appropriate      section   of
Indian Penal Code e.g. 120-B, 121, 121-A, 122,
112 I.P.C. and Section 3/4 Prevention of Damages
to Public Property Act, 1984 and provision of
Religious    Institution   (Prevention    of  Misuse)
Act,   1988  in  crime   no.  2776  of  2008  and  to
investigate the issue of conspiracy also.
(iii)    Issue a writ, order or direction in the
nature of mandamus directing and commanding the
respondents to take disciplinary action against
the officers who at the relevant point of time
failed to act in accordance with law and had not
taken   any  action  to   initiate   criminal  action
against the culprits.
(iv)     Issue a writ, order or direction in the
nature of mandamus directing and commanding the
respondent no. 1 to provide adequate security to
the petitioners.”
3.   During the hearing, the Division Bench of the
High   Court   framed  three   issues  for   determination,
which are as follows:
(1) When the State fails to perform its statutory
and constitutional duty to investigate a crime in
a fair and impartial manner, whether the High
Court in exercise of its jurisdiction conferred
by Article 226 of the Constitution is vested with
the power to transfer the investigation to be
conducted by any other investigating agency.
(2) Whether in the facts and circumstances of the
instant case, the State has failed to perform its
statutory duty to conduct a fair investigation in
the   matter   and   the    same   is   liable     to   be
transferred to some other independent agency to
ensure fair investigation.
(3) Whether the State can pass an order under
Section  196   Cr.P.C.   in   respect   of   a   proposed
accused in a criminal case who in the meantime
gets elected as the Chief Minister and is the
Executive Head as per the scheme provided under
Article 163 of the Constitution of India.
4.   After   hearing    both    sides   and   perusing      the
relevant   records,   the  Division    Bench    of   the   High
Court extensively dealt with all the issues and came
to  specific   conclusions   with   respect   to    the  same.
Ultimately,   the  Division     Bench  of   the   High   Court
dismissed the Writ Petition and held as follows:-
“In view of the facts and discussions, we
do not find any procedural error either in
the conduct of the investigation or in the
decision making process of refusal to grant
sanction   or   any   other   illegality  in   the
order which may require any interference by
this   Court   while    exercising    its   extra-
ordinary   power    under   Article  226  of   the
Constitution of India.”
5.  Aggrieved by the impugned judgment, the present
appeal by way of special leave has been filed by the
appellants who were the original petitioners before
6.  Heard learned counsel for the parties.
7.  Mr. Fuzail Ahmad Ayyubi, learned counsel for the
appellants fairly conceded at the outset that he did
not  intend   to   press   any   submissions   relating  to
prayer numbers (i) & (ii), as sought in the writ
petition. The sole contention he sought to advance
before  us   is  in   respect    of   issue  no.   (iii) as
identified by the High Court, relating to denial of
sanction for prosecution of the accused under Section
196 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The foundation
for such a grievance is that the accused no. 1, who
was then a Member of Parliament and had allegedly
made a hate speech, had later on became the Chief
Minister of the State of Uttar Pradesh and thereby,
the Executive Head of the State. It is contention of
the appellants that in such a situation, it is the
Governor of the State who is empowered to consider
the question of grant of sanction in terms of the
Rules of Business. He submits that the Division Bench
of the High Court has failed to consider this issue
in an appropriate manner, including the Constitution
Bench judgment of this Court in M.P. Special Police
Establishment v. State of M.P., (2004) 8 SCC 788.
8.   On  the  other  hand,  Mr.  Mukul   Rohatgi   learned
Senior counsel for the State contends that nothing
survives in this matter except for a mere academic
exercise, as a closure report has already been filed
by the investigating agency. Additionally, he submits
that   the  judgment  of  this  Court   in   M.P.  Special
Police   Establishment   (supra)   does    not   have  any
relevance in the facts of this case as the underlying
material   did    not   amount    to   anything,     let   alone
establish a case for issuance of sanction. Learned
Senior counsel submits that the first CD containing
the recording in 2008 which was in a broken condition
while  the    second    CD   which    was   provided    by   the
appellants    after     a   lapse    of    five    years,    was
determined   to   be  tampered    by   the   Central   Forensic
Science Laboratory (CSFL). The third CD only provided
a voice sample. All these facts have been extensively
dealt with by the High Court before rejecting the
prayers of the appellants.
9.  Having    heard    the   parties    and    considered    the
material placed on record, we are in agreement with
learned Senior counsel appearing for the respondent
that the subsequent events have rendered the present
appeal into a purely academic exercise. We will now
explain the raison d’etre for such a conclusion.
10. The   words     “No   Court    shall    take    cognizance”
employed  in    Section    196   of  the   Code   of   Criminal
Procedure (for short ‘CrPC’) and the consequential
bar   created      under    the     said    provision      would
undoubtedly show that the bar is against ‘taking of
cognizance by the Court’. In other words, it creates
no   bar    against      registration     of    a    crime    or
investigation by the police agency or submission of a
report by the police on completion of investigation
as  contemplated      under   Section    173,   CrPC   [Refer:-
State of Karnataka v. Pastor P Raju, (2006) 6 SCC
11. It   appears    from   the    record  that   the   forensic
report   of   the   CD   which    forms   the   basis   of   the
prosecution was found to be tampered and edited as
per  the   report    dated   13.10.2014,    submitted    by  the
CFSL  which   position     has  not   been   disputed    by  the
appellants herein.
12. In the instant case, a short affidavit was filed
on  behalf   of   the   second    respondent   wherein    it  is
stated   that   the    investigation    was   closed   vide   FR
No.1/17   dated     06.05.2017.     This   position     is   not
disputed   by   the   appellants.    Thus,   as   of  now,   the
position that emerges is that the investigation has
culminated    in   a   closure    /  refer    report.   Learned
counsel for the appellants has informed us that a
protest  petition   has  been  filed  which  is  pending
consideration before the trial Court.
13. In the aforesaid circumstances, we do not think
it necessary to go into the contentions raised by
both sides on the issue of denial of sanction for
prosecution and the legal pleas sought to be raised
in relation to the said issue. However, we think it
appropriate that the legal questions on the issue of
sanction   be  left   open  to   be  considered   in  an
appropriate case.
14. Consequently, this appeal is dismissed subject to
the above observations. Pending applications, if any,
stand disposed of.