2.   The Board of Governors of Medical Council of India (now, “The
National Medical Commission”) has filed these appeals assailing
the judgment of the High Court of Calcutta directing respondent
no.2­West Bengal University of Health Sciences to admit the
respondent­candidates initially by interim orders dated 04 th June
2019, 16th July, 2019 and 30th July, 2019 passed by the learned
Single Judge of the High Court of Calcutta granting provisional
admission pursuant to interim orders to the student­applicants in
post­graduate medical courses beyond the cut­off date in complete
ignorance of their placement in the order of merit in post­graduate
medical courses, which were later disposed of by an Order dated
4th November, 2019 on the premise that since the respondent­
students have undergone six months of post­graduate medical
course, their provisional admission stand regularized and later
directed to be treated as a regular post­graduate student.
3.   Facts have been noticed from Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) Nos.3507­
3508 of 2020 and Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) No.27463 of 2019.
4.    It is not disputed that the respondent­students are MBBS
Doctors and appeared in NEET (PG)­2019 entrance examination
seeking admission in State quota seats in post­graduate medical
courses in medical colleges of the State of West Bengal for the
academic year 2019­2020.
5.   The result of NEET­PG was declared by the National Board of
Education (NBE) on 31st January, 2019. The minimum cut­off
qualifying marks for NEET examination are as follows:­
1) Unreserved category ­ 50th percentile – 340/1200 marks
2) Reserved category(SC/ST/OBC)­40th percentile – 292/1200
3) PwD – 45th percentile – 317/1200 marks
The NEET marks and the rank of the respondent­students are
6.   The admission schedule for the academic year 2018­19
onwards for post­graduate courses as provided in the Medical
Council of India Postgraduate Medical Education Regulations,
2000(hereinafter being referred to as the “Regulations 2000”)
amended upto May, 2018 is as follows:­
In the above Appendix the time schedule with regard to Broad
Speciality has been substituted with the following in terms of
Notification published in the Gazette of India on 20.02.2018 and
Admission schedule from the academic year 2018­19 onwards for
Postgraduate courses (broad speciality):­
S.No    Schedule        for    All India Deemed           + Counsellin
Admission              Quota        Central         g
4       Last Date of joining      3rd April     3rd April    12th April
5       2nd    Round        of  6th April –    6th April –   15th April
6       Last date of joining     22 April      22 April       3rd May
7       Mop up Round                           12th May –    4th May –
8       Last date of joining                    26th May     12th May
9       Forwarding the list                     27th May     13th May
of students in order
10     Last date of joining                    31st May     18th May
1. All India Quota Seats remaining vacant after last date for joining
i.e. 10th May will be deemed to be converted into State Quota.
2. Institute/College/Courses permitted after 28th February will not
be considered for admission/allotment of seats for current
academic year.
3. In any circumstances, last date for admission/joining will not
be extended after 31st May.
4. For the purpose of ensuring faithful obedience to the above time­
schedule, Saturday, Sunday or Holidays (except National Holiday)
shall be treated as working day.
5. The following Matrix shall be applicable with regard to
permissibility to students to exercise fresh choice during
Round          Fre    Exit     with Ineligible for Amount        of
e      forfeiture of further        registration
Exit   fees          counselling    fee
7.   The admission schedule has to be rigidly followed in admission
to the post­graduate courses and Note 3 appended thereto clearly
stipulates     that,     in    any     circumstances,     last     date    for
admission/joining will not be extended beyond 31 st May and no
deviation from the admission schedule is permissible and this
schedule has been fixed by this Court pursuant to the judgment in
Mridul Dhar(Minor) and Another vs. Union of India and Others1
followed in Priya Gupta vs. State of Chhattisgarh and Others 2
and Ashish Ranjan and Others vs. Union of India and Others3.
8.     It will be relevant to note that this Court in Mridul
Dhar(Minor) and Another (supra) noted that there was no
consistency in fixing the time schedule for admissions to medical
courses and there were much irregularities in maintaining a
prescribed schedule which has been exploited by medical colleges
by admitting undeserved students and that was affecting the
academic session. This Court intervened in the matter and fixed the
time schedule for admission to the medical colleges including post­
graduate admissions and accordingly, the schedule was notified by
the Medical Council of India and direction was given for strict
adherence of rules which was later reiterated in Priya Gupta
(supra) followed by Ashish Ranjan and Others(supra).
9.      This Court specifically gave its approval to the admission
schedule which has been prescribed under the broucher of Medical
Council of India (now, The National Medical Commission) for the
academic year 2018­19 onwards for the post­graduate medical
courses which the Commission has to strictly follow and no
deviation is permissible in any circumstances and accordingly last
date for admission/joining will not be extended after 31 st May.
10.   It reveals from the record that after the admission/counselling
process was over on 31 st May, 2019, approximately 153 seats
remained vacant in State Quota of the post­graduate medical seats
for the academic year 2019­20 and the respondent­students have
failed in their attempt after participating in the last counselling in
securing admission to post­graduate medical seat in any of the
specialty because of their much lower rank in the order of merit.
11.   At this stage, the respondent Dr. Priyambada Sharma and
others filed their writ petitions before the High Court under Article
226 of the Constitution with the grievance that although the final
round of counselling on 31st May, 2019 is over, the post­graduate
seats for academic session 2019­20 are still available/lying vacant
and at least against the vacant seats, they may be considered for
admission in the post­graduate medical course.
12.    The learned Single Judge by interim orders dated 04 th June,
2019, 16th July, 2019 and 30th July, 2019 in a batch of writ
petitions directed the appellant to grant provisional admissions to
the students in post­graduate medical courses by ignoring the cut­
off date i.e. 31st May and also ignoring the principle of merit and
these interim orders were later made absolute by order dated 04 th
November, 2019 on the premise that the students have joined post­
graduate medical courses and have undergone training/education
for six months or more and accordingly, such admissions are
regularized and each of them who have joined post­graduate
medical course shall be treated as normal post­graduate student.
13.    These orders became a subject matter of challenge in special
leave petitions before this Court and the interim orders and also the
final order dated 04th November, 2019 passed by the High Court
were stayed by this Court in the respective special leave petitions. It
is informed that so far as respondent Dr. Priyambada Sharma is
concerned, she has not continued her studies since September,
2019.    At the same time, in Civil Appeal @ SLP(C) No.27463 of
2019, respondent­students were allowed to pursue the course by
the University despite the stay order granted by this Court.
14.   Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the High Court
has    committed    manifest  error   in  directing  the  provisional
admissions in this batch of appeals in post­graduate medical
courses in the academic year 2019­20 beyond 31 st May and that
apart, the admission could not have been made on the principle of
first­cum­first­serve regardless of their placement in the order of
merit which is the touchstone for admissions to the post­graduate
medical courses. Such orders passed by the High Court are not
legally sustainable and deserve to be set aside.
15.    Learned counsel for the appellant further submits that merely
because some of the students have been allowed to be continued on
provisional basis in post­graduate medical courses despite the stay
order passed by this Court, no sympathy can be claimed by them
and such misplaced sympathy indeed will lay down a bad precedent
and submits that all such interim orders and the provisional
admissions made of the respective respondents students in post­
graduate medical courses for the academic year 2019­20 deserve to
be quashed and set aside.
16.    Learned counsel for the appellant further submits that in
numerous cases, petitions have been filed in this Court seeking
extension of time either on account of some particular exigency
faced by any individual college or university but generally on the
ground that large number of seats for post­graduate courses either
remained unfilled or are lying vacant and this Court has declined
such request with the direction that time schedule must be strictly
adhered to.
17.    On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondents
submits that either of the respondent­student was not at fault and
only because of the interim orders passed by the High Court in the
first instance, the University could not conduct the second round of
counselling within the time schedule and pursuant to the order of
the Division Bench dated 30th May 2019, the second round of
counselling was held on 31st May, 2019 and on the same day,
admissions to post­graduate medical courses were closed. Only to
meet out the aforesaid difficulty, interim orders were passed by the
High Court in the interest of justice.     In the first instance, the
respondent­students are deprived from participating in a fair
manner in the second round of counselling which was held on 31 st
May, 2019 and that was the reason for which the respondents
approached the High Court by filing the writ petitions and taking
the legitimate grievance of the students, interim orders were passed
granting provisional admissions to post­graduate medical courses
without disturbing the admissions already made and the students
have become the victims of delay in holding the second round of
counselling for the academic year 2019­20.
18.   Learned counsel for the respondents further submits that the
students were not at fault and any intervention made by the High
Court while passing the interim orders in the first instance
interfering the admission process duly notified, in no manner, could
be attributed to the students but ultimately down the line, it is the
students who suffer and at least such of the students who have
completed their course or are at the verge of completing the course,
be permitted to complete the course and to appear in the
examination and if that is not being permitted in the given facts and
circumstances, they will only lose three precious years of their life
and neither the appellant nor anyone else is going to be benefitted.
19.   We have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their
assistance perused the material available on record.
20.   That so far as the time schedule prescribed by the Medical
Council of India in its Regulations, 2000 of which reference has
been made for the academic year 2019­20 for admission to the
post­graduate medical courses is concerned, it has to be strictly
followed and that, in any circumstance, is not to be deviated. Last
date for admissions to the post­graduate medical course will not be
extended after 31st May and the schedule has been prescribed in
compliance of the judgments of this Court of which reference has
been made in Mridul Dhar(Minor) and Another(supra) followed by
this Court in Priya Gupta (supra)         and Ashish Ranjan and
Others(supra) and this Court has consistently held that the
schedule for admission to the post­graduate medical courses must
be followed strictly leaving no discretion to any authority to permit
admissions over the cut­off date under schedule for admission to
post­graduate medical courses i.e. 31st May.
21.    That even when the complaints are made to this Court that
large number of seats are lying vacant seeking extension of time to
fill those unfilled undergraduate/post­graduate seats of medical
courses, this Court always declined such requests and directed that
schedule must be strictly adhered to.
22.    This Court in Education Promotion Society for India and
Another vs. Union of India and Others4 held as under:­
“6. In this case the petitioners want a general extension of time
not on account of any particular difficulty faced by any individual
college or university but generally on the ground that a large
number of seats for the PG courses are lying vacant. It is stated
that more than 1000 seats are lying vacant. In the affidavit filed
by the UoI it is mentioned that as far as deemed universities are
concerned there are 603 seats lying vacant. However, it is
important to note that out of 603 seats lying vacant only 31 are
in clinical subjects and the vast majority (572) that is almost 95%
of the seats are lying vacant in non­clinical subjects. There is no
material on record to show as to what is the situation with regard
to the remaining 400­500 seats. This Court however can take
judicial notice of the fact that every year large number of non­
clinical seats remain vacant because many graduate doctors do
not want to do postgraduation in non­clinical subjects. Merely
because the seats are lying vacant, in our view, is not a ground to
grant extension of time and grant further opportunity to fill up
vacant seats. The schedule must be followed. If we permit
violation of schedule and grant extension, we shall be opening a
pandora's box and the whole purpose of fixing a time schedule
and laying down a regime which strictly adheres to time schedule
will be defeated.”
23.   Further, this Court in Dr. Astha Goel and Others vs.
Medical Counselling Committee and Others5 held as under:­
“23. Applying the law laid down by this Court in the aforesaid
two decisions to the facts of the case on hand and when the
Medical Counselling Committee and the Union of India have to
adhere to the time schedule for completing the admission process
and when the current admission of NEET­PG­2021 is already
behind time schedule and ever after conducting eight to nine
rounds of counselling, still some seats, which are mainly non­
clinical courses seats have remained vacant and thereafter when
a conscious decision is taken by the Union Government/the
Medical Counselling Committee, not to conduct a further Special
Stray Round of counselling, it cannot be said that the same is
arbitrary. The decision of the Union Government and the Medical
Counselling Committee not to have Special Stray Round of
counselling is in the interest of Medical Education and Public
Health. There cannot be any compromise with the merits and/or
quality of Medical Education, which may ultimately affect the
26. At the cost of repetition, it is observed and held that even
after eight to nine rounds of counselling, out of 40,000 seats,
1456 seats have remained vacant, out of which approximately,
more than 1100 seats are non­clinical seats, which every year
remain vacant, of which the judicial notice has been taken by
this Court in the case of Education Promotion Society for
24.   In the given facts and circumstances, in our considered view,
the interim orders passed by the High Court granting provisional
admissions in the post­graduate medical courses in the months of
June and July, 2019 by orders dated 04 th June, 2019, 16th July,
2019 and 30th July, 2019 which were later made absolute by an
order dated 04th November, 2019 are not legally sustainable.
25.   The feeble submission made by the respondents’ counsel that
a sympathetic view may be taken on the premise that they have
been allowed to continue in their respective post­graduate medical
courses for quite some time or few of them have completed the
course in the           interregnum despite the order of stay granted by
this Court and the reliance placed on the judgment of this Court in
Medical Council of India vs. Ritwik & Others 6, in our view, may
not be of any assistance for the reason that it was a case where the
student was selected in the counselling in the first year MBBS
course but was not granted admission due to his inability to pay
the fee before the last date i.e. 31st August, 2018 and he was
allowed to continue and pursue the course by interim order passed
by this Court. In the given peculiar facts and circumstances, his
admission was approved under the order of this Court. As far as
the cases of present respondents are concerned, they have
participated in the second round of counselling but failed to get any
seat in the post­graduate medical course because of lower rank in
order of merit and by interim orders passed by the High Court,
provisional admissions were granted to them ignoring the principle
of merit which cannot be countenanced by this Court.
26.  In our considered view, no sympathy can be shown to such
students who have not only entered/admitted after 31 st May of the
year but their admissions were completely in contravention to the
Regulations, 2000 and provisional admissions were granted by the
High Court ignoring the principle of merit which is the sole
touchstone for admission to the post­graduate courses based on the
NEET examination, 2019 where admissions are made strictly in the
order of merit­cum­preference and despite the stay order passed by
this Court, if they are allowed to continue in post­graduate medical
courses,   the   same    would   be  completely   illegal and  such
contemptuous action on the part of the authorities, cannot be
approved by this Court.
27.  Consequently, the appeals succeed and are accordingly
allowed. The impugned orders passed by the High Court in the
respective appeals are hereby quashed and set aside. No costs.
28. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand disposed of.