1)     The petitioner has challenged the complaint filed by the respondent
against it before the Court of learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Anantnag,
as also order dated 31.07.2018 passed by the learned Magistrate in the said
2)     Before coming to the grounds of challenge raised in the petition, it
would be apt to refer to the allegations contained in the complaint filed by
the respondent.
3)     A complaint came to be filed by respondent before learned Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Anantnag, seeking a direction for conducting
enquiry/registration of FIR against the officials of the State Bank of India,
Branch office Anantnag. The particulars of the officials of the Bank are
given in para (7) of the complaint. It was alleged in the complaint that
respondent is maintaining a cash credit account No.11419005877 with
State Bank of India, Branch Office, Anantnag. It was further averred that
on 29.01.2018, it came to the knowledge of the complainant/respondent
that a huge amount has been credited and debited in his said account with
effect from 01.01.2009 to 03.04.2014 at his back and without his
knowledge, the details of which are projected in the statement of account
issued by the Bank. It is also averred that the officials of the petitioner
Bank have deceitfully and dishonestly used his account for ulterior
motives supposedly in the name of ‘Window Dressing”, a process of
operating the accounts, the knowledge of which the respondent herein got
through reliable sources. The respondent is alleged to have made a
representation on 31.01.2018 to the Branch Manager of the Bank, who
issued revised statement of account after deleting the fictitious entries and
also issued a certificate to the effect that inflated debit and credit entries
made in the account do not belong to the account holder but the same have
been made by the Bank officials as a means of “Window Dressing”. It was
also alleged in the complaint that by making these illegal/fictitious
transactions, the officials of the Bank have committed serious offences
thereby tarnishing image of the respondent/complainant. It is contended
that due to these fictitious credit and debit entries in the account of the
respondent/complainant, his position became dubious before the Income
Tax Department, as a result whereof, the Income Tax Authorities issued
notices under Section 133(6) of the Income Tax Act for the year 2010-
2011 and 2011-2012 against the respondent/complainant. With these
allegations, the respondent/complainant sought direction that the matter
be investigated under law.
4)      It appears that on 17.04.2018, another application was made by the
respondent/complainant whereby he sought permission to place on record the
reply dated 09.04.2018 sent to him by the Branch Manager, State Bank of India,
5)      Upon the aforesaid complaint filed by respondent/complainant, the
learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Anantnag, recorded preliminary
statement of the respondent/complainant and one more witness,
whereafter the learned Magistrate recorded in his order dated 17.04.2018,
that the matter needs to be enquired into. On 31.07.2018, another order
came to be passed by the learned Magistrate, whereby the learned
Magistrate forwarded the complainant of respondent/complainant to
police for conducting preliminary verification. It was observed in the said
order that the record highlights the fact that the officials/unknown persons
have operated the bank account of the complainant illegally thereby
inflating the bank account without the knowledge of the complainant and
fictitious entries/transactions have been made in the account head of the
complainant, which requires a detailed enquiry.
6)      The petitioner has challenged the impugned order as well as the
impugned complaint filed by the respondent/complainant on the ground
that the allegations made in the complaint do not make out any offence
against the petitioner nor recording of entries in the account of respondent
constitute any offence under any penal law. It is further contended that the
first application filed by the respondents before the learned Magistrate was
sent to the police for enquiry, as such, when second application was made
by respondent before the learned Magistrate on 17.04.2018, it was not
open to the learned Magistrate to direct enquiry in terms of Section 202 of
Cr. P. C. It is also contended that the alleged entries were made from the
year 2009 to 2014, but the complaint has been filed by the
complainant/respondent in February, 2018. Thus, the same is barred by
limitation. Another contention that has been raised by the petitioner is that the
officials of the petitioner Bank being public servants, cognizance of offences
against them cannot be taken without previous sanction and that this aspect of
the matter has been ignored by the learned Magistrate.
7)      I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material
on record.
3)      So far as the first contention of learned counsel for the petitioner
that no offence is made out against the officials of the petitioner Bank is
concerned, the determination of merits of the said contention at this
moment of time when no process has been issued against the officials of
the petitioner Bank would be premature. Any opinion that may be
rendered by this Court in this regard would definitely have a bearing upon
the course that may be adopted by the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate
after getting the report of enquiry from the police. The petitioner has, it
seems, prematurely approached this Court when not even process has been
issued against the officials of the petitioner Bank, which means that
learned Chief Judicial Magistrate has yet to make up his mind whether
any offence is made out on the basis of the material before him. In fact,
the enquiry report has still not been produced by the police before the
learned Chief Judicial Magistrate. It is only thereafter that the learned
Magistrate would be in a position to make a, prima facie, opinion as to
whether any offence is made out against the officials of the petitioner
Bank. The filing of the instant petition, even prior to issuance of process
against the officials of the petitioner Bank, is premature, as a prospective
accused has no right or locus standi to be heard on the question whether
the process should be issued against him or not.
4)     Coming to the second contention raised by learned counsel for the
petitioner that it was not open to the learned Magistrate to direct the police
to conduct the preliminary verification, the same also appears to be
without any merit. A perusal of the trial court record shows that there is
no order on record of the file that would indicate that the first complaint
filed by the respondent was referred to the police for enquiry by the order
of the learned Magistrate. There is only an endorsement by clerk of the
Court of Chief Judicial Magistrate, which records that earlier application
has been sent for enquiry but no order of the Court could be found on the
record of the file to this effect. Although respondent in his complaint filed
before the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate had prayed that an FIR should
be registered against the officials of the petitioner Bank, yet the learned
Magistrate instead of directing registration of the FIR in terms of Section
156(3) of Cr. P. C recorded the preliminary evidence and took cognizance
of the complaint, whereafter in terms of Section 202 of Cr. P. C, a
direction was issued on 31.07.2018 asking the concerned police to conduct
the preliminary verification. The course adopted by the learned Chief
Judicial Magistrate is in accordance with law and cannot be found fault
5)      The third contention which has been raised by learned counsel for
the petitioner is with regard to the bar of limitation. According to the
petitioner, cognizance of the offences alleged in the complaint cannot be
taken in view of the bar contained in Section 538-B of J&K Cr. P. C. The
argument of the learned counsel is misplaced for the reason that
respondent in the complaint has alleged commission of offences under
Section 409, 420, 120-B, 467, 471 of RPC. Some of these offences carry
punishment upto imprisonment for life. Therefore, provisions contained
in section 538-B of J&K Cr. P. C, which create a bar to take cognizance
after lapse of the period of limitation, is not attracted to the instant case,
as the bar to take cognizance of offences carrying punishment of life
imprisonment is not applicable at all.
6)      Lastly, it has been argued by learned counsel for the petitioner that
officials of the petitioner Bank are public servants and, as such, cognizance of
offences against them cannot be taken without previous sanction. He has
pressed into service provisions of Section 197 of Cr. P. C in this regard.
7)      It is true that the officials of the petitioner Bank come within the
definition of public servant as contained in Section 21 of IPC but the officials
of the bank are not the public servants who cannot be removed from their office
save by or with the sanction of the Government. The appointing and removing
authority of the officials of the petitioner Bank is not the Government but it is
the competent authority of the State Bank of India who is empowered to do so.
Thus, the provisions of Section 197 of the Cr. P. C are not attracted to the case
of the petitioners. I am supported in my aforesaid view by the judgment of the
High Court of Madras in the case of Ramesh Gelli vs. The Inspector of Police,
Central Bureau of Investigation, 2017 Supreme (Mad) 1915, wherein, while
considering this question, the Court observed as under:
“18. Even that is so, it is not the Government who has
appointed him and it is not the competent authority to
remove him from office. Therefore, banking sector, being
governed by the Reserve Bank of India and considered as
virtue of Section 46A of Banking Regulation Act, the
petitioner is deemed to be a ‘public servant’ for the
purpose of provisions under the Prevention of Corruption
Act. It cannot be extended to I.P.C.
12. Even for the sake of argument, if the petitioner
should be considered as a ‘public servant’ for I.P.C
offences also, the protection available under Section 197
Cr. P. C, is not available for the petitioner herein since the
conditions in-built in Section 197 Cr. P. C, which say a
person removable from office save or by sanction to
committed in discharge of official duty, does not attract
to the facts of the present case.”
8)     From the foregoing enunciation of law on the subject, it is clear that
an official of the bank may qualify to be a public servant and for
prosecuting such an official in connection with offences under the
provisions of Prevention of Corruption Act, a previous sanction has to be
obtained but so far as prosecution of officials of the bank in connection
with offences under I.P.C/RPC are concerned, no previous sanction is
9)      For the foregoing reasons, I do not find any merit in this petition.
The same is, accordingly, dismissed. It is, however, provided that the
learned Magistrate shall, after obtaining the enquiry report from the
enquiry officer, consider the material on record and thereafter take a
decision as to whether any offence is made out against the officials of the
petitioner Bank without being influenced by the observations made by him
in his order dated 31.07.2018.
10)     A copy of this order be sent to the learned Magistrate for
information and compliance.