addition of Section 376(n) of IPC and Sections 4,
5(L),      6,      8    and    12    of      POCSO    Act     was       made        on
07.03.2022. It is mainly alleged that on 03.10.2021,
the    petitioner         has     been     kidnapped      by     the      accused
named in the FIR. As the father of the petitioner did
not     know          the    whereabouts          of    the       petitioner,
ultimately he lodged FIR on 18.12.2020 against the
concerned accused person.
4.     It    is     further      submitted        that   the     age       of     the
petitioner victim – complainant is 17 years and 2
4.1.      At this stage, it is submitted that during the
course        of       medical     examination          carried          out        on
05.03.2022, it was found that the victim girl was
having       pregnancy        of    6    weeks     and    3    days.         It     is
submitted that the petitioner is a victim of rape
case and her mental health coupled with the fact that
bearing and rearing of a child in the womb would
create a great mental agony to her for her entire
life and may invite other social economical problems
and,      hence,         the     petitioner         has     expressed             her
willingness to terminate her pregnancy through her
father. It is further submitted that the father of
the victim has produced a consent letter on behalf of
minor      petitioner.          Petitioner         is  also       willing           to
terminate her pregnancy.
5.     Learned advocate for the petitioner has placed
reliance upon the provision of Medical Termination of
Pregnancy (Amendment) Act, 2021 (hereinafter referred
to “MTP Act, 2021” for short) and submitted that in
the said provision, it is specifically provided that
where there is any pregnancy alleged by the pregnant
woman to have been caused by rape, anguish cause by
such   pregnancy         shall   be     presumed      to   constitute             a
grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant
woman.      Referring        to   the       said    provision,          it      is
contended that the case of the petitioner – victim
falls      in      such     criteria         and   thus,      appropriate
direction may be issued.
6.    Learned advocate for the petitioner has placed
reliance upon the judgment of the Hon’ble Apex Court
in case of Ms. Z Vs. State of Bihar, reported in
(2018) 11 SCC 572 as well as the judgment of this
Court    in      case    of   Janak     Ramsang      Kanzariya        (minor)
through Manjuben Knazar Vs. State of Gujarat & Anr.,
reported       in     2011   Cri.L.J.        1306.   Relying      upon        the
judgment of this Court, it is contended that in case
of pregnancy of 12 weeks, permission was granted for
termination          of  pregnancy.        It   is,   therefore,          urged
that this petition be allowed and relief as prayed
for be granted.
7.    This       Court     has   passed        an   interim       order         on
15.03.2022, which reads as under:
“1. This petition is filed by the petitioner
under Article 227 of the Constitution of
India, read with Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in brief, ‘the
Code’), seeking following reliefs:
(A) Your Lordships may be pleased to issue
appropriate writ or order or direction to the
respondent        authority           to   terminate            the
pregnancy of the petitioner who is aged 17
years and 2 months, at the earliest, as the
same being in the best interest of the
victim, considering her very young age,
physical health and incident of rape causing
grave injury to her mental health and further
be pleased to direct the respondent no.3 to
hand over, in scientific manner, the tissues
drawn from the fetus for DNA identification
to the police Sub Inspector, Vijapur Police
Station, Mehsana for onward transmission of
the same to the concerned Forensic Science
Laboratory, interest of justice;
(B) Pending admission hearing and final
disposal of this petition, Your Lordships may
be pleased to direct the respondents to
conduct medical termination of pregnancy of
the minor victim with two qualified surgeons
including Gynecologist, Obstetrician and in
presence of qualified physician with due care
and precaution after carrying out necessary
medical        checkup,     so        as  to     avoid          any
likelihood of untoward harm to the physical
or mental health of the minor victim, in the
interest of justice;
(C) Any other and Further relief/s which may
be deemed fit by this Hon’ble Court be
2. The present petition is filed by the
father of the victim girl, who is a rape
victim in connection with the FIR bearing No.
11206074210981        of     2021,       registered           with
under Sections 363 and 366 of the Indian
2.1 The petitioner has prayed for termination
of pregnancy, which is of about eight weeks,
as per the report of the doctor.
3. Learned APP, Mr. Raval, as well as the
learned Advocate for the petitioner, Mr.
Patadia, jointly submitted that for such type
of cases, the necessary facilities are
available at G.M.E.R.S. Hospital, Vadnagar,
where, the victim girl was examined. It was,
therefore, submitted that, if, the victim
girl is taken to the said hospital, she shall
be examined there, accordingly.
4. In view of the above, the petitioner shall
go to G.M.E.R.S. Hospital, Vadnagar, along
with the victim girl on 16TH MARCH, 2022, at
about          11:00     A.M.,          for     her       medical
examination, whereupon, she will be examined
by the expert doctors of the hospital.
4.1 The senior expert Doctors at G.M.E.R.S
General Hospital, Vadnagar, are DIRECTED to
examine         the    victim        for     termination             of
pregnancy         and     about         the    risk        factor.
Moreover, the doctors shall also mention the
stage of pregnancy and medical position of
the victim girl and shall CLARIFY, as to
whether, termination of pregnancy of victim
girl could be performed or not by giving
detailed reasons.
4.2 The Medical Officer shall report to this
Court about the above aspects through learned
APP on or before 17th March, 2022.
4.3 Learned APP is DIRECTED to intimate /
communicate          this     order        to    the      concern
authorities, i.e. the officials of G.M.E.R.S
Hospital and Vijapur Police Station.
5. Stand over to 17TH MARCH, 2022. Direct
service is permitted, TODAY.”
8.    Pursuant to the aforesaid order dated 15.03.2022
passed by this Court in the present matter, learned
APP has placed on record an opinion dated 16.03.2022
given    by      the   panel    Doctors        of   G.M.E.R.S         General
Hospital, Vadnagar. The said opinion reads as under:
“Here come for expert opinion for MTP Done or Not.
I/D (1) small Black mole over left side of neck
(2) small Black mole over upper chest.
According to panel (1) Dr. Nikhil Anand (Asso. Prof) (2)
Prof.) suggest that medical termination of pregnancy of
this victim can be done at GMERS Vadnagar under MTP Act
with patient’s guardian’s consent with minimal risks
involved in surgical procedures such as Anesthesia related
risks, Risks of Bleeding, perforation, infection and
incomplete procedure.”
9.     On the basis of the aforesaid opinion, learned
APP    submits        that   this   Court        may  pass      appropriate
order in the interest of the petitioner – victim.
10. I have considered the submissions canvassed by
learned        advocate     Mr.    Patadiya        appearing          for       the
petitioner and learned APP Mr. Ronak Raval for the
respondent          –   State.   I    have       also    considered             the
documents produced on record including the opinion
dated      16.03.2022       given     by       the   panel      doctors           of
11. Section 3 of the MTP Act, 2021 reads as under,
“3. When        pregnancies        may     be  terminated            by
registered medical practitioners.-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the
Indian      Penal    Code        (45   of     1860),           a
registered medical practitioner shall not
be guilty of any offence under that Code
or under any other law for the time being
in force, if any pregnancy is terminated
by him in accordance with the provisions
of this Act.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section
(4), a pregnancy may be terminated by a
registered medical practitioner,-
(a) where the length of the pregnancy does
not exceed twelve weeks, if such medical
practitioner is, or
(b) where the length of the pregnancy exceeds
twelve weeks but does not exceed twenty
weeks, if not less than two registered
medical  practitioners       are,   of    opinion,
formed in good faith, that-
(i) the continuance of the pregnancy would
involve  a   risk      to   the   life      of       the
pregnant woman or of grave injury to her
physical or mental health; or
(ii) there is a substantial risk that if the
child  were  born,      it  would   suffer         from
such physical or mental abnormalities as
to be seriously handicapped.
Explanation   1.-Where      any   pregnancy           is
alleged  by  the    pregnant    woman      to      have
been caused by rape, the anguish caused
by such pregnancy shall be presumed to
constitute a grave injury to the mental
health of the pregnant woman.
Explanation 2.-Where any pregnancy occurs
as a result of failure of any device or
method used by any married woman or her
husband for the purpose of limiting the
number of children, the anguish caused by
such unwanted pregnancy may be presumed
to     constitute     a     grave   injury      to       the
mental health of the pregnant woman.
(3) In determining whether the continuance of
a pregnancy would involve such risk of
injury to the health as is mentioned in
sub-section (2), account may be taken to
the pregnant woman's actual or reasonable
foreseeable environment.
(b) Save as otherwise provided in clause (a),
no pregnancy shall be terminated except
with the consent of the pregnant woman.”
12. Thus from the above provision, it is clear that
as per Section 3 of the MTP Act, 2021, where the
length of pregnancy does not exceed 12 weeks, the
registered Medical Practitioner and where such length
of pregnancy exceed 12 weeks but does not exceed 20
weeks, two Medical Practitioners can terminate the
pregnancy. But they have to form an opinion that the
continuation of pregnancy would invoke a risk to the
life of the pregnant woman or of grave injury to her
physical       life     of   the  pregnant       woman   or     of      grave
injury to her physical or mental health or there is a
substantial risk that if the child were born, it
would       suffer        from    such        physical      or         mental
abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped. Thus on
perusal of Section 3 of the MPT Act, 2021, it is
clear    that        that   section      allows    abortion       only        if
specific       conditions      are    met     with.   Thus,      from        the
opinion given by the penal doctors of G. G. Hospital,
Jamnagar       after      medical    examination       of    the        victim
girl, it is revealed that the concerned doctors                              are
of the opinion that the victim can undergo MTP with
due risk of complications, few of them mentioned are
haemorrhage,          retained     product       of   conception             and
infection.          It   is   also     stated      that     if      MTP        is
considered then it should be performed without delay
to   avoid        major     complications        and    other        adverse
effects like negative impact on her mental, social,
physical condition.
13. Further,            in   this    case,       the   petitioner              is
pregnant because of forcible rape by the accused. As
contended        by    learned   advocate       for   the    petitioner,
petitioner as well as her father have given consent
for termination of pregnancy. It is also contended
that because of continuation of pregnancy, it would
cause or constitute a grave injury to the mental
health of the minor – victim coupled with the fact
that bearing and rearing of child in the womb would
create a great mental agony to her for her entire
life and invite many other socio-economical problems.
This can be said to be a grave injury to the mental
health of the pregnant woman.
14. I have also considered the judgment upon which
reliance has been placed by learned advocate for the
petition in case of Janak Ramsang Kanzariya (supra).
In that case aslo, the Court has granted permission
for termination of pregnancy of 12 weeks. I have also
considered the judgment of Hon’ble Supreme Court in
case    of     Sarmistha   Chakraborty         Vs.  Union      of      India
reported in (2018) 13 SCC 339, where also the Hon’ble
Supreme Court has granted permission to terminate the
pregnancy of 25 weeks.
15. Considering         the    contents         of   the       petition,
provision of the applicable law, ratio laid down by
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in above referred to cases,
right of privacy of the petitioner, medical reports,
and bearing in mind the best interest principle, as
discussed herein above, I am of the view that the
present petition deserves to be allowed as prayed for
only with a view to save and protect the life of the
petitioner – victim.
16. Therefore, the present petition stands allowed.
The concerned Doctors shall terminate the pregnancy
with due risk after ANC profile report. The In-charge
General        Hospital,   Vadnagar         shall   hand      over,          in
scientific manner, the tissues drawn from the foetus
for DNA identification to the investigating officer
of the crime registered by the petitioner against the
accused at Vijapur Police Station, District Mehsana
for onward transmission of the same to the concerned
Forensic Science Laboratory. Registry to provide copy
of this order to learned APP for onward communication
and to the learned advocate for the petitioner, to
the    concerned      investigating         officer   and      G.M.E.R.S
General Hospital, Vadnagar for follow up action.
17. Rule is made absolute to the aforesaid extent.
Direct service today is permitted.