This Writ Petition is filed by the Decree holder in Execution
No.3835 of 2019 on the file of LXXXV Additional City Civil and
Sessions Judge at Bangalore, allowing the memo dated 16th
January, 2020 filed by the judgment debtor.
2.  Facts in nutshell are that, the petitioner had entered
into an agreement No.001/2011-12 dated 03rd August, 2011 for
execution of “Construction of Community Centres at thirteen
locations under Phase-2 and work at the identified slums in
Bengaluru City”.        The total amount for the project was
Rs.6,41,58,238/- and the time stipulated to complete the project
was twelve months. However, for the reasons best known to the
parties, the project was not completed within the stipulated
period and as such the respondent herein refuted the claims
made by the petitioner on account of the delay in execution of
work and in that view of the matter the petitioner invoked
arbitration clause in the agreement dated 03rd August, 2011. A
Sole Arbitrator was appointed on 23rd October, 2017 for
adjudication of dispute between the parties.          The Arbitral
Tribunal, by award dated 08th April, 2019, ordered that the
Decree holder/petitioner is entitled for Rs.63,97,750/- with
further simple interest at the rate of Rs.15.80% (SBI PLR + 2%)
from 09th April, 2016 till realisation. The counter claim filed by
the   respondent    was   rejected   by   the  learned  Arbitrator.
Thereafter, the petitioner herein has filed Execution Petition
No.3835 of 2019 on the file of the trial Court to execute the
award made by the learned Arbitrator.            In the Execution
Proceedings the judgment debtor filed Memos dated 16th
January, 2020 and 12th December, 2019; and the memo of
calculation filed by the Decree holder on 16th January, 2020.
The trial Court heard the learned counsel appearing for the
parties and allowed the memo dated 16th January, 2020 filed by
the judgment debtor/respondent and as such, modified the
award.      Feeling   aggrieved     by  the   same,   the  Decree
holder/petitioner herein has presented this petition.
3.  Sri Samaksh Sood, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner drew the attention of the Court to the award at
Annexure-B made by the learned Arbitrator and also Section 33
of  the   Arbitration and   Conciliation Act,   1996  (for  short,
hereinafter referred to as "Act”).       He submitted that the
Executing Court has no jurisdiction to correct the award made by
the learned Arbitrator and therefore, he places reliance on the
judgment of the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the case of S.P.S.
RANA v. MTNL AND OTHERS decided on 14th January, 2010; in
the   case of DO-IT COMPUTER          JV A   v. THE   MUNICIPAL
CORPORATION OF GREATER MUMBAI reported in 2018 SCC
ONLINE Bom.1192; and in the case of UNION OF INDIA v.
POPULAR CONSTRUCTION COMPANY reported in (2001)8 SCC
470. Placing reliance on the above judgments, learned counsel
appearing for the petitioner submitted that neither the petitioner
nor the respondent have filed an application under Section 33 of
the Act and therefore the impugned order passed by the
Executing Court modifying the award requires interference in this
4. Respondents are served remained absent.
5.    In the light of the submission made by the learned
counsel appearing for the petitioner I have carefully examined
the finding recorded by he trial Court in the impugned order
dated 18th February, 2021. Section 33 of the Act provides as
“33.   Correction and interpretation of award;
additional award.—
(1) Within thirty days from the receipt of the arbitral
award, unless another period of time has been agreed
upon by the parties—
(a) a party, with notice to the other party, may request
the arbitral tribunal to correct any computation errors,
any clerical or typographical errors or any other errors of
a similar nature occurring in the award;
(b) if so agreed by the parties, a party, with notice to the
other party, may request the arbitral tribunal to give an
interpretation of a specific point or part of the award.
(2) If the arbitral tribunal considers the request made
under sub-section (1) to be justified, it shall make the
correction or give the interpretation within thirty days
from the receipt of the request and the interpretation
shall form part of the arbitral award.
(3) The arbitral tribunal may correct any error of the type
referred to in clause (a) of sub-section (1), on its own
initiative, within thirty days from the date of the arbitral
award.
(4) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a party with
notice to the other party, may request, within thirty days
from the receipt of the arbitral award, the arbitral tribunal
to make an additional arbitral award as to claims
presented in the arbitral proceedings but omitted from
the arbitral award.
(5) If the arbitral tribunal considers the request made
under sub-section (4) to be justified, it shall make the
additional arbitral award within sixty days from the
receipt of such request.
(6) The arbitral tribunal may extend, if necessary, the
period of time within which it shall make a correction,
give an interpretation or make an additional arbitral
award under sub-section (2) or sub-section (5).
(7) Section 31 shall apply to a correction or interpretation
of the arbitral award or to an additional arbitral award
made under this section.”
6.     The language employed in Section 33 of the Act
provides for corrections and interpretation of the award and
same has to be made within thirty days from the date of receipt
of the arbitral award by the parties.          Any correction in the
arbitral award has to be made only after providing opportunity to
both the sides.      In the instant case, perusal of Writ Petition
papers would indicate that, no such application under Section 33
of the Act has been made before the Executing Court. On the
other    hand,   respondent  herein    has   filed   memo,  seeking
clarification as per Annexure-D to the Writ Petition. Objections
have been filed by the decree holder stating that the judgment
debtor, if aggrieved by the award made by the arbitral Tribunal,
has to challenge the award as per Section 34 of the Act and on
the other hand sought clarification from the arbitral Tribunal
within thirty days of the receipt of the award. Undisputably, the
thirty days time elapsed on account of delay in filing the
application before the arbitral Tribunal and therefore, the
Executing Court, based on the memo filed by the judgment
debtor, has passed the impugned order by exercising jurisdiction
under Section 36(1) and 36(2) of the Act which is impermissible
in law since no application has been filed by the judgment
debtor, even before the Execution Court, seeking correction of
typographical     mistakes, in  that    regard,    I  have carefully
considered the judgment referred to by the learned counsel
appearing for the petitioner in S.P.S RANA (supra). Paragraph 9
of the judgment reads as under:
“9. Section 33 of the Act does not use the words
"but not thereafter". However, the period of 30 days is
subject to "unless another period of time has been agreed
upon by the parties". In our view the said expression has
to be read in the same manner as the expression "but not
thereafter" was interpreted in M/s Popular Construction
Co. (supra). Also, Section 32 inter alia provides for
termination of the arbitral proceedings by the final
award. Section 32 (3) lays down that the mandate of the
Arbitral Tribunal shall terminate with the termination of
the arbitral proceedings, subject inter alia to Section 33.
It will thus be seen that unless a case is covered
by Section 33, the mandate of the Arbitral Tribunal is
terminated.     Thus,    unless    an    application/petition
under Section 33(1) of the Act is preferred within 30 days
of the making of the award, the mandate of the Arbitral
Tribunal terminates. Once the mandate of the Arbitral
Tribunal   terminates,   it is   not  possible  to  file  the
application / petition under Section 33 of the Act.”
7. Following the law declared by the Division Bench of the
High Court of Delhi referred to above, I am of the view that after
the completion of thirty days of the making of the award, no
application shall be entertained under Section 33 of the Act for
rectification of typograhpical mistakes. That apart, in the instant
case, the trial Court ought not to have passed the impugned
order in the absence of application filed by the respondent and
therefore, I am of the view that the order dated 08th February,
2021 passed in Execution Petition No.3835 of 2019 is liable to be
set aside, accordingly, set aside. In the result, Writ Petition is