(1) Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 2853 of 2022
Counsel for Appellant :- Furkan Pathan
Counsel for Respondent :- Shikha Sinha
(2) Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 2854 of 2022
Counsel for Appellant :- Furkan Pathan
Counsel for Respondent :- Shikha Sinha
Heard learned counsel for the appellants and Ms Shikha Sinha,
Special Counsel for NIA.
The aforesaid two appeals arise out of a common FIR registered
as Crime No. RC 02/2021, under Section 120B IPC and Section
Pursuant to the FIR lodged, the appellants on being
apprehended were arrested on 14.7.2021 and are in jail since
last one year and eight months.
Learned counsel for the appellants has submitted that the
investigation has already been concluded and the charge sheet
submitted before the special court. On examination of the entire
material collected during the course of investigation, prima
facie, charge under Section 120B IPC and Section 25 (1B)(a)
Arms Act has been framed against the appellants.
It is argued that once the purpose of investigation with the
collection of relevant material has been served, the curtailment
of liberty of the appellants any further, that too in a situation
where the trial is to take a long time for the list of witnesses
being lengthy, the prolonged incarceration is hit by Article 21 of
the Constitution of India, moreso when the presumption of guilt
is not available to the prosecution with respect to the offences
It is further argued that the offences for which the appellants
have been charged for facing trial are to be proved during the
course of trial and the benefit of Section 43-E of the Unlawful
Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 is not available. Even
otherwise, the charges framed are not covered within the scope
of the schedule appended to NIA Act, therefore, the detention of
the appellants any further amounts to violation of their liberty
contrary to the mandate of Article 21 of the Constitution of
On the aspect of their antecedents, it is pointed out that both the
appellants are engaged in self employment. The appellant
Mohd. Mustaqeem is a mason whereas Mohammad Shakil is a
e-rickshaw driver, however, proof in support of this contention
is not available on record.
Learned counsel for the appellants has further submitted that
there is no past criminal history of the appellants and they have
falsely been roped in on the basis of combined call details
which are a part of the material before the trial court.
Learned counsel for the NIA has vehemently opposed the
prayer for bail and has argued that the trial court has rightly
rejected the bail application of the appellants on appreciation of
the prima facie evidence against them. However, the factual
position as aforesaid could not be dispelled satisfactorily.
Having regard to the gravity of the offences for which the trial
is framed and looking to the past antecedents of the appellants
being unblemished coupled with the fact that they are in jail for
the last one year and eight months and trial has begun, a case
for grant of bail is made out.
Let Mohd. Mustaqeem (appellant of criminal appeal no. 2853 of 2022)
and Mohammad Shakeel (appellant of criminal appeal no. 2854 of
2022) be released on bail in the aforesaid case crime on each of
them furnishing a bail bond and two sureties in the like amount
to the satisfaction of the court concerned, however, with a rider
that both the appellants shall mark their presence in local police
station in the first week of every month and shall cooperate
with the trial without seeking any undue adjournments.
Both the criminal appeals are accordingly allowed and the
impugned orders passed in the respective appeals set aside.
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad,