1.       The petitioner has filed the present petition, inter alia, praying that
he be appointed as a Judicial Officer at the Delhi Higher Judicial Service
(hereafter ‘DHJS’) by creating a supernumerary vacancy. The petitioner
further prays that directions be issued to the respondents to de-reserve the
vacancies reserved for candidates belonging to Scheduled Castes and
W.P.(C) 167/2023                                             Page 1 of 10
Scheduled Tribes by amending the advertisement published on
24.02.2022 (hereafter ‘the impugned advertisement’) issued for inviting
applications for Delhi Higher Judicial Service Examination - 2022
(hereafter ‘DHJS Exam-2022’). The petitioner also prays that he be
considered for appointment as a person belonging to the Economically
Weaker Section (EWS). Alternatively, the petitioner prays that the
impugned advertisement for DHJS Exam-2022 be set aside.
2.      Respondent no.2 (hereafter ‘the DHC’) had issued the impugned
advertisement dated 23.02.2022, inviting online applications from eligible
candidates for filling up 45 (forty-five) vacancies (43 existing vacancies
and 02 anticipated vacancies) by way of a direct recruitment to the Delhi
Higher Judicial Service (DHJS). The selection for the candidates involved
three successive stages. In the first stage, the eligible candidates were
required to appear and clear the Delhi Higher Judicial Service Preliminary
Examination. The said examination entailed answering objective type
questions with 25% negative marking. The candidates qualifying the said
preliminary examination would be eligible to appear for the Delhi Higher
Examination (Mains)’), and those candidates, who qualified the said
examination, were admitted for the viva voce test.
3.      The break-up of the vacancies, as specified in the impugned notice,
“The category wise breakup of vacancies to be filled is as
W.P.(C) 167/2023                                        Page 2 of 10
Category        Break up of Vacancies     Total No. of
Existing Anticipated      vacancies
Note I: Out of the aforesaid 45 vacancies, the reservation for
PwD candidates shall be as follows:
and PwD (Multiple Disabilities involving
Blindness and low vision, one arm, one leg,
both legs, leprosy cured, dwarfism and acid
attack and specific learning)
4.      The petitioner qualified the Delhi Higher Judicial Service
Preliminary Examination, which was held on 23.04.2022. He was
admitted to the DHJS Examination (Mains).
5.      The results of the DHJS Examination (Mains) were declared on
26.08.2022 and the petitioner cleared the said examination which was
held on 14.05.2022 and 15.05.2022.
6.      After the said results were declared, one of the unsuccessful
candidates filed a writ petition [being W.P.(C) 739/2022 captioned Anil
Kumar v. High Court of Delhi] before the Supreme Court, which was
dismissed by an order dated 16.09.2022. Thereafter, the said petitioner
W.P.(C) 167/2023                                         Page 3 of 10
(Anil Kumar) filed a petition before this Court [being W.P.(C)
14252/2022] seeking enhancement/revaluation of the marks awarded in
one of the papers of DHJS Examination (Mains). Some of the other
candidates also filed petitions, inter alia, seeking revaluation of the marks
awarded in DHJS Examination (Mains). These petitions were dismissed
as well.
7.      The unsuccessful candidates made a representation to the DHC,
which were considered by the DHC and additional 1.5 marks (1 mark in
Law Paper-III and 0.5 mark in General Knowledge and Language) were
awarded to all the candidates who had appeared in DHJS Examination
(Mains). In view of the additional marks awarded to all candidates, three
candidates, who had not qualified earlier, also qualified for being
admitted to viva voce.
8.      The petitioner and the other qualified candidates appeared for the
interview (viva voce). The final results of DJHS-Exam-2022 were
declared on 10.11.2022. The petitioner was ranked at serial no.37 in the
merit list. However, he is not entitled to be appointed to the Delhi Higher
Judical Service, as the selection was only for 32 vacancies (including
anticipated vacancies) for general candidates. And, the petitioner does not
belong to the reserved categories.
9.      One of the candidates, who was unsuccessful in the DHJS
Examination (Mains) but had qualified by virtue of the additional 1.5
marks being awarded to all candidates, was selected and is placed at serial
no.21 in the order of merit. The other two unsuccessful candidates, who
W.P.(C) 167/2023                                         Page 4 of 10
had qualified to appear for viva voce test by virtue of award of additional
marks, were not selected.
10.     The petitioner is, essentially, aggrieved by not being selected to the
Delhi Higher Judicial Service. He has raised several challenges to the
process and the distribution of vacancies, for seeking an appointment in
the said service. First, the petitioner claims that the unfilled vacancies
reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes category candidates
should be de-reserved and added to the number of vacancies available for
the General Category candidates. The petitioner contends that the
vacancies reserved for Scheduled Tribes candidates has not been filled up
for a long time and therefore are required to be de-reserved. Second, the
petitioner also challenges the award of 1.5 marks to all candidates who
appeared in the DHJS Examination (Mains). He also claimed that he
belongs to the EWS category and therefore, ought to be appointed to the
11.     Mr. Sinha, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner,
referred to the decision of the Co-ordinate Bench of this Court in Manish
Sharma v. Lt. Governor and Ors.: W.P.(C) 747/2018, decided on
28.08.2019, and on the strength of the said decision, contended that in the
given cases, to meet the ends of justice, the Court could direct diversion
of vacancies reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
candidates. He also referred to the decision of the Himachal Pradesh High
Court in Amardeep Singh v. State of H.P. and Ors.: CWP 1624/2008
and CWP 1122/2009, decided on 17.09.2009 to contend that the unfilled
W.P.(C) 167/2023                                          Page 5 of 10
vacancies for reserved category candidates ought not to be carried
forward for more than three years. In that case, the High Court had set
aside a circular dated 26.07.1989, which had removed the time cap for de-
reserving the vacancies, making it mandatory to carry over the vacancies
in perpetuity. The Himachal Pradesh High Court was of the view that the
vacancies reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes, ought not
to be carried over for more than three years.
12.     In addition to the above, Mr. Sinha had also referred to the decision
of the Co-ordinate Bench of this Court in S.N. Aggarwal v. Union of
India and Ors.: 45 (1991) DLT 609 (DB), whereby this Court had
directed adjustment of candidates of general category against vacancies of
unreserved category.
13.     Lastly, he contended that the award of 1.5 marks to candidates is
illegal as it is contrary to the impugned notification. The rounding of
marks is impermissible and there was no ground to award any grace
marks. He contended that the additional marks were awarded only to
accommodate certain candidates that had failed to satisfy the qualifying
criteria, albeit by a few marks.
14.     Dr. Amit George, learned counsel appearing for the DHC
countered the aforesaid submissions. He submitted that the petitioner had
participated in the selection process against 32 (thirty-two) vacancies
without any objection to the vacancies reserved for Schedule
Castes/Schedule Tribes. In the circumstances, the petitioner is now
precluded from challenging the notice after participating in the selection
W.P.(C) 167/2023                                        Page 6 of 10
process. He also referred to the decision of the Supreme Court in
Kulwinder Pal Singh and Anr. v. State of Punjab and Ors.: (2016) 6
SCC 532 and submitted that after insertion of Clause (4B) in Article 16 of
the Constitution of India by the Eighty First (Amendment) Act, 2000, the
unfilled vacancies for Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes are required
to be carried forward independent of the ceiling of reservation of 50%.
15.     We have heard the learned counsel for the parties.
16.     As noted above, the petitioner is ranked at serial no.37 and only
one candidate, who had qualified to the DHJS Examination (Mains) by
virtue of award of 1.5 additional marks, has been selected. Thus, even if
the petitioner’s challenge to the award of additional 1.5 marks to all
candidates that had appeared in the DHJS Examination-2022 is accepted
and the said candidate (who is ranked at serial no.21) is found to be
disqualified, the petitioner cannot be appointed is his place. Although, the
petitioner’s position in the order of merit would improve from rank 37 to
rank 36; the same would not result in the petitioner being included in the
select list of 32 candidates.
17.     The principal question to be addressed is whether the petitioner has
any right to seek appointment to the Delhi Higher Judicial Services
against unfilled vacancy reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes candidates by insisting that the same be de-reserved and added to
the vacancies for the general category candidates.
W.P.(C) 167/2023                                        Page 7 of 10
18.     As stated above, the petitioner had participated in the selection
process pursuant to the impugned notification without any reservation as
to the allocation of vacancies. The petitioner cannot be permitted to
challenge the notification dated 13.10.2022 after being unsuccessful in
being selected. The Supreme Court in the case of Ramesh Chandra Shah
and Ors. v. Anil Joshi and Ors.: (2013) 11 SCC 309 held that the
candidates, who had participated in the selection process but were
unsuccessful, are disentitled to challenge the selection process and seek
any relief under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. The court held
that they were “deemed to have waived their right to challenge the
advertisement and the procedure of selection”.
19.     We are of the view that the petitioner cannot claim, as a matter of
right, that the vacancies reserved for Scheduled Castes/Scheduled Tribes
candidates be de-reserved. In the case of Kulwinder Pal Singh and Anr.
v. State of Punjab and Ors. (supra), the Supreme Court considered the
provisions of Section 7 of the Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes
(Reservation in Services) Act, 2006. Sub-section (1) of Section 7 of the
said Act expressly provided that there would be no de-reservation of any
reserved category by any appointing authority in any establishment.
However, Sub-section (2) of Section 7 of the said Act enabled the
appointing authority to refer the vacancies to the Department of Welfare
of Scheduled Castes and Backward Classes for de-reservation, if the
appointing authority deemed it necessary in public interest to fill up the
said vacancies. In the aforesaid context, the Supreme Court had held as
W.P.(C) 167/2023                                       Page 8 of 10
“15. By perusal of Section 7, it appears that as a general rule
there is a bar on dereservation of the post reserved for
Scheduled Caste candidates. However, sub-clause (2)
provides an exception to this general rule by laying down
that in the public interest the authorities may by passing an
order in writing dereserve the seats reserved for candidates
belonging to Scheduled Castes category. After insertion of
clause (4-B) in Article 16 of the Constitution vide Eighty
First (Amendment) Act, 2000, dereservation could not have
been done. Under Article 16(4-B) of the Constitution of
India, unfilled vacancies reserved for Scheduled Castes or
Scheduled Tribes candidates are to be carried forward
independent of ceiling of reservation of fifty per cent. The
seats reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
categories are to be filled only by specified category.
Therefore, High Court was right in finding fault with the
dereservation of the seven posts which were filled by
candidates belonging to general category and we do not find
any reason warranting interference.”
20.     The petitioner does not have any indefeasible right to be appointed
to the Delhi Higher Judicial Service. We are unable to accept that any
order or direction requires to be issued to the respondents for undertaking
any exercise for de-reservation of vacancies reserved for candidates
belonging to Scheduled Castes /Scheduled Tribes. In the event any such
de-reservation of reserved vacancies is considered necessary by the
respondents, on account of the same remaining unfilled over a long period
of time, for want of the candidates meeting the qualifying criteria, the
respondents may undertake the exercise for de-reserving such vacancies.
In the event any such vacancies are de-reserved, the same would be
available for being filled pursuant to the selection exercise conducted in
the future. In any view, such vacancies cannot be made available for the
W.P.(C) 167/2023                                          Page 9 of 10
selection     process   that commenced      pursuant     to    the     impugned
advertisement. The vacancies, as advertised by the impugned notification,
cannot be increased by diverting vacancies earmarked for the reserved
category.
21.     The petitioner’s contention that he is entitled to be considered for
appointment as he belongs to the EWS is also unmerited. The impugned
advertisement did not contain any such reservation for EWS category.
22.     The petition is unmerited and, accordingly, dismissed. All pending
applications are also disposed of.