Mr. Pravin Faldessai, Additional Public Prosecutor for the State.
Heard Mr. Shivan Desai for the Petitioners and Mr. Pravin
Faldessai, learned Additional Public Prosecutor for the State in all these
2.     Learned Counsel for the parties agree that all these Petitions raise
common issues of law and fact and therefore, can be disposed of by a
common Judgment and Order.
3.     In these matters, we had directed the impleadment of K. Venkat
Krishna, the complainant as Respondent No.3. This matter was
adjourned on some occasions to ensure that service is complete on
Respondent No.3. Despite service, however, Respondent No.3 has
chosen not to appear in these Petitions. The notice/ orders had made it
clear that these Petitions would be disposed of finally at the stage of
admission itself. The Petitions were taken up for final disposal after
service was complete upon Respondent No.3 and even the affidavit to
that effect was filed by the Petitioners.
4.     The Petitioners are members of an art-rock live performance
project known as “Dastaan LIVE”. This band performs live on stage and
tours India for its performances. The Petitioners claim that the said band
is driven by several influential poets and writers from Faiz Ahmed Faiz to
Baba Nagarjuna, to Sahir Ludhianvi to Nazeer Akbarabadi, and has
composed their lyrics using progressive rock and shades of folk music to
create an audio-visual live performance.
5.     The Petitioners on the night of 17.12.2019 were performing live
at the Serendipity Arts Festival, 2019, at Campal, Panaji, Goa. As a part
of the live performance, the said band played their set-list of eight songs
which were performed in various cities around India, unhindered, till
then. One such song performed by the Petitioners' band was the
“Mantra Kavita” by Vaidyanath Misra (widely known as Baba Nagarjun),
which was originally composed in the year 1969. The Petitioners have
stated on oath that the Poet Shri Vaidyanath Misra @ Baba Nagarjun is a
highly acclaimed poet who has received two Sahitya Akademy Awards
from the Government of India.
6.     The Petitioners have pleaded that on the next day of their
performance, i.e. on 18.12.2019, some of them i.e. Anirban Ghosh,
Sumant Balkrishnan, Ms. Shiva Pathak, and Ms. Nirmala Ravindran
were called to the Panaji Police Station and were informed that some
person had complained about their band. They were informed that they
were called to the Police Station to issue an apology.
7.     The Petitioners have pleaded that the aforesaid four persons,
including two women, reported to the Police Station, intending to
cooperate with the Police. The Police, however, placed these four persons
including the two women under arrest, informing them that an offense
under section 295-A of the IPC r/w section 34 of the IPC was registered
against them based on a complaint lodged by one K. Venkat Krishna
(Respondent No.3 herein).
8.     The Petitioners have pleaded that the arrested Petitioners were
eventually released on bail and the Petitioners who were yet to be
arrested secured anticipatory bail.
9.     The Petitioners by instituting these Petitions, have sought for
quashing of FIR No.268/2019 dated 18.12.2019 alleging that the
Petitioners have committed an offense under section 295-A r/w section
34 of the IPC. The Petitioners contend that the complaint made by
Respondent No.3 does not disclose the commission of any offenses
under section 295-A r/w section 34 of the IPC and therefore, this is a
case of abuse of the criminal process warranting interference by invoking
the provisions of section 482 of the Cr.P.C. and Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.
10.    The Petitioners have pleaded that their band was only performing
their own musical adaptation of the poem composed by Shri Vaidyanath
Misra @ Baba Nagarjun and even the lyrics were not modified by them,
in the least. The Petitioners have pleaded that Shri Vaidyanath Misra @
Baba Nagarjun composed this poem in the year 1969 and various artists
have given their own musical adaptation to this composition. The
Petitioners have claimed that this composition is said to be the grand and
nihilistic climax to this poet's earlier poem.
11.    The Petitioners have pleaded that the alacrity and the undue haste
in registering the FIR give the Petitioners reason to believe that both the
lodging as well as registering of this FIR was driven by political interest
and/or for collateral purposes and/or with malicious intent to damage
the band's reputation and to curb free speech and artistic intent/ creative
12.    The Petitioners have also placed on record the entire text of the
“Mantra Kavita” by Shri Vaidyanath Misra @ Baba Nagarjun
accompanied by a certificate under section 65-B of the Evidence Act,
1872. This certifies to the computer printout of the composition, the
extract of which was taken from “http://kavitakosh.org/kk” and printed
directly from the website. The certificate complies with other
requirements of section 65-B of the Evidence Act.
13.    Mr. Shivan Desai, the learned Counsel for the Petitioners submits
that the complaint of Respondent No.3 does not even remotely disclose
the ingredients of section 295-A r/w section 34 of the IPC. He
submitted that there are no allegations of deliberate and malicious intent
of outraging the religious feelings of any class of citizens of India or
otherwise insult or attempt to insult the religion or religious beliefs of
that class. He submits that the complainant has attempted to
misinterpret or in any case take out of context the line from the
composition and allege “blasphemy”. The complainant, by again taking a
line out of context has claimed that the same has hurt the sentiment of
“hundred crores of India and few million abroad”. Mr. Desai submitted
that the registering of the FIR with such haste based upon such a
frivolous complaint amounts to a clear abuse of the criminal process. He
relies on Ramji Lal Modi vs. The State of U.P. 1, Mahendra Singh
Dhoni        vs.    Yerraguntla  Shyamsundar       and   Ors. 2,   Devidas
Ramachandra Tuljapurkar vs. State of Maharashtra and Ors. 3, Arnab
Ranjan Goswami vs. State of Maharashtra and Ors. 4 and Indibly
Creative Private Limited and Ors. vs. Government of West Bengal
and Ors. 5 in support of his submissions.
14.     Mr. Faldessai, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor submitted
that the complaint had disclosed the commission of an offense under
section 295-A r/w section 34 of the IPC. He submitted that because
further proceedings were stayed by this Court, the investigating
authorities could not gather material on the aspect of “deliberate and
malicious intention”. He submits that the burden is on the Petitioners to
explain as to why they chose this particular composition and why they
contend that they did not have any deliberate or malicious intention of
outraging the religious feelings of the Hindus. He submits that “OM” is
quite sacred to the Hindus and if the same is recited in a negative
narrative or clubbed with the words or phrases “Ullu ka pattha”, then,
the same amounts to insulting religion and religious beliefs. He submits
that there is no abuse involved and these petitions may be dismissed with
an opportunity for the Petitioners to face trial and prove their innocence.
He submits that these Petitions are quite premature and if based on
investigation, the Police agencies are satisfied that there is no case for
filing a charge-sheet, they will not file any charge-sheet. He however
submits that the Petitions, being premature, may now be dismissed so
that law can take its course. He submitted that the decisions relied upon
by Mr. Desai turn on their facts and do not apply to the present matter.
He, therefore, submitted that all these Petitions may be dismissed.
15.    The rival contentions now fall for our determination.
16.    The Petitioners, as noted earlier, are a part of a band which, in the
course of their live performance in Goa on 17.12.2019, presented a
musical adaptation of “Mantra Kavita” composed by Shri Vaidyanath
Misra @ Baba Nagarjun. There was no dispute raised that this poet was
an acclaimed poet having received two Sahitya Akademy Awards from
the Government of India. There was no allegation either in the
complaint or by filing any return to these Petitions that the Petitioners
had, in any manner, tampered with the lyrics of the “Mantra Kavita”.
There was also no dispute raised about the extract of the entire
composition as downloaded from the internet by the Petitioners and
produced on record under cover of a certificate under section 65-B of the
Evidence Act, 1872. The complainant, when he lodged his complaint on
18.12.2019 had not even bothered to supply the full extract of that
composition to the Police authorities. Even the Police authorities,
registered the FIR, literally the minute the same was lodged, perhaps,
without even bothering to either read the complaint or the provisions of
section 295-A of the IPC. The FIR records that the same was lodged at
13:17 hours on 18.12.2019 and the same recorded also at 13:17 hours
on the same date. The GD Reference Entry No. is 57 and the time
indicated against the same is “13:17:53 hours”.
17.   The complaint dated 18.12.2019, based upon which the aforesaid
FIR came to be registered is transcribed below in its entirety for
convenience of reference.
Re: In continuation to my complaint over telephone
Sub: complaint against the 'Group Dastaan' who played a
I, K. Venkat Krishna, Advocate, Supreme Court of India,
having residential address at S-221, second floor, Greater Kailash
Part-11, New Delhi hearby state as under:
(a) I was on a visit to Goa and Panaji on holiday and visiting
different place of interest and come to know about a
program in football grounds. I have been to concert on
Sunday, Monday and Tuesday.
(b) The programs on Monday & Sunday was well organized
and has clean entertainment.
(c) To our surprises on Tuesday we found a narrative
being set - up against the government in power and trying
to play victim card. As opinion maker myself I felt they were
opining on government but to surprise they began chanting
'OM' a symbol of my faith in negative narrative and
ultimately abusing people chanting the OM and following
to Hindu stream has Ullu ke patta. They abuse the practice
by words with picture of different walks of life and what
they have said and did was blasphemy of my religion and
sentiment of hundred crores of India and few million
abroad.
I request you to take stringent action against the group Dastaan
for mususing the platform given to them to perform for
entertainment. I will be available to any help or need on the
phone number 9560608924 for further enquiry.
(ii) Hon'ble home minister of lndia”
18.     As noted earlier, the Petitioners have pleaded that based upon the
aforesaid complaint and the FIR, some of the Petitioners were called to
the Police Station “to issue an apology”. This categorical averment in the
Petitions has not been denied by the Respondents by filing a return.
According to us, the Police authorities cannot call citizens to the Police
Station and demand apologies of this nature. As if that was not
sufficient, the Police, placed some of the Petitioners under arrest in the
late evening of 18.12.2019, thereby forcing them to seek bail. Some of
the other Petitioners had to secure anticipatory bail to avoid physical
arrest. Having regard to the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of Arnesh Kumar vs. State of Bihar and another 6, we think
that there was no justification whatsoever for arresting the Petitioners
who were the members of this band and who have been making such
presentations all over the Country, unhindered and unmolested.
19.        In the context of arrests concerning offenses punishable with
imprisonment extendable to seven years the Hon’ble Supreme Court has
laid down guidelines, which, according to us, were completely ignored
by the police authorities. On the effect of arrest, the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in paragraph 5 has made the following significant observations:
“5. Arrest brings humiliation, curtails freedom and casts scars
forever. Lawmakers know it so also the police. There is a battle
between the lawmakers and the police and it seems that the police
has not learnt its lesson: the lesson implicit and embodied in
CrPC. It has not come out of its colonial image despite six
decades of Independence, it is largely considered as a tool of
harassment, oppression and surely not considered a friend of
public. The need for caution in exercising the drastic power of
arrest has been emphasised time and again by the courts but has
not yielded desired result. Power to arrest greatly contributes to its
arrogance so also the failure of the Magistracy to check it. Not
only this, the power of arrest is one of the lucrative sources of
police corruption. The attitude to arrest first and then proceed
with the rest is despicable. It has become a handy tool to the
police officers who lack sensitivity or act with oblique motive.
20.     Similarly, in Jogindar Kumar vs. State of U.P. 7, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that the quality of a nation's civilisation can be
largely measured by the methods it uses in the enforcement of criminal
law. No arrest can be made because it is lawful for the police officer to do
so. The existence of the power to arrest is one thing. The justification for
the exercise of it is quite another. The police officer must be able to
justify the arrest apart from his power to do so. Arrest and detention in
police lock-up of a person can cause incalculable harm to the reputation
and self-esteem of a person. No arrest can be made routinely on a mere
allegation of commission of an offense made against a person. It would
be prudent for a police officer in the interest of protection of the
constitutional rights of a citizen and perhaps in his own interest that no
arrest should be made without a reasonable satisfaction reached after
some investigation as to the genuineness and bona fides of a complaint
and a reasonable belief both as to the person's complicity and even to the
need to effect an arrest. Denying a person of his liberty is a serious
matter. The recommendations of the Police Commission merely reflect
the constitutional concomitants of the fundamental right to personal
liberty and freedom. A person is not liable to arrest merely on the
suspicion of complicity in an offense. There must be some reasonable
justification in the opinion of the officer effecting the arrest that such
arrest is necessary and justified. Except in heinous offenses, an arrest
must be avoided if a police officer issues notice to a person to attend the
Station House and not to leave the station without permission would do.
21.      The aforesaid observations aptly apply to how some of the
Petitioners were arrested and dealt with by the police authorities. Based
on a frivolous complaint, some of the Petitioners, who were only
members of a band were incarcerated or forced to seek anticipatory bail.
22.    According to us, based upon the complaint, which we have already
adverted to, the police authorities were neither justified in registering the
FIR nor arresting any of the Petitioners disregarding the rulings of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Arnesh Kumar (supra) and Joginder Singh
23.   The Petitioners have produced on record the entire text of the
composition of Shri Vaidyanath Misra @ Baba Nagarjun, the Sahitya
Akademy Awardee poet accompanied by a certificate under section 65-B
of the Evidence Act. The entire text of the composition is reproduced
below, again for the convenience of reference.
“OM shbd hii brahm hai..
OM naare, aur naare, aur naare, aur naare
OM kuchh nhiin, kuchh nhin, kuchh nhiin
OM ptthr pr kii doob, khragosh ke siing
OM Daayn kii chiikh, aughD kii aTpT baat
OM idmaannan, imaa aapH idmjyan, idan hviH
OM yjmaan, OM purohit, OM raajaa, OM kviH
OM kraantiH kraantiH srvgvankraantiH
OM shaantiH shaantiH shaantiH srvgyan shaantiH
OM bhraantiH bhraantiH bhraantiH srvgvan bhraantiH
OM angiikraN, shuddhiikraN, raaSTrikraN
OM guTnirapekS, sttaasaapekS joD-toD
OM chhl-chhand, OM mithyaa, OM hoDmhoD
OM kaalii kaalii kaalii mhaakaalii mhakaalii
OM maar, maar, maar, maar, maar, maar, maar
OM apojiishn ke munD bne tere gle kaa haar
OM hm chbaayenge tilk aur gaandhii kii Taang
OM booDhe kii aankh, chhokrii kaa kaajl
OM tulsiidl, bilvptr, chndn, rolii, akSt, gangaajl
OM sher ke daant, bhaaloo ke naakhoon, mrkT kaa fotaa
OM hmeshaa hmeshaa raaj kregaa meraa potaa
OM bhairon, bhairon, bhairon, OM bjrangblii
OM bandook kaa ToTaa, pistaul kii nlii
OM dhratii, dhratii, dhratii, vyom, vyom, vyom, vyom
OM durgaa, durgaa, durgaa, taaraa, taaraa, taaraa
OM isii peT ke andr smaa jaay srvhaaraa
hriH OM ttst, hriH OM ttst”
24.   Now if the complaint which is the basis for the FIR is perused, it is
apparent that the complainant has adverted to only one small portion of
the composition and by interpreting the same or rather misinterpreting
the same, made the following vague allegations, which, according to us,
do not even remotely constitute the ingredients of Section 295-A of the
“To our surprises on Tuesday we found a narrative being set - up
against the government in power and trying to play victim card.
As opinion maker myself I felt they were opining on government
but to surprise they began chanting 'OM' a symbol of my faith in
negative narrative and ultimately abusing people chanting the OM
and following to Hindu stream has Ullu ke patta. They abuse the
practice by words with picture of different walks of life and what
they have said and did was blasphemy of my religion and
sentiment of hundred crores of India and few million abroad.”
25.    Section 295-A of the IPC reads as follows:-
“[295A. Deliberate and malicious acts, intended to outrage
religious feelings of any class by insulting its religion or religious
Whoever, with deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the
religious feelings of any class of [citizens of India], [by words,
either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible representations
or otherwise], insults or attempts to insult the religion or the
religious beliefs of that class, shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend to [three years],
or with fine, or with both.]”
26.    The allegations in the complaint, which constitute the basis for the
FIR, even if accepted in their entirety, do not even remotely point out
the ingredients of Section 295-A of IPC. In the first place, there are no
allegations about any deliberate or malicious intentions of outraging the
feelings of any class of citizens of India. There are no allegations of insult
or attempts to insult the religion or the religious beliefs of that class. To
simply allege that “OM” which is a symbol of the complainant's faith
“in negative narrative” or “abusing people chanting the OM and
followers to Hindu stream as Ullu ke Patta” is by no means sufficient to
spell out the ingredients of Section 295-A of the IPC. Further, to allege
“blasphemy of my religion and sentiment of hundred crores of India and
few million abroad” also does not spell out the ingredients of Section
295-A of the IPC. Even Mr. Faldessai, the learned Additional Public
Prosecutor conceded that “blasphemy” is not an offense under the Indian
Penal Code as it now stands.
27.    In the aforesaid circumstances, we are satisfied that the prosecution
of the Petitioners in pursuance of such an FIR will amount to an abuse
of the process of the Court. According to us, there was no justification
whatsoever for the Police Inspector to hurriedly register such an FIR,
possibly without even going into the complaint or for that matter the
provisions of Section 295-A of the IPC. The Police authorities are
expected to be quite sensitive in such matters, because, what is at stake is
the freedom of speech and expression. Therefore, unless the complaint
discloses the ingredients of the offense under section 295-A of IPC, it is
not expected of the Police authorities to rush and register an FIR in such
cases. In any case, there was no justification whatsoever to call some of
the Petitioners to the Police Station and require them to apologize or to
arrest some of the Petitioners, no sooner the FIR was registered.
28.    In Ramji Lal Modi (supra), the constitutional validity of section
295-A was no doubt upheld by the Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court. But in so upholding the constitutional validity, the
Constitution Bench made it clear that section 295-A of IPC does not
penalize any and every act of insult or attempt to insult the religion or
religious beliefs of a class of citizens but it penalizes only those acts of
insults to or those varieties of attempts to insult the religion or the
religious beliefs of a class of citizens, which are perpetrated with the
deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious feelings of
that class. Insults to religion offered unwittingly or carelessly or without
any deliberate or malicious intention to outrage the religious feelings of
that class do not come within the section. It only punishes the
aggravated form of insult to religion when it is perpetrated with the
deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious feelings of
that class. In other words, the language employed in the section is not
wide enough to cover restrictions both within and without the limits of
constitutionally permissible legislative action affecting the fundamental
right guaranteed by Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution.
29.    As noted earlier, in the complaint, there are not even any
allegations of deliberate or malicious intention to outrage religious
feelings of any class of persons. In the absence of such allegations,
therefore; there was no justification whatsoever to register the FIR and to
proceed against the Petitioners. The criminal machinery ought not to
have been set into motion based upon such a complaint. This was indeed
the abuse of the process, because, it is apparent that the Police authorities
have not even taken cognizance of the legal position explaining the scope
of section 295-A of IPC by the Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Ramji Lal Modi (supra).
30.     In Mahendra Singh Dhoni (supra), the allegation against the
cricketer was that he posed for a magazine photograph/painting with the
caption “God of Big Deals”. There was a description underneath which
had the characters of some advertisements. A complaint was filed
alleging offense under section 295-A of IPC but the Police authorities
declined to register the FIR. The complainant, therefore, filed a
complaint under section 200 of the Cr.P.C. before the Magistrate who
issued the process to the cricketer. The Hon'ble Supreme Court quashed
the process by referring to the decision of the Constitution Bench in
Ramji Lal Modi (supra). In paragraph 7, this is what the Hon'ble
“7. On a perusal of the aforesaid passages, it is clear as crystal that
Section 295A does not stipulate everything to be penalised and
any and every act would tantamount to insult or attempt to insult
the religion or the religious beliefs of class of citizens. It penalise
only those acts of insults to or those varieties of attempts to insult
the religion or religious belief of a class of citizens which are
perpetrated with the deliberate and malicious intention of
outraging the religious feelings of that class of citizens. Insults to
religion offered unwittingly or carelessly or without any deliberate
or malicious intention to outrage the religious feelings of that class
do not come within the Section. The Constitution Bench has
further clarified that the said provision only punishes the
aggravated form of insult to religion when it is perpetrated with
the deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious
feelings of that class. Emphasis has been laid on the calculated
tendency of the said aggravated form of insult and also to disrupt
the public order to invite the penalty.”
31.    In Mahendra Singh Dhoni (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court,
before parting with the case, sounded a word of caution that the
Magistrates who have been conferred with the power of taking
cognizance and issuing summons are required to carefully scrutinize
whether the allegations made in the complaint proceeding meet the basic
ingredients of the offense; whether the concept of territorial jurisdiction
is satisfied; and further whether the Accused is really required to be
summoned. This has to be treated as the primary judicial responsibility
of the court issuing process.
32.    According to us, even though the aforesaid observations were made
in the context of Magistrate issuing summons in such matters, the
observations will equally apply to Police authorities registering FIRs
based on complaints that do not even meet with the basic ingredients of
section 295-A of IPC. In this case, Police authorities, without even
examining the complaint or for that matter the provisions of section
295-A, hurriedly registered the FIR and then proceeded to even arrest
some of the Petitioners, possibly because they refused to apologize at the
Police station. This is certainly not how the Police machinery should act
in a matter of this nature.
33.    In Indibly Creative Private Limited (supra), the allegation was that
the State of West Bengal caused an utterly unlawful obstruction of the
public exhibition of the Petitioner's Bengali feature film 'Bhobishyoter
Bhoot'. Simply put, the Petitioner's grievance was summarized that the
State of West Bengal was misusing police power and acting as a “super-
censor” sitting atop the CBFC and is violating the petitioners'
fundamental rights guaranteed under Articles 14, 19(1)(a), 19(1)(g) and
21 of the Indian Constitution through the Kolkata Police which is under
the Department of Home.
34.    The Hon'ble Supreme Court, allowed the petitions instituted
under Article 32 of the Constitution of India with costs quantified at
Rs.20 lakhs by making the following observations, which, apply to the
“46. Contemporary events reveal that there is a growing
intolerance: intolerance which is unaccepting of the rights of
others in society to freely espouse their views and to portray them
in print, in the theatre or in the celluloid media. Organised groups
and interests pose a serious danger to the existence of the right to
free speech and expression. If the right of the playwright, artist,
musician or actor were to be subjected to popular notions of what
is or is not acceptable, the right itself and its guarantee under the
Constitution would be rendered illusory. The true purpose of art,
as manifest in its myriad forms, is to question and provoke. Art in
an elemental sense reflects a human urge to question the
assumptions on which societal values may be founded. In
questioning prevailing social values and popular cultures, every art
form seeks to espouse a vision. Underlying the vision of the artist
is a desire to find a new meaning for existence. The artist, in an
effort to do so, is entitled to the fullest liberty and freedom to
critique and criticize. Satire and irony are willing allies of the quest
to entertain while at the same time to lead to self-reflection. We
find in the foibles of others an image of our own lives. Our
experiences provide meaning to our existence. Art is as much for
the mainstream as it is for the margins. The Constitution protects
the ability of every individual citizen to believe as much as to
communicate, to conceptualize as much as to share.
47. Public power must be conscious of the fact that ours is a
democracy simply because the Constitution recognizes the
inalienable freedoms of every citizen. Power has been entrusted to
the state by the people under a written Constitution. The State
holds it in trust and its exercise is accountable to the people. The
State does not entrust freedoms to the people: the freedoms which
the Constitution recognizes are inseparable from our existence as
human beings. Freedom is the defining feature of human
existence. Freedoms are not subject to power. Public power is
assigned by the people to Government. Ours is a controlled
Constitution, a Constitution which recognizes the fullest element
of liberty and freedom and of the answerability of power to
freedom.
48. The views of the writer of a play, the metre of a poet or the
sketches of a cartoonist may not be palatable to those who are
criticized. Those who disagree have a simple expedient: of not
watching a film, not turning the pages of the book or not hearing
what is not music to their ears. The Constitution does not permit
those in authority who disagree to crush the freedom of others to
believe, think and express. The ability to communicate ‘ideas’ is a
legitimate area of human endeavor and is not controlled by the
acceptability of the views to those to whom they are addressed.
When the ability to portray art in any form is subject to extra-
constitutional authority, there is a grave danger that fundamental
human freedoms will be imperiled by a cloud of opacity and
arbitrary State behaviour.”
35.     In Arnab Ranjan Goswami (supra), the Division Bench of this
Court granted interim reliefs holding that section 295-A of IPC covers
the offense of deliberate and malicious acts intended to outrage religious
feelings of any class by insulting its religion or religious feelings by words
either spoken or written or by signs or by visible representations or
36.     The Division Bench referred to the decision of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Manzar Sayeed Khan vs. State of Maharashtra &
Anr. 8, in which, the Hon'ble Supreme Court, referring to the provisions
of section 153-A of IPC held that the prosecution has to prove prima
facie the existence of mens rea on the part of the accused. The matter
complained of as being within the ambit of Section 153A must be read
as a whole. One cannot rely on strongly worded and isolated passages for
proving the charge nor indeed can one take a sentence here and a
sentence there and then connect them by a meticulous process of
inferential reasoning. The Hon'ble Supreme Court also referred to its
earlier decisions and observed that the effect of the words must be
judged from the standards of reasonable, strong-minded, firm, and
courageous men and not those of weak and vacillating minds nor of
those who scent danger in every hostile point of view.
37.     In the present case, the Respondent, has precisely chosen to take a
sentence here and a sentence there or rather, a word here and a word
there and on such basis filed a vague complaint which does not even
spell out the basic ingredients of section 295-A of IPC. Besides, the
Police authorities have completely ignored the dictum of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court which provides that the effect of the words must be
judged from the standards of reasonable, strong-minded, firm, and
courageous men and not those of weak and vacillating minds nor of
those who scent danger in every hostile point of view.
38.     In Maqbool Fida Husain v. Rajkumar Pandey 9, the Petitioner
was charged with obscenity and hurting religious sentiments for his
painting which depicted India as a nude woman with her hair flowing in
the form of Himalayas. Sanjay Kishan Kaul, J (as His Lordship then
was), upheld the artistic freedom of the painter, noting thus:
“112. … Pluralism is the soul of democracy. The right to dissent is
the hallmark of a democracy. In real democracy the dissenter must
feel at home and ought not to be nervously looking over his
shoulder fearing captivity or bodily harm or economic and social
sanctions for his unconventional or critical views. There should be
freedom for the thought we hate. Freedom of speech has no
meaning if there is no freedom after speech. The reality of
democracy is to be measured by the extent of freedom and
accommodation it extends.”
39.     In S. Tamilselvan vs. State of Tamil Nadu 10, the Division Bench
of the Madras High Court speaking through Sanjay Kishan Kaul, J (as
His Lordship then was) did not approve the action of the State officials
in succumbing to the demands of extra-judicial elements and forcing the
author to withdraw unsold copies of the book and to tender an apology.
The Division Bench, after quoting the decision in Maqbool Fida Husain
(supra), held that there was a requirement of positive measures of
protection to be taken to protect free speech permissible under the law.
The Division Bench made the following observations:-
“180. … In such simmering circumstances, it was the bounden
duty of the State Government to ensure that the law and order
situation does not go out of hand, but that ought not be achieved
by placating anyone who seeks to take the law and order in his
own hand at the cost of the person who has peacefully expressed
his/her view. …and the authorities really were not neutral in the
episode, but were possibly more concerned with the law and order
scenario, as opposed to the freedom of expression of a single
individual.
181. ... We may also say that the State and the police authorities
would not be the best ones to judge such literary and cultural
issues, which are best left to the wisdom of the specialists in the
field and thereafter, if need be, the Courts.”
40.     The decisions in Maqbool Fida Husain (supra) and S. Tamilselvan
(supra) were quoted with approval by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Indibly Creative Private Limited (supra). The action of the Police
authorities in the present case in registering the FIR and requiring the
Petitioners to tender apology or to face the humiliation of arrest was
contrary to the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in such
41.    In State of Haryana vs. Brij Lal Mittal & Ors .11, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that an FIR can be quashed if it does not
disclose an offense and there is no need for any investigation or
recording of any statement. The contention that because of the stay
granted in the present proceedings, no further investigation could be
carried out to ascertain whether the intention of the Petitioners was
malicious or deliberate to outrage the religious feelings of any class is
unacceptable. When there are no allegations in the very complaint about
any acts on the part of the Petitioners being deliberate or malicious with
the intent of outraging religious feelings of any class or community, there
was no question of even registering the FIR and proceeding with the
42.    According to us, this is a case where the complaint or the FIR does
not disclose the commission of any offense. The basic ingredients
necessary to invoke the provisions of section 295-B of the IPC are totally
missing. Besides, we are satisfied that this is a case where the criminal
process has been abused by the Respondents by registering the FIR based
upon a vague complaint. The Petitioners were unnecessarily arrested
possibly because they refused to tender any apology at the Police Station.
Some of the Petitioners were forced to seek anticipatory bail. The action
of the Respondents was contrary to judicial precedents in matters of
arrest or explaining the true scope of Section 295-A of IPC. There is
merit in the submission of Mr. Desai that the FIR was registered
hurriedly and possibly without even perusing the complaint or in any
case the provisions of section 295-B of the IPC. Mr. Desai is quite right
in his submission that this was an unwarranted assault on creativity and
freedom of speech and expression itself.
43.    For all the aforesaid reasons, we quash the impugned FIR
No.268/2019 dated 18.12.2019 and make the Rule absolute in terms of
prayer clause (a) in each of these Petitions.
44.    In the fond hope that Respondents No.1 and 2 will not act
similarly in the future, we refrain from imposing any costs in each of