Petitioners are the accused in S.C. No.1 of 2017 on the files of
the Sessions Court, Kavarthi, Union Territory of Lakshadweep. By
judgment dated 11-01-2023, they have been found guilty for the
offences under sections 143, 147, 148, 448, 427, 324, 342, 307 and
506 r/w section 149 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 and have been
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for periods ranging
from 1 month to 10 years. The sentence of 10 years imprisonment is
imposed for the offence under section 307 read with section 149 of
the IPC. Petitioners pray that the conviction and sentence imposed
against them be suspended pending disposal of the appeal.
2.    I have heard Sri.P.Vijayabhanu, learned Senior Counsel
and Sri.Sasthamangalam S.Ajithkumar, learned counsel appearing
on behalf of petitioners. I have also heard Sri. K.N. Nataraj, the
learned Additional Solicitor General of India, apart from Sri. S. Manu,
Deputy Solicitor General of India, for the Union Territory of
Lakshadweep on behalf of whom, a detailed objection to the
application has been filed. I have also heard Adv. Ajit G.Anjarlekar for
the defacto complainant. By a separate order of today, I have already
admitted the appeal.
3.    The application seeks to suspend the conviction and
sentence imposed on the petitioners. The thrust of the arguments
revolves around the conviction of the second accused, who was, on
the date of judgment, a Member of Parliament from the Union
Territory of Lakshadweep.         He was elected as a Member of the
Parliament in the year 2014 and again in 2019. According to the 2nd
petitioner, if his conviction is not suspended, the consequence will be
his disqualification as a Member of Parliament, resulting in serious
4. The incident is alleged to have occurred on 16.04.2009.
According to the prosecution, accused 1 to 12, along with other
identifiable persons armed with deadly weapons, formed themselves
into an unlawful assembly and committed the offence of rioting and
voluntarily caused hurt to PW1 after wrongfully confining him and
PW11 at a place near the courtyard of the house by name
Padippurakadu at Androth island. The prosecution further alleges
that after the third accused pushed PW11 into a room in the house of
PW5, the accused attacked PW1, and during the course of the
transaction, the first accused directed the other accused to kill the
said witness and thereafter brutally manhandled him with dangerous
weapons including swordstick, chopper, iron rod, rafters, sticks etc.
The second accused is alleged to have attacked PW1 with an iron
rod. The injured PW1 was taken to the Government Hospital, Androth
and thereafter, he was referred to the Specialist Hospital, Ernakulam,
and the accused thus committed the offences alleged against them.
Though as many as 37 accused were arrayed, the Sessions Court
found accused 1 to 4 guilty and sentenced them to imprisonment for
various terms for the different offences, including ten years for the
offence under section 307 IPC. 5th accused had expired during trial,
while accused 6 to 37 were acquitted.
5.    In support of the contentions seeking suspension of
conviction, the learned Senior Counsel and the Counsel for the
petitioners relied upon several decisions of the Supreme Court. While
the learned Additional Solicitor General also relied upon those
decisions as well as a few other decisions to support his arguments,
Adv. Ajith G. Anjerlaker also referred to decisions of different High
Courts and contended that the conviction ought not to be suspended.
6. On an appreciation of the legal principles laid down in the
various      decisions     cited,   starting   from   K.C.Sareen     v.   CBI,
Chandigarh          [(2001)    6   SCC      584],     Ravikant     S.Patil  v.
v. State of Punjab and Another [(2007) 2 SCC 574], Sanjay Dutt v.
State of Maharashtra through CBI, Bombay [(2009) 5 SCC 787],
Lily Thomas v. Union of India and Others [(2013) 7 SCC 653],
Shyam Narain Pandey v. State of Uttar Pradesh [(2014) 8 SCC
909], Lok Prahari through its General Secretary, S.N.Shukla v.
Election Commission of India and Others [(2018) 18 SCC 114] the
following six principles can be culled out.
(i) Suspending the sentence and suspending the conviction
are two different aspects, and the said powers can be
traced to section 389(1) Cr.P.C,.
(ii) When a statutory appeal is filed against a conviction
with a sentence for a fixed period, suspension of
sentence can be liberally considered unless there are
exceptional circumstances.
(iii) The power to suspend conviction should be exercised
only in very exceptional cases, and while suspending a
conviction, the court has a duty to look at all aspects,
including the ramifications of keeping such conviction in
abeyance.
(iv) Stay of conviction is not the rule but is an exception to
be resorted to in rare cases depending upon the facts of
a case.
(v) The power to stay conviction must be exercised only in
circumstances where failure to stay the conviction
would lead to injustice and irreversible consequences,
(vi) The person seeking a stay of conviction should
specifically draw the attention of the appellate court to
the consequences that may arise if the conviction is not
stayed and unless the attention of the court is drawn to
the specific consequence that would follow on account
of the conviction, the persons convicted cannot obtain
an order of stay of conviction.
7. This application for suspending the conviction and sentence
has to be considered bearing in mind the above principles. The
factual aspects may also have to be considered to a limited extent
solely for the purpose of the claim to suspend the conviction on the
ground of it being frivolous.
8. Admittedly, the second petitioner was a sitting Member of
Parliament from Lakshadweep until the date of judgment. He was
elected in the year 2014 and again in the year 2019. His term, in the
ordinary course, as a Member of Parliament, would expire only in
2024. The judgment was delivered on 11.01.2023. The proceedings
of this appeal reveal that this appeal, along with the petition for
suspension of conviction and sentence, came up before the Court on
12.01.2023 and was posted to 17.01.2023 for hearing and again to
18.01.2023. The case was again heard on 20.01.2023, on which date
the defacto complainant was impleaded and the case was posted to
23.01.2023 for hearing. However, on 23.01.2023, there was a roster
change, and the matter came up before this Court. Since it was
submitted that the matter is urgent, it was heard in detail on
23.01.2023 and again on 24.01.2023.
9. During the course of arguments, it was submitted that the
second petitioner has been disqualified by notification dated
13.01.2023, and a press note was issued on 18.01.2023 calling for
elections to the Constituency, which was occupied by the second
petitioner. It was also submitted that though the notification for the
election has not yet been issued, the date of election is proposed to
be 27.02.2023. The defacto complainant, in his impleading petition,
has produced the notification dated 13-01-2023, which states that the
second petitioner stands disqualified from 11-01-2023 consequent
upon his conviction.
10. Second petitioner, as mentioned above, was a serving
member of Parliament from 2014 onwards till the date of his
conviction i.e., 11-01-2023. The prosecution case relates to an
incident that occurred 13 years ago, in 2009, when the second
petitioner was not a Member of Parliament. If the sentence of
conviction is not suspended, the consequence would be that due to
the conviction, and consequent disqualification under section 8(3) of
the Representation of Peoples Act, 1951, an election to the said
constituency becomes inevitable. The next general election to the
Parliamentary Constituencies in India is required to be held in the
year 2024. If the election to the constituency of Lakshadweep is to be
held immediately on account of the conviction and consequent
disqualification of the second petitioner, the financial burden upon the
Government and indirectly upon the people is immense. Even after
incurring enormous expenditure for the election, the elected
candidate will have a term of only a period of fewer than fifteen
months. The aforesaid irreversible outcome cannot be ignored by this
Court since the consequence of not suspending the conviction is
drastic. No doubt, the case falls under the category of rare and
exceptional situation warranting a suspension of the conviction.
11. Though it was contended by Sri. Nataraj, the learned
Additional Solicitor General and Adv. Ajith G. Anjerelkar that since
disqualification takes effect by operation of law immediately on his
conviction and a suspension/stay of conviction will not revive his
membership in Parliament, the said contention is not tenable for
more reasons than one.
12. There can be no quarrel (and it was not disputed also) that
if a sitting Member of the Parliament is convicted and, in the appeal,
a stay or suspension of conviction is granted by the Appellate Court,
the disqualification will cease to operate from the date of
suspension/stay. Reference to the decisions in Ravikant S.Patil v.
Sarvabhouma S.Bagali [(2007) 1 SCC 673] and Lily Thomas v.
Union of India and Others (2013) 7 SCC 653 are profitable.
13. However, If once the stay or suspension of conviction is
granted by the appellate court and it does not relate back to the date
of order of conviction, it would lead to an incongruous and illogical
situation as for a brief period of few days the member remained
disqualified and thereafter, his disqualification becomes ineffective.
Such an absurd and dissonant consequence could not have been in
the contemplation of the Legislature at all. In fact, the said issue
needs no elaboration as the Supreme Court had, in the decision in
Lok Prahari, Through its General Secretary S.N Shukla v.
Election Commission of India and Others (AIR 2018 SC 4675),
held as follows: “Upon the stay of a conviction under S.389 of the
Cr.P.C., the disqualification under S.8 will not operate. The decisions in
Ravi Kant Patil and Lily Thomas conclude the issue. Since the decision in
Rama Narang, it has been well-settled that the appellate court has the
power, in an appropriate case, to stay the conviction under S.389 besides
suspending the sentence. The power to stay a conviction is by way of an
exception. Before it is exercised, the appellate court must be made aware
of the consequence which will ensue if the conviction were not to be
stayed. Once the conviction has been stayed by the appellate court, the
disqualification under sub-sections 1, .2 and 3 of Section 8 of the
Representation of the People Act 1951 will not operate. Under Article
102(1)(e) and Article 191(1)(e), the disqualification operates by or under
any law made by Parliament. Disqualification under the above provisions
of Section 8 follows upon a conviction for one of the listed offences. Once
the conviction has been stayed during the pendency of an appeal, the
disqualification which operates as a consequence of the conviction cannot
take or remain in effect. In view of the consistent statement of the legal
position in Rama Narang and in decisions which followed, there is no
merit in the submission that the power conferred on the appellate court
under Section 389 does not include the power, in an appropriate case, to
stay the conviction. Clearly, the appellate court does possess such a
power. Moreover, it is untenable that the disqualification which ensues
from a conviction will operate despite the appellate court having granted a
stay of the conviction. The authority vested in the appellate court to stay a
conviction ensures that a conviction on untenable or frivolous grounds
does not operate to cause serious prejudice. As the decision in Lily
Thomas has clarified, a stay of the conviction would relieve the individual
from suffering the consequence inter alia of a disqualification relatable to
the provisions of sub-sections.1, 2 and 3 of Section 8. (emphasis
14. Thus, the consequence of not suspending the conviction of
the second accused, as mentioned earlier, is drastic not only for the
second petitioner but even for the nation. With the fear of repetition it
is observed that the cumbersome process of elections will have to be
started, and the exorbitant cost of a Parliamentary election will have
to be borne by the nation and indirectly by the people of this Country.
The enormity of administrative exercises required for the conduct of
an election will inevitably lead to various developmental activities in
the Union Territory of Lakshadweep coming to a halt for a few weeks
atleast. Despite all these exercises and financial burdens, the
maximum period for which the elected candidate can function will be
only a period less than fifteen months.
15. In this context, it is worthwhile to refer to some of the
special features of the case, as pointed out by the counsel appearing
for both parties. Ext.P8 is the wound certificate issued by PW8 -
Doctor, who in his evidence during the chief examination as well as in
cross-examination, stated that the injuries sustained by PW1 are
simple injuries. It is also noticed from Ext.P8 wound certificate that
PW1 was fully conscious and oriented and the history of the case
was given to the Doctor by him. Though the FIS and the prosecution
alleged that        there were several sharp-edged weapons like
swordstick, chopper and knife, none of those weapons of offence
were recovered. Of course, recovery of weapons of offence is not a
sine qua non for entering a conviction. The learned Sessions Judge
had in fact, held in paragraph 81 of the Judgment that “However the
testimony of PW16 would also show that all the injuries mentioned
could be caused with blunt objects. Even if, for the sake of argument,
it is admitted that knife or choppers are used, nobody has got a case
that the sharp edge of that object was used or else the chopper used
was a sharp edged one.” The said observation/finding is crucial for
two reasons -(i) the prosecution case is that dangerous weapons like
swordstick, chopper, knives and iron rods were used to attack PW1.
(ii) despite possessing the aforementioned dangerous weapons, the
accused had not used the sharp edges of those weapons. When the
accused are being prosecuted for attempt to murder, it is of
significance that despite possessing sharp-edged weapons, they
chose not to use the sharp edges but only the blunt sides of those
weapons. In this context, the evidence of PW8 and PW16, who are
the doctors who attended to the injured and who deposed that the
injuries were simple and were caused by blunt objects, also assumes
relevance. Though the nature of injuries cannot be determinative of
the offence alleged, and it is only the intent coupled with the act that
are relevant, those are all matters to be considered at the time of
final hearing.
16. Though the second petitioner is alleged to be having
criminal antecedents as he is facing trial in two other cases in RC No.
03/2009 of CBI, Kochi, and RC No. 05/2022 of CBI New Delhi and is
an accused in Crime No. 33 of 2022 of Kavarthi Police Station, those
are not cases where he has incurred a conviction. The benefit of the
presumption of innocence will have to be accorded to the second
petitioner in respect of those antecedents at this juncture.
17.     Of course, it is necessary that purity in politics and,
consequently, in democracy is required to be infused. The
decriminalisation of politics is an essential requirement of every
democracy. As a constitutional court, it is the bounden duty to
advance the constitutional objectives, including purity in politics.
However, those lofty principles cannot be the reason for denying the
application of the principles of rule of law. The societal interest in
averting an expensive election that too, when the elected candidate
can continue for a limited period alone if the fresh election is
conducted, cannot be brushed aside by this court. The societal
interest and the need to have purity in politics and elections will have
to be balanced. In this context, the circumstance that the appeal is a
statutory right and under section 393 Cr.P.C finality is attached only
to the judgment of the appellate court assumes significance.
18. On consideration of the various legal and other
circumstances and the special features arising in this case,
especially those relating to the second petitioner, this Court is of the
view that the case of the second petitioner falls within the category of
rare and exceptional circumstances. The ramifications of not
suspending the conviction are enormous. Hence this Court is of the
view that the conviction and sentence of imprisonment imposed upon
the second accused in SC 1/2017 on the files of the Sessions Court,
Kavarthi, Union Territory of Lakshadweep should be suspended until
disposal of the appeal.
19. As far as petitioners 1, 3 and 4 are concerned, no specific
reasons have been stated to suspend their conviction. The first
petitioner has been terminated from his service as a teacher
consequent to his conviction as evident from Ann.B in the impleading
application of the defacto complainant. The termination is personal to
him, and as held by this Court in Ajith Kumar v. Central Bureau of
Investigation (2019 (1) KLT 368), a conviction cannot be suspended
merely because the accused will lose his employment. Further, no
reasons have also been stated in the application for suspending the
conviction of those accused. Therefore I find no reason to suspend
the conviction of petitioners 1, 3 and 4. However, since they are
sentenced to a limited period, their sentence is liable to be
suspended pending disposal of the appeal.
20. Accordingly, I allow this application in part as follows:
(i) The conviction and sentence of imprisonment imposed upon
the second petitioner as second accused in S.C. No.1/2017 on the
files     of  the   Sessions     Court,  Kavarthi,  Union   Territory   of
Lakshadweep, shall stand suspended until disposal of the appeal on
condition that the said petitioner deposits the amount of fine imposed
upon him within two weeks from today.
(ii) The sentence of imprisonment of accused 1, 3 and 4, in S.C.
No.1/2017 on the files of the Sessions Court, Kavarthi, Union
Territory of Lakshadweep shall stand suspended until disposal of the
appeal on condition that those accused deposit the amount of fine
imposed upon them within two weeks from today.
(iii) The petitioners shall execute a bond for Rs.50,000/- with two
solvent sureties each for the like sum to the satisfaction of the