The instant misc. appeal has been filed by the appellant Smt.
Rekha Kumari for assailing the judgment-cum-decree dated
09.11.2021 passed by the Judge, Family Court (Additional District
and Sessions Judge), Gulabpura, District Bhilwara in Civil Misc.
Case No.39/2021 whereby, the application preferred by the
appellant and respondent under Section 13B of the Hindu Marriage
Act seeking decree of divorce by mutual consent was dismissed.
On the previous date of hearing, we had directed the
Superintendent of Police, Bhilwara to get an enquiry conducted to
find out as to whether the appellant had made any application
seeking Government employment under the ‘Divorcee category’.
The Superintendent of Police, Bhilwara has forwarded a report
dated 03.08.2022 as per which, the appellant Rekha Kumari was
appointed as Panchayat Sahayak in the year 2017. She has not
procured any Government employment in the ‘Divorcee category’.
Presently, she is posted in the Government Senior Secondary
Learned counsel Shri Vishan Das representing the appellant
and    Shri  Kunal     Bishnoi,      learned        counsel     representing   the
respondent, urged that the learned Judge, Family Court was
totally unjustified in rejecting the application preferred by the
parties under Section 13B of the Hindu Marriage Act with the
observation that the very fact of their marriage was under a cloud
of doubt. They urged that there was a specific averment of the
parties in the divorce application that they were married by
following the Hindu rites and rituals in the year 2007. Photographs
of the marriage ceremony were also annexed with the application.
They thus urged that the conjectural view taken by the learned
Judge, Family Court that the divorce application had been filed so
as to procure a decree of divorce for facilitating the path of the
appellant in procuring Government employment under ‘Divorcee
category’, is absolutely unjustified.
We    have    given      our     thoughtful          consideration   to  the
submissions    advanced at bar and have gone through                           the
impugned judgment-cum-decree and the material available on
We feel that the observations made by the learned Judge,
Family   Court   in    the    impugned          judgment-cum-decree          dated
09.11.2021 that the parties could not prove the factum of their
marriage as per Hindu rites and rituals and thus, they were not
entitled to a decree of divorce, is absolutely unjustified and
hypothetical. Pertinent affidavits were filed by the appellant and
the respondent in support of the pleadings of the divorce
application that they were married to each other in the year 2007.
Photographs of the marriage ceremony were also annexed with
the divorce application. True it is that the exact date of marriage
was not mentioned in the divorce application but for that reason
alone, the divorce application could not have been thrown out. If
the learned Judge, Family Court was of the view that the
averments as made in the application on the aspect of marriage
were inconclusive, powers under Section 165 of the Indian
Evidence Act should have been exercised to put court questions to
the appellant and the respondent so as to verify the truthfulness
of the averments made in the application. The shypothetical view
taken by the learned Judge, Family Court that the decree of
divorce by mutual consent might be misused by the appellant for
procuring the Government employment, is also unsustainable in
view    of  the   report    dated       03.08.2022          procured   from   the
Superintendent of Police, Bhilwara.
In wake of the discussion made herein above, the impugned
judgment-cum-decree dated 09.11.2021 passed by the Judge,
Family Court (Additional District and Sessions Judge), Gulabpura,
District Bhilwara in Civil Misc. Case No.39/2021 cannot be
sustained and is hereby quashed and set aside. The marriage of
the appellant and the respondent is dissolved by mutual consent.
The appeal is allowed in these terms. Decree be prepared
accordingly.