Smt. Archana Kher, Deputy Advocate General for the
respondent Nos.1 to 3/State.
Shri A. K. Saxena, Counsel for the respondent Nos.4 to 6.
(Passed on 02/03/2022)
1]    This writ appeal has been filed under Section 2(1) of Madhya
Adhiniyam, 2005 and the rules made thereunder being aggrieved of
the order passed by the learned Single Judge on 12.03.2021, in W.P.
No.17603 of 2020 wherein while quashing the impugned order dated
24.09.2020, passed by the Sub-Divisional Magistrate whereby
custody of the children of the appellant was given to her husband the
respondent No.4 herein, the writ court has granted only partial relief
by not giving any express direction restoring the custody of the
children in favour of the appellant.
Writ Appeal No.1066 of 2021
2]     In brief, the facts giving rise to the present appeal are that the
appellant is the wife of the respondent No.4 Vikas Chakravarti and
their marriage solemnized in the year 2003. Out of this wedlock, they
have twin sons aged around 16 years the respondent Nos.5 and 6
herein. Admittedly, a dispute has taken place between the parties,
which led to the respondent No.4 filing an application under Section
97 of the Cr.P.C. for custody of the children before the Sub-Divisional
Magistrate, Narsinghgarh, District Rajgarh and the SDM, while
exercising its power under Section 97 of Cr.P.C., has issued a search
warrant on 11.09.2020 and in compliance thereto, the Police
Narsinghgarh has produced the respondent Nos.5 and 6 in his Court
and after taking their statements, their custody has been handed over
to the respondent No.4, the husband vide order dated 24.09.2020. The
aforesaid order has been challenged by the appellant/wife in W.P.
No.17603 of 2020 and the learned Single Judge while allowing the
aforesaid writ petition agreeing with the contention raised by the
counsel for the appellant/petitioner has passed the following order,
which is under challenge before this Court. The relevant Para 13 of
the same reads as under:-
“13. Respondents No.5 & 6 are aged 16 years, therefore, they
are in a position to give their choice as to with whom they want
to live. They recorded their statement before the Magistrate as
well as before the Registrar of this Court that they are willing to
Writ Appeal No.1066 of 2021
live with their father. So far the allegation against the mother
i.e. petitioner is concerned same is very vague in nature. No
specific instances have been quoted in their statements about
ill-treatment by the petitioner. Some times mother become very
strict towards their children than the father, therefore, the
Children's liking develops towards the father but that does not
mean that the mother ill-treats her children or becomes their
enemy. The children spend most of the time with their mother,
therefore, some times does not like the control and strictness of
the mother and by no stretch of the imagination, it cannot be
termed as an offence that can be led to illegal confinement. It
appears that respondents No.5 & 6 were not liking the strictness
of the mother, therefore, they have shown their willingness to
reside with the father. Since they are aged about 16 years,
therefore, it would not be proper to pressurize them to live
either with mother or father but so far the order of the
Magistrate is concerned it is per se illegal and without
jurisdiction. Sub Divisional Magistrate has wrongly exercised
his power under section 97 Cr.P.C that too without following
the principle of natural justice. Sub Divisional Magistrate did
not issue a notice to the petitioner and called the children
through police and recorded their statement behind the back of
the petitioner without there being any cross-examination etc.
and passed the order. Respondents No.5 & 6 are minors as per
the definition of child under section 2(12) of the Juvenile
Justice (Care & Protection of Children) Act, 2015. The Sub
Divisional Magistrate has directed the police to produce them
before the Court by way of a search warrant without
considering that such process may affect their mind, it is
nothing but insensitive conduct on the part of the Sub
Divisional Magistrate, therefore, the order dated 24.09.2020
passed by the Sub Divisional Magistrate is hereby quashed.
Respondent No.4 is directed not to force respondents No.5 & 6
Writ Appeal No.1066 of 2021
to live with him. They are free to live with their mother.”
3]     Shri Prateek Maheshwari, counsel appearing for the appellant
has submitted that despite the petition being allowed and the
impugned order being quashed, the appellant/petitioner has got no
relief as custody of her both the sons have not been given to her,
despite the fact that their custody was illegally obtained by the
respondent No.4 in the first place. In support of his contention, Shri
Maheshwari, has also relied upon the various decisions of Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Yashita Sahu Vs. State of Rajasthan
and others reported in (2020) 3 SCC 67 para 9; Nil Ratan Kundu
and others Vs. Abhijit Kundu reported in (2008) 9 SCC 413 para
56 and S. Anand Vs. Vanitha Vijaya Kumar and others reported in
(2011) 4 MLJ 494 paras 55, 57, 58 & 59. Thus, it is submitted that
the impugned order be modified, accordingly to the extent that the
custody of the children be handed over to the appellant wife from the
respondent No.4 husband.
4]     Counsel appearing for the respondent No.4, on the other hand
has opposed the prayer and it is submitted that no interference is
called for as the aforesaid order has been passed by the learned Single
Judge after having an interaction with the respondent Nos.5 and 6,
who have expressed their willingness to reside with their father the
respondent No.4 only. Thus, it is submitted that the appeal is liable to
Writ Appeal No.1066 of 2021
5]     Heard counsel for the parties and perused the record.
6]     From the record it is apparent that the learned Single Judge has
effectively quashed the order dated 24.09.2020 passed by the SDM
but has not given the custody of the children to the appellant. There is
no doubt about it that where the impugned order is set aside by a
higher authority, as a natural corollary, the status quo, prior to the date
of impugned order has to be restored to the parties but this case is not
in respect of the any immovable or movable property or any live
stock, but is in regard to two human beings, the minor sons aged 16
years of the appellant and the respondent No.4. It is true that both of
them are minor, however, the age of 16 years is not such an age where
a child, given a choice, is not able to make up his or her mind as to his
or her inclination to reside with either of the parents. In the present
case, this choice has been exercised in favour of the father and thus,
despite agreeing with the contentions of the appellant/petitioner
regarding the legality of the impugned order, the learned Writ Court
has not found it to be appropriate to hand over the custody of the
children to the appellant/petitioner/wife.
7]     So far as the decisions cited by Shri Maheshwari in the case of
Yashita Sahu Vs. State of Rajasthan and others;                 Nil Ratan
Kundu and others Vs. Abhijit Kundu and S. Anand Vs. Vanitha
Writ Appeal No.1066 of 2021
Vijaya Kumar and others (supra) are concerned, none have dealt
with such a peculiar situation as in the present case and thus are
distinguishable. In all, the decisions cited by Shri Maheshwari, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has emphasized that while deciding the
custody of the child, primary and paramount consideration is the
welfare of the child and if the welfare of the child so demands,
technical objections cannot come in the way. In the present case, it is
nobody's case that the respondent No.4 is in any manner incompetent
or is having such vices which may prejudice the interest of the
children in his company. In the considered opinion of this court, had it
been a case where the father was not found fit to provide healthy
environment to the children's upbringing, this court would certainly
have interfered in the impugned order and the choice made by the
children, but there are no such facts brought on record by the
appellant.
8]     In view of the same, the appeal being devoid of merits and is
hereby dismissed.