APPLICATION U/S 438 CR.P.C. No. - 9391 of 2022
Heard Sri V.M. Zaidi, learned Senior Counsel assisted by Sri
M.J. Akhtar, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Vibhav
Anand Singh, learned A.G.A. for the State as well as perused
the record.
The present anticipatory bail application has been filed on
behalf of the applicant in Case Crime No.390 of 2021, under
Section 3/7 of The Essential Commodities Act, Police Station-
Sarsawa, District Saharanpur with a prayer to enlarge him on
anticipatory bail.
Learned Senior Counsel for the applicant has stated that the
applicant was enlarged on bail by the Sessions Judge,
Saharanpur vide order dated 28.02.2022, under Sections 379,
427 IPC, Sections 15, 16 of The Petroleum and Minerals
Pipeline (Acquisition of Users in Land) Act, Section 3/4 of the
Exclusive Substances Act and 3/4 of The Prevention of
Damages to Public Property Act. Learned Senior Counsel has
further stated that after investigation, final report has been
submitted in the added Sections 3/7 of Essential Commodities
Act. The said sections have been added just to frustrate the case
of the applicant, so that he may be sent behind the bars. Learned
Senior Counsel has further stated that once the applicant has
been admitted to bail and there is nothing on record to suggest
that he has misused it or he has committed any other offence,
then he may be enlarged on bail under the added sections under
the provisions of 438 Cr.P.C. Several other submissions have
been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity
of the allegations made against him. The circumstances which,
as per counsel, led to the false implication of the applicant have
also been touched upon at length. Learned counsel for the
applicant undertakes that he has co-operated in the investigation
and is ready to do so in trial also failing which the State can
move appropriate application for cancellation of anticipatory
Learned Senior Counsel has placed much reliance on the
judgments of the Apex Court passed in case of Bhadresh
Bipinbhai Sheth vs. State of Gujarat & Another reported in
2016 (1) SCC (Cri) 240 and Manoj Suresh Jadhav & Ors. vs.
The State of Maharashtra, reported in 2018 SCC OnLine SC
3428, wherein the applicant therein was enlarged on
anticipatory bail in the added sections U/S 438 Cr.P.C. after
being enlarged on regular bail U/S 439 Cr.P.C. Learned Senior
Counsel has also placed reliance on the judgment of this Court
passed in Criminal Misc. Anticipatory Bail Application U/S 438
Cr.P.C. No.9742 of 2021, wherein the accused was enlarged on
anticipatory bail after being granted regular bail. He has further
stated that the applicant does not have any criminal antecedents
to his credit.
Per contra, the prayer for anticipatory bail has been vehemently
opposed learned A.G.A. However, he could not dispute the said
facts advanced by learned Senior Counsel for the applicant.
It is true that the applicant was enlarged on bail in the said
F.I.R. and he has not misused it during investigation and no
apprehension of tampering with evidence has been raised by the
A.G.A. Sending the applicant behind bars again in the added
sections would be of no fruitful use.
The expression 'bail' whether it is a regular bail or an
anticipatory bail from Sections 437 to 439 of the Code states
that a person accused of, or suspected of, the commissioning of
offences of the type referred therein may be 'released on bail'.
The only difference between Sections 437, 438 and 439 Cr.P.C.
is that an order of anticipatory bail under Section 438 Cr.P.C.
insulates a person arrested from custody, while an order of bail
under Section 437 or 439 Cr.P.C. gets him released from
custody. Under all the three provisions, Sections 437 to 439
Cr.P.C., the person is set at liberty on security being taken for
his appearance on a bail and a place.
On due consideration to the arguments advanced by learned
counsel for the applicant as well as learned A.G.A. and
considering the nature of accusations and antecedents of the
applicant and the case law produced by learned Senior Cousel,
the applicant is liable to be enlarged on anticipatory bail in view
of the judgment of Supreme Court in the case of "Sushila
Aggarwal Vs. State (NCT of Delhi), (2020) 5 SCC 1". The
future contingencies regarding the anticipatory bail being
granted to applicant shall also be taken care of as per the
aforesaid judgment of the Apex Court.
In view of the above, the anticipatory bail application of the
applicant is allowed. Let the accused-applicant- Shahzad be
released forthwith in the aforesaid case crime (supra) on
anticipatory bail on furnishing a personal bond of Rs.50,000/-
and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of
the court concerned with the following conditions:-
1. that the applicant shall make himself available for
interrogation by a police officer as and when required;
2. that the applicant shall not, directly or indirectly make any
inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the
facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such
facts to the court or to any police officer or tamper with the
3. that the applicant shall not leave India without the previous
permission of the court;
4. that in case charge-sheet is submitted the applicant shall not
tamper with the evidence during the trial;
5. that the applicant shall not pressurize/ intimidate the
prosecution witness;
6. that the applicant shall appear before the trial court on each
date fixed unless personal presence is exempted;
7. that in case of breach of any of the above conditions the court
below shall have the liberty to cancel the bail.
It is made clear that observations made hereinabove are
exclusively for deciding the instant anticipatory bail application
and shall not affect the trial or deciding the regular bail
application.