The present petitioner has a grievance regarding the
arms license.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has laid the
grievances with regard to matters relating to licenses of
firearm sunder the Arms Act, 1959 (hereinafter “the Act
of 1959”), before the Court, viz. inaction and unjustified
delay in issuance of arms license / no opportunity of
hearing given and despite pendency of only one criminal
(2 of 6)        [CW-7422/2022]
case / rejected without cause or speaking order / renewal
denied despite acquittal in criminal cases /renewal denied
despite pending criminal case related to gambling and
thereby not impacting public safety / no transfer to legal
heir despite surrender of old license / no grant or refusal
of application for license and inordinate delay, despite
prescribed statutory time period of 60 days asunder
Schedule V, of the Arms Rules, 2016(“the 2016 Rules”).
Learned counsel for the petitioner further submits
that there is a statutory provision for persons to apply
and acquire a firearm license, and thus, the respondents
ought to maintain maximum transparency, while passing
the orders, whereas the impugned orders have been
passed without making any individual consideration of
the relevant criteria.
Learned counsel for the respondents submits that
there is no absolute right of any person to acquire an
arms license and the respondents have every right to
objectively   decide    each   case,      while taking    into
consideration the past record of the person seeking such
license as well as the pendency of proceedings, if any.
Learned counsel for the petitioner at this stage,
submits that it would be sufficient if the respondents are
directed to pass fresh orders on the petitioners’ cases
individually, while keeping in the view the judgment
rendered by a Division Bench of this Hon’ble Court in
Khem Singh Vs. State of Rajasthan & Ors. reported
in 2005 (2) Cr. L.R. (Raj.) 907. This Court’s attention
is drawn to Para 5 of Khem Singh (supra) –
(3 of 6)         [CW-7422/2022]
“Mere fact that some reports have been
lodged against the license holder is not
sufficient for cancelling the license. A license
can be revoked u/s.17 (3) if the licensing
authority deem it necessary for the security of
public peace or public safety. In absence of any
finding that cancellation was necessary for
public peace or public safety, such an order is
liable to be quashed.”
Learned counsel for the petitioner also drew the
attention of this Court towards two orders passed in
Sarjeet Singh Vs. State of Rajasthan & Ors. SB Civil
WP No. 110/2011 and Gurdev Singh Vs. State of
Rajasthan & Ors. SB Civil WP No.5681/2005 this
Court passed in 2014, and 2016 respectively. In Sarjeet
Singh (supra), the Court observed the following –
“There remains no quarrel in the legal
position that pendency of a criminal case
cannot     be    cited   as       aground   for
cancellation / suspension of Arms License
under Section 17 of the Arms Act 1959 (for
short ‘the Act of 1959’). The Division Bench
of this Court in Khem Singh Vs. State of
Rajasthan & Ors. has held that pendency of
criminal case against an incumbent is not a
ground of cancellation of Arms License
under Section 17(3) (B) of the Act of 1959.
The Court has further held that in absence
of any finding that cancellation was
necessary for public safety such order
cannot be sustained.”
Heard learned counsel for the parties as well as
perused the record of the case.
Section 17 of the Arms Act, 1959 reads as under:
17. Variation, suspension and revocation of
(1) The licensing authority may vary the
conditions subject to which a licence has been
granted except such of themas have been
prescribed and may for that purpose require
the licence-holder by notice in writing to
deliver-up the licence to it within such time as
may be specified in the notice.
(2) The licensing authority may, on the
application of the holder of a licence, also vary
the conditions of the licence except such of
them as have been prescribed.
(3) The licensing authority may by order in
writing suspend a licence for such period as it
thinks fit or revoke a licence—
(a) if the licensing authority is satisfied that the
holder of the licence is prohibited by this Act or
by any other law for the time being in force,
from acquiring, having in his possession or
carrying any arms or ammunition, or is of
unsound mind, or is for any reason unfit for a
licence under this Act; or
(b) if the licensing authority deems it necessary
for the security of the public peace or for public
safety to suspend or revoke the licence; or
(c) if the licence was obtained by the
suppression of material information or on the
basis of wrong information provided by the
holder of the licence or any other person on his
behalf at the time of applying for it; or
(d) if any of the conditions of the licence has
been contravened; or
(e) if the holder of the licence has failed to
comply with a notice under sub-section (1)
requiring him to deliver-up the licence.
(5 of 6)        [CW-7422/2022]
(4) The licensing authority may also revoke a
licence on the application of the holder thereof.
(5) Where the licensing authority makes an
order varying a licence under sub-section (1) or
an order suspending or revoking a licence
under sub-section (3), it shall record in writing
the reasons therefor and furnish to the holder
of the licence on demand a brief statement of
the same unless in any case the licensing
authority is of the opinion that it will not be in
the public interest to furnish such statement.
(6) The authority to whom the licensing
authority is subordinate may by order in writing
suspend or revoke a licence on any ground on
which it may be suspended or revoked by the
licensing    authority;    and       the foregoing
provisions of this section shall, as far as may
be, apply in relation to the suspension or
revocation of a licence by such authority.
(7) A court convicting the holder of a licence of
any offence under this Act or the rules made
thereunder may also suspend or revoke the
licence: Provided that if the conviction is set
aside on appeal or otherwise, the suspension or
revocation shall become void.
(8) An order of suspension or revocation under
sub-section (7) may also be made by an
appellate court or by the High Court when
exercising its powers of revision.
(9) The Central Government may, by order in
the Official Gazette, suspend or revoke or
direct any licensing authority to suspend or
revoke all or any licences granted under this
Act throughout India or any part thereof.
(10) On the suspension or revocation of a
licence under this section the holder thereof
shall without delay surrender the licence to the
authority by whom it has been suspended or
revoked or to such other authority as may be
specified in this behalf in the order of
suspension or revocation.”
This Court is of the opinion that any interference in
rejection of grant of fresh application / refusal / renewal
of license for firearms is not warranted except when
extraordinary circumstances are pointed out.
Looking      into the submission       made   by   learned
counsel for the parties that it would be suffice if their
rights    are   redetermined  by   the     respondents,    while
keeping into consideration the judgment rendered in
Khem Singh (supra), the same is accepted.
Thus,     in the given circumstances,        the present
petition is disposed of, while directing that the petitioner
shall file a fresh representation within a period of 15 days
from the date of obtaining the certified copy of this order
and the representation shall be considered afresh by the
respective District Magistrate by passing speaking orders,
while keeping in mind the relevant aforementioned
judgments, the existing policy of the State, strictly in
accordance with law.
All pending applications also stand disposed of.