Aggrieved by the judgment of the I Additional Sessions and
Special   Judge,   Chikkamagaluru,     in Special Case  (PCSOA)
No.23/2019 dated 01.02.2020, whereby the trial Court has
acquitted the accused, the complainant – State has preferred
this appeal.
2. For the sake of convenience, parties are referred to as
per their status before the trial Court.
3.   The case of the prosecution is that on 29.04.2019,
PW-1–complainant filed a complaint with the jurisdictional police
stating that he has a daughter by name Preethi, who is 16 years
and is studying in 10th Std. He along with his family lives and
work in a coffee estate which belongs to one Nushrath Ali. The
accused by name Santhosh also joined the said estate for work
around 10 months back.       The accused acquainted himself with
the daughter of the complainant Preethi and both fell in love.
The accused made his daughter believe that he would marry her
and when no one was there in the house, he came and had
forcible sexual intercourse with his daughter and that from past
20 days he has gone away to his native without telling anybody.
Presently, his daughter Preethi is seven months pregnant and
accordingly, he has sought for initiating criminal proceedings
against the accused Santhosh.
4.   In the course of the investigation, the police also
recorded the statement of victim Preethi who is PW-2 herein.
She has also stated the same facts before the police. Ex.P.4 is
the Medico-legal Examination Report of Sexual Violence against
the victim Preethi and it records that the said Preethi is pregnant
and fetus is about 32 weeks old.
5. Based on the charge sheet, the trial Court has framed
the following charge against the accused:-
Sessions judge, Chikkamagaluru, do hereby charge
Santhosh S/o Thippeshnaika, Aged about 19
That since seven months prior to the date of
complaint, in the coolie lane of Nasrath Ali, situated
at Kesarike village, Chikkamagalaur Taluk, coming
within the judrisdiction of Aldur Police Station, when
CW.4 – victim minor girl was alone in her house, you
accused had repeated sexual intercourse with CW.4
and thereby you accused committed an offence
punishable under Section 376(2)(n) of I.P.C., and
within the cognizance of this Court.
Secondly, on the aforesaid date, time and
place,     you    accused     committed     aggravated
penetrative sexual assault on CW.4, the victim minor
girl, repeatedly and as a consequence of which she
became pregnant and you thereby committed an
offence    under Section    5(j)(ii) punishable  under
Section 6 of POCSO Act, 2012 and within the
cognizance of this court.
And I hereby direct that you be tried by this
court on the said charges.
Dated this the 16th day of July 2019.”
6. The prosecution to prove its case has examined PW-1
to PW-5 and got marked Ex.P.1 to P.15.       The defense has not
examined any witnesses nor got marked any documents.
7.    Based on the evidence let in, the trial Court has
acquitted the accused for the offences charged.       Aggrieved by
the same, the prosecution has filed this appeal.
8.   Ex.P.4 – Medico-legal Examination Report of Sexual
Violence indicates that the victim was a minor and was about
seven months pregnant when she was examined.
9. PW-1 is the complainant and father of the victim. PW-2
is the victim.  PW-3 is the mother of the victim.      PW-4 is the
brother of the victim and PW-5 is the sister of the victim. All of
them have turned hostile. They have not supported the case of
the prosecution at all. Even the contents of complaint are denied
by PW-1 complainant and statement made by PW-2 victim before
the police is also denied.   They have not deposed anything to
suggest   that  the   accused    has  committed    forcible  sexual
intercourse with the victim or that he has made her pregnant.
For the said reasons, the trial Court has acquitted the accused of
the charges alleged.
10. It is noticed that the prosecution to prove its case had
requested the permission of the Court to examine other
witnesses mentioned in the charge sheet.        However, the trial
Court on the ground that the victim and other material witnesses
have turned hostile has rejected the prayer of the prosecution to
examine other witnesses and has acquitted the accused.
11. The State in its appeal has contended that DNA test of
the child and the accused has not been conducted and the trial
Court has erred in not permitting the other witnesses to be
examined    by    the  prosecution   including  Doctor,   who   has
examined the victim and argues that this is a case for remand.
12.   Per contra, learned counsel for the accused has
justified the judgment of the trial Court and has sought for
dismissal of the appeal.
13.  The questions that arises for consideration in this
appeal is whether the trial Court has erred in not directing
conduct of DNA test of the child and the accused, whether it
erred in not permitting the prosecution to examine other
14.   It is seen from the records that the prosecution has
not made necessary application before the trial Court to have a
DNA test conducted for relating the child with the accused. They
cannot now turn around and argue that the trial Court committed
an error in not permitting the required DNA test.
15. Normally, it is obligatory on the part of the trial Court
to permit the prosecution to examine the witnesses mentioned in
the charge sheet to prove its case. However, in the instant case,
as the victim girl, her father, mother, brother and sister have not
supported the case of the prosecution, the trial Court on the
ground that all the material witnesses have turned hostile has
not permitted further examination of the witnesses and has
acquitted the accused.
16.     It is further submitted by the learned counsel
appearing for the accused that presently, the accused and the
victim are married and are leading a happy married life.
However, learned Additional SPP submits that it is a wrong
submission.    He further submits that on enquiry, it is revealed
that the accused held out a promise of marriage to the victim
girl. For the said reasons, the victim and other material
witnesses have turned hostile before the trial Court. It is further
submitted that pursuant to the said acquittal, the accused has
abandoned her and the child and is untraceable.      It is further
submitted by the learned Additional SPP that the prosecution has
a good case on merits and the trial Court has committed serious
error in not permitting the prosecution to adduce additional
evidence.   It is further submitted that they would also make
necessary applications to have the DNA test conducted in respect
of the accused and the child and it will prove the case of the
17. The guilt of the accused can be established only after
examination of all the witnesses as desired by the prosecution.
It is a specific case of the prosecution that it has necessary
evidence to prove the guilt of the accused and it is desirous of
making necessary application to have DNA test conducted and
that the material witnesses have turned hostile only on the false
promise of the accused.
18. Considering the submission made by the prosecution,
under peculiar facts and circumstances of the case, in our
opinion, the ratio laid down in State of Karnataka vs.
Sri.Paruvangada Bopanna reported in 2017 CRR 394
(Kant) is not applicable to the present facts and circumstances
of the case.
19. Under the given facts and circumstances of the case,
the trial Court clearly erred in not permitting the prosecution to
lead necessary evidence to prove the guilt of the accused.
(i)       The appeal is allowed.
(ii)      The order of acquittal dated 01.02.2020 passed by
the I Additional Sessions and Special Judge at
Chikkamagaluru      in   Special    Case    (PCSOA)
No.23/2019 against the accused is hereby set
aside.
(iii)     The matter stands remanded back to the trial
Court to continue the trial with liberty being given
to the prosecution to adduce necessary evidence.
(iv)      No order as to costs.