13 24-05-2021            This matter has been taken up online because of COVID-
19 pandemic restrictions.
As per this High Court’s calendar, annual vacation of this
Court commenced from 23.05.2021 and the Court is scheduled
to reopen on 21.06.2021. It would be apt to mention that the
annual calendar of this Court is decided by the Judges at a
meeting of the Full Court in terms of Item (vii) of sub-rule (1)
of Rule 13 of the Patna High Court Rules, 1916 (hereinafter
referred to as ‘the Rules’).
This writ application, filed under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, has been listed before me today, during
annual vacation, evidently as a vacation judge. There is no
gainsaying that the working days of the High Court are
Patna High Court CWJC No.7739 of 2020(13) dt.24-05-2021
regulated by the said Rules which have statutory character, in
view of Article 225 of the Constitution of India. Article 225 of
the Constitution of India reads thus :-
“225. Jurisdiction of existing High
Constitution and to the provisions of any
law of the appropriate Legislature made
by virtue of powers conferred on that
Legislature by this Constitution, the
jurisdiction of, and the law administered
in, any existing High Court, and the
respective powers of the Judges thereof in
relation to the administration of justice in
the Court, including any power to make
rules of Court and to regulate the sittings
of the Court and of members thereof
sitting alone or in Division Courts, shall
be the same as immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution:
Provided that any restriction to which the
exercise of original jurisdiction by any of
the High Courts with respect to any matter
concerning the revenue or concerning any
act ordered or done in the collection
thereof was subject immediately before the
commencement of this Constitution shall
no longer apply to the exercise of such
jurisdiction.”
Rule 4 of Chapter II of the Rules lays down powers
which a Single Judge, while acting in a long vacation as a
vacation judge, may exercise, and reads as under :-
“4. Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary contained in these Rules, a
Single Judge, while acting in long
vacation as a vacation Judge, may issue
Patna High Court CWJC No.7739 of 2020(13) dt.24-05-2021
notice or Rule, as the case may be, in any
criminal matter, and in such other
matters, civil or under the Constitution,
as he may consider emergent, and may
also pass interim orders regarding stay,
injunction, bail and other reliefs, as may
be deemed fit.”
There appears to be no notice issued by the High Court
on its administrative side re-scheduling the annual vacation.
This observation is being made to reiterate that the matter has
been placed before this Court during the annual vacation before
a vacation judge. The language of Rule 4 of Chapter II of the
Rules is crystal clear which begins with a non-obstante clause.
Apparently, a Single Judge, while acting in long vacation as a
vacation judge, may issue notice or Rule, as the case may be, in
any criminal matter, and in such other matters, civil or under the
Constitution ‘as he may consider emergent’, and may also pass
interim orders regarding stay, injunction, bail and other reliefs,
as may be deemed fit. Apparently thus, a vacation judge may
grant bail in criminal matters and pass ‘interim orders’ only
regarding stay, injunction and other reliefs in such other
matters, civil or under the Constitution ‘as he may consider
emergent’ but cannot decide and dispose of a case, other than
bail applications, on merits.
Neither, learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of
Patna High Court CWJC No.7739 of 2020(13) dt.24-05-2021
the petitioner nor learned counsel representing the State of
Bihar nor the Bihar Public Service Commission appear to have
made any mention for emergent hearing of this application
during the vacation. The parties have already entered
appearance. Even the pleadings are complete.
However, in view of the provisions of Rule 4 of Chapter
II of the Rules, the matter cannot be taken up and decided
during the annual vacation.
In response to a query made by this Court as to whether
there is any decision taken re-scheduling the annual vacation,
this Court has been informed that no such decision has been
taken and such matters, which were listed before this Bench on
17.05.2021, have been directed to be listed before this Bench.
Possibly, the provisions under Rule 4 of Chapter II of the Rules
have not been brought to the notice of Hon’ble the Chief
Let this order be placed before Hon’ble the Chief Justice.
The Court is not unmindful of the situation arising out of
unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic and in a given situation,
the Court, on its administrative side, could take a decision in
accordance with law, to overcome the limitation under Rule 4
of Chapter II of the Rules but, in no case, statutory provisions
Patna High Court CWJC No.7739 of 2020(13) dt.24-05-2021
prescribing limitations on a vacation judge sitting during long
vacation can be breached.
List this case on 21.06.2021.