(The case has been taken up for hearing through video
1.           The petitioner has filed the present (first) petition under
Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for grant of
regular bail in case FIR No. 70 dated 29.07.2020 registered under
Sections 408, 420 and 120-B of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short
'the IPC') at Police Station North, Chandigarh to which Sections 467,
468, 471 and 473 of the IPC were added later on.
2.           Sh. Sushil Singla, Managing Director of M/s Supreme
Securities Limited submitted written complaint to the Senior
Superintendent of Police, Chandigarh against Vipin Kumar Dua,
Senior Executive (the petitioner) and Sukhchain Singh, Field Executive
- employees of M/s Supreme Securities Limited working in its Sector 8-
C Branch. In the complaint, it has been inter-alia alleged that all the
above said four accused persons were responsible for the day to day
business of the branch and to maintain the accounts books in due course
of the business. Accused Nos.1 to 4 have misappropriated and
embezzled amount of, at least, Rs.4,91,61,424/- which amount was in
their possession as property of the Company as its employees/agents.
The breakup of the amount of Rs.4,91,61,424/- is (i) Rs.91,97,400/- as
foreign currency given to Ashu Forex + (ii) Rs.13,71,750/- outstanding
in the books of Ashu Forex + (iii) Rs.20,43,880/- as foreign currency
given to Jupiter Forex (net amount receivable as per books of accounts
of the company from Jupiter Forex being Rs.20,41,700/-) + (iv)
Rs.80,30,692/-      withdrawn    from     ICICI  Bank      Account + (v)
Rs.2,78,07,425/- equivalent to foreign currencies + (vi) Rs.6,96,616/-
available as cash in the Branch + (vii) Rs.15,841/- withdrawn from
Kotak Mahindra Bank. The complainant accordingly requested for
registration of FIR against them under the appropriate penal provisions
of law and recovery of the embezzled/misappropriated amount. The
police investigated the case and arrested the petitioner on 14.01.2021.
However, no recovery could be made from her. On completion of
investigation, the police filed charge-sheet against her.
3.            The petitioner being in custody has filed the present
petition for grant of regular bail.
4.            The petition has been opposed by the respondent-U.T.,
Chandigarh in terms of affidavit of Uday Pal Singh, Deputy
Superintendent of Police, Economic Offences Wing, Chandigarh.
5.            The petition has also been opposed by the complainant in
terms of reply dated 04.07.2021 filed by the complainant.
6.            The petitioner has also filed rejoinder to the reply filed by
the complainant.
7.            I have heard learned Counsel for the petitioner, learned
Public Prosecutor and Additional Public Prosecutor for U.T.,
Chandigarh and learned Counsel for the complainant and gone through
the relevant record.
8.            Learned Counsel for the petitioner has argued that the
petitioner was employed as Senior Executive in the Sector 8-C Branch,
Chandigarh of the complainant company M/s Supreme securities
Limited. The work of the petitioner was to see front office for the direct
clients visiting the office. The petitioner was having one key of the
locker but one key of the locker was with Sukhchain Singh and second
set of keys of the locker was with Manoj Bhalla and Manoj Bhalla
could open the safe without knowledge of the petitioner which makes
the allegation of embezzlement by the petitioner doubtful. All the e-
mails were generated in the name of the petitioner due to computer
software and the e-mail ID and password were known to other staff
members and e-mails were received and sent by them in the name of the
petitioner. The bank statements sent were computer generated
statements and the petitioner could not be attributed responsibility for
the same being false. The accounts of the branch were audited as per
RBI guidelines and no irregularities were found at the time of such
audits. The head office had the access to the system and the forgery
being attributed to the petitioner is probably the creation of the
complainant. Vipin Kumar Dua, Regional Manager made a complaint
dated 21.05.2020 to RBI and present FIR was lodged to silence him and
the petitioner was falsely implicated due to internal fighting in the
management. As per the case of the complainant, Vipin Kumar Dua,
Regional Manager was responsible for conduct of the business and was
operating the bank accounts in the branch and was the main accused
involved in the crime. Vipin Kumar Dua, Regional Manager has been
granted regular bail by the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order dated
01.07.2021. The petitioner is in custody since 14.01.2021 and the
petitioner is also entitled to grant of regular bail on parity with co-
accused Vipin Kumar Dua. Charge-sheet has already been filed but the
prosecution evidence of 49 prosecution witnesses is yet to be recorded.
The trial is likely to take long time due to restrictions imposed to
prevent spread of infection of Covid-19. No useful purpose will be
served by further detention of the petitioner in custody during trial.
Therefore, the petitioner may be granted regular bail.
9.           On the other hand, learned State Counsel and learned
Counsel for the complainant have argued that the petitioner was
working as a Senior Executive in Sector 8-C, Chandigarh Branch of
M/s Supreme securities Limited. Co-accused Vipin Kumar Dua,
Regional Manager was authorised to operate the bank accounts of the
company but all the four accused persons namely Vipin Kumar Dua,
Senior Executive (the petitioner) and Sukhchain Singh, Field Executive
were responsible for day to day business of the branch and to maintain
the account books in the due course of the business. All the above said
four accused in collusion and conspiracy with each other and with
common intention embezzled the amount which has been found to be
approximately Rs.5.50 crores. Prime duty of the petitioner was to enter
sale/purchase transactions in the computer ledger after having seen the
sale/purchase invoices. The petitioner had been entering fake
transactions in the computer ledger. The petitioner e-mailed three bank
accounts for the financial years 2016-17, 2017-18 and 2018-19 which
did not match with the actual bank statements. Keys of the locker, from
which foreign currency was embezzled/stolen, were with the petitioner
and Sukhchain Singh, Field Executive. In view of the involvement of
the petitioner in subject offences which fall in the category of economic
offences, the petitioner is not entitled to grant of regular bail. Co-
accused Vipin Kumar Dua has claimed his limited role in the entire
matter and has attributed the criminality to other co-accused. The
petition filed by co-accused Vipin Kumar Dua for grant of regular bail
was dismissed by this Court vide detailed reasoned order dated
09.02.2021. Hon'ble Supreme Court granted bail to co-accused Vipin
Kumar Dua in view of long period of his custody but did not discuss
the merits and did not set aside the reasoned order passed by this Court
on merits. The case of the petitioner stands on a different footing and
the petitioner is not entitled to grant of regular bail on the ground of
parity with co-accused Vipin Kumar Dua. In view of the nature of
accusation and gravity of offences, the petitioner does not deserve grant
of regular bail. Therefore, the petition may be dismissed.
10.           Now, it is well settled that the object of detention during
investigation and trial is not punishment but to secure presence of the
accused during investigation and trial. Bail is the rule and committal to
jail is an exception as held in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and others Vs.
State of Punjab : 1980(2) SCC 565. Accused is presumed to be
innocent till proved to be guilty. Detention in custody may be a cause of
great hardship to the accused as he may, besides being subjected to the
psychological and physical deprivations of jail life, lose his job, be
prevented from contributing to the preparation of his defence and
burden of his detention may fall heavily on the innocent numbers of his
family as held by Hon'ble Supreme Court in Moti Ram Vs. State of
11.           While considering the question of grant of bail, the Court
has to keep in mind (i) whether there is any prima facie or reasonable
ground to believe that the accused had committed the offence; (ii)
nature and gravity of the charge; (iii) severity of the punishment in the
event of conviction; (iv) danger of the accused absconding if released
on bail; (v) character, behaviour, means, position and standing of the
accused; (vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated; (vii) reasonable
apprehension of tampering with evidence and intimidating witnesses;
(viii) danger of course of justice being thwarted by grant of bail (see
State of U.P. Vs. Amarmani Tripathi : (2005)8 SCC 21; Sanjay
Chandra Vs. CBI : 2012(1) SCC 40 and Bhadresh Bipinbhai Sheth
Vs. State of Gujarat and another : 2016(1) SCC 152); (ix) seriousness
of the offence (see Criminal Appeal No. 320 of 2021 (Arising out of
SLP (Criminal) No. 2545 of 2020 titled Naveen Singh Vs. State of
Uttar Pradesh and another decided on 15.03.2021); and (x) whether
offences fall in the category of socio-economic offences (see State of
Bihar and another Vs. Amit Kumar @ Bachaha Rai : 2017 (13) SCC
751 and Rohit Tandon Vs. Directorate of Enforcement : 2018(11)
12.          However, there is another dimension to the matter of
consideration of grant of bail. In Malimath Committee Report (March
"6.7.1 Historically speaking, Criminal Justice
System seems to exist to protect the power, the privilege
and the values of the elite sections in society. The way
crimes are defined and the system is administered
demonstrate that there is an element of truth in the above
perception even in modern times. However, over the years
the dominant function of criminal justice is projected to be
protecting all citizens from harm to either their person or
property, the assumption being that it is the primary duty
of a State under rule of law. The State does this by
depriving individuals of the power to take law into their
own hands and using its power to satisfy the sense of
revenge through appropriate sanctions. The State (and
society), it was argued, is itself the victim when a citizen
commits a crime and thereby questions its norms and
authority. In the process of this transformation of torts to
crimes, the focus of attention of the system shifted from the
real victim who suffered the injury (as a result of the
failure of the state) to the offender and how he is dealt
with by the State. Criminal Justice came to comprehend all
about crime, the criminal, the way he is dealt with, the
process of proving his guilt and the ultimate punishment
given to him. The civil law was supposed to take care of
the monetary and other losses suffered by the victim.
Victims were marginalized and the state stood forth as the
victim to prosecute and punish the accused.
6.7.2 What happens to the right of victim to get
justice to the harm suffered? Well, he can be satisfied if
the state successfully gets the criminal punished to death,
a prison sentence or fine. How does he get justice if the
State does not succeed in so doing? Can he ask the State to
compensate him for the injury? In principle, that should be
the logical consequence in such a situation; but the State
which makes the law absolves itself.
6.8.1 The principle of compensating victims of crime
has for long been recognised by the law though it is
recognised more as a token relief rather than part of a
punishment or substantial remedy. When the sentence of
fine is imposed as the sole punishment or an additional
punishment, the whole or part of it may be directed to be
paid to the person having suffered loss or injury as per the
discretion of the Court (Section 357 Cr.P.C.).
Compensation can be awarded only if the offender has
been convicted of the offence with which he is charged.
6.8.7 Sympathising with the plight of victims under
Criminal Justice administration and taking advantage of
the obligation to do complete justice under the Indian
Constitution in defense of human rights, the Supreme
Court and High Courts in India have of late evolved the
practice of awarding compensatory remedies not only in
terms of money but also in terms of other appropriate
reliefs and remedies. Medical justice for the Bhagalpur
blinded victims, rehabilitative justice to the communal
violence victims and compensatory justice to the Union
Carbide victims are examples of this liberal package of
reliefs and remedies forged by the apex Court. The recent
decisions in Nilabati Behera v. State of Orissa, (19932
SCC 746) and in Chairman, Railway Board v. Chandrima
Das are illustrative of this new trend of using
Constitutional jurisdiction to do justice to victims of crime.
Substantial monetary compensations have been awarded
against the instrumentalities of the state for failure to
protect the rights of the victim.
6.8.8 These decisions have clearly acknowledged the
need for compensating victims of violent crimes
irrespective of the fact whether offenders are apprehended
or punished. The principle invoked is the obligation of the
state to protect basic rights and to deliver justice to
victims of crimes fairly and quickly. It is time that the
Criminal Justice System takes note of these principles of
Indian Constitution and legislate on the subject suitably."
13.          In Re: State of Assam & 2 Others (PIL (Suo Motu) No.
26/2013) decided vide judgement dated 24.4.2013, a Division Bench of
Gauhati High Court considered the question whether interim
compensation can be ordered to be paid at the earliest to the victim
irrespective of stage of enquiry or trial, either on application of the
victim or suo motu by the Court. While referring to judgments of
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Savitri Vs. Govind Singh Rawat : 1986(1)
RCR (Criminal) 83 and Shail Kumari Devi Vs. Krishan Bhagwan
Pathak : 2008(3) RCR (Criminal) 842 (in which the Magistrate was
held to have the power to direct the payment of interim compensation
under Section 125 of the Cr.P.C.) the Division Bench of Guahati High
“We are of the view that above observations support
the submission that interim compensation ought to be paid
at the earliest so that immediate need of victim can be met.
For determining the amount of interim compensation, the
Court may have regard to the facts and circumstances of
individual cases including the nature of offence, loss
suffered and the requirement of the victim. On an interim
order being passed by the Court, the funds available with
the District/State Legal Services Authorities may be
disbursed to the victims in the manner directed by the
Court, to be adjusted later in appropriate proceedings. If
the funds already allotted get exhausted, the State may
place further funds at the disposal of the Legal Services
14.         In Suresh and another Vs. State of Haryana : 2015(1)
R.C.R. (Criminal) 148, Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as under:-
“We are of the view that it is the duty of the Courts,
on taking cognizance of a criminal offence, to ascertain
whether there is tangible material to show commission of
crime, whether the victim is identifiable and whether the
victim of crime needs immediate financial relief. On being
satisfied on an application or on its own motion, the Court
ought to direct grant of interim compensation, subject to
final compensation being determined later. Such duty
continues at every stage of a criminal case where
compensation ought to be given and has not been given,
irrespective of the application by the victim. At the stage of
final hearing it is obligatory on the part of the Court to
advert to the provision and record a finding whether a
case for grant of compensation has been made out and, if
so, who is entitled to compensation and how much. Award
of such compensation can be interim. Gravity of offence
and need of victim are some of the guiding factors to be
kept in mind, apart from such other factors as may be
found relevant in the facts and circumstances of an
individual case........We also direct that a copy of this
judgment be forwarded to National Judicial Academy so
that all judicial officers in the country can be imparted
requisite training to make the provision operative and
meaningful.”
15.          In view of these latest developments in the filed of
victimology, the Investigating Officer is, besides making recoveries as
may be possible, also required to collect evidence during investigation
regarding liability of the accused to restitution of moveable/immovable
property illegally/fraudulently received or forcibly taken/occupied and
also the financial resources/capabilities of the accused to pay
compensation to the victim so that the Court can assess liability of the
accused to restitution of such moveable/immovable property and his
ability to pay interim/final compensation to the victim of the offence
but due to lack of requisite training generally no such evidence is
collected by the Investigating Officer in this regard during
16.          In cases of embezzlement, fraudulently receiving/forcibly
taking possession of moveable/immovable property, restitution to the
victim of the benefit received/property taken away by the accused is an
important    aspect     as   the     accused   cannot      be allowed   to
harvest/reap/retain fruits of his crime. Such restitution of the benefit
illegally received/forcibly obtained by the accused to the victim
constitutes an important aspect which cannot be ignored by the Court
even at the time of consideration of the question of grant of bail
particularly where the accused admits or there is prima facie
unimpeachable documentary material/video footage etc. regarding the
accused having received any such benefit and the accused does not
furnish any reasonable explanation as to his legally enforceable
entitlement to the same. It is now well settled that at the time of grant of
bail the Court cannot impose any 'onerous condition' which may
amount to virtual denial of grant of bail. For judicial precedents in this
regard reference may be made to Deepak Chandratan Pareek Vs.
Union of India through CBI (SC) : 2017(4) JT 487: 2017(5) Scale
412 : 2017 Cri. L.R. (SC) 443; Shyam Singh Vs. State through C.B.I.
(SC) : 2006(9) SCC 169 and Runa Pasricha Rajpoot Vs. State of
Haryana (PHHC) : 2019(2) R.C.R.(Criminal) 873. There is no dispute
with the proposition of law that the Court cannot impose any onerous
condition at the time of grant of bail but the question which arises is
that if the accused admits or there is prima facie unimpeachable
documentary material/video footage etc. regarding the accused having
fraudulently/forcibly received a benefit from the victim and fails to
show his legal entitlement to the same, then why even at the time of
granting bail to the accused the Court cannot impose the condition of
restitution of such benefit by the accused to the victim immediately or
in such manner as may be agreed to by the victim. For example, if there
is a video footage coming from authentic source as to snatching of
mobile phone and vehicle of the victim by the accused and the police
neglects, fails or is unable to recover the same will it not be just and
proper that the Court imposes the condition of restitution of the same
by the accused to the victim at the time of grant of bail or at the initial
stage after taking cognizance? If the accused is granted bail and
allowed to face and delay trial without such restitution on the ground
that the Court can award compensation at the time of sentencing the
accused after his conviction, will it not amount to allowing the accused
to enjoy the fruits of his crime? Will not subjecting the complainant to
wait till payment of compensation on final determination of guilt of the
accused by final disposal of his appeal, which may take years or even
decades, amount to illegally depriving the victim of his fundamental
right to life and liberty and statutory right to property without any just
and proper remedy at the appropriate time? I am of the considered view
that if the accused admits or there is prima facie unimpeachable
documentary material/video footage etc. regarding the accused having
fraudulently/forcibly received a benefit/property from the victim and
the accused fails to show his legal entitlement to the same, then even at
the time of granting bail to the accused the Court can impose the
condition of restitution of such benefit/property by the accused to the
victim immediately or in such manner as may be agreed to by the
victim. In the very nature of things imposition of any such condition for
such restitution of the benefit/property as aforesaid by the accused to
victim cannot be said to fall in the category of 'impermissible onerous
17.           It may be observed here that the jurisdiction now conferred
on the Court to award compensation in criminal cases is by way of
assumption of the powers of Civil Court to award compensation on
liability under law of torts. Under order XXXVIII of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 the Civil Court has the power to call upon the
defendant to furnish security for production of property and order
attachment of such property before judgment if such security is not
furnished. Section 53 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 makes
every transfer of immovable property made with intent to defeat or
delay the creditors of the transferor voidable at the option of any
creditor so defeated or delayed. No doubt, in a case where the accused
disputes the prosecution version, the question of grant of interim or
final compensation by the Court will generally arise after taking of
cognizance by the Court and not at the stage of consideration of the
question of grant of bail to the accused and will also be dependent on
interim assessment on the basis of the material on record or final
determination of the questions of guilt or innocence of the accused on
the basis of evidence produced during trial, yet even in criminal cases
the accused cannot be allowed to fraudulently transfer his properties to
defeat or delay the rights of/payment of compensation to the victim.
Therefore, I am of the considered view that in appropriate cases if the
facts and circumstances of the case so warrant even the Criminal Court
can, at the time of considering the question of grant of bail to the
accused, direct the accused to disclose his moveable and immovable
properties/assets and also to submit an undertaking that he will not
fraudulently transfer the same in order to defeat any order which may
be passed by the Court for restitution/payment of interim/final
compensation to the victim of the offence and imposition of any such
condition will not fall in the category of 'impermissible onerous
18.          In view of the facts and circumstances of the case, nature
of accusation and evidence against the petitioner, role attributed to the
petitioner, period of her custody and parity with co-accused Vipin
Kumar Dua who has been granted regular bail by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court vide order dated 01.07.2021 and also the fact that the
trial, which involves examination of 49 prosecution witnesses besides
witnesses to be examined by the accused in their defence, is likely to
take long time particularly due to restrictions imposed to prevent spread
of infection of Covid-19, but without commenting on the merits of the
case, I am of the considered view that the petitioner deserves grant of
regular bail subject to the condition of the petitioner furnishing
declaration of her immovable properties and also an undertaking that
the petitioner will not transfer the same without obtaining permission
from the Court.
19.          In view of the above, the petition is allowed and the
petitioner is ordered to be released on regular bail on furnishing of
personal and surety bonds to the satisfaction of the trial Court/Chief
Judicial Magistrate/Duty Magistrate concerned and furnishing of
declaration of her immovable properties and also an undertaking that
the petitioner will not transfer the same without obtaining permission
from the Court.
20.          However, in case the declaration by the petitioner of her
immovable properties is at any time found to be false in any material
particular or the petitioner is found to have committed any breach of the
undertaking given by her, not only the petitioner shall be liable to be
proceeded against for contempt of Court but also her bail shall be liable
to be cancelled on application to be filed in this regard.