(RR 2 & 3 represented by their natural guardian and mother Muthulakshmi)
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. seeking to
quash the proceedings in D.V.C. No.74 of 2022 on the file of the Additional
Mahila Court, Thiruvallur, Thiruvallur District, against the petitioners.
Prayer in Crl.O.P. SR. No.28394 of 2022
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. seeking to call
for the records in D.V.C. No.7 of 2022 pending on the file of the District
Munsif-cum-Judicial Magistrate Court, Ranipet, Ranipet District and quash the
complaint dated 04.05.2022.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. seeking to call
for the records relating to the case in D.V.C No.9 of 2022 on the file of the
Judicial Magistrate Court No.III, Puducherry, and to quash the same.
Prayer in Crl.O.P. SR. No.29745 of 2022
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. seeking to call
for the complaint made by the respondent in D.V.C. No.15 of 2022 on the file
of the Judicial Magistrate Court No.XVII, Saidapet, Chennai and quash the
same.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to quash the
proceedings in D.V.O.P. No.5 of 2021 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records of the complaint in D.V.C No.2 of 2022 pending on the file of the
Judicial Magistrate Court No.I, Poonamallee and quash the same as far as the
petitioners are concerned.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records relating to the case in D.V.A. No.8 of 2022 on the file of the Judicial
Magistrate Court No.I, Pollachi, Coimbatore District and quash the same.
Prayer in Crl.O.P. SR. No.33350 of 2022
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records pertaining to D.V.A. No.175 of 2021 insofar as the order dated
14.12.2021 pending on the file of the Special Court for trial of Domestic
Violence Act Cases, Coimbatore and quash the same.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records and quash the proceedings as against the petitioners in D.V.A. No.167
of 2020 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate (Special Court to try cases under
the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act) Court, Coimbatore.
Prayer in Crl.O.P. SR. No.33780 of 2022
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
entire records connected in D.V.A. No.3 of 2022 on the file of the Judicial
Magistrate Court, Madukkarai, Coimbatore District and quash the same against
the petitioners.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records in D.V.C. No.263 of 2022 pending on the file of the Judicial Magistrate
Court No.I, Mayiladuthurai and quash the same as against the petitioners.
Prayer in Crl.O.P. SR. No.34048 of 2022
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records in D.V.C. No.8 of 2021 dated 27.04.2020 against the petitioners on the
file of the Judicial Magistrate Court, Thiruvottriyur and quash the same.
Prayer in Crl.O.P. SR. No.34753 of 2022
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records relating to the impugned proceedings made in D.V.C. No.5 of 2022 on
the file of the Judicial Magistrate Court No.I, Poonamallee and quash the same.
Prayer in Crl.O.P. SR. No.35061 of 2022
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records pertaining to D.V. No.6 of 2022 initiated under the Protection of
Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005, against the petitioner at the behest
of the first respondent pending before the Additional Mahila Court, Alandur
and quash the same.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
entire records pursuant to the complaint in D.V.C. No.7 of 2022 on the file of
the Judicial Magistrate Court No.II, Poonamallee, Tiruvallur District and quash
the same.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
entire records connected with the complaint in D.V.C. No.5 of 2022 pending on
the file of the Judicial Magistrate Court No.II, Sivakasi and quash the same.
Prayer in Crl.O.P. SR. No.35838 of 2022
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records pertaining to the proceedings in D.V.C. No.1 of 2022 on the file of the
Judicial Magistrate Court No.II, Attur and quash the same.
Prayer in Crl.O.P. SR. No.35983 of 2022
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records in D.V.C. No.10 of 2022 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate Court at
Arakkonam and quash the same.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records relating to D.V.C. No.4 of 2021 on the file of the District Munsif-cum-
Judicial Magistrate Court at Neyveli, Cuddalore District and to quash the same.
Prayer in Crl.O.P. SR. No.36570 of 2022
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records in D.V.C. No.21 of 2021 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate Court
No.I, Mayiladuthurai and quash the same.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records in D.V.C. No.2 of 2022 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate Court
No.I, Tindivanam and quash the same.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
entire records pertaining to the complaint dated 04.05.2022 given under the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act in D.V.C. No.51 of 2022 on
the file of the Judicial Magistrate Court No.I, Puducherry and quash the same
with regard to the petitioners.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records relating to the case in D.V.A. No.201 of 2019 pending on the file of the
Judicial Magistrate Court No.III, Coimbatore and quash the same.
Prayer in Crl.O.P. SR. No.36948 of 2022
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records in D.V. No.11 of 2022 pending on the file of the Judicial Magistrate
Court No.II, Attur and quash the same.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
entire records pertaining to the complaint in D.V.C. No.3 of 2022 on the file of
the District Munsif-cum-Judicial Magistrate Court, Madathukulam and quash
the same with regard to the petitioners.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for
records pertaining to the proceedings in D.V.C. No.41 of 2022 pending on the
file of the IX Metropolitan Magistrate Court, Saidapet, Chennai and quash the
same.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records pertaining to D.V.A. No.2 of 2021 on the file of the Principal District
Munsif-cum-Judicial Magistrate Court, Gudalur, the Nilgiris and quash the
same.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records in D.V.C. No.11 of 2019 on the file of the District Munsif-cum-
Magistrate Court, Sriperumbudur and quash the same.
Prayer in Crl.O.P. SR. No.37872 of 2022
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to quash the
complaint in D.V.C. No.16 of 2021 on the file of the Judicial Magistrate Court
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records in D.V.A. No.84 of 2022 on the file of the Special Court under the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, Coimbatore and quash the
same.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records in D.V.C. No.2 of 2022 under Sections 18 to 20 and 22 of the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005, pending on the file of
the Additional Mahila Court, Nagapattinam and quash the same as against the
petitioners.
Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to call for the
records of the proceedings in D.V.C. No. 5 of 2016 on the file of the Judicial
Magistrate Court, Rasipuram and quash the same as illegal and without
jurisdiction.
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.31852 of 2022        : Mr. P. Chandrasekar
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.28394 of 2022        : Mr. R. Balakrishnan
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.29208 of 2022        : Mr. Pon Pandian
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.29745 of 2022        : Mr. M.L. Ramesh
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.32249 of 2022 : Mr. M. Senthilkumar
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.32612 of 2022 : Mr. Adithya Varadarajan
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.32966 of 2022 : Mr. V. Murugesan
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.33350 of 2022 : Mr. S. Karthikei Balan
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.33623 of 2022 : Ms. G.S. Thilagavathi
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.33780 of 2022 : Mr. P. Saravanan
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.33937 of 2022 : Mr. M. Soundar Vijay Arulram
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.34048 of 2022 : Mr. D. Nandhagopal
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.34753 of 2022 : Mr. K. Muthumalai
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.35061 of 2022 : Mr. N. Jothi for Mr. S. Vinod
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.35431 of 2022 : Mr. M. Sathish Kumar
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.35555 of 2022 : Mr. M. Anandan
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.35838 of 2022 : Mr. R. Dineshkumar
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.35983 of 2022 : Mr. S. Udhaya Kumar
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.36564 of 2022 : Mr. S. Vijayakumar
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.36570 of 2022 : Ms. D. Kamachi
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.36636 of 2022 : Mr. K. Thenrajan
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.36648 of 2022 : Mr. B. Kumarasamy
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.36683 of 2022 : Ms. S. Vennila
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.36948 of 2022 : Mr. S.N. Subramani
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.36956 of 2022 : Mr. B. Kumarasamy
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.37007 of 2022 : Mr. L. Sivakumar
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.37218 of 2022 : Mr. R. Siva
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.37713 of 2022 : Mr. L. Mahendran
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.37872 of 2022 : Mr. T. Shanmugam
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.37980 of 2022 : Mr. K. Myilsamy
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.38281 of 2022 : Mr. K. Venkateswaran
Crl.O.P. Sr.No.38330 of 2022 : Mr. N. Naganathan
Counsel who assisted the Court           : Mr. Nithyaesh Natraj
This Full Bench has been constituted under the orders of the Hon’ble
Chief Justice on a reference made by our learned brother Justice N. Sathish
Kumar vide order dated 12.08.2022 to answer the following questions:
(a) “Whether a proceeding under Section 12 of the D.V. Act can
be challenged under Article 227 of the Constitution or under
Section 482 of Cr.P.C. ?
(b) Whether the aforesaid remedy is available to an aggrieved
person before approaching the learned Magistrate and, if
necessary, the Court of Sessions by way of an appeal under
Section 29 of the D.V. Act?”
2         As the order of reference is prefaced by a chequered history, it is
necessary to briefly set out the manner in which these matters have come up
a         The Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2005 (“the
D.V.Act” for short), was enacted with the avowed purpose of providing more
effective protection of the rights of women, who are victims of violence of any
kind, occurring within the family. Under the scheme of the said Act, an
aggrieved person or a Protection Officer (PO) or any other person on behalf of
the aggrieved person, may present an application before the Magistrate, under
Section 12, seeking one or more reliefs under the said Act.
b     As the reliefs that could be sought and granted under the said Act
were civil in nature, the Registry of this Court entertained a doubt as to whether
a petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. was maintainable. One such matter came
up before V. Ramasubramanian, J. (as he then was) in M. Muruganandam v
M. Megala1, wherein, it was held that a petition under Article 227 of the
Constitution was maintainable against a complaint instituted under Section 12
of the D.V. Act. However, even after this decision, it is common knowledge
that petitions challenging proceedings under the D.V. Act under Section 482
Cr.P.C. were being filed and entertained in this Court, presumably on the
ground that complaints under the D.V. Act were akin to a complaint under
Chapter XV of the Cr.P.C.
c     However, in Dr.P.Pathmanathan v V.Monica2, N. Anand
Venkatesh, J. held that an application under the D.V. Act could not be equated
to a complaint as defined in Section 2(d) of the Cr.P.C. This was because a
complaint for grant of one or more reliefs under Section 12 of the D.V. Act did
not contemplate any action in respect of an offence, but was a petition for grant
of certain civil reliefs. This position was no longer res integra in view of the
Supreme Court judgment in Kunapareddy v Kunapareddy Swarna Kumari3,
wherein, it was held that all the reliefs granted by the Magistrate under the D.V.
Act were civil in nature, and that an offence under Section 31 of the D.V. Act
would be made out only if there was a breach of a protection order made under
the Act.
d     N. Anand Venkatesh, J. also pointed out that though the
jurisdiction under the D.V.Act was conferred on a Magistrate, it did not
necessarily follow that the Court of the Magistrate, exercising jurisdiction
under the D.V. Act, was thereby a “Criminal Court” for the purpose of Section
6 Cr.P.C. Alluding to the decision of the Supreme Court in State of
W.B. v Sujit Kumar Rana4 and of a Division Bench of this Court in
Rajamanickam v State of Tamil Nadu5, N. Anand Venkatesh, J. observed that
Section 482 Cr.P.C. applied only in respect of preventing abuse of process and
securing the ends of justice in matters that were in seisin before a Criminal
Court which is subordinate to the High Court. At this juncture, it may be
relevant to state that the High Court has also been classified as a Criminal
Court in Section 6 of the Code albeit the fact that the Madras High Court is a
creature of the Letters Patent issued under the Indian High Courts Act, 1861.
As the Magistrate exercising power under Section 12 of the D.V. Act was not a
Criminal Court, the learned judge concluded that a petition under Section 482
Cr.P.C., challenging an application under Section 12 of the D.V. Act was not
maintainable. It was also held that in view of the procedural flexibility given to
a Magistrate under the D.V. Act, it was open to a respondent in a D.V.
application to approach the Magistrate, upon receipt of notice, and seek
exoneration. If the respondent was aggrieved by the decision of the Magistrate,
an avenue of appeal was available under Section 29 of the D.V. Act to the
e     Shortly thereafter, in Arun Prakash v Sudhamary6, the husband
filed a transfer petition before this Court, under Section 24 of the C.P.C.,
seeking to withdraw a D.V. application filed by his wife before the
Metropolitan Magistrate, Saidapet and transfer the same to the file of the
Family Court at Chennai. It appears that the Registry of this Court had
entertained doubts on the nature of the relief sought in the petition, and the
matter was, therefore, placed before S.M.Subramaniam, J. for considering the
issue of maintainability. S.M.Subramaniam, J. observed that an application
registered under Section 12 of the D.V. Act “is criminal proceedings on the
criminal side of the judiciary and accordingly, the said proceedings are to be
regulated under the Criminal Procedure Code”. He eventually concluded that
“the application under Section 12 of the Domestic Violence Act cannot be
construed as a civil natured proceedings”. We notice from the above order that
the attention of the learned judge was not invited to the decision of the Supreme
Court in Kunapareddy, supra, wherein, the Supreme Court has held that
D.V.Act proceedings are civil in nature. The decision of a coordinate bench in
Pathmanathan, supra, was also not brought to the notice of the learned judge.
S.M.Subramaniam, J. eventually dismissed the petition holding that a petition
filed to “transfer a case registered under the Domestic Violence Act must be
entertained only under the Code of Criminal Procedure and certainly not by
invoking the powers under Article 227 of the Constitution of India, to transfer
the said case to the Civil Court or Family Court.”
f     In the meantime, one Muthulakshmi had filed a petition under
Article 227 of the Constitution before the Madurai Bench challenging the
D.V.application instituted by her daughter-in-law Vijitha before the Judicial
Magistrate Court-I, Tirunelveli. The Registry raised a doubt on the
maintainability of the petition, and the matter was eventually placed before
G.R. Swaminathan, J. (Muthulakshmi v Vijitha7). Swaminathan, J. noticed
that the decision of S.M.Subramaniam, J. in Arun Prakash, supra, was not in
consonance         with     the     decisions    of  A.D.     Jagadish        Chandira,         J.
(G.Jayakumar v. Jayanthi8)                and   S.  Vaidyanathan,        J.   in     Mohana
Seshathri v. E. Anuja9, wherein, it was held that a petition under Article 227
to transfer a D.V. Act application was maintainable. However, as the petition
before him was not one for transfer, but was one for quashing an application
under the D.V. Act, Swaminathan, J. very properly declined to make a reference
to a larger Bench. The learned judge held the petition to be maintainable
observing that a proceeding whether “civil or criminal, the power under Article
227 of the Constitution would always lie to quash the proceedings, if a case is
really made out.”
8 Crl.OP No.17235 of 2016 decided on 12.02.2021
g      Subsequently, in P. Ganesan v M. Revathy Prema Rubarani10,
the husband approached the Madurai Bench by way of a petition under Article
227 to quash the application instituted by his wife under the D.V. Act. When
the matter came up before K. Murali Shankar, J., the learned judge noticed a
divergence of opinion between the decision of N. Anand Venkatesh, J. in
Pathmanathan, supra, which had held that a proceeding under Section 12 of
the Act was a civil proceeding and the decision of S.M.Subramaniam, J. in
Arun Prakash, supra, which had held to the contra. The learned judge, also
flagged certain other issues and by order dated 27.09.2021, referred the
following five questions for an authoritative decision by a larger bench:
(i)    Whether the proceedings initiated under the provisions
of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act before the
Magistrate Courts are the Civil proceedings or Criminal
(ii)   Assuming that the proceedings are civil in nature,
whether the High Court can exercise its power under Section 482 of
Cr.P.C., in respect of the said proceedings ?
(iii) Whether the provisions of Section 468 of Cr.P.C., are
applicable for the proceedings initiated under the Domestic Violence
(iv) Assuming that Section 468 Cr.P.C., is not applicable,
what is the period of limitation for initiating the proceedings under
the Domestic Violence Act ?
(v)    Whether the proceedings initiated under the Domestic
Violence Act and pending before the Magistrate Court can be
transferred to the Civil Court or Family Court, by invoking Article
227 of Constitution of India?”
h      In the meantime, another transfer petition in Tr.C.M.P. No.478 of
202111 was filed by the husband before the Principal Seat invoking Section 24
of the C.P.C and seeking transfer of a D.V. application filed by his wife before
the Court of a Magistrate to the Family Court. When this matter came up before
R. Subramanian, J., the learned judge noticed the conflicting views prevailing
as regards the question of invoking Article 227 of the Constitution to transfer
D.V. cases, which have already been alluded to in paragraph 2(g), supra. The
learned judge, by order dated 06.12.2021, referred the matter to a larger bench
to resolve the conflicting views expressed therein without framing any
particular question of law. In effect, the issue in reference made by the learned
judge is the same as question no.(v) framed by Murali Shankar, J.
i      Pursuant to the orders of the Hon’ble Chief Justice, the two
references made by K. Murali Shankar, J. and R. Subramanian, J., were
eventually placed before a Division Bench of this Court comprising
M.Duraiswamy and Sunder Mohan, JJ. (P. Ganesan v Revathi Prema
Rubarani12). The said Division Bench agreed with the view expressed by N.
11 R. Vivek @ Sudharshan v V. Shakthi
Anand Venkatesh, J. in Pathmanathan, supra, that the proceedings under the
D.V. Act were civil in nature and it is only when there is a breach of the
protection       order passed   by the Magistrate, the          proceedings        would
metamorphose to become penal in nature. As regards the issue of limitation
[Questions (iii) and (iv)] raised by Murali Shankar, J., the Division Bench
concluded that the issue was no longer res integra in view of the decision of the
Supreme Court in Kamatchi v Lakshmi Narayanan13 which had held that
Section 468 Cr.P.C. was not applicable to a proceeding under Section 12 of the
D.V. Act, and that no period of limitation could be judicially prescribed for
making such an application. As regards the issue of transfer [(Question (v)], the
Division Bench concluded that an application under the D.V. Act cannot be
transferred from a Magistrate Court to a Family Court or any other Civil Court,
save with the consent of the aggrieved person.
j     As regards the maintainability of a petition under Section 482
Cr.P.C. challenging an application under the D.V. Act (Question ii), the
Division Bench differed with the views of N. Anand Venkatesh, J. and held that
a Magistrate dealing with a case under the D.V. Act was a Criminal Court. It
was observed that although in Muruganandam, supra, this Court had held that
a petition under Article 227 was maintainable, the said decision did not hold
that a petition under Section 482, Cr.P.C. was not maintainable. It was further
observed that irrespective of the portfolio, every judge of the High Court is
entitled to exercise inherent powers on the criminal side by invoking Section
482, Cr.P.C. or under Article 227 of the Constitution. The Division Bench held
that a petition under Section 482, Cr.P.C. challenging an application under
Section 12 of the D.V. Act, was maintainable. The Court concluded by
“When it was the Parliament's intention to confer
powers on a Magistrate/criminal Court to adjudicate Civil
rights and confer appellate power to the Court of Sessions, we
cannot rule out the Criminal jurisdiction of this Court alone
by saying Section 482 of Cr.P.C.. is inapplicable. It is
therefore, the procedure which is more relevant rather than
the reliefs sought for the purpose of invoking Section 482
Cr.P.C. We are also of the view that any person aggrieved by
an order passed under Section 29 by the Sessions Court can
approach this Court under Section 397 Cr.P.C., provided he
is able to bring his case within the limited scope of revision
under Section 397 of Cr.P.C..”            (emphasis supplied)
k     Pursuant to the aforesaid decision, a batch of petitions under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. challenging various applications under Section 12 of the
D.V. Act came up before N. Sathish Kumar, J. The learned judge noted that
certain conclusions reached by the Division Bench in P.Ganesan, supra, were
internally inconsistent. For instance, it was noticed that though the Division
Bench had not disapproved the decision of V. Ramasubramanian, J. (as he then
was) in Muruganandam, supra, holding that a petition under Article 227 was
maintainable, it had disapproved the conclusion in paragraph 52 (xiv) of
Pathmanathan, supra, (N.Anand Venkatesh, J.) which held that a petition
under Article 227 would be maintainable under certain exceptional
circumstances. It was also noticed that the decision of the Supreme Court in
Kamatchi, supra, had approved the view of N.Anand Venkatesh, J. in
Pathmanathan, supra, by holding that an application under Section 12 of the
D.V. Act could not be equated to an application under the Cr.P.C. Since the
learned judge (N. Sathish Kumar, J.) found that the decision of the Division
Bench was also in conflict with certain other precedents of the Supreme Court,
the matter was directed to be placed before the Hon’ble Chief Justice, who, in
turn, has constituted this Full Bench to answer the questions that have been set
out in paragraph 1, supra.
3     The D.V. Act was enacted in response to the obligations under the
U.N. Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women (CEDAW) to which India had become a signatory in 1993. The object
of the legislation is to provide women with civil remedies against acts of
domestic violence. This is clear from the Statement of Objects and Reasons
which reads as follows:
“It is, therefore, proposed to enact a law keeping in view the
rights guaranteed under Articles 14,15 and 21 of the Constitution to
provide for a remedy under the civil law which is intended to protect
the woman from being victims of domestic violence and to prevent
the occurrence of domestic violence in the society.”
(emphasis supplied)
4      Having carefully examined the scheme and the provisions of the
D.V. Act, we find that the legislature has envisaged a completely different
scheme for entertaining applications and granting reliefs under the D.V. Act.
The salient features that are discernible are:
a      Section 12 of the D.V. Act contemplates an application being
made to a Magistrate for grant of civil reliefs and not for taking cognizance of
an offence.
b      As has been pointed out in Pathmanathan, supra, an application
is made under Section 12 in terms of Rule 6(1) of the D.V. Rules, 2006, and not
by way of a complaint as defined in Section 2(d) of the Cr.P.C. Consequently,
an application, not being a complaint under the Cr.P.C., the procedure for
cognizance set out under Section 190(1)(a) Cr.P.C. followed by the procedure
set out in Chapter XV of the Cr.P.C. for taking cognizance, will have no
application to a proceeding under the D.V. Act.
c     Since the respondents before the Court are not accused of any
offence, Section 13 of the D.V. Act and Rule 12 of the Rules expressly provide
that the Magistrate shall issue “a notice” fixing a date of hearing as prescribed
in Form VII appended to the D.V. Rules, and not a summons under Section 61,
d     Section 14 of the D.V. Act empowers the Magistrate to direct the
parties to undergo counselling at any stage of the proceeding, which is
something that an ordinary Criminal Court can never do while trying an
offence.
e     More importantly, the jurisdiction of the Magistrate is statutorily
prescribed by Sections 2(i) and 27 of the Act. The succeeding Section, viz.,
Section 28, sets out the procedure for exercise of jurisdiction by the Magistrate
under the D.V. Act.
f     Section 29 provides for a right of appeal against an order of the
Magistrate. This was obviously necessary since Chapter XXIX of the Cr.P.C.
has no application since it deals with appeals arising out of trials for offences
and against orders passed under Chapter VIII of the Code.
5      It may not be necessary to allude to the very many authorities that
were cited at the Bar regarding the nature of reliefs that can be granted by the
Magistrate under the D.V. Act, as the legal position is no longer res integra in
view of the decision of the Supreme Court in Kunapareddy, supra, wherein, it
was held that the various reliefs under Sections 17-23 of the D.V. Act which
can be granted by the Magistrate are civil in nature. It is only upon the breach
of an interim protection order or a protection order that an offence in terms of
Section 31 of the D.V. Act is committed. This is clear from the following
observations of the Court:
“It is, thus, clear that various kinds of reliefs which can be
obtained by the aggrieved person are of civil nature. At the same
time, when there is a breach of such orders passed by the Magistrate,
Section 31 terms such a breach to be a punishable offence”
Thus, at the stage of considering an application under Section 12 of the D.V.
Act, the Magistrate does not perform his conventional role of trying any
offence and is merely considering an application for grant of civil reliefs under
the D.V. Act. This position is reiterated in Kamatchi, supra. We also notice
that the Division Bench in P. Ganesan, supra, also arrived at the same
conclusion while expressing their agreement with the conclusion of N. Anand
Venkatesh, J. in Pathmanathan, supra.
6      In Pathmanathan, supra, the learned single judge concluded that
a Magistrate exercising jurisdiction under the D.V. Act is not a Criminal Court
within the meaning of Section 6 of the Cr.P.C. Placing reliance on the decision
of the Supreme Court in Sujith Kumar Rana, supra, it was observed that the
power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. can be exercised only in relation to a
proceeding before a Criminal Court; as the Magistrate under the D.V. Act was
not a Criminal Court, a petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. was not
maintainable to quash an application filed under Section 12 of the D.V. Act.
7      The Division Bench, in P.Ganesan, supra, has categorically and
correctly restated the legal position, in two places that the proceedings under
the D.V. Act are civil in nature. For the sake of convenience, we are extracting
those portions from P. Ganesan, supra.
(i)       As we have already held that the proceedings under the
Domestic Violence Act are civil in nature.............
16     (c)        We have already held that the proceedings under
Chapter IV of the Domestic Violence Act are civil in
nature..........”
8      We concur with the above view of Anand Venkatesh, J., as
affirmed by the Division Bench in P.Ganesan, supra. However, after saying
so, the Division Bench, in P.Ganesan, supra, found itself in disagreement with
the opinion of Anand Venkatesh, J. that a petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to
quash a D.V. proceedings is not maintainable and has given a contrary opinion
“N. Anand Venkatesh, J. held that the Magistrate while
adjudicating Civil rights cannot be called Criminal Court. We do not
agree with this view of the learned Judge, firstly because the
Parliament intended to deliberately confer Jurisdiction on the
Criminal Court. An appeal is also provided to the Court of Sessions
and not to the District Judge. Secondly, the learned Judge relied upon
a number of cases to hold that where the Magistrate is conferred
power to grant reliefs of Civil nature he cannot be called to a
‘Criminal Court’. We find that in all the Judgments referred by the
learned Judge, the Courts have held that the Magistrate was not a
Court when he was exercising Ministerial/Administrative functions
and not a criminal Court when he was following the procedure
stipulated under the Special Act which gave his power and not under
Cr.P.C.. Therefore, in our view those Judgments cannot be relied
upon to hold that the Magistrate is not a criminal Court while dealing
with an Application under 12 of the Domestic Violence Act. Just as
we found that the nature of reliefs would determine the character of
the proceedings we find that the nature of the procedure adopted
would determine the character of the Tribunal. There is no doubt that
the         Magistrate         dealing         with            proceedings
under Domestic Violence Act is a Criminal Court who has to follow
the procedure under Cr.P.C., exception being provided under Section
28 (2) of the Act.”                               (emphasis supplied)
9      From a reading of the aforesaid, we are able to infer that albeit the
fact that D.V. proceedings initiated on an application under Section 12 are civil
proceedings, the Magistrate is nonetheless a Criminal Court as the procedure he
is required to follow is one under the Code of Criminal Procedure. To put it
more precisely, according to the Division Bench, it is not the substantive law,
but the procedural law that determines the character of the Court of the
Magistrate. This is where, in our considered opinion, with due respect, the
Division Bench appears to have fallen in error.
10       To examine the correctness of the conclusions of the Division
Bench, it is necessary to first examine the relevant provisions of the Cr.P.C.
Section 6 in Chapter II of the Cr.P.C. sets out various Classes of Criminal
Courts and reads as follows:
Besides the High Courts and the Courts constituted under any law,
other than this Code, there shall be, in every State, the following
classes of Criminal Courts, namely:-
(ii) Judicial Magistrates of the first class and, in any metropolitan
area, Metropolitan Magistrates;
(iii) Judicial Magistrates of the second class; and
It is apparent that Section 6 Cr.P.C. does not purport to define a Criminal
Court, and merely enumerates the various classes of Criminal Courts under the
Code, and also includes those Courts ‘constituted under any law’ other than the
Code. For instance, the High Court of Madras, which is a creature of the
Letters Patent read with the Indian High Courts Act, 1861, has also been
classified as a Criminal Court. In the absence of any statutory definition of a
“Criminal Court” in the Cr.P.C., the Court must look to the dictionary meaning
of the term as was pointed out by the Supreme Court in CIT v. Raja Benoy
11     A Criminal Court is defined in the Black’s Law Dictionary (9th
Edition) to mean “A court with jurisdiction over criminal matters”. In an earlier
edition of the same dictionary (3rd Edition), a Criminal Court was defined to
mean “One where criminal cases are tried and determined, not one where civil
cases are tried, or persons charged with criminal offenses are held for action
by proper authority.” Therefore, an application under Section 12 of the D.V.
Act, not being a proceeding involving the trial and determination of offences,
does not, textually or contextually, fit in the aforesaid definition of a Criminal
Court as it is not a criminal matter by any stretch of imagination.
12     As to what constitutes a “criminal proceeding”, the Supreme
Court, in Ram Kishan Fauji v. State of Haryana15, has laid down the
“As far as criminal proceeding is concerned, it clearly
stipulates that a criminal proceeding is ordinarily one which, if
carried to its conclusion, may result in imposition of (i) sentence,
and (ii) it can take within its ambit the larger interest of the State,
orders to prevent apprehended breach of peace and orders to bind
down persons who are a danger to the maintenance of peace and
order.”
An application under Section 12 of the D.V. Act does not lead to the imposition
of any sentence. In fact, as has been pointed out by the Supreme Court in
Kamatchi, supra, at the stage of an application under Section 12 of the
D.V.Act, there is no offence at all. The enquiry under Section 12 may culminate
with the granting of one or more of the civil reliefs set out in Sections 17-23,
and does not lead to the imposition of any sentence. Nor can such a proceeding
be characterised as one to prevent an apprehended breach of peace which is
governed by Chapter VIII of the Code. Thus, by applying the aforesaid test, it is
clear that the character of the proceeding before the Court in an application
under Section 12 of the D.V. Act is civil and not criminal in nature.
13    The aforesaid dictionary meaning of a “Criminal Court” appears to
be in line with the scheme of the Code which would be evident from Chapter
III of the Cr.P.C. which sets out the “Power of Courts”. Section 26, Cr.P.C.
proceeds to set out the Courts by which “offences” are triable. This provision
has to be read in conjunction with the First Schedule to the Code which
enumerates the various offences under the IPC and the Court(s) by which they
are to be tried. The succeeding Sections 28, 29, 30 and 31 of the Code set out
the various sentences which a Criminal Court may pass in the course of a trial
before it. What is apparent is that the Classes of Courts set out in Section
6,Cr.P.C. and the corresponding powers conferred on such Courts under
Chapter III of the Code, concern the trial of “offences”, and do not take within
their fold, proceedings of the nature set out in Section 12 of the D.V. Act.
14     We must now examine the impact of Section 28 of the D.V. Act
which appears to have weighed heavily with the Division Bench in P.Ganesan,
supra. Section 28, ibid., reads as follows:
(1)     Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all proceedings
under sections 12, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22 and 23 and offences under
section 31 shall be governed by the provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
(2)     Nothing in sub-section (1) shall prevent the court from
laying down its own procedure for disposal of an application under
section 12 or under sub-section (2) of section 23.”
According to the Division Bench, the Magistrate is enjoined by Section 28(1)
to follow the Cr.P.C. while dealing with an application under Section 12 of the
D.V. Act; consequently, the Magistrate exercises power under the Cr.P.C. while
deciding an application under Section 12 and is, thus, a Criminal Court under
the Code. The Division Bench concludes by observing:
“We have already held that it was the intention of the
Legislature that the Civil Law remedies have to be adjudicated and
enforced by adopting the criminal procedure in order to provide teeth
to the remedies. Section 28 (1) is nothing but a reflection of the
statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act. That is why this Act is
unique and by a judicial pronouncement we cannot dilute the
intention of the Parliament.”
15     Normally, when a matter is to be adjudicated by a Court, the
normal incidents of the procedure of that Court automatically attaches to it
during the adjudication of a dispute. This principle was laid down by the House
of Lords in National Telephone Co. Ltd. v Postmaster General16 in the
“When a question is stated to be referred to an established
court without more, it, in my opinion, imports that the ordinary
incidents of the procedure of that court are to attach, and also that
any general right of appeal from its decisions likewise attaches.”
This principle finds its manifestation in Section 4 of the Cr.P.C. which makes
the provisions of the Code applicable, by default, to the inquiry and trial of all
offences under the IPC and other laws. However, as observed, supra, the
Magistrate deciding an application under Section 12 of the D.V. Act is not a
Criminal Court trying an offence with the result that Section 4, Cr.P.C. would
have no application to the matters before it. The legislature, being aware of this
position, engrafted Section 28(1) which states that the procedure before the
Magistrate is to be “governed” by the Cr.P.C. The opening words of Section
28(1) of the D.V. Act begin with the expression “Save as otherwise provided in
this Act” which indicates that the special procedure set out in the Act would
prevail over the procedure under the Cr.P.C. This was necessary since the
enquiry conducted by the Magistrate under the D.V. Act is not akin to an
enquiry under Chapter XV of the Cr.P.C., which deals with the procedure for
taking cognizance of offences.
16    Looking at the scheme of Section 28 of the D.V. Act, we are of the
opinion that the legislature was conscious of the fact that the Magistrate was
required to grant civil reliefs under Sections 18 to 22 of the D.V.Act. A
wholesale application of the provisions of the Cr.P.C would have been
unworkable and therefore, a special procedure was devised. In the Code of
Criminal Procedure, there are five forms of trial for offences, to wit, Sessions
Trial (Chapter XVIII), Magisterial Trial on a police report (Chapter XIX-A),
Magisterial Trial otherwise than on a police report (Chapter XIX-B), Summons
Trial (Chapter XX) and Summary Trial (Chapter XXI). In special penal
enactments like the Prevention of Corruption Act, NDPS Act, etc., wherein,
establishment of Special Courts for trial of the offences therein is envisaged,
the statutes themselves prescribe the mode of inquiry and trial by telescoping
one of the five modes stated above.          However, under the D.V. Act, the
legislature did not say so because of two-fold reasons: (a) The aforesaid five
chapters would apply for trial of offences, whereas, Sections 18 to 22 of the
D.V. Act are not penal provisions; (b) The Magistrate in D.V. proceedings is
not conducting a trial, but, an enquiry.
17     Since the enquiry should be conducted expeditiously and not like a
proceeding before Civil Courts, the legislature has stated in Section 28, ibid.,
that the proceedings shall be “governed” by the provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure. After saying so, it has given a further leeway to the
Magistrate by saying in Section 28(2) that the Court which includes the
Magistrate, can lay down its own procedure. The word “governed” used in
Section 28(1) and the general power to devise “its own procedure” in Section
28(2), are the two acupressure points in Achilles' feet of Section 28 that were
lost sight of by the Division Bench in P. Ganesan, supra, while holding that
the Magistrate is a Criminal Court. The following observations of the Supreme
Court in Kunapareddy, supra, support this view:
“In the aforesaid scenario, merely because Section 28 of the DV Act
provides for that the proceedings under some of the provisions
including Sections 18 and 20 are essentially of civil nature.”
18     Once the procedure set out in the five chapters of the Code
referred to above are excluded from application for an enquiry by a Magistrate
under the D.V. Act, then, what obviously remains is only Chapter IX – “Order
for maintenance of wives, children and parents”, because, Chapter X, wherein,
an inquiry is contemplated, deals with maintenance of public order, which can,
by no stretch of imagination, be applied to D.V. Act proceedings. The
legislature could have straightaway stated in Section 28 that Chapter IX of the
Code of Criminal Procedure would apply, but, instead, has stated in general
terms that the proceedings “shall be governed by the provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure” so as to leave it to the wisdom of the Central Government
to lay down the specifics in the Rules via the rule-making power under Section
37 of the D.V. Act. Accordingly, the Central Government has laid down the
specifics in Rule 6(5) of the D.V. Rules, 2006, which reads as follows:
“6.   Applications to the Magistrate.--
5.    The applications under section 12 shall be dealt with
and the orders enforced in the same manner laid down under section
125 of the Code or Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).”
19     Since Chapter IX of the Code has an in-built mechanism for the
enforcement of the orders of maintenance, the legislature deemed it fit to mirror
the said procedural mechanism under the D.V. Act and the Rules by a well-
known legislative device of incorporation by reference.                     At the risk of
repetition, the legislature has not stated that the Code would apply to the
proceedings under the D.V. Act, but has only stated that the proceedings shall
be governed by the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Whereas, the
Division Bench, with due respect, has fallen in error by holding that the
Magistrate “has to follow the procedure under the Cr.P.C., exception being
provided under Section 28(2) of the Act”.
20      It is necessary to restate that Section 28(2) of the D.V. Act begins
with the expression “Nothing in sub-section (1) shall prevent the Court from
laying down its own procedure. .............”. The non-obstante clause in Section
28(2), ibid., cannot be an exception to Section 28(1), for, that would be putting
the cart before the horse. To be noted, wherever the legislature has envisaged
the “application” of the Code, it has stated so explicitly. For instance, Section
31 of the POCSO Act reads as follows:
“31. Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to
proceedings before a Special Court:
Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) (including the
provisions as to bail and bonds) shall apply to the proceedings before
a Special Court and for the purposes of the said provisions, the
Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court of Sessions and the
person conducting a prosecution before a Special Court, shall be
deemed to be a Public Prosecutor.”
That is not the case in Section 28 of the D.V. Act. That is why, we lay emphasis
on the expression “governed” which is in contra distinction with the expression
“apply”, the former being generic in character while the latter is specific in the
present context.
21     The legislative technique of empowering Magistrates to grant civil
reliefs through the procedural mechanism of the Cr.P.C. is not unknown to our
law. Way back in 1856, Act XIII of 1856 was enacted by the Legislative
Council of India for regulating the police of the Towns of Calcutta, Madras and
Bombay and certain settlements. Section XLIII of the Act ran as under:
“If any person, having sufficient means, neglects or refuses to
maintain his wife or any legitimate or illegitimate child unable to
maintain himself, it shall be lawful for a Magistrate, upon due proof
thereof to order such person to make a monthly allowance….”
22     In 1861, a Code of Criminal Procedure for Courts of criminal
jurisdiction not established by Royal Charter, (Act XXV of 1861) was passed
by the Legislative Council of India. The corresponding provision of Section
XLIII of the 1856 Act was Section 316 in the 1861 Code. In the succeeding
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1872, the corresponding provision was Section
536. In the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898, this remedy was housed in
Chapter XXXVI titled “Of the maintenance of wives and children” and was
housed in Part VIII of the Code titled “Special Proceedings.” In the present
Code, the special provisions regarding the maintenance of wives and children
are found in Chapter IX of the Code.
23      In Nand Lal Misra v Kanhaiya Lal Misra17, Subba Rao, J.
termed Chapter XXVI of the 1898 Code (present Chapter IX of the 1973 Code)
as a “self-contained” one. Furthermore, it is well settled that though the
Magistrate exercises power under the Code to grant maintenance, the
proceedings before him do not partake the character of a criminal proceeding.
This was pointed out by J.C. Shah, J. (as the learned Chief Justice then was) in
Jaswantsinghji Fathehsinghji Thakore v Kesuba Harisinh Dipsinhji18,
wherein, it was held as follows:
“What is essentially a civil remedy is given to abandoned
wives and children by providing in Chap. XXXVI of Criminal P.C. a
right to approach a Magistrate of the First Class or a Presidency
Magistrate for an order for payment of maintenance. The fact that the
proceedings lie in the Court of a Magistrate does not convert those
proceedings into 'criminal proceedings' nor proceedings in respect of
an offence. Inherent in the provisions of Ss.488, 489 and 490, which
fall in Chapter XXXVI of the Code, is sufficient indication that the
proceedings under S.488 of the Code are not regarded as proceedings
in respect of an offence.”                       (emphasis supplied)
24      In Balan Nair v Bhavani Amma Valsalamma and others19, a
Full Bench of the Kerala High Court (U.L.Bhat, K.T.Thomas and
P.K.Shamsuddin, JJ.) reiterated the aforesaid position. Speaking for the Full
Bench, Justice U.L.Bhat observed:
“The relief given, as we have indicated is essentially of a civil
nature and the proceedings are essentially civil proceedings and not
criminal proceedings. The proceedings have been described in some
decisions as of a quasi-criminal nature or quasi-civil nature. But we
are of opinion that they are essentially of a civil nature. The fact that
the provisions occur in the Cr. P.C. and not the Civil P.C. and the
fact that the recalcitrant opposite party who suffers the order of
maintenance and does not obey the order may have to go to prison,
will not change the nature of the proceedings from civil to criminal.
The provisions have been incorporated in the Cr. P.C. only with a
view to expedite the proceedings, as it was thought that the
Magistrate could better deal with the matter in a summary manner.”
We are in complete agreement with the aforesaid observations. We may add
that the considerations that impelled the Parliament to vest power with the
Magistrate to grant civil reliefs under the D.V. Act appear to be the same. Cases
in the Civil Court do not move with any degree of expedition, as is well known.
Then, there is the proverbial lament harking back to the days of the Privy
Council that the difficulties of the litigant in India begin when he has obtained
a decree. This observation, which was made in 1872, was reiterated by the
Supreme Court in 2022 in Air Liquide Deutschland GMBH v Goyal MG
Gases Pvt. Ltd.20. Under these circumstances, it would have been an exercise
in futility to provide a mechanism for expeditious remedy for a victim of
domestic violence and then toss her into the Civil Courts for eking out her
redress, given the vagaries and procedural uncertainties that plague our civil
justice system. It is for this reason, that the Parliament has vested a special
statutory jurisdiction under the D.V. Act, empowering a Magistrate to entertain
and grant one or more reliefs under the D.V. Act.
25     At this juncture, it is necessary to notice that the word
“jurisdiction” relates to the power of the Court to decide a class or classes of
cases. The import of the expression has been considered by the Supreme Court
in Nusli Neville Wadia v Ivory Properties21, wherein, it was observed as
“The word “jurisdiction” is derived from Latin words “juris”
and “dico”, meaning “I speak by the law” and does not relate to
rights of parties as between each other but to the power of the court.
Jurisdiction relates to a class of cases to which a particular case
belongs. Jurisdiction is the authority by which a judicial officer takes
cognizance and decides the cases. It only presupposes the existence
of a duly constituted court having control over subject-matter which
comes within classification limits of the law under which court has
been established. It should have control over the parties' litigant,
control over the parties' territory, it may also relate to pecuniary as
well as the nature of the class of cases. Jurisdiction is generally
understood as the authority to decide, render a judgment, inquire into
the facts, to apply the law, and to pronounce a judgment. When there
is the want of general power to act, the court has no jurisdiction.
When the court has the power to inquire into the facts, apply the law,
render binding judgment, and enforce it, the court has jurisdiction.
Judgment within a jurisdiction has to be immune from collateral
attack on the ground of nullity. It has co-relation with the
constitutional and statutory power of tribunal or court to hear and
determine. It means the power or capacity fundamentally to entertain,
hear, and determine.”                            (emphasis supplied)
26     In view of the above, the power of the Magistrate to entertain and
decide an application under Section 12 and grant one or more reliefs under the
D.V. Act is an aspect of his jurisdiction. It is settled law that jurisdiction is an
issue that belongs to the realm of substantive law. Procedural law, on the other
hand, prescribes the mode and manner in which such jurisdiction is to be
exercised. A character of the Court is an essential aspect of its substantive
jurisdiction, and would depend on the nature or subject matter of the case
before it.
27     In V.B. D’Monte v Bandra Borough Municipality22, the question
before the Full Bench of Bombay High Court was whether an application for
revision against an order of a Magistrate made under Section 110 of the
Bombay Municipal Boroughs Act, 1925, lies on the civil or criminal side of the
High Court. Under the scheme of the Act, Magistrates or Benches of Magistrate
were to be designated as appellate authorities under Section 110 of the Act. The
contention raised before the Full Bench was as follows:
“Now the contention put forward is that inasmuch as the
decision is given by a Magistrate under s. 110 and an appeal from the
Magistrate's decision lies to the High Court on its criminal side, the
order of the Magistrate should be revised by the High Court on its
criminal side and not on its civil side.”
28      Speaking for the Full Bench, Chagla, C.J. repelled the aforesaid
contention observing, inter alia, as under:
“Now it cannot be disputed that the subject matter of the
decision of the Magistrate is a purely civil matter. He is dealing with
rates and taxes. He is not exercising any criminal jurisdiction, nor is
he dealing with any criminal matter. Therefore when the matter
comes before us in revision, it is a matter which is civil in its nature;
and we see no reason why such a matter should be entertained on the
criminal side of the High Court and not on the civil side.
…….The better view seems to be that a criminal Court may be
constituted as a Court designata and civil jurisdiction may be
conferred upon that Court. If a criminal Court exercises that
jurisdiction, then it is not necessarily an inferior criminal Court
within the meaning of the Criminal Procedure Code; and if a right of
revision is given from a decision of such a Court, then that revisional
application is civil in its character and not criminal.”
(emphasis supplied)
29      From the aforesaid, it is evident that where the subject matter for
decision before the Magistrate is purely a civil matter, he cannot be said to be
exercising criminal jurisdiction or be dealing with a criminal matter. We are in
respectful agreement with the aforesaid conclusion of the learned Chief Justice.
We also find that this conclusion is fortified by the decision of the Supreme
Court in S.A.L. Narayan Row v Ishwarlal Bhagwandas 23, wherein, it was
“The character of the proceeding, in our judgment, depends
not upon the nature of the tribunal which is invested with authority to
grant relief, but upon the nature of the right violated and the
appropriate relief which may be claimed. A civil proceeding is,
therefore, one in which a person seeks to enforce by appropriate
relief the alleged infringement of his civil rights against another
person or the State, and which if the claim is proved would result in
the declaration express or implied of the right claimed and relief
such as payment of debt, damages, compensation, delivery of
specific property, enforcement of personal rights, determination of
status etc.”                                     (emphasis supplied)
30      Thus, in our considered opinion, the character of the proceeding,
must be ascertained having regard to the nature of the subject matter and the
reliefs sought. Viewed thus, there can be no two opinions that the proceeding
before the Magistrate is essentially civil in character. The Magistrate under the
D.V. Act is, to borrow the words of Chagla, C.J., in V.B. D'Monte, supra, a
“Court designata” and not a “Criminal Court”.                   Consequently, we cannot
agree with the conclusion of the Division Bench in P. Ganesan, supra, that
“the nature of the procedure adopted would determine the character of the
Tribunal”, for, that would imply that a Criminal Court must be defined not as
one “with jurisdiction over criminal matters”, but as one which “exercises
criminal procedure over certain matters”. To borrow the words of Sir Henry
Maine, that would be secreting a facet of jurisdiction, which is a matter of
substantive law, into the “the interstices of procedure”.
31    Since we are agreeing with the opinion of the Bombay High Court in
Jaswant Singhji (supra) that a proceeding under Section 125 Cr.P.C. is not a
criminal proceeding, we are required to answer a seminal doubt, viz., “if a pro-
ceeding under Section 125 Cr.P.C. is not a criminal proceeding, then, how can a
revision petition under Section 397 Cr.P.C. or a petition under Section 482
Cr.P.C. be maintained?” The short answer to this question is that an order made
by the Magistrate under Chapter IX, which envisages a right for maintenance and
provides a remedy thereof, is nonetheless an order passed “under the Code” (See
Sec 482 Cr.P.C). Consequently, an order passed under Section 125 Cr.P.C. is re-
visable under Section 397 Cr.P.C. or the proceeding itself can be challenged in an
appropriate case under Section 482 Cr.P.C. Whereas, an order passed granting one
or more reliefs under the D.V. Act, is not an order passed under Chapter IX of the
Cr.P.C. It remains an order passed under the D.V. Act which is susceptible to an
appeal under Section 29 of the said Act. There is no appeal from an order under
Chapter IX Cr.P.C, and such order can, nonetheless, be revised under Section 397
Cr.P.C, since it is an order made under the provisions of the Code.
32    We are, therefore, of the considered opinion that in a proceeding
under Chapter IV of the D.V. Act, a Magistrate exercises civil jurisdiction to
grant one or more civil reliefs under Sections 18-23 of that Act. Consequently,
we affirm the view of N. Anand Venkatesh, J. in Pathmanathan, supra, that a
Magistrate exercising jurisdiction under Section 12 of the D.V. Act, is not a
Criminal Court for the purpose of Chapter IV of the said Act.
33    As a sequitur, in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court
in Sujit Kumar Rana, supra, that a petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is
maintainable only against the proceedings of a Criminal Court, we also affirm
the view in Pathmanathan, supra, that a petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is
not maintainable to challenge a proceeding under Chapter IV of the D.V. Act.
34    A decision of the Full Bench of the Bombay High Court in
Nandkishor Pralhad Vyawahare v Mangala24, which has been cited with
approval in P.Ganesan, supra, was brought to our notice. The Full Bench, like
the Division Bench in P. Ganesan, supra, has proceeded on the basis that the
procedure prescribed in Section 28 of the D.V.Act attracts the jurisdiction of
the High Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C. For the reasons indicated earlier, we
respectfully find ourselves unable to subscribe to this view.
35    The other aspect of the first question raised in the order of
reference is whether a proceeding under Chapter IV of the D.V. Act can be
assailed before this Court by way of a petition under Article 227 of the
Constitution. In Pathmanathan, supra. it was held that a petition under Article
227 of the Constitution challenging a proceeding under Chapter IV of the D.V.
Act, would be maintainable if it suffered from a patent lack of jurisdiction. This
conclusion was set out in paragraph 52 (xiv) of the order of the learned single
judge. In paragraph 6(k) in P. Ganesan, supra, the Division Bench appears to
have concurred with all the conclusions summed up in paragraph 52 of the
order of the learned single judge in Pathmanathan, supra, except paragraphs
52 (xi) and (xiv) which are extracted hereunder for the sake of convenience:
“xi. In Satish Chandra Ahuja (cited supra), the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has pointed out the importance of the enabling
provisions under Section 26 of the D.V. Act to avoid multiplicity of
proceedings. Hence, the reliefs under Chapter IV of the D.V. can
also be claimed in a pending proceeding before a civil, criminal or
family court as a counter claim.
xiv. A petition under Article 227 of the Constitution may still
be maintainable if it is shown that the proceedings before the
Magistrate suffer from a patent lack of jurisdiction. The jurisdiction
under Article 227 is one of superintendence and is visitorial in nature
and will not be exercised unless there exists a clear jurisdictional
error and that manifest or substantial injustice would be caused if the
power is not exercised in favour of the petitioner. (See Abdul Razak
v. Mangesh Rajaram Wagle, (2010) 2 SCC 432, Virudhunagar Hindu
Nadargal Dharma Paribalana Sabai v. Tuticorin Educational Society,
(2019) 9 SCC 538). In normal circumstances, the power under
Article 227 will not be exercised, as a measure of self-imposed
restriction, in view of the corrective mechanism available to the
aggrieved parties before the Magistrate, and then by way of an appeal
under Section 29 of the Act.”
36      We also notice that, on the one hand, while disapproving of
paragraph 52 (xiv), supra, in Pathmanathan, supra, the Division Bench has,
on the other hand, not explicitly observed that a petition under Article 227 is
not maintainable. The Division Bench has, however, gone on to observe:
“It is needless to mention that Section 482 Cr.P.C. does not
confer any new power to the High Court. It only reiterates the
existence of the inherent powers of the High Court. The
nomenclature of the petition makes no difference. The roaster
system/portfolio allocation is an Administrative act for the purpose
of convenience and to bring about regularity in distribution of cases.
It does not take away the powers inherent in every Judge of this
Court. Every Judge irrespective of the portfolio can exercise inherent
powers in criminal Cases or powers of superintendence under Article
227 Constitution of India or power to issue Writs under Article 226.
When it was the Parliament's intention to confer powers on a
Magistrate/criminal Court to adjudicate Civil rights and confer
appellate power to the Court of Sessions, we cannot rule out the
Criminal jurisdiction of this Court alone by saying Section 482 of
Cr.P.C. is inapplicable. It is therefore, the procedure which is more
relevant rather than the reliefs sought for the purpose of invoking
37     It is no doubt true that Section 482 Cr.P.C. does not confer any
new power on the High Court, but, merely preserves the inherent power which
inheres in the High Court as a Court of Record. However, it does not follow
that any judge of this Court can exercise power under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
ignoring the allocation of cases made by the Chief Justice as the Master of the
Roster. That apart, the aforesaid observations run counter to the decision of the
Supreme Court in State of Punjab v Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar25, wherein,
it was held as follows:
“69. It has rightly been pointed out by the Full Bench of the
Allahabad High Court in Sanjay Kumar Srivastava v. Chief Justice
[1996 All WC 644] , that if the Judges were free to choose their
jurisdiction or any choice was given to them to do whatever case
they would like to hear and decide, the machinery of the court could
have collapsed and judicial functioning of the court could have
ceased by generation of internal strife on account of hankering for a
particular jurisdiction or a particular case.
70.     In view of the above, the legal regime, in this respect
emerges to the effect that the Bench gets jurisdiction from the
assignment made by the Chief Justice and the Judge cannot choose
as to which matter he should entertain and he cannot entertain a
petition in respect of which jurisdiction has not been assigned to him
by the Chief Justice as the order passed by the court may be without
jurisdiction and make the Judge coram non judice.”
(emphasis supplied)
38      To the same effect are the following observations of a learned
single judge of this Court in Dorothy Thomas v Rex Arul26:
“Within the precincts of this heritage structure, every Judge
exercises different jurisdictions, some under the Constitution, some
on the Civil Appellate Side, some on the Ordinary Original Civil
Side and so on and so forth. While exercising jurisdiction on one
side, it is not open to a Judge to exercise jurisdiction on another side,
merely because the High Court is one. My jurisdiction in this case
arises out of some of the provisions of the Letters Patent, the rules on
the Original Side of this Court and the Code of Civil Procedure.
Therefore, I cannot now convert this into a proceeding under the
Guardians and Wards Act.”
39      Thus, the conclusion of the Division Bench in P. Ganesan, supra,
that it is open to any judge of this Court to exercise inherent jurisdiction in
criminal matters irrespective of portfolio may not reflect the correct legal
position.
40    The next question is whether the proceedings under Chapter IV of
the D.V. Act can be assailed by way of a petition under Article 227 of the
Constitution. Indubitably, the power of judicial review under the said provision
is a part of the basic structure of the Constitution. After the decision of the
Constitution Bench in L.Chandra Kumar v Union of India27, it is no longer
open to doubt that the power of judicial review under Articles 226/227 cannot
be taken away even by a constitutional amendment, let alone by a statute.
Nevertheless, the existence of power is one thing and the exercise of power is
quite another. Though the power of superintendence under Article 227 over the
proceedings of the Magistrate under the D.V. Act exists, its exercise would, no
doubt, be conditioned on certain very salutary principles one of which is that a
High Court will not exercise its power of superintendence if there exists an
efficacious alternative remedy.
41    As has been adverted to, supra, the legislature has very
thoughtfully provided an appellate remedy, under Section 31 of the D.V. Act,
before the Court of Session against an order of the Magistrate. The existence of
an appellate remedy would almost always be a “near total bar” for exercising
power under Article 227, as has been pointed out by the Supreme Court in
Virudhunagar Hindu Nadargal Dharma Paribalana Sabai v. Tuticorin
Educational Society28. An exception to the aforesaid rule is where the
proceedings before the Court below are patently lacking in jurisdiction. An
illustrative instance of such a case is where a Magistrate, who does not possess
jurisdiction under Section 27, entertains an application under the D.V. Act or
where the reliefs sought are outside the scope of the Act, etc. Such instances
would, no doubt, be few and far between. We only reiterate that the policy of
the D.V. Act is expedition, which cannot be achieved if all and sundry orders
are called into question before the High Court. This aspect must necessarily
weigh with the learned single judges while exercising jurisdiction under Article
227 in a challenge to proceedings under the D.V. Act.
42    We also notice that in many cases, such as the cases on hand, a
challenge is straightaway made primarily by in-laws and others contending that
the application arraying them as a respondent is an abuse of process. In such
cases, upon receipt of notice from the Magistrate Court, it would be open to the
respondents to approach the Magistrate and file their responses or seek deletion
of their names by way of an appropriate application. In Pathmanathan, supra,
the learned single judge has observed thus:
“In the first instance, it is, therefore, necessary to examine the
areas where the D.V. Act or the D.V. Rules have specifically set out
the procedure thereby excluding the operation of Cr.P.C. as
contemplated under Section 28(1) of the Act. This takes us to the
D.V. Rules. At the outset, it may be noticed that a “complaint” as
contemplated under the D.V. Act and the D.V. Rules is not the same
as a “complaint” under Cr.P.C. A complaint under Rule 2(b) of the
D.V. Rules is defined as an allegation made orally or in writing by
any person to a Protection Officer. On the other hand, a complaint,
under Section 2(d) of the Cr.P.C. is any allegation made orally or in
writing to a Magistrate, with a view to his taking action under the
Code, that some person, whether known or unknown has committed
an offence. However, the Magistrate dealing with an application
under Section 12 of the Act is not called upon to take action for the
commission of an offence. Hence, what is contemplated is not a
complaint but an application to a Magistrate as set out in Rule 6(1) of
the D.V. Rules. A complaint under the D.V. Rules is made only to a
Protection Officer as contemplated under Rule 4(1) of the D.V.
20. Rule 6(1) sets out that an application under Section 12 of
the Act shall be as per Form II appended to the Act. Thus, an
application under Section 12 not being a complaint as defined under
Section 2(d) of the Cr.P.C., the procedure for cognizance set out
under Section 190(1)(a) of the Code followed by the procedure set
out in Chapter XV of the Code for taking cognizance will have no
application to a proceeding under the D.V. Act. To reiterate, Section
190(1)(a) of the Code and the procedure set out in the subsequent
Chapter XV of the Code will apply only in cases of complaints,
under Section 2(d) of Cr.P.C., given to a Magistrate and not to an
application under Section 12 of the Act.”
43     The aforesaid observations have been quoted by the Supreme
Court in Kamatchi, supra. It was also contended before the Supreme Court in
Kamatchi, supra, that in view of the decision in Adalat Prasad v Rooplal
Jindal29, once notice was issued by the Magistrate, the only remedy for a
respondent in a D.V. case was to challenge the said proceedings under Section
482 Cr.P.C. Rejecting this submission, the Supreme Court held as under:
“Lastly, we deal with the submission based on the decision in
Adalat Prasad. The ratio in that case applies when a Magistrate takes
cognizance of an offence and issues process, in which event instead
of going back to the Magistrate, the remedy lies in filing petition
under Section 482 of the Code. The scope of notice under Section 12
of the Act is to call for a response from the respondent in terms of the
Statute so that after considering rival submissions, appropriate order
can be issued. Thus, the matter stands on a different footing and the
dictum in Adalat Prasad would not get attracted at a stage when a
notice is issued under Section 12 of the Act.”
44     It is, therefore, clear that what is contemplated under the D.V. Act
is the issuance of notice under Section 13 and not a summons under Section 61
of the Cr.P.C. The decision in Adalat Prasad, supra, concerned the correctness
of the view taken by a two judge bench of the Supreme Court in K.M.Mathew
v State of Kerala30, wherein, it was held that an order issuing process was
merely an interim order which could be recalled/varied. It was held that once
process was issued, the accused could appear before the Magistrate and plead
that the process issued against him must be recalled, and that it was open to the
Magistrate to reconsider the complaint and drop proceedings if the situation so
warranted. In Adalat Prasad, supra, a three judge bench overruled the
aforesaid decision observing, inter alia, as under:
“It is true that if a Magistrate takes cognizance of an offence,
issues process without there being any allegation against the accused
or any material implicating the accused or in contravention of
provisions of Sections 200 and 202, the order of the Magistrate may
be vitiated, but then the relief an aggrieved accused can obtain at that
stage is not by invoking Section 203 of the Code because the
Criminal Procedure Code does not contemplate a review of an order.
Hence in the absence of any review power or inherent power with the
subordinate criminal courts, the remedy lies in invoking Section 482
of the Code.”
45      It is on account of the decision in Adalat Prasad, supra, that
petitions under Section 482 Cr.P.C. are entertained after the trial court takes
cognizance and issues process in a case arising out of complaint or upon
submission of a final report under Section 173 Cr.P.C. in a police case.
However, as pointed out in Kamatchi, supra, such a constraint cannot apply
when the Magistrate exercises jurisdiction under the D.V. Act because the
procedure of taking cognizance and issuing summons does not apply to a
proceeding under that Act. It would, therefore, be open to the respondent in a
D.V. case to appear in response to the notice and urge all such grounds, as may
be open to him in law, before the Magistrate. If any party is aggrieved by an
order passed by the Magistrate thereafter, it would be open to him to pursue the
remedy of a statutory appeal before the Sessions Court under Section 29 of the
46    There is another insurmountable difficulty in accepting the line of
reasoning adopted by the Division Bench in P. Ganesan, supra. After having
affirmed the directions in Pathmanathan, supra, that it was open to the
respondent to approach the Magistrate, upon receipt of notice, to seek
appropriate reliefs, the Division Bench has gone on to hold that a petition under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. would still be maintainable to challenge a proceeding
under Section 12. On a demurrer, once it is accepted that a remedy is available
before the Magistrate, it must necessarily follow that the invocation of inherent
power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is impermissible (See State v Murugesan31
following Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar, supra (para 52).
47    It was also brought to our notice that despite the decision in
Pathmanathan, supra, the Magistrates are continuing to issue summons and
warrants in a proceeding under the D.V. Act. We have no hesitation in
concluding that such a course is clearly impermissible in law. The Magistrates
will, therefore, scrupulously adhere to the directives set out in paragraphs 52
(iv),(v) and (vi) in Pathmanathan, supra.
48    As has been pointed out in Pathmanathan, supra, the Sessions
Court, hearing an appeal under Section 29 of the D.V. Act, does not function as
a Court of Appeal under Chapter XXIX of the Cr.P.C. It is elementary that an
appeal is a continuation of an original proceeding. Thus, if an original
proceeding bears a civil character, it is impossible to term an appeal arising out
of such a case as a criminal proceeding. That apart, the Sessions Court, while
hearing an appeal under Section 29 of the D.V. Act, is not shackled by any of
the procedural rigours which applies to appeals under Chapter XXIX of the
Cr.P.C. Against the order of the Sessions Court, neither a revision to the High
Court under Section 397 Cr.P.C. nor a petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is
maintainable. However, a remedy under Article 227 would be available in an
appropriate case.
49    Our answer to the reference is intricately and inextricably linked to
the power of transfer of proceedings from one Court to another. This is
because, our finding on the character of a Court will have a direct bearing on
the issue of transfer. There appears to be a conflict between paragraph 19(j) and
19(g) in P. Ganesan, supra, which requires to be addressed. Paragraph 19(j)
and 19(g) are extracted for ready reference.
“19(j) The Proceedings under the Domestic Violence Act
being Civil in nature, can also be tried before the Family Court.
There cannot be any dispute over that proposition of Law.”
“19(g) It is therefore clear that the Family Court can exercise
all powers of any District Court or any Subordinate Civil Court to
deal with the proceedings which are found in clauses (a) to (g) to the
explanation. However, the Family Court can exercise the jurisdiction
of a Magistrate only while dealing with the proceedings under
Chapter IX of Cr.P.C. The Family Court can exercise any other
Jurisdiction only if the same is conferred on it by any other
enactment. Thus, we find that unless the enactment confers the
Jurisdiction on the Family Court to exercise the Powers of the
Magistrate, the Family Court cannot exercise the powers of the
Magistrate while deciding the Domestic Violence Act proceedings.
In the absence of such powers, we are of the view that if the
Domestic Violence Act proceedings are transferred from the
Magistrate to the Family Court or any other Civil Court, the intention
of the Legislature would be defeated.” (emphasis supplied)
50      Our attention was also drawn to the following conclusion in
“Thus, we can see that it is only the Code of Civil Procedure
that governs the Proceedings under the Family Court, except when
the Family Court is dealing with the proceedings under Chapter IX
of the Criminal Procedure Code. The Family Court cannot exercise
any of the Powers that the Magistrate exercises while disposing of
the applications under Section 12 of Domestic Violence Act.
Although, Section 26 (2) of the Domestic Violence Act provides that
the reliefs provided under the Act can also be sought in Civil Suit or
Legal Proceedings before Civil or Criminal Court, it no way declares
that when the reliefs are sought before the Civil Court or Family
Court, the Procedure under Domestic Violence Act can be followed.
It does not also say that the Civil Court or Family Court would be
deemed to be a Magistrate for the purpose of deciding the
applications under Section 12. Further, we also find that section 29
which provides for right of appeal to the Court of Sessions also
confers the appellate power only to a Criminal Court namely the
Court of Sessions. If the Proceedings are transferred to Family Court,
there would also be difficulty in fixing the forum for filing an appeal
as the Family Court is equal in rank to that of the Court of Session.
The intention of the Legislature clearly appears to provide for a host
of Civil rights and all the Civil rights are to be dealt with by applying
the provisions of Criminal Procedure. The reason being obvious that
the Parliament wanted to enforce these Civil rights in a more
effective and forceful manner. The fear of Criminal Procedure and
that of the Magistrate may be an effective tool to enforce the
provisions of Domestic Violence Act. Further the parliament also
thought it fit to provide for Penal consequences wherever there is a
breach of protection order. Section 26 (2) also clearly stipulates that
the proceedings under Domestic Violence Act can be in addition to
any other proceedings before any Civil Court, Family Court or
Criminal Court. Therefore, the choice of the forum is with the
complainant and it is not proper for this Court to force him to give
up his rights to have his application determined by applying the
procedure under Domestic Violence Act.”
It is submitted that having held as above, the Division Bench has gone on to
hold, in paragraph 22(e) as under:
“(e) Proceedings under Domestic Violence Act cannot be
transferred from a Magistrate to a Civil or Family Court at the
instance of the Respondent defined under 2 (q) of the
Domestic Violence Act. However, the proceedings can be
transferred at the instance of the applicants/victim or with her
consent.”
51     The contention raised before us was that in paragraph 19(j), the
Division Bench has observed that D.V. proceedings can be entertained in a
Family Court, whereas, in paragraph 19(g), it has concluded that no power is
vested with the Family Court to exercise the powers of a Magistrate under the
D.V. Act. However, in paragraph 22(e), it has once again concluded that
transfer to a Family Court is possible with the consent of the complainant. In
other words, the contention is that jurisdiction must either exist or not exist and
there cannot be a half-way house. In any case, ‘the consent of a complainant’
cannot be a determinative factor since consent cannot confer jurisdiction on a
Court which otherwise does not possess any inherent jurisdiction. As one part
of the reasoning of the Division Bench contradicts another, the learned counsel
submitted in unison that this aspect may also be ironed out by this Full Bench
as the legal position is under a cloud.
52    It was also submitted that the observations in paragraph 19(g) of
P.Ganesan, supra, run counter to the law laid down in the Supreme Court in
Satish Chander Ahuja v Sneha Ahuja32. In particular, our attention was
invited by the Bar to Section 26 of the D.V. Act which runs as follows:
“26. Relief in other suits and legal proceedings.—
(1) “Any relief available under sections 18, 19, 20, 21 and 22
may also be sought in any legal proceeding, before a civil
court, family court or a criminal court, affecting the
aggrieved person and the respondent whether such
proceeding was initiated before or after the
commencement of this Act.
(2) Any relief referred to in sub-section (1) may be sought for
in addition to and along with any other relief that the
aggrieved person may seek in such suit or legal
proceeding before a civil or criminal court.
(3) In case any relief has been obtained by the aggrieved
person in any proceedings other than a proceeding under
this Act, she shall be bound to inform the Magistrate of
the grant of such relief.”
53     The seminal question, therefore, is whether a proceeding under the
D.V. Act before the Magistrate could be transferred to a Civil or Family Court
in exercise of powers under Section 24 of the CPC or under Article 227 of the
Constitution. This issue appears to have cropped up in several High Courts
across the country.
54     In an early case before the Kerala High Court in M.A.Mony v
M.P.Leelamma33, R. Basant, J. held that a proceeding under Section 12 of the
D.V. Act, pending before the Magistrate cannot be transferred to a Family
Court in exercise of powers under Article 227 of the Constitution. The learned
judge noticed that there was no provision for transfer in the D.V. Act, and at
any rate, there was no provision enabling the Family Court or the Civil Court to
entertain an application under Section 12 of the D.V. Act. The same view was
taken in Anish Antony Thimohty v Neetha34 and still more recently in
Ammini K.A v Ravi N.A35.
55    In Madras, the decision in M.A. Mony, supra, was followed by a
learned single judge of this Court (K. Mohan Ram, J.) in Capt. C.V.S Ravi v
Ratna Sailaja36 where the husband invoked the inherent power of this Court
under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to transfer the D.V. proceedings initiated by his wife
from the XVII Metropolitan Magistrate, Saidapet, to the Family Court,
Chennai. Mohan Ram, J. followed the decision in M.A. Mony, supra, and
rejected the petition, holding that the Family Court had no power to entertain an
application under Section 12 of the D.V. Act. Mohan Ram, J. reiterated this
view in M.J.John v Elizabeth John.37
56    However, in S.Gowrishankar v Deepa38, a learned single judge of
this Court appears to have exercised power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to
transfer a D.V. application from the Court of the Judicial Magistrate, Palani, to
the Family Court, Dindigul. Having perused the decision, we find that the order
was passed with the consent of both parties and that there is no declaration of
law by the learned single judge.
57    In Sathiyaseelan v Preethi39, another learned single judge, after
extracting Section 26 of the D.V. Act, was of the view that this provision
enabled the High Court to exercise power under Section 407 Cr.P.C. to
withdraw a case from the file of the Judicial Magistrate and transfer the same to
the Sub-Court, Villupuram, for joint trial along with a pending matrimonial
proceeding. Shortly thereafter, in P.Rajendran v P. Sasikala40, one of us,
(A.D.Jagadish Chandira, J.) following the decision of Mohan Ram, J. in
Capt.C.V.S.Ravi, supra, took the view that a petition under Sections 407 or
482 Cr.P.C could not be entertained to transfer a D.V. application from the
Judicial Magistrate to the Family Court. Later, in G. Jayakumar, supra, it was
held that such a transfer was possible under Article 227 of the Constitution and
not under Section 407 Cr.P.C. A diametrically opposite view was taken in
Arun Prakash, supra, wherein, it was held that a D.V. Act proceeding which is
essentially criminal in nature, cannot be transferred to the Family Court or any
Civil Court under Article 227.
40 Crl.O.P 29522 of 2013 decided on 14.09.2017
58      We have set out the aforesaid decisions of this Court in some
detail only to note that the apprehension and concern expressed at the Bar is
certainly not misplaced. The morass of conflicting views, expressed supra, on a
vital issue like jurisdiction, is only bound to result in chaos and confusion. We
have, therefore, thought it fit to set this controversy at rest once and for all.
59      To complete the picture, we also take note of the recent decision of
the Delhi High Court in Sandeep Aggarwal v Viniti Aggarwal 41, wherein, it
was held that an application under Section 12 of the D.V. Act cannot be
transferred from the Court of the Magistrate to the Family Court. On the other
hand, the Bombay High Court has taken the contra view in Sandip Mrinmoy
Chakrabarty v Reshita Sandip Chakrabarty42 and Dr.Sandeep Shekar
Shetty v Dr.Sarika Sandeep Shetty43.
60      To begin with, we notice that the legislature has not provided for
transfer of cases under the D.V. Act. Matrimonial statutes normally contain
such a power to avoid multiplicity of proceedings and conflicting judgments44.
44 See Section 40-A of the Special Marriage Act, Section 21-A of the Hindu Marriage Act, etc.
However, even assuming that the absence of any specific provision is not
determinative of the question, we must still answer whether the transfer is
jurisdictionally permissible in the light of the overall scheme of the D.V. Act.
61    It was contended at the Bar that Section 26 of the D.V. Act is the
provision that enables the High Court to effect a transfer in an appropriate case.
Having closely examined this contention, we are unable to agree. Section 26(1)
is an enabling provision that facilitates a remedy for the aggrieved person under
Sections 18-22 in any legal proceeding pending before the civil, criminal or the
Family Court. Thus, the key to the operation of Section 26(1) is the pendency
of any legal proceeding. In simpler terms, the operation of Section 26(1) is
parasitic on the existence of a “legal proceeding” affecting aggrieved person
and the respondent in any of the aforementioned courts. This is clear from the
expression “may also be sought in any legal proceeding” occurring in Section
26(1). Thus, it is evident that Section 26(1) does not confer any original
jurisdiction on a Civil, Criminal or Family Court to entertain an application
under Section 12 of the D.V. Act.
62    Similarly, Section 26(2) on the other hand, enables the aggrieved
person to seek the reliefs under Sections 18-22 of the D.V. Act, in any
proceeding she may seek before the Civil or Criminal Court. This provision
also has a parasitic existence, for, the reliefs under Sections 18-22 of the D.V.
Act can be sought “in addition to and along with any other relief” claimed
before the Civil or Criminal Court. Thus, what Section 26(2) does is that it
enables the aggrieved person to seek the special remedies under the D.V. Act in
a conventional civil or criminal proceeding. For instance, the wife may
approach the Magistrate with a complaint under Section 498-A IPC. In
addition, she may also seek other reliefs under Sections 18-22 of the D.V. Act,
which can be granted by the Magistrate trying the offence under Section 498-A
IPC, without driving the lady to institute a separate proceeding under Section
12 of the D.V.Act. Another example could be a case of a live-in relationship
between a man and a woman. If the woman had suffered physical violence due
to which the man is being prosecuted in a Criminal Court, say, for an offence
under Section 323 or 324 IPC, the woman could claim the reliefs under the
D.V. Act before the Criminal Court in the said prosecution. Consequently, we
find that Section 26(2) cannot be construed as vesting original jurisdiction with
the Civil or Criminal Courts to decide an application under Section 12 of the
D.V. Act. We also have no doubt in our minds that the legislative inspiration
for Section 26 of the D.V. Act is a similar provision viz., Section 23-A in the
Hindu Marriage Act, which is titled “Relief for respondent in divorce and
other proceedings” which enables the respondent to make a counter-claim for
any relief under that Act.
63    We also notice that Section 26(1) refers to “Civil Court, Family
Court or a Criminal Court”, whereas, Section 26(2) refers to “Civil or
Criminal Court”. We are disposed to think that the omission of the expression
“Family Court” in Section 26(2) is clearly the draftsman’s devil. Sections 26(1)
and (2) serve a common object i.e., to prevent multiplicity of proceedings. We
are, therefore, of the considered view that Section 26(2) must be construed as
including the Family Court as well.
64    We may now notice the decision of the Supreme Court in Vaishali
Abhimanyu Joshi v Nanasahed Gopal Joshi45, which illustrates the operation
of Section 26(1). A matrimonial dispute resulted in the husband leaving the
matrimonial home which belonged to the father-in-law. The father-in-law
instituted a suit in the Small Causes Court, Pune, to restrain the daughter-in-law
from using the flat. The daughter-in-law filed her written statement and set up a
counter claim by seeking residence orders under Section 19 of the D.V. Act.
She contended that the flat was a shared household where she resided with her
son. She also sought a decree of perpetual injunction to restrain the plaintiff
from creating any third party interest in respect of the flat. The counter-claim
was rejected by the Small Causes Court on the ground that it did not have any
jurisdiction to grant a residence order under the D.V. Act. The daughter-in-law
assailed this order in the Bombay High Court which did not meet with any
success. The matter eventually travelled to the Supreme Court. Setting aside the
order of the High Court, the Supreme Court observed that there could be no
dispute that the proceeding before the Small Causes Court was a “legal
proceeding” before a Civil Court. Alluding to the object and purpose of the
D.V. Act, the Court observed:
“Section 26 of the 2005 Act has to be interpreted in a manner to
effectuate the very purpose and object of the Act. Unless the
determination of claim by an aggrieved person seeking any order as
contemplated by the 2005 Act is expressly barred from consideration by
a civil court, this Court shall be loath to read in bar in consideration of
any such claim in any legal proceeding before the civil court. When the
proceeding initiated by the plaintiff in the Judge, Small Cause Court
alleged termination of gratuitous licence of the appellant and prays for
restraining the appellant from using the suit flat and permit the plaintiff
to enter and use the flat, the right of residence as claimed by the
appellant is interconnected with such determination and refusal of
consideration of claim of the appellant as raised in her counterclaim
shall be nothing but denying consideration of claim as contemplated by
Section 26 of the 2005 Act which shall lead to multiplicity of
proceedings, which cannot be the object and purpose of the 2005 Act.”
65     A similar situation arose in Satish Chander Ahuja, supra, where
a matrimonial dispute had broken out and the husband had filed a divorce
proceeding against the wife. The wife, in turn, filed a domestic violence
complaint. The father-in-law joined the bandwagon by filing a suit for recovery
of possession against his daughter alleging that she was harassing him by
occupying the first floor and filing false cases against him and his wife. A
prayer was also made to direct the daughter-in-law to pay Rs.1 lakh per month
as mesne profits from the date of filing of the suit till the date of handing over
possession. The daughter-in-law filed her written statement and set up a
counter-claim claiming a right of residence, and sought a residence order under
Section 19 of the D.V. Act. The father-in-law filed a petition under Order XII
Rule 6 of the CPC on the premise that as the daughter-in-law had admitted that
the property was acquired by him, a decree could be passed on admission. The
trial court allowed the application without considering the claim of the
daughter-in-law under Section 19 of the D.V. Act. On appeal, the Delhi High
Court reversed the decree observing, inter alia, that in view of the mandate of
Section 26 of the D.V. Act, the trial court ought to have considered the counter-
claim of the daughter-in-law under Section 19 of the D.V. Act. The decision of
the High Court was eventually affirmed by the Supreme Court holding that the
prayer under Section 19 of the D.V. Act, ought to have been examined by the
trial court as a counter claim in view of the provisions of Section 26.
66    Satish Chander Ahuja, supra, is, therefore, not an authority for
the proposition that an application under Section 12 can be transferred to a
Family Court to be tried along with the matrimonial proceeding. It is not
possible for us to attribute something which was never decided in that case. It is
axiomatic that a case is an authority for what it decides and not what logically
flows therefrom.
67    It is also necessary to notice that Section 26 which is titled “Relief
in other suits and proceedings” is placed side by side with Section 27 which
deals with “Jurisdiction”. Viewed thus, it is clear as the day that Section 26
deals with “reliefs” in “other suits and proceedings” and does not concern itself
with Section 12 of the D.V. Act at all. On the other hand, Section 27 explicitly
stipulates that the Judicial Magistrate (First Class) or the Metropolitan
Magistrate shall be the “competent court” to grant a protection order and other
orders under this Act, and also to try offences under the Act. If Section 26 were
to be construed as vesting Civil and Family Courts with jurisdiction to
determine complaints under Section 12, the succeeding Section 27 would be
rendered otiose. Under the well settled cannons of interpretation, we cannot
attribute surplusage to the legislature. The aforesaid conclusion is fortified by
the following observation in Satish Chander Ahuja, supra.
“Considering Section 12(2) and Section 26(3), read with Section
25(2), even the legislature envisaged the two independent proceedings, one
before the Magistrate under the DV Act and another proceeding other than
the proceedings under the DV Act.”                  (emphasis supplied)
68      We, therefore, hold that the jurisdiction to entertain and decide a
complaint under Section 12 must be reckoned with reference to Section 27 of
the D.V. Act alone. Section 26, on the other hand, applies only if the reliefs
under Sections 18-22 of the D.V. Act are sought in other legal proceedings i.e.,
legal proceedings other than Section 12 of the D.V. Act.
69      Coming to the aspect of transfer, we must take notice of two
cardinal principles set out in the majority view in A.R. Antulay v R.S.
Nayak46. The first principle has been explained by Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. in
“The power to create or enlarge jurisdiction is legislative in
character, so also the power to confer a right of appeal or to take away
a right of appeal. Parliament alone can do it by law and no court,
whether superior or inferior or both combined can enlarge the
jurisdiction of a court or divest a person of his rights of revision and
appeal.”
The second principle is found in the concurring judgment of S.
Ranganathan, J wherein it is observed thus:
“A power of transfer postulates that the court to
which transfer or withdrawal is sought is competent to
exercise jurisdiction over the case.”
Thus, the basic principle governing transfer is that the transferee court must be
competent to exercise jurisdiction over the case which is transferred from the
transferor court. Applying this test, the question would then be : could a Family
Court or the Civil Court entertain an application under Section 12 of the Family
Courts Act? The answer, in our considered opinion, is in the negative. The
court, designated under Section 27 of the D.V.Act, is the Court of the
Magistrate. We would be doing violence to the plain language of this provision
by telescoping Section 26 into it.
70      Our attention was then drawn to Section 7(2)(b) of the Family
Courts Act, 1984, to contend that the Family Court derives its jurisdiction over
D.V. cases by virtue of that provision. We are unable to countenance this
submission. Section 7(2)(b) of the Family Courts Act states that a Family Court
may exercise “such other jurisdiction as may be conferred on it by any other
enactment”. It is obvious from a reading of Section 7(2)(b) that it does not vest
any jurisdiction with the Family Court. All that it does is to enable jurisdiction
to be vested with a Family Court through an enactment. We find nothing in the
D.V. Act vesting jurisdiction in the Family Court to entertain an application
under Section 12. Indeed, Section 27 of the D.V. Act militates against this
view. What the D.V. Act does under Section 26 is, to empower the Family
Court, Civil Court/Criminal Court also to grant reliefs under the D.V. Act in
other legal proceedings. Like the Magistrate, the Family Court, Civil Court and
Criminal Court do not have the original jurisdiction to entertain an application
under Section 12 of the D.V. Act.
71    Lastly, our attention  was    drawn      to     Sandip       Mrinmoy
Chakrabarty, supra, decided by a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court.
The facts are that a petition was filed by the wife under the Special Marriage
Act for divorce on the ground of adultery and cruelty. The husband filed a
counter claim seeking divorce on the ground of cruelty. The wife followed this
up with a D.V. complaint before the Magistrate at Pune. The husband
approached the High Court and sought transfer of the D.V. case to the Family
Court to be decided along with the divorce case(s) by invoking Section 24
C.P.C. A learned single judge of the High Court ordered the transfer and the
Family Court, Pune, passed a composite order disposing the D.V. case and the
divorce case by framing separate issues. The question for consideration before
the Bombay High Court was as follows:
“whether Appeal under section 19(1) of the Family Courts Act, 1984 is
maintainable also in respect of the reliefs granted by the Family Court
claimed under the provisions of Domestic Violence Act along with the
reliefs granted in the divorce proceedings under the provisions of
Special Marriage Act by a common judgment or not.”
The High Court went on to observe:
“A perusal of the relief granted by the Family Court in favour of the
respondent on the application filed by the respondent under the
provisions of the Domestic Violence Act clearly indicates that neither
any of the reliefs falling under sections 31 or 33 were sought nor were
granted by the Family Court. All the reliefs sought by the respondent
and granted by the Family Court were under the provisions of sections
19 to 22 of the Domestic Violence Act, which were of the civil nature
and did not attract any offence punishable under criminal law.”
72      With due respect, we venture to point out that under the scheme of
the D.V. Act, reliefs are granted under Sections 18-22 of the Act. Section 31
contemplates a prosecution for breach of a protection order and is not a relief.
The Division Bench then goes on to say:
“The moment both the proceedings came to be clubbed by
judicial order of this Court and directed to be tried together, the
jurisdiction of the Family Court became abundantly clear over the
proceedings under the Domestic Violence Act. Resultantly, the order
passed in the proceedings became the orders passed by the learned
Judge of the Family Court for all purposes and therefore, it would be a
fallacy and myopic to term part of the order pertaining to the reliefs
under Domestic Violence Act as an order amenable to revisional
jurisdiction. This would amount to nothing but a self serving
interpretation. The proceedings under the provisions of Domestic
Violence Act having subsumed with the proceedings of Special
Marriage Act by virtue of the order of clubbing and consequently final
orders flowing therefrom, needless to say acquired the characters of
orders passed by the learned Judge of Family Court and nothing else.”
73      With very great respect, we are unable to concur with the aforesaid
observations, particularly, the observation that the D.V. proceedings were
subsumed into the proceeding for divorce. This finding appears to run counter
to the following observations of the Supreme Court in Satish Chander Ahuja,
“Therefore, on conjoint reading of Sections 12(2), 17, 19, 20, 22,
23, 25, 26 and 28 of the DV Act, it can safely be said that the
proceedings under the DV Act and proceedings before a civil court,
family court or a criminal court, as mentioned in Section 26 of the DV
Act are independent proceedings, like the proceedings under Section
125 CrPC for maintenance before the Magistrate and/or family court
and the proceedings for maintenance before a civil court/family court
for the reliefs under the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act.”
(emphasis supplied)
It is, thus clear, that a proceeding under Section 12 of the D.V. Act and a
proceeding in a Civil/Criminal or Family Court invoking Section 26 of the D.V.
Act are independent proceedings. Consequently, we are unable to persuade
ourselves to agree with the decision of the Bombay High Court in Sandip
Mrinmoy Chakrabarty, supra.
74      We now summarise our conclusions on the issue of transfer:
i.     The legislative scheme of the D.V. Act clearly envisages two
independent proceedings: proceedings before the Magistrate under
Section 12 of the D.V. Act and “proceedings before a Civil Court,
Family Court or a Criminal Court, as mentioned in Section 26 of the
D.V. Act” (vide paragraphs 140 & 144 of Satish Chander Ahuja,
supra).
ii.     Section 26 deals with “reliefs” in “other suits and proceedings” and does
not concern itself with Section 12 of the D.V. Act at all. Section 26 is an
enabling provision where reliefs provided in Sections 18-22 of the
D.V.Act may be sought in a “legal proceeding” pending before a Civil
Court, Family Court or a Criminal Court.
iii.      Similarly, such reliefs can be prayed for as part of other reliefs in
collateral proceedings before a Family Court/Civil Court/Criminal Court.
The following illustrations will give clarity:
i.   The wife files a divorce petition on the ground of
cruelty in the Family Court. In the same petition,
she can seek reliefs under Sections 18-22 r/w
Section 26 of the D.V. Act.
ii.   The husband files a petition for restitution of
conjugal rights in the Sub Court. The wife can file
a counter resisting the prayer and also seeking
reliefs under Sections 18-22 r/w Section 26 of the
In the above two illustrations, the Family Court/Sub Court is not
governed by the Code of Criminal Procedure. The enquiry for the reliefs
claimed under the D.V. Act will be held under the procedure that applies
to the Family Court or Sub Court, as the case may be. The appeals from
these Courts will be to the usual forum, viz., under Section 19 of the
Family Courts Act or under Section 96 read with Order XLI, C.P.C., as
the case may be.
iv.      Section 27 of the D.V. Act is the sole repository of jurisdiction for an
application under Section 12, ibid., and the Magistrate is the statutorily
designated forum to entertain an application under Section 12, ibid., and
also to try offences under the D.V. Act.
v.       The power of transfer postulates that the Court to which transfer or
withdrawal is sought, is competent to exercise jurisdiction over the case.
vi.       No power has been vested with the Family Court, either under the
D.V.Act or the Family Courts Act, 1984, to entertain an application
under Section 12 of the D.V. Act. Similarly, no power has been vested
with the Civil Court to entertain an application under Section 12 of the
vii.      Consequently, we hold that an application under Section 12 of the D.V.
Act cannot be transferred from the Court of the Magistrate, designated
under Section 27 of the D.V. Act, to the Family Court or the Civil Court.
Decisions of learned single judges which have held to the contra in
paragraphs 56 and 57, supra, will stand overruled.
viii.      We, therefore, uphold the first limb of the conclusion of the Division
Bench in paragraph 17(e) in P. Ganesan, supra, though for different
reasons. The second limb of paragraph 17(e) of the opinion in
P.Ganesan, supra, will stand overruled in the light of the well settled
principle that consent cannot confer jurisdiction on a court which does
not otherwise possess inherent jurisdiction (vide Raghunath Rai Bareja
v Punjab National Bank47).
ix.      We also uphold the direction in paragraph 52 (xi) of the decision in
Pathmanathan, supra, holding that the reliefs under Chapter IV of the
D.V. Act can also be claimed in a pending proceeding before a Civil,
Criminal or Family Court as a counter claim in the light of the decision in
Satish Chander Ahuja, supra.
75    We now summarise our conclusions to the questions set out in
paragraph 1 of this opinion:
a     A petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. challenging a proceeding
under Section 12 of the D.V. Act is not maintainable. A petition under Article
227 of the Constitution is maintainable on a limited ground of patent lack of
jurisdiction, as indicated in paragraphs 40 and 41, supra.
b     Except on the limited ground indicated, supra, jurisdiction under
Article 227 of the Constitution will not be exercised, as a measure of self-
imposed restriction, by-passing the statutory remedies under the D.V. Act in the
light of the decision of the Supreme Court in Virudhunagar Hindu Nadargal
Dharma Paribalana Sabai, supra.
c     In the light of the aforesaid conclusions, we uphold the decision of
N. Anand Venkatesh, J. in Pathmanathan, supra, including the directions set
out, in paragraph 52 in their entirety, though, in our view, the reference to
Section 483 Cr.P.C. therein, may not be appropriate. The decision of the
Division Bench in P. Ganesan, supra, to the extent that it is contrary to this
opinion, shall stand overruled. Ex consequenti, the decisions of learned single
judges in S.Gowrishankar, supra, Sathiyaseelan, supra,                  G.Jayakumar,
supra, Mohana Seshathri, supra, and other cases following or adopting the
line of reasoning therein, shall stand overruled, to the extent that they are
contrary to the view taken herein.
d     As a sequitur to the above, it must necessarily follow that the
petitions in this batch are not maintainable. We, therefore, see no useful
purpose in remitting the matter to the learned single judge to perform the
obsequies. Accordingly, exercising power under Order I Rule 7 of the
Appellate Side Rules, we hold that all the petitions filed under Section 482
Cr.P.C. shall stand dismissed at the SR stage itself, preserving all the rights and
contentions of the parties and granting liberty to move the Magistrate to agitate
their grievances, which shall be considered in consonance with the directions
set out in paragraph 52 of the decision in Pathmanathan, supra.
76    Before bringing the curtains down, for the sake of convenience
and clarity, we reiterate the following directions passed by the learned single
judge in Pathmanathan, supra, which shall now govern the disposal of
applications under the D.V. Act:
“i.     An application under Section 12 of the D.V. Act, is not a
complaint under Section 2(d) of the Cr.P.C. Consequently, the procedure
set out in Section 190(1)(a) & 200 to 204, Cr.P.C. as regards cases
instituted on a complaint has no application to a proceeding under the
D.V. Act. The Magistrate cannot, therefore, treat an application under the
D.V. Act as though it is a complaint case under the Cr.P.C.
ii.     An application under Section 12 of the Act shall be as set
out in Form II of the D.V. Rules, 2006, or as nearly as possible thereto.
In case interim ex-parte orders are sought for by the aggrieved person
under Section 23(2) of the Act, an affidavit, as contemplated under Form
III, shall be sworn to.
iii. The Magistrate shall not issue a summon under Section 61,
Cr.P.C. to a respondent(s) in a proceeding under Chapter IV of the D.V.
Act. Instead, the Magistrate shall issue a notice for appearance which
shall be as set out in Form VII appended to the D.V. Rules, 2006. Service
of such notice shall be in the manner prescribed under Section 13 of the
Act and Rule 12(2) of the D.V. Rules, and shall be accompanied by a
copy of the petition and affidavit, if any.
iv.     Personal appearance of the respondent(s) shall not be
ordinarily insisted upon, if the parties are effectively represented through
a counsel. Form VII of the D.V. Rules, 2006, makes it clear that the
parties can appear before the Magistrate either in person or through a
duly authorized counsel. In all cases, the personal appearance of relatives
and other third parties to the domestic relationship shall be insisted only
upon compelling reasons being shown. (See Siladitya Basak v. State of
v.      If the respondent(s) does not appear either in person or
through a counsel in answer to a notice under Section 13, the Magistrate
may proceed to determine the application ex parte.
vi.    It is not mandatory for the Magistrate to issue notices to all
parties arrayed as respondents in an application under Section 12 of the
Act. As pointed out by this Court in Vijaya Baskar (cited supra), there
should be some application of mind on the part of the Magistrate in
deciding the respondents upon whom notices should be issued. In all
cases involving relatives and other third parties to the matrimonial
relationship, the Magistrate must set out reasons that have impelled them
to issue notice to such parties. To a large extent, this would curtail the
pernicious practice of roping in all and sundry into the proceedings
before the Magistrate.
vii. As there is no issuance of process as contemplated under
Section 204, Cr.P.C. in a proceeding under the D.V. Act, the principle
laid down in Adalat Prasad v. Rooplal Jindal ((2004) 7 SCC 338) that
a process, under Section 204, Cr.P.C, once issued cannot be reviewed or
recalled, will not apply to a proceeding under the D.V. Act.
Consequently, it would be open to an aggrieved respondent(s) to
approach the Magistrate and raise the issue of maintainability and other
preliminary issues. Issues like the existence of a shared
household/domestic relationship etc., which form the jurisdictional basis
for entertaining an application under Section 12, can be determined as a
preliminary issue, in appropriate cases. Any person aggrieved by such an
order may also take recourse to an appeal under Section 29 of the D.V.
Act for effective redress (See V.K. Vijayalekshmi Amma v. Bindu
V., (2010) 87 AIC 367). This would stem the deluge of petitions
challenging the maintainability of an application under Section 12 of the
D.V. Act, at the threshold before this Court under Article 227 of the
viii. Similarly, any party aggrieved may also take recourse to
Section 25 which expressly authorises the Magistrate to alter, modify or
revoke any order under the Act upon showing change of circumstances.
ix.    In Kunapareddy (cited supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court
upheld the order of a Magistrate purportedly exercising powers under
Order VI, Rule 17 of The Civil Procedure Code, 1908 (hereinafter
referred to as “C.P.C.”), to permit the amendment of an application under
Section 12 of the D.V. Act. Taking a cue therefrom, it would be open to
any of the respondent(s), at any stage of the proceeding, to apply to the
Magistrate to have their names deleted from the array of respondents if
they have been improperly joined as parties. For this purpose, the
Magistrate can draw sustenance from the power under Order I Rule 10(2)
of the C.P.C. A judicious use of this power would ensure that the
proceedings under the D.V. Act do not generate into a weapon of
harassment and would prevent the process of Court from being abused by
joining all and sundry as parties to the lis.
x.     The Magistrates must take note that the practice of
mechanically issuing notices to the respondents named in the application
has been deprecated by this Court nearly a decade ago in Vijaya
Baskar (cited supra). Precedents are meant to be followed and not
forgotten, and the Magistrates would, therefore, do well to examine the
applications at the threshold and confine the inquiry only to those
persons whose presence before it is proper and necessary for the grant of
reliefs under Chapter IV of the D.V. Act.
xi.    In Satish Chandra Ahuja (cited supra), the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has pointed out the importance of the enabling provisions
under Section 26 of the D.V. Act to avoid multiplicity of proceedings.
Hence, the reliefs under Chapter IV of the D.V. Act can also be claimed
in a pending proceeding before a civil, criminal or family court as a
counter claim.
xii. While recording evidence, the Magistrate may resort to chief
examination of the witnesses to be furnished by affidavit
(See Lakshman v. Sangeetha, (2009) 3 MWN (Cri) 257. The
Magistrate shall generally follow the procedure set out in Section 254,
Cr.P.C. while recording evidence.
xiii. Section 28(2) of the Act is an enabling provision permitting
the Magistrate to deviate from the procedure prescribed under Section
28(1), if the facts and circumstances of the case warrants such a course,
keeping in mind that in the realm of procedure, everything is taken to be
permitted       unless     prohibited      (See Muhammad                 Sulaiman
Khan v. Muhammad Yar Khan, (1888) 11 ILR All 267).
xiv. A petition under Article 227 of the Constitution may still be
maintainable if it is shown that the proceedings before the Magistrate
suffer from a patent lack of jurisdiction. The jurisdiction under Article
227 is one of superintendence and is visitorial in nature and will not be
exercised unless there exists a clear jurisdictional error and that manifest
or substantial injustice would be caused if the power is not exercised in
favour of the petitioner. (See Abdul Razak v Mangesh Rajaram
Paribalana Sabai v Tuticorin Educational Society (2019) 9 SCC 538).
In normal circumstances, the power under Article 227 will not be
exercised, as a measure of self-imposed restriction, in view of the
corrective mechanism available to the aggrieved parties before the
Magistrate, and then by way of an appeal under Section 29 of the Act.”
77     The order of reference dated 12.08.2022 is, thus, answered on the
aforesaid terms.
We place on record our appreciation to all the members of the bar for
their able assistance to us in answering the reference, that too on a holiday, viz.,
38281 and 38330 of 2022
Today, after the orders were pronounced, the members of the bar submitted
that applying the law laid down as it obtained earlier, several applications under
Section 12 of the D.V. Act that were pending before the various Magistrates have
been transferred to the Family Courts or to the Civil Courts, as the case may be, on
the orders of this Court and therefore, an order could be passed by this Court
retransferring the said cases, to the Court of the Magistrate concerned, where, the
applications under Section 12 of the D.V. Act were originally pending.
We are afraid that we cannot accede to this request as those transfers were
effected by judicial orders which cannot be upset wholesale, though we have held
in this batch of cases that such a transfer is impermissible. In other words, this
Full Bench cannot set at naught, the earlier judicial orders and can only lay down
the law in answer to the reference made to us. That apart, the disputes are
essentially matrimonial in nature and it may further prolong the agony of the
parties if they are tossed from one Court to another, from time to time.