The vires of the Rule 14(2) of the Assam Secondary Education
(Provincialisation) Service Rules, 2003 (hereinafter referred as “ the Rules
of 2003”) has been questioned by the petitioner in the present writ
petition. The petitioner was initially appointed as a Graduate Teacher in
C.S. Rawanapur Higher Secondary School, Majuli by an order dated
12.10.1988 issued by the Inspector of Schools, Jorhat District Circle. By
order dated 16.06.1994 issued by the Director of Secondary Education,
Assam, she was transferred from C.S. Rawanapur Higher Secondary
School, Majuli to Sarojini Devi Uccha Balika Bidyalaya, Chengeligaon,
Jorhat. She was also appointed as In-charge, Headmistress of the Sarojini
Devi Uccha Balika Bidyalaya, Chengeligaon, Jorhat vide the order dated
26.04.2016 issued by the Director of Secondary Education, Assam upon
the post falling vacant due to the retirement of the previous incumbent.
During the relevant period of time in response to an advertisement issued
by the concerned authorities in the year 2015, she applied for and was
selected as the Assistant Headmistress of the School. In terms of the said
selection by order dated 05.08.2017, the petitioner was promoted to the
post of Assistant Headmistress of Sarojini Devi Uccha Balika Bidyalaya,
Chengeligaon, Jorhat. Although she was appointed as the Assistant
Headmistress and had joined in a substantive post, she continued to also
discharge her services as the In-charge, Headmistress of the said school
2.     The Department of Secondary Education, Government of Assam
advertised the post of Headmaster along with other posts lying vacant
including those which are likely to fall vacant by 31.12.2017. In response
to the said advertisement, the petitioner as well as respondent No. 5
applied for the post of Headmistress of Sarojini Devi Ucchal Balika
Bidyalaya, Chengeligaon, Jorhat. In the selection pursuant to the said
advertisement, respondent No. 5 was selected for the post of
Headmistress in Sarojini Devi Uccha Balika Bidyalaya, Chengeligaon,
Jorhat. Being aggrieved, the present writ petition has been filed
challenging the validity of Rule 14(2) of the Assam Secondary Education
(Provincialisation)   Service  Rules,   2003  as   well    as   praying   for
consequential order for setting aside the impugned selection of the
respondent No. 5 and also for setting aside the order dated 09.12.2019
issued by the Department of Secondary Education, Assam promoting the
respondent No. 5 as the Headmistress of Sarojini Devi Uccha Balika
Bidyalaya, Chengeligaon, Jorhat in place of the writ petitioner.
3.    The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that under the Rules
of 2003, the post of Headmaster is included in the cadre of Class-II
(Senior) and the post of Assistant Headmaster is included in the cadre
Class-II (Junior) under the Rules. The post of Graduate Teacher is also
included in the cadre of Class-II (Junior). The learned counsel for the
petitioner submits that the provisions for recruitment to the post of
Headmaster/ Assistant Headmaster interalia is prescribed under Rule 14
of the Rules of 2003. He strenuously submits that although under Rule
14(2), it is prescribed that the post of Headmaster shall be filled upon by
promotion from school wise seniority list on the recommendation of the
State Selection Board, Assam and the selection of the incumbent shall be
based upon seniority and satisfactory ACR for the three (3) consecutive
years, but it is also provided that the seniority shall be determined from
the date of receiving the Graduate Scale as per Rule 24(2). The learned
counsel for the petitioner submits that it is this provision for deciding the
seniority on the basis of receiving Graduate Scale which is opposed to the
scheme of the Rules and more particularly the class and cadre specified
under the Rules. As such to the extent the Rule provides for deciding the
seniority on the basis of receipt of Graduate Scale of Pay as per Rule
24(2), the instant Rule i.e. Rule 14(2) is violative of Article 14 of the
Constitution of India as it has the effect of treating two different posts in
the cadre to be equal for the purposes of being feeder posts for
promotion to the post of Head Master of the School. According to the
learned counsel for the petitioner, the respondent No. 5 was not eligible
for the selection to the post of Head Master for the years 2014, 2015 and
2016 as she did not fulfill the eligibility criteria because she did not
acquire the requisite qualification of B.Ed Degree. On the contrary, the
petitioner had all the requisite qualifications. She was a Master Degree
Holder as well as B.Ed Degree holder and consequently she was selected
for promotion to the post of Assistant Headmistress in the year 2017. The
petitioner having been promoted to the post of Assistant Headmistress
with effect from 05.08.2017, her seniority and the seniority of respondent
No. 5 cannot be equated. The learned counsel for the petitioner urged
that the seniority in terms of receipt of the Graduate Scale can only be
used as a yardstick to decide the seniority, provided the incumbents are
holding the similar posts. The post of Assistant Headmistress is a higher
post drawing a higher salary and the incumbent is also required to
perform the higher responsibilities. Therefore, the determination of
seniority from the date of receipt of Graduate Scale as prescribed under
Rule 14(2) has the effect of treating two unequal persons as equal and
therefore it offends the scheme of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
The learned counsel also submits that as the petitioner was transferred
from C.S. Rawanapur Higher Secondary School, Majuli to Sarojini Devi
Uccha Balika Bidyalaya, Chengeligaon, Jorhat, her seniority in respect of
the earlier school has not been counted as well. The learned counsel for
the petitioner therefore submits that the Rule 14(2) in so far as it decides
the seniority between the incumbent from the date of receipt of Graduate
Scale should be suitably interfered with and set aside. The learned
counsel for the petitioner submits that the provision of Rule 14(2) in so
far as it provides for seniority to be decided on the basis of receipt of
Graduate Scale is arbitrary as it seeks to equate the seniority of two posts
which are not equal in hierarchy. The learned counsel submits that the
feeder post to the post of Assistant Head Master is a graduate teacher,
therefore, the seniority to be counted from the date of receipt of
Graduate Scale cannot be the yardstick for determining the seniority for a
person who in the meantime had been promoted to the post of Assistant
4.    The learned Government Advocate appearing for the Department
submits that the matter in respect of the vires of Rule 14(2) had already
been dealt with by a Co-ordinate Bench of this Court in Kripa Sindhu Das
Vs. State of Assam & Ors reported in 2020(1) GLT 545. The learned
counsel for the Department submits that since the Judgment in Kripa
Sindhu Das (Supra) upheld the vires of Rule 14(2), no further deliberation
on the matter is called for as the issue raised in the writ petition in similar
to the issue raised in the writ petition in the case of Kripa Sindhu Das
5.    The learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 5 supports
the contention of the learned Government counsel that the issue
pertaining to the vires of Rule 14 (2) of the Rules of 2003 had already
been upheld in Kripa Sindhu Das (Supra). He submits that this matter is
squarely covered by the Judgment and Order dated 16.08.2019 passed in
Kripa Sindhu Das (Supra) and should therefore be dismissed.
6.    We have heard the learned counsels for the parties and have
perused the pleadings on record. It would be necessary to refer to the
relevant Rules before proceeding further in the matter. Rule 3 of the
Rules 2003 lays down the classes on the cadre. Rule 14 provides for
Recruitment to the Post of Vice Principal/Head Master/ Head Mistress/
Superintendent/ Asstt. Head Master/ Asstt. Head Mistress of High/ HS/HS
& MP School and Rule 24(2) provides for seniority. The said Rules are
3. Classes and Cadres - (1) The service in provincialised School
shall consist of the teaching and non-teaching staff. The teaching
staff shall consist of following classes and cadres, each one of those
constituting a distinct and separate cadre as on the commencement
of these rules, namely: - (a) Class II (Senior): - It includes the cadres
of - (i) Principal; (ii) Vice-Principal; (iii) Post-Graduate Teacher; (iv)
Headmaster/Superintendent; (b) Class II (Junior): - It includes the
cadres of - (i) Assistant Headmaster/Assistant Superintendent; (ii) (a)
Graduate Teacher, (b) Hindi Teacher having Bachelor Degree from any
recognized University, (c) Classical Teacher (Sanskrit/Arabic/Language
teacher) having Bachelor Degree from any recognized University; (iii)
Demonstrator; (iv) Senior Classical Teacher without Bachelor Degree;
Master/Asstt. Head Mistress of High/HS/HS & MP School- (1)
The post of Vice-Principal shall be filled up by promotion on the basis
of combined seniority in the School among the Graduate and Post-
Graduate Teachers with minimum 10 (ten) years of teaching
experience in case of Post Graduate teachers and 12 years teaching
experience, in case of Graduate teacher subject to Page No.# 7/27
satisfactory Annual Confidential Report for 3 (three) consecutive
years. Selection shall made on the basis of recommendation of the
State Selection Board. The seniority of teachers in the Schools shall
be determined as per provision under Rule 24 (1). (2) The post of
Head Master/Head Mistress and Superintendent shall be filled up by
promotion from the School-wise seniority list on the recommendation
of the State Selection Board. The selection of Head Master/Head
Mistress/Superintendent shall be based upon seniority and
satisfactory Annual Confidential Report for 3 (three) consecutive
years. The seniority shall be determined from the date of receiving
graduate scale as per Rule 24 (2). (3) The post of Assistant Head
Master/Asstt. Head Mistress/Assistant Superintendent shall be filled
up by promotion from the school-wise seniority list of Assistant
Teachers on recommendation of the State Selection Board. The
selection shall also be based be upon satisfactory Annual Confidential
Report for last 3 (three) years and seniority of service in graduate
scale of pay with a minimum 7 years of teaching experience. In case
of amalgamated High School the Head Master/Head Mistress of the
M.E. School is eligible for selection as Assistant Head Master/Asstt.
Head Mistress subject to condition that - (i) the incumbent should
have at least 5 years of teaching experience in M.E. School if he/she
is the founder Head Master/Head Mistress of the M.E. School; (ii) the
incumbent should have at least 10 years of teaching experience in
M.E. School if he/she is not the founder Head Master/Head Mistress
of the M.E. School. The seniority shall be determined as per provision
of Rule 24(2). (4) Eligibility for the post of Head Master/Head
Mistress/Asstt. Page No.# 8/27 Superintendent of High/High
Madrassa School as the case may be - (i) the minimum qualification
for the post of Head Master/Head Mistress/Superintendent/Assistant
Head Master/Asstt. Head Mistress/Assistant Superintendent shall be
graduate in Arts, Science or Commerce with B.T. or B.Ed. degree; (ii)
He/She must possess at least 10 years of teaching experience as
Graduate Teacher; (iii)He/She must possess at least seven years of
teaching experience as Graduate teacher to be an Assistant Head
24. Seniority.- 2) If a member of the service in a cadre fails to join
the appointment within the initial 15 days of receipt of the order of
appointment or within the extended period as mentioned in rule 19,
but joins later, his seniority shall be determined in accordance with
the date of joining.
7.    The Rules extracted above defines the class and cadre under Rule 3
where it is seen that both posts of Assistant Head Master and the post of
Graduate Teacher are included in Class-II (Junior) cadre. Rule 14(2)
prescribes promotion to the posts of Headmaster/Headmistress and
Superintendent from the school-wise seniority list on recommendation by
the State Selection Board and that the seniority will be from the date of
receipt of Graduate Scale as per Rule 24(2).
8.    In the Judgment of Kripa Sindhu Das (Supra), it is seen that in the
said matter vires of Rule 3, Rule 14(2), Rule 24, and Rule 25 of the Rules
of Assam Secondary Education (Provindialised) Service Rules, 2003 have
been questioned by the petitioner therein. The vires of the said Rules
have been put to challenge by the petitioner therein on the following
(i)   The post of Head Master and Assistant Head Master in a High
School are to be filled up by way of promotion, but in both the cases the
feeder cadre is that way of Graduate Teacher. But the cadre of Assistant
Head Master although a higher post post and drawing a higher salary is
not a feeder cadre to fill up the post of Head Master.
(ii)  The scale of pay of Assistant Head Master is higher than that of
the Graduate Teacher, which difference in the pay structure have been
maintained in the Assam Services (Revision of Pay) Rules, 2017. From
the said classification, it is clear for all intents and purposes that the
cadre of Assistant Head Master is a higher cadre than that of the cadre of
Graduate Teacher. The effect of Rule 24(2) and Rule 25 of the Rule of
2003 are that for fixation of inter se seniority of all the members of the
feeder cadre in the Service are place in a single Gradation List on the
basis of date of appointment, date of joining of School, receipt of
Graduate Scale Etc. There is no provision of placing of Assistant Head
Master in a Higher position than Graduate Teacher in the Gradation List
by virtue of the incumbent have been promoted to a higher post with
higher salary and greater responsibility.
As such the contention of the petitioner in Kripa Sindhu Das (Supra)
was that the incumbent in the cadre of Assistant Head Master cannot be
equally treated at par with incumbent in the feeder cadre of Graduate
Teacher for the purposes of promotion to the cadre of Head Master in the
9.    The Co-ordinate Bench of this Court considered the relevant Rules
and contentions made by the parties. The Co-ordinate Bench held that as
the Rules permit, there is no infirmity in taking School-wise seniority in
the cadre of Graduate Teacher as the basis for considering the inter se
seniority and also for the purposes of considering the incumbents in the
feeder cadre for promotion to the next higher post. The Co-ordinate
Bench negated the challenge made by the petitioner therein that inclusion
of only the cadre of Graduate Teacher as the feeder cadre for promotion
to the cadre of Head Master in a School, without any reference to the
intermediate higher cadre of Assistant Head Master, does not diminish the
chance of promotion of the Assistant Head master to the next higher post
of Head Master as compared to the Graduate Teachers. It was held that
the right to be considered for promotion is a fundamental right, while the
right to promotion is (not) fundamental right. It was held that the right of
the Assistant Head Master to be promoted to the post of Head Master is
not denied or diminished as he still can be promoted to the post of Head
Master by taking into account his seniority in the cadre of Graduate
Teacher and therefore his chance of getting promoted to the post of Head
Master is not lost. It was also held that in High Schools having five (5)
Classes i.e. from Class-VI to Class-X, the cadres of Head Master, Assistant
Head Master and Graduate Teacher exists. But in Schools having two (2)
Classes i.e. Class IX and Class X, the cadres of Head Master and Graduate
Teacher exists and but there is no cadre of Assistant Head Master. As per
the strength of cadres provided in Schedule-III(A)-Teaching, the number
of posts in the cadre of Assistant Head Master is lesser than the number
of posts in the cadre of Head Master in the High Schools in the State. The
cadre of Head Master in both the types of High Schools is a single post
cadre. The cadre of Assistant Head Master in High Schools having five (5)
Classes is also a single post cadre. However, the cadre of Graduate
Teachers are available in both the types of High Schools. It was further
noticed that the post of both Head Master and Assistant Head Master are
to be filled up by promotion from the numbers of service on the basis of
School-wise seniority. This Court held that if the contention of the
petitioner to the effect that the Assistant Head Master is to be made in
the feeder cadre for the promotion to the cadre of Head Master, to the
exclusion of a Graduate Teacher, then in Schools having the post of
Assistant Head Master as the selection is made School-wise, there will be
only one incumbent available for selection to vacant post of Head Master.
If the said incumbent is not found suitable then the post of Head Master
is likely to remain vacant.
11. As regards Schools where there are no Assistant Head Master, it was
held that when a vacancy in the post of Head Master arises, in the
absence of Graduate Teacher being made a feeder cadre, the post of
Head Master can never be filled up.
12. On the basis of the reasoning given, this Court came to a finding
that no fundamental right of any members of the service has been
violated and the keeping the over-all effects and workability of the
provisions impugned, it was held that the impugned provisions did not
result of any kind of unfairness, arbitrariness and irrationality to the
incumbent in the cadre of Assistant Head Master. The said writ petition
was accordingly found to be devoid of merit and dismissed.
13. We have carefully perused the Judgment of the Co-ordinate Bench
as discussed above. The issue raised in the present proceedings have
already been specifically dealt with by this Court in Kripa Sindhu Das
(Supra). We are in complete agreement with the views arrived at by the
learned Co-ordinate Bench of this Court. There are no averments or
submissions made that the Judgment rendered by the Coordinate Bench
in Kripa Sindhu Das (Supra) requires any reconsideration. Accordingly, we
find no reasons to take a different view in the present proceedings, from
the view taken by the Co-ordinate Bench in Kripa Sindhu Das (Supra).
13.    Accordingly, we find no merit in the writ petition and the same is
therefore, dismissed.