46502/2022 (for exemption)
Allowed, subject to all just exceptions.
The applications shall stand disposed of.
1.     This writ petition is directed against the order dated 18 October
2022 passed by the Divisional Commissioner acting as the Appellate
Authority under the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior
Citizens Act, 2007 [“the 2007 Act”]. In terms of the said order, the
prayer for placing the order of the District Magistrate in abeyance
during the pendency of the appeal has been negated.
2.     Learned counsel for the petitioner would submit that that in
light of the serious civil dispute which was pending inter partes and
also forms subject matter of the civil suit coupled with the rights
which are claimed by the petitioner in the property itself, the
Divisional Commissioner has clearly erred in proceeding to reject the
application for stay. It was additionally contended that since the
3.      Having heard learned counsel for the petitioner, this Court is of
the considered opinion that no interference is warranted with the order
impugned for the following reasons.
4.      It becomes relevant to note that the forums which stand created
under the 2007 Act are neither obliged nor placed under a duty to
render categorical findings with respect to the civil rights which are
claimed by parties. The primordial consideration of those proceedings
is to safeguard the interest of the senior citizens and to ensure that they
are not harassed or ill-treated in their twilight years.
5.      Dealing with considerations which would weigh with the
Appellate Authority while considering applications for stay in those
proceedings, this Court in Virender Singh vs. PR Secretary Cum
Divisional Commissioner & Ors. [W.P.(C) 14149/2022] has held as
“3. While in the case of ordinary civil litigation, the issue of grant
of stay is governed by the principles of prima facie case, balance of
convenience and irreparable loss with courts bearing in mind the
need to preserve the rights of parties inter se during the pendency
of proceedings, the primordial consideration in proceedings under
the 2007 Act is the necessity to protect and secure the life and
property of the complainant senior citizen/s. While dealing with an
application for stay that may be made in a pending appeal under
the 2007 Act, the appellate authority would have to necessarily
take into consideration the nature of evidence that was placed
before the Tribunal and constrained it to frame orders for eviction.
If it finds that the order of eviction is predicated upon cogent and
reliable material that evidences harassment and ill-treatment, the
ends of justice may warrant the order of eviction being permitted to
run its course and the offending parties being required to remove
themselves from the premises till such time as the appeal is
decided.
4. The Court notes that at that stage the authorities administering
the provisions of the 2007 Act are to primarily weigh in
consideration the imperatives of securing the physical and mental
well-being of the senior citizens and their security bearing in mind
the predominant objective and purpose of the 2007 Act. In such
situations and unlike civil litigation, a prayer for the status quo
being maintained is not liable to be granted as a matter of course.
This since the continuance of the offending parties in the premises
may itself cause irreparable damage and perpetuate the mental and
physical torture which the senior citizens may have suffered in the
past and had compelled them to initiate proceedings under the 2007
5. The appellate authority would also be obliged to bear in mind
that the order of eviction would have come to be made after due
contest with an opportunity of hearing having been duly provided
to parties by the Tribunal. The Court observes that at the interim
stage and where the appellate authority comes to the prima facie
conclusion that the order of the Tribunal is not shown to suffer
from a patent or manifest error or where the ultimate direction of
eviction is not ex facie untenable, the ends of justice may merit
parties being required to separate and await the final outcome of
the appeal.
6. Ultimately it would be the facts of each case which would merit
examination and evaluation in order to guide the exercise of the
power to stay as conferred upon the appellate authority. All that the
Court seeks to emphasize is that the power to grant interim stay is
not to be exercised mechanically or as a matter of rote. The mere
fact that the appeal has been entertained would also not and
necessarily warrant the order of the Tribunal being placed in
abeyance. It would be the individual facts of each case on a
consideration of which the appellate authority would have to
consider whether interim protection is liable to be accorded to
parties against whom allegations may have been levelled by the
senior citizen/s. The power to grant interim relief would ultimately
have to be left to the sound and judicious discretion of the appellate
authority.
7. In the facts of the present case, the Court notes that the
conclusions with respect to harassment and ill treatment which
came to be recorded by the SDM and formed the basis for the order
of the Tribunal were neither questioned nor assailed. In view of the
aforesaid, the Court finds no justification to interfere with the order
impugned.
8. The writ petition shall consequently stand dismissed.”
6.     Since learned counsel for the petitioner has failed to point out
any material perversity in the order that was passed by the District
Magistrate and which had constrained it to frame directions for
eviction, the Court finds no ground to interfere with the impugned
order. While arriving at the aforesaid conclusion, the Court has also
weighed in mind the principles which were enunciated in Virendra
Singh and have been extracted hereinabove.
7.      Accordingly, and for the aforesaid reasons, the Court finds no
ground to interfere with the order impugned. The writ petition fails