This petition is filed by the petitioner-accused No.2
under Section 482 OF Cr.P.C           for setting aside the
judgment of conviction and sentence passed by the 27th
Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Bengaluru in
C.C.No.22746/2017 dated 2.1.2023 for having convicted
petitioner for the offence punishable under Section 138 of
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (hereinafter referred as
2.    The   office   raised  the  objection  regarding
maintainability of this petition filed under section 482 of
Cr.P.C., as the petitioner being the accused convicted in
the trial court, requires to file appeal under section 374 of
3.   Heard, Sri. Sandesh J. Chouta, learned senior
Counsel for petitioner.
4.   The learned senior counsel has contended that
the criminal petition filed under section 482 of Cr.P.C is
maintainable, even though the statutory right of the
accused for filing appeal is available, therefore filing this
petition is maintainable.  Hence, prayed for over ruling the
office objections.
5. The learned counsel relied upon the judgments of
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Punjab State
Traders and Ors reported in (2011) 14 SCC 615 and in
case of Vijay and another Vs State of Maharashtra
and Anr reported in (2017) 13 SCC 317.
6.   Having heard the arguments and perused the
records, it is an admitted fact that the accused was a
convicted accused by the trial court for the offence
punishable under Section 138 of NI Act. The contention of
the learned senior counsel is that while convicting the
accused No.2, who is only Managing Director of the
company but the trial court acquitted the accused No.1
who is the Company.         Therefore, there is an error
committed by the trial court in acquitting the Company
from the charges and convicting only the Managing
Director, which is against the principles laid down by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in various cases.      Therefore, this
petition is maintainable under section 482 of Cr.P.C.
7.   The learned senior counsel relied upon the
judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Punjab State
Traders and Ors reported in (2011) 14 SCC 615 where
Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that even the alternative
remedy of filing appeal is available, but there is no
absolute bar to entertain the petition under section 482 of
Cr.P.C. I have verified the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the said cases, where the private complaint filed
by the complainant came to be dismissed for default which
falls under section 256 of Cr.P.C.      On perusal of the
provisions of the section 256 of Cr.P.C which defines that
closing   the   proceedings   amounts    to   an  acquittal.
Therefore, an appeal      can also be filed under section
378(4) of Cr.P.C which is a statutory right and the parties
can also invoke the provisions of section 482 of Cr.P.C.
This court in various cases entertained section 482 of
Cr.P.C., where the complaint was dismissed for non
prosecution or default of not taking steps, even though an
alternative statutory remedy is available, the High Court
can also exercise the power under section 482 of Cr.P.C as
both remedies are before the High Court and not before
8.    Another case reported in case of Vijay and
another Vs State of Maharashtra reported in (2017)
13 SCC 317, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that
section 397 of Cr.P.C., is attracted against all the orders
except the interlocutory orders, even mere availability of
alternative   remedy    cannot   be   a   ground   to  dis-
entitlement of     relief under section 482 of Cr.P.C.    The
law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in respect of
quashing the FIR for the IPC offences or any other
offences, this Court can entertain the petitions filed under
Section 482 of Cr.P.C for quashing the petitions and FIR.
Therefore, this ruling is not applicable to the case on hand,
as this petition is filed for setting aside the judgment of
conviction and sentence passed by the trial court, even in
the case of Punjab State case stated supra, there is an
alternative remedy available in respect of 378 of Cr.P.C.
This court entertaining 482 of Cr.P.C, where there is no
evidence led by the parties and there is no final judgment
of conviction or acquittal after the trial in those cases.
Therefore, the High Court can entertain Section 482 of
Cr.P.C, if the complaint is dismissed for non-prosecution or
dismissed for default under section 256 of Cr.P.C.
9.    Whereas, the present case on hand, the
petitioner is challenging the conviction and sentence
passed by the trial court by exercising the power under
section 255 of Cr.P.C. Therefore, the petitioner is required
to file appeal under section 374 (2) of Cr.P.C before the
Sessions Judge, where the first appellate court required to
re-appreciate evidence on record and pass the final
judgment      and   thereafter  the  aggrieved   parties  can
approach high court under section 397 of Cr.P.C, if any
concurrent finding of both the Court below.      Here in this
Court, this Court cannot re-appreciate the evidence on
record, both on facts and law, which is required to be dealt
with, by the appellate court in the appeal under Section
374 of Cr.P.C.        This Court cannot re-appreciate any
evidence on record and give findings, it is only extra
ordinary power for quashing the proceedings, since the
first  appeal   is   nothing   but  continuation  of  original
proceedings in appellate court.
If this petition filed under section 482 of Cr.P.C, is
entertained, the respondent will be deprived of right of
appeal before the appellate court and thereafter parties
can approach the High Court.
It appears the accused are following these back door
tactics in order to avoid the interim compensation going to
be imposed by the first appellate court under section 148
of NI Act.    Therefore, I am of the view the petition filed
under section 482 of Cr.P.C is not maintainable. The office
objection is sustained.
Hence,    the   petition    is   dismissed     as   not
Liberty is granted to the petitioner to file appeal
before the appropriate forum.         The office to return the
documents to the learned counsel for the petitioner.
Registry is directed to follow this order while raising