1.      Heard Ms. Aarushi Khare, learned Amicus Curiae for the appellant
and Sri Vinod Kumar Singh Parmar, learned AGA for the State.
2.      Present Criminal Appeal under Section 374(2) of the Cr.P.C. has
been preferred by accused-appellant Ishrat against the judgment and order
dated 20.10.1992 passed by Sri S.C. Nigam, Seventh Additional District
and Sessions Judge, Kanpur Nagar in Sessions Trial No.175 of 1990
whereby accused-appellant was convicted u/s 324 IPC and sentenced to
three years rigorous imprisonment. He was also convicted u/s 354 IPC
and sentenced to two years rigorous imprisonment. Both sentences were
to run separately.
3.       Prosecution story, in nutshell, as unfolded from written report
dated 29.11.1988 (Ex.Ka-1) is that informant Shaukat Ali (PW-1) filed
written report (Ex.Ka-1) transcribed by Mohd. Aslam, mentioning therein
that on 29.11.1988 between 01:00 PM to 03:00 PM, his minor daughter
aged about 4-5 years had gone to the house of one of the neighbours to
play. On the same day at about 03:00 PM, some people of the locality
were stated to have brought his minor daughter in a blood soaked
condition from the field and informed that some unknown person had
assaulted her private parts by a blade. The victim was taken to the hospital
for treatment. It has also been stated in the FIR that blood stained blade is
still lying in the field.
4.     On the basis of written report (Ex.Ka-1), Chik FIR (Ex.Ka-5) was
registered on 29.11.1988 at 09:15 PM as Case Crime No.274 of 1988,
under Section 324 IPC against unknown person. Thereafter investigation
was initiated.
5.     The investigation was taken up by the Investigating Officer
Mehfooz Ali, Sub-Inspector who after recording the statement of the
witnesses, preparing site plan, taking in possession the blood stained
blade and other materials, arrested the appellant and prepared the arrest
memo dated 1.12.1988, thereafter submitted the charge-sheet against him
6.     Charge against the appellant was framed by the Trial Court on
22.6.1990 u/s 324, 376/511 IPC. The appellant had claimed himself to be
juvenile at the time of offence but after the radiological examination, he
was found to be major. The trial was proceeded as such.
7.     In order to prove its case, the prosecution has examined ten
witnesses i.e. PW-1 Shaukat Ali (Informant), PW-2 Victim, PW-3 Dr.
Ashok Upadhyay, PW-7 Mohd. Javed, PW-8 Gulshan, PW-9 Shakeela and
PW-10 Mahfooj Ali. The Court was pleased to examine Dr. Ram Babu as
CW-1 to prove the ossification test report of the appellant wherein the age
of the appellant was found above 18 years.
8.     PW-1 informant is the father of the victim and has corroborated the
prosecution story. He has stated that the appellant had committed the
diabolic offence of severely cutting the private parts of his minor daughter
after having attempted to rape her. The witness was cross-examined by the
counsel for the appellant wherein he has stated that after lodging of the
FIR, he was informed by the victim that it was the appellant who had
committed the said crime to her as by the time of lodging of the FIR, she
was not in a condition to speak. He has proved his written report as
9.     PW-2 is the victim who has stated that the appellant had taken her
behind the bushes in the field by luring her to give her a toffee where she
was disrobed and her private part was cut by him with a blade. She has
also stated in the examination-in-chief that she had told about the name of
the appellant at the hospital. She had identified the appellant in the dock.
Nothing material could be extracted from her in cross-examination by the
defence counsel.
10.    PW-3 is Dr. Sushma Singh who has stated that the victim was in a
state of shock at the time of her medical examination and was not even
able to speak. Her blood pressure was found 180-50 mm Hg. Her internal
examination was conducted under general anesthesia. She had observed
that her private part was badly damaged and tear were present of size
06mm x 5mm and 08mm x .5mm. No spermatozoa were found by the
pathologist in the vaginal smear. Dr. Singh has further opined that there is
a possibility of sexual intercourse having been committed with the victim.
She has proved the medical examination report as Ex.Ka-2. As per the
Ossification test, the age of the victim was found to be four years. She has
even confirmed the time of the offence. Dr. Sushma Singh has further
stated that due to the serious condition of the victim, she had consulted
Senior Dr. Negi and Surgeon Dr. Bahadur and the medical examination of
the victim was conducted by her in their presence.
11.    PW-4 Ram Kishore is the formal witness. He has proved the FIR as
Ex.Ka-5 and the GD of the institution of the FIR as Ex.Ka-6.
12.    PW-5 Dr. H.N. Bahadur, Senior Consultant who has proved the bed
head ticket of the victim as Ex.Ka-7. The victim had undergone treatment
from 29.11.1988 to 23.12.1988.
13.    PW-6 Dr. Ashok Upadhyay who was the first person to examine the
victim on 29.11.1988 at about 03:45 PM and found following injuries on
her body.
“1. Horizontal incised wound 6cm x 1cm x muscle deep present on
the pubic region 6cm below the umbilicus fresh bleeding present.
2. Horizontal incised wound 8cm x 1cm x muscle deep present half
cm below injury no. One. Fresh bleeding present.
3. Horizontal incised wound 10cm x 2cm x muscle deep present
One & half cm below injury no. Two.
4. Multiple incised wounds over right labia majora region on its
upper surface & by the side ranging in size from 4cm x ¼cm to 1cm
x ¼cm in size depth not probed. Fresh bleeding present.
5. Multiple incised wounds over left labia region on its upper
surface & by its side ranging in size from 2cm x ¼cm to ½cm x
¼cm depth not probed. Fresh bleeding present.
6. Multiple small incised wounds present all along the margin of
right labia ranging in size from ¼cm x ¼cm to ½cm x ¼cm x depth
not probed. Fresh bleeding present.
7. Multiple small incised wounds present all along the margin of
left labia ranging in size from ¼cm x ¼cm to ½cm x ¼cm x depth
not probed. Fresh bleeding present.
All injuries are fresh caused by sharp edged object for
ascertaining the nature. All injuries kept under observation. Patient
admitted & referred to E.M.O. Dufferin Hospital for internal
examination of private parts and necessary action.”
14.    He opined that the said injuries could have been sustained by the
victim on 29.11.1988 between 1 to 2 PM.
15.    PW-7 Mohd. Javed is the independent witness. He has stated in his
examination-in-chief that he has not seen the occurrence but had heard of
it on 29.11.1988 at about 05:00 PM. He has not supported the prosecution
story and thus, was declared hostile by the public prosecutor and cross-
16.    PW-8 Gulshan is another independent witness who had also resiled
from his statement recorded by the Investigating Officer and has not
supported the prosecution version.
17.    PW-9 is the mother of the victim and has stated that about 15 days
before the occurrence, an altercation with the appellant had occurred over
watching television in her house. She has also corroborated the statement
of the victim.
18.    PW-10 Mehfooj Ali is the Investigating Officer who has proved
recovery memo of blood stained blade recovered from the place of
occurrence as Ex.Ka-8. He has proved the memo blood stained sand and
simple sand as Ex.Ka-9. Ex.Ka-10 is the letter for medical examination of
victim wherein Doctor has opined that the victim was found in an
unconscious state. He has further stated that the victim was not able to
speak at the time of her admission on 29.11.1988. Site plan has been
proved as Ex.Ka-11. Ex.Ka-12 is the memo of blood stained frock of the
victim. He has also proved the recovery memo of blood stained frock of
the victim as Ex.Ka-13. The charge-sheet has been proved as Ex.Ka-14.
19.    Thereafter, the statement of accused-appellant under Section 313
Cr.P.C. was recorded. He has stated that the prosecution story is false.
Appellant-accused Ishrat claimed that he has been falsely implicated in
the case to get the house vacated.
20.    On appreciation of evidence available before Trial Court and after
hearing parties, learned Sessions Judge convicted and sentenced accused-
appellant, Ishrat, as stated above, by judgment and order impugned in this
i) Whether the appellant had committed the said offence of assault
causing grievous hurt by dangerous weapon to the victim on
29.11.1988 between 1 PM to 3 PM?
ii) Whether the appellant had caused any assault or criminal force to
the victim with an intent to outrage her modesty?
21.   Ms. Aarushi Khare, learned Amicus Curiae appearing for the
appellant has argued that the appellant has been falsely implicated in the
present case. The FIR is delayed by about six hours and there is no
explanation of the said delay caused. The appellant is not named in the
FIR. During investigation, his name has come up in the statement of the
victim, informant and other witnesses. Learned Amicus Curiae has further
stated that there are several contradictions in the statements of the
witnesses. She has also stated that as per the statement of the mother of
the victim PW-9, the victim had come to the house of the appellant
walking although she has denied the said fact later on during further
cross-examination. She has referred to several contradictions in the said
statement of the prosecution witnesses, namely, PW-1, PW-2 & PW-9.
She has further stated that the blood stained blade and the blood stained
frock of the victim has not been seen for chemical examination by the
Investigating Officer. This is the serious lacuna in the prosecution story.
She has also stated at Bar that the offence is of the year 1988 and much
water has flown down the Thames, thus, the appellant is entitled to
acquittal. The witnesses are interested witnesses and the said fact stands
supported by the statements of appellant recorded u/s 313 Cr.P.C. The
independent witnesses PW-7 and PW-8 have turned hostile. The
prosecution story is falsified on account of absence of corroboration. She
has also stated that if the court is not inclined in allowing the appeal, the
appellant may be released to the period of sentence already undergone.
22.   Per contra, Sri Vinod Kumar Singh Parmar, learned AGA has
vehemently opposed the criminal appeal on the ground that the victim is a
child of tender age of four years. The offence of cutting her private parts
with a blade and also attempting to commit rape and outraging the
modesty of the victim has categorically been proved by the statement of
the PW-1 and PW-2 and has also been corroborated by PW-9 who
happens to be the mother of the victim. There are no material
contradictions in their statements. The treating Doctors have also
categorically corroborated the prosecution story and have even been asked
about the alleged time of offence regarding the injuries sustained by the
victim which further substantiate the prosecution allegations.
23.    Learned AGA has further stated that the FIR was naturally lodged
by the appellant as it was his priority to get the victim medically
examined as her private part was found mutilated and she was not in a
conscious state. The said delay stands explained by the statement of the
PW-1. The said fact has also been corroborated by the statement of PW-2
victim and PW-10 Sub-Inspector Mehfooj Ali, the Investigating Officer.
24.    Learned AGA has further stated that in the present scenario, no
independent witness is ready to depose against another person to face ire
of the accused later on in life. To buttress his argument, he has placed
much reliance on the judgement of Supreme Court in the case of Shiv
Ram and Another vs. State of U.P.1, and the operative part of para-16
"16. ...... The witnesses further admitted that many persons had gathered at the
place of occurrence, if this be so it was very much necessary for the
prosecution to examine some independent witnesses to lend assurance to the
credibility of the evidence of these two eyewitnesses. These submissions do not
impress us at all. Nowadays it is a common tendency that no outsider would
like to get involved in a criminal case much less in the crime of present
magnitude and, therefore, it was quite natural that no independent witness
would come forward to assist the prosecution. It is well settled that the
evidence of witnesses cannot be discredited only on the ground that they are
close relatives of the deceased persons. All that is required in such a situation
is that the court must scrutinize the evidence of such witnesses with utmost
care and caution. The magnitude of the present crime and nature of
prosecution evidence has put us on guard to appreciate the evidence of these
two eye witnesses with utmost care and caution. We have done this exercise
and we are unable to be persuaded to discard the evidence of these two
witnesses on the grounds urged before us. The evidence of both these witnesses
in our considered view is absolutely straightforward, unblemished and without
any infirmity. The first information report which was lodged within four hours,
naming all the accused also lends asurance to our conviction that the evidence
of these two witnesses is trustworthy and cannot be discarded. The contentions
of the learned counsel for the accused, therefore, stand rejected."
25.    Learned AGA has also stated that the prosecution story is itself
proved by the statements of PWs-1, 2 and 9 and they cannot be considered
as interested witnesses as there is nothing on record to suggest that the
appellant has been falsely implicated by the informant.
26.    This is one of the most serious and diabolic offence committed
against a minor girl of tender age of four years.
27.    Coming to the first point for determination, it is proved beyond
reasonable doubt by the statements of prosecution witnesses i.e. PW-1
informant, PW-2 victim, PW-3 Dr. Sushma Singh, PW-5 Dr. H.N.
Bahadur, PW-6 Dr. Ashok Upadhyay and PW-9 Shakeel, mother of the
victim that the appellant has committed the aforesaid heinous offence with
the victim of tender age. In the statements of prosecution witnesses, the
date, time and motive of offence also stands corroborated. The
identification of the appellant in the dock has been done by the PW-2
victim. The witnesses have not been cross-examined on this point by the
counsel for the appellant. Even the minor contradictions that had crept up
in the statement of the victim, have not been put to the Investigating
Officer as per the provision of Section 145 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872, thus, it also stands proved and unrebutted.
28.    Now, I proceed to consider second point for determination which is
in regard to commission of any assault or criminal force by the appellant
with the victim with an intent to outrage her modesty. The said point has
also been proved beyond reasonable doubt by the statements of the victim
and the doctors referred above.
29.    The learned Trial Court has rightly taken recourse of Section 222 of
Cr.P.C. wherein the allegations of commission of rape by the appellant
with the victim were not found. Although the internal examination report
of the victim supports it. However, the evidence regarding the
commission of offence punishable under Section 354 IPC was established
by the statement of the victim PW-2 and, therefore, on this count, learned
Trial Court has rightly convicted the appellant u/s 354 IPC, although, the
charge was framed u/s 376/511 IPC. The accused-appellant deserved
harsh punishment for the diabolic offence committed by him which
depicts his depraved mental status.
30.    Learned Amicus Curiae appearing for the appellant has pointed out
certain discrepancies in the statements of the prosecution witnesses. On
this count, this Court is of the considered view that it is but natural that
minor discrepancies and contradictions may appear in the statement of
witnesses. It is a settled law that in the evidence of untutored witnesses
such contradictions are bound to creep in. The witnesses have not been
examined in Court immediately after the offence. They have been
examined after about two years of the occurrence and some trivial and
minor contradictions are natural to come up in their statements as they are
not bound to possess a photographic memory.
31.    The said view has been vented by the Apex Court in Bharwada
Bhoginbhai Hirjibhai Vs. State of Gujarat 2, and the relevant paragraphs
no.5, 6 & 10 are as under:-
“5. ……… We do not consider it appropriate or permissible to enter upon a
reappraisal or reappreciation of the evidence in the context of the minor
discrepancies painstakingly highlighted by learned counsel for the appellant.
Over much importance cannot be attached to minor discrepancies. The
(1) By and large a witness cannot be expected to possess a
photographic memory and to recall the details of an incident. It is
not as if a video tape is replayed on the mental screen.
(2) ordinarily it so happens that a witness is overtaken by events.
The witness could not have anticipated the occurrence which so
often has an element of surprise. The mental faculties therefore
cannot be expected to be attuned to absorb the details.
(3) The powers of observation differ from person to person. What
one may notice, another may not. An object or movement might
emboss its image on one person's mind whereas it might go
unnoticed on the part of another.
(4) By and large people cannot accurately recall a conversation
and reproduce the very words used by them or heard by them.
They can only recall the main purport of the conversation. It is
unrealistic to expect a witness to be a human tape recorder.
(5) In regard to exact time of an incident, or the time duration of
an occurrence, usually, people make their estimates by guess
work on the spur of the moment 1.1 at the time of interrogation.
And one cannot expect people to make very precise or reliable
estimates in such matters. Again, it depends on the time- sense of
individuals which varies from person to person.
(6) Ordinarily a witness cannot be expected to recall accurately
the sequence of events which take place in rapid succession or in
a short time span. A witness is liable to get confused, or mixed up
when interrogated later on.
(7) A witness, though wholly truthful, is liable to be overawed by
the court atmosphere and the piercing cross examination made by
counsel and out of nervousness mix up facts, get confused
regarding sequence of events, or fill up details from imagination
on the spur of the moment. The sub-conscious mind of the witness
sometimes so operates on account of the fear of looking foolish or
being disbelieved though the witness is giving a truthful and
honest account of the occurrence witnessed by him-Perhaps it is a
sort of a psychological defence mechanism activated on the spur
of the moment.
6.      Discrepancies which do not go to the root of the matter and shake the
basic version of the witnesses therefore cannot be annexed with undue
importance. More so when the all important "probabilities-factor" echoes in
favour of the version narrated by the witnesses.
10. Without the fear of making too wide a statements or of overstating the case,
it can be said that rarely will a girl or a woman in India make false allegations
of sexual assault on account of any such factor as has been just enlisted. The
statement is generally true in the context of the urban as also rural Society. It
is also by and large true in the context of the sophisticated, not so
sophisticated, and unsophisticated society. Only very rarely can one
conceivably come across an exception or two and that too possibly from
amongst the urban elites. Because: (1) A girl or a woman in the tradition
bound non- permissive Society of India would be extremely reluctant even to
admit that any incident which is likely to reflect on her chastity had ever
occurred. (2) She would be conscious of the danger of being ostracised by the
Society or being looked down by the Society including by her own family
members, relatives, friends and neighbours. (3) She would have to brave the
whole world. (4) She would face the risk of losing the love and respect of her
own husband and near relatives, and of her matrimonial home and happiness
being shattered. (S) If she is unmarried, she would apprehend that it would be
difficult to secure an alliance with a suitable match from a respectable or an
acceptable family. (6) It would almost inevitably and almost invariably result
in mental torture and suffering to herself. (7) The fear of being taunted by
others will always haunt her. (8) She would feel extremely embarrassed in
account of the upbringing in a tradition bound society where by and large sex
is taboo. (9) The natural inclination would be to avoid giving publicity to the
incident lest the family name and family honour is brought into controversy.
(10) The parents of an unmarried girl as also the husband and members of the
husband's family of a married woman would also more often than not, want to
avoid publicity on account of the fear of social stigma on the family name and
family honour. (11) The fear of the victim herself being considered to be
promiscuous or in some way responsible for the incident regardless of her
innocence. (12) The reluctance to face interrogation by the investigating
agency, to face the court, to face the cross examination by Counsel for the
culprit, and the risk of being disbelieved, acts as a deterrent.”
32.    It has also been settled by the Apex Court in Rameshwar v. State of
Rajasthan3, that corroboration is not the sine qua non for a conviction in a
rape case.
“The rule, which according to the cases has hardened into one of law, is not
that corroboration is essential before there can be a conviction but that the
necessity of corroboration, as a matter of prudence, except where the
circumstances make it safe to dispense with it, must be present to the mind of
the judge .......
The only rule of law is that this rule of prudence must be present to the mind of
the Judge or the jury as the case may be and be understood and appreciated by
him or them. There is no rule of practice that there must, in every case, be
corroboration before a conviction can be allowed to stand.”
33.    Section 134 of Indian Evidence Act, 1872 provides that it is the
quality and not quantity that matters with respect to proving of fact. The
provision clearly states that no particular number of witnesses are required
to establish a case. In the case herein, the statement of the victim stands
corroborated by the medical evidence. In the case of Chacko alias
Aniyan Kunju and Others Vs. State of Kerala 4, the Apex Court has
discussed in para-7 the parameters of Section 134 of the Indian Evidence
Act, 1872 and the same is reproduced hereunder:-
“7. Coming to the question whether on the basis of a solitary evidence
conviction can be maintained, a bare reference to Section 134 of the Evidence
Act, 1872 (in short “the Evidence Act”) would suffice. The provision clearly
states that no particular number of witnesses is required to establish the case.
Conviction can be based on the testimony of a single witness if he is wholly
reliable. Corroboration may be necessary when he is only partially reliable. If
the evidence is unblemished and beyond all possible criticism and the court is
satisfied that the witness was speaking the truth then on his evidence alone
conviction can be maintained. Undisputedly, there were injuries found on the
body of the accused persons on medical evidence. That per se cannot be a
ground to totally discard the prosecution version. This is a factor which has to
be weighed along with other materials to see whether the prosecution version
is reliable, cogent and trustworthy. When the case of the prosecution is
supported by an eyewitness who is found to be truthful as well, mere non-
explanation of the injuries on the accused persons cannot be a foundation for
discarding the prosecution version. Additionally, the dying declaration was
found to be acceptable.”
34.    Regarding the argument tendered by the learned Amicus Curiae
pertaining to the hostility of the two witnesses i.e. PW-7 and PW-8 in the
present case, the statement of hostile witnesses can be discarded and only
the part which corroborates the prosecution story has to be considered.
The two witnesses have not denied the commissioning of offence, but
have only denied having seen it. The Apex Court in the case of C.
Muniappan v. State of Tamil Nadu5, has opined as under:-
“81. It is settled legal proposition that:
“6. … the evidence of a prosecution witness cannot be rejected in toto
merely because the prosecution chose to treat him as hostile and cross-
examined him. The evidence of such witnesses cannot be treated as
effaced or washed off the record altogether but the same can be
accepted to the extent their version is found to be dependable on a
careful scrutiny thereof.”
82. In State of U.P. v. Ramesh Prasad Misra [(1996) 10 SCC 360 : 1996 SCC
(Cri) 1278] this Court held that (at SCC p. 363, para 7) evidence of a hostile
witness would not be totally rejected if spoken in favour of the prosecution or
the accused but required to be subjected to close scrutiny and that portion of
the evidence which is consistent with the case of the prosecution or defence
can be relied upon. A similar view has been reiterated by this Court in Balu
Sonba Shinde v. State of Maharashtra [(2002) 7 SCC 543 : 2003 SCC (Cri)
112] , Gagan Kanojia v. State of Punjab [(2006) 13 SCC 516 : (2008) 1 SCC
(Cri) 109] , Radha Mohan Singh v. State of U.P. [(2006) 2 SCC 450 : (2006) 1
SCC (Cri) 661] , Sarvesh Narain Shukla v. Daroga Singh [(2007) 13 SCC
360 : (2009) 1 SCC (Cri) 188] and Subbu Singh v. State [(2009) 6 SCC 462 :
83. Thus, the law can be summarised to the effect that the evidence of a hostile
witness cannot be discarded as a whole, and relevant parts thereof which are
admissible in law, can be used by the prosecution or the defence.”
35.    Considering the overall facts and circumstances of the case,
statement of the witnesses, relevant case laws and the fact that the offence
committed by the appellant by mutilating the private part of the minor girl
cannot be termed as an act of a person of normal virtues. The said offence
has been committed out of severe sexual lust and sadistic approach. The
appellant does not deserve any kind of leniency as the said case stands
proved beyond any reasonable doubt by the statement of the prosecution
witnesses and the medical evidence adduced.
36.    It is a very sorry state of affairs that the State has not preferred any
appeal against the leniency observed by the learned Trial Court in
sentencing the appellant to such a short term. The lethargy of the public
prosecutor is highly deplorable.
37.    From the evidence available on record, it is proved beyond
reasonable doubt that the accused-appellant Ishrat had committed grave
offence and the learned lower court had rightly convicted and sentenced
him as mentioned above.
38.    In above circumstance, I do not find any merit in the appeal. The
appeal is dismissed, accordingly. The judgement and order dated
20.10.1992 passed by Sri S.C. Nigam, Seventh Additional District and
Sessions Judge, Kanpur Nagar in Sessions Trial No.175 of 1990 (State Vs.
Ishrat), Police Station- Chamanganj, District- Kanpur Nagar, is hereby
affirmed. Bail bonds of accused-appellant are hereby cancelled and
sureties are discharged from their liability. He is directed to surrender
before the court below forthwith to serve out remaining sentence and if he
fails to do so, concerned Chief Judicial Magistrate shall take appropriate
action in this regard.
39.    Let a copy of this judgement along with Lower Court Record be
returned to the court concerned forthwith for compliance. A compliance
report be also sent to this Court.