Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 1443 of 2008
Counsel for Appellant :- Onkar Nath,Birendra Prasad
Counsel for Respondent :- Govt. Advocate
1.    We have heard Sri Amit Tripathi for the appellant; Sri
Amit Sinha, learned AGA, for the State and have perused
the record.
2.    This appeal is against the judgment and order dated
21.02.2008, passed by Sessions Judge, Etah in Sessions
Trial No.655 of 2003, arising out of Case Crime No.62 of
2003, police station Bagwala, district Etah, whereby the
accused-appellant has been convicted under Section 302
IPC and punished with imprisonment for life and fine of
Rs.5,000/- coupled with a default sentence of two years
3.    The FIR of the case was lodged by Virendra Singh
(PW-1) vide written report (Exb.Ka-1) dated 23.07.2003
scribed by Rahees Ahmad (not examined), which was
registered as Case Crime No.62 of 2003 at police station
Bagwala, district Etah on 23.07.2003 at 18.20 hrs. The GD
entry (Exb.Ka-3) of the written report and the chik FIR
(Exb.Ka-2) was prepared by PW-3 at the time and date
specified. The allegation in the FIR is to the effect that
informant’s sister-in-law Anima (the deceased) was
married to Narendra. Narendra used to work as a labour in
Delhi whereas his elder brother Raj Kishore @ Pappu (the
accused-appellant) used to stay in the village and was
addicted to liquor. It is alleged that the appellant used to
harass the deceased Anima for money and used to pester
her for money sent by her husband. According to the
allegations, few days before the incident, Narendra
(husband of the deceased) had sent money to Anima. The
accused-appellant asked Anima for the money. When
Anima refused, she was assaulted. On 23.07.2003 i.e. the
date of the incident, the informant (PW-1) and his wife
Anita (PW-2) came to know that the accused-appellant
was assaulting Anima. On getting information, the
informant and his wife Anita, at about 2.00 pm, rushed to
Anima’s house. There they noticed that the accused-
appellant was coming out of the hut on the first floor of
the house and running away. When they went up-stairs,
they noticed that Anima’s body was lying with injury
marks on her neck. The FIR was lodged by alleging that
the accused-appellant has killed Anima.
4.    After registration of the report, inquest was
conducted at the spot. After completing the inquest by
about 22.00 hrs on 23.07.2003, inquest report (Exb.Ka-5)
was prepared by PW-5. The body of the deceased was
sealed and dispatched for autopsy. The autopsy was
conducted by PW-4 at about 2.30 pm on 24.07.2003. The
autopsy report (Exb.Ka-4) notices :
Well built body. Rigor Mortis passed off from upper
extremities and present in lower extremities. Face, neck
and upper part of chest congested. Abdomen distended
(sic) bloated.
(i) Abraded contusion 2 cm x 1.25 cm, right side of
neck anteriorly on upper part. Underlying tissues
(ii) Two abraded contusions in a row on left side of
neck upper part anteriorly. Each 1.75 cm x 1.25 cm.
Underlying tissues congested.
Larynx/Bronchi – Congested. Both cornua of hyoid
bone fractured.
Abdomen – Stomach full of un-identified food
Large Intestine - gases and faecal matter.
Cause of Death - death is due to asphyxia as a
result of throttling on account of AMI.
Estimated time of death – about one day before.
5.   Investigation was conducted by PW-5 who visited the
spot, conducted inquest, prepared papers for autopsy,
prepared site plan (Exb.Ka-9) at the behest of PW-2,
recorded statement of witnesses and, after carrying out
various stages of investigation, submitted charge-sheet
(Exb.Ka-10) against the accused-appellant. After taking
cognizance on the charge-sheet, the case was committed
to the court of session.
6.   The court of session vide order dated 11.02.2004
framed charge of the offence of murder punishable under
Section 302 IPC against the appellant. The accused-
appellant pleaded not guilty and claimed trial.
7.   During the course of trial, the prosecution examined
as many as six witnesses, their testimony, in brief, is
8.   PW-1 – Raj Kishore @ Pappu (Informant). He stated
that the deceased Anima was his sister-in-law, younger
sister of his wife and used to reside in the same village in
which he resided; whereas, Narendra, her husband, used
to work as a labour in Delhi. The accused-appellant, elder
brother of Narendra, was a liquor addict and he used to
harass Anima for money to cater to his liquor addiction. In
respect of the incident, PW-1 stated that about a day or
two before the incident, Rs.1,000/- was sent by Narendra
to Anima. On the date and time of the incident, PW-1 was
in his own house when he was informed by fellow villager,
namely, Damodar, that Anima is being assaulted by the
accused. On getting the information, PW-1 and his wife
Anita (PW-2), at about 2.00 pm, went to her house. They
heard Anima crying for help. Those cries were coming
from the hut on upper floor of the house. Soon thereafter,
they noticed the accused rushing out of the hut located on
the upper floor and escaping. When PW-1 went inside the
hut, he noticed the body of Anima lying in the hut with
injury marks on her neck. PW-1 stated that he got a
written report scribed by Rahees Ahmad, which was
submitted at the police station. The written report was
exhibited as Exb.Ka-1.
During cross-examination, the witness stated that
usually money was delivered to the deceased by her
husband, when he used to visit. But this time money was
sent through a boy Talewar one or two days before the
incident. PW-1 stated that his house is about 15-20 paces
away from the house of the deceased. In between his
house and the house of the deceased, there were two or
three houses. He denied the suggestion that the house of
PW-1 is about 250 paces away from the house of the
deceased. PW-1, however, maintained that information
about the incident was received by him from Damodar
whose house is next to the house of the deceased. At this
stage, the witness was confronted with an omission in the
written report with regard to receiving information from
Damodar about the deceased being assaulted by the
appellant. He was also confronted with an omission in the
written report that he heard cries of Anima. He admitted
that he had not mentioned in the report that he heard
screams of Anima and stated that by the time he reached
there, she was dead. But immediately thereafter, he stated
that Anima was asking for help in a low tone. In paragraph
16 of his statement, during cross-examination, the witness
stated as follows :
“nkeksnj us [kcj fn;k rks dsoy 5 feuV esa gh eS igqap x;k FkkA ekjus okyk
fiNokM+s] dks dwn x;k FkkA esjs 'kksj epkrs gh og dwn x;k FkkA ”
In paragraph 17 of his statement, the witness stated
that there was no blood on the cot where he found the
body of the deceased. PW-1 stated that when the I.O. had
arrived at the spot, he was there. He stated that he had
shown the staircase to the I.O. but had not shown to the
I.O. either his or Damodar’s house. PW-1 stated that he
had also not shown to the I.O. the direction and the place
from where he arrived at the spot. The witness, however,
denied the suggestion that he has not seen the accused-
appellant escaping from the house/room and that he has
lodged a false case to get the benefit of the money left by
her sister-in-law.
9.     PW-2 – Anita – elder sister of the deceased and wife
of PW-1. After disclosing her relationship with the
deceased, PW-2 stated that the husband of the deceased,
namely, Narendra, used to work in Delhi and used to send
money to the deceased; the accused-appellant and her
sister’s husband, Narendra, used to reside in the same
house; that the accused-appellant was addicted to liquor
and used to pester the deceased for money to satisfy his
liquor addiction; that just two days before the incident,
Rs.1,000/- was sent by her husband to the deceased, the
accused-appellant came to know about receipt of money
by her and, therefore, asked her for money; and that
when money was not given to the accused, he assaulted
the deceased. In respect of the incident, PW-2 stated that
Damodar had given information that the accused-appellant
is beating Anima. On receipt of this information, PW-2 and
her husband (PW-1) went to the spot. Anima was crying.
She noticed accused-appellant rushing out from the hut
located on the upper floor of the house. When PW-2 went
there, she noticed Anima lying dead with injury marks on
her neck. She stated that the time must have been 2.00
pm. PW-2 stated that her husband and other villagers had
also spotted the accused coming out of that hut. PW-2
stated that after the I.O. arrived at the spot he took her
statement and prepared site plan as per her instructions.
During cross-examination, PW-2 stated that her
house is just 15-20 paces away from the house of the
deceased. She, however, admitted of not showing her
house to the I.O. She stated that her brother-in-law
(husband of the deceased) used to send money to the
deceased monthly or bi-monthly. In paragraph 6 of her
deposition, during cross-examination, she stated as
“Damodar us [kcj fn;k rks eS ?kj es dke dj jgh FkhA cPpks dks ,sls gh
NksM+dj eS pyh] 5 feuV yxk igq¡pus esaA eS igq¡ph rks cgqr /kheh vkokt esa og
dg jgh Fkh fd cpk ys cpk ysA tc rd eS Åij igq¡ph rks xys ij esjh cgu
ds fu’kku Fks vkSj og ej xbZ Fkh rFkk vfHk;qDr ihNs dks dwn x;kA ”
She denied the suggestion that her house is 500
paces away from the house of the deceased. She also
denied the suggestion that she arrived at the spot after
learning about the death of her sister. She denied the
suggestion that there use to be quarrel between the
accused and PW-2’s husband in respect of the money sent.
She also denied the suggestion that she has not seen
anyone escaping from the spot.
10. PW-3 – Suraj Pal Singh. He is the constable of the
police station concerned who made the GD entry of the
written report and the chik FIR in connection therewith.
The chik FIR and GD entry were exhibited as Exb.Ka-2 and
Ka-3, respectively. He denied the suggestion that the FIR
was ante-timed but admitted that on the date when the
FIR was registered, there was no other cognizable report
made at the police station concerned.
11. PW-4 – Dr. V.V. Verma – autopsy surgeon. He proved
the autopsy report and the contents thereof already
noticed above. He stated that during internal examination,
he had noticed that both cornua of hyoid bone were
fractured and in the uterus a 4 cm long foetus was
present. The autopsy report was exhibited as Exb.Ka-4. He
accepted the possibility of death having occurred at about
2.00 pm on 23.07.2003 as a result of the injuries noticed
in the autopsy report.
During cross-examination, he accepted that there
could be variation of about six hours either way in his
estimate regarding the time of death.
Officer. He proved various stages of investigation. He
stated that he visited the spot, noticed the body of Anima
lying on a cot in a hut on the upper floor of the house. He
proved the preparation of the inquest report and
documents prepared for autopsy. He stated that he
inspected the spot in torch and gas light in the presence of
the informant as well as his wife Anita and prepared the
site plan accordingly, which was marked as Exb.Ka-9. He
stated that he recorded the statement of the witnesses
and after completing the investigation submitted charge-
sheet, which was marked as Exb.Ka-10. He produced the
articles worn by the deceased at the time of her death,
which were made material exhibits I.e. Exb.Ka-1 to Ka-5.
During cross-examination, PW-5 stated that
neither the house of Damodar nor the house of informant
was shown by him in the site plan because at the time of
inspection he had not noticed them. He also admitted that
he had not shown the place from where the witnesses
heard the cries of the deceased. PW-5 stated that
although he cannot say whether the house of the
witnesses was 200 mtrs away from the spot but admitted
that the house of the witnesses examined was in the
middle of village Abadi and quite far from the spot. After
stating as above, PW-5, to disclose the surroundings,
stated as follows :
“To Counsel & e`rd dk edku xkao dh vkcknh ds iwjc esa gSA e`rd ds
edku ds iwjc esa Hkwnso vkSj dqaojiky ds edku gSA dqaoj iky dk edku e`rd
ds edku ds lkeus fLFkr [kjatk ds iwjc esa gSA dqaojiky o Hkwnso ds edkuks ds
iwjc esa vkcknh ugha gSA ;g ckr Hkh eS viuh ;knnkLr ls gh ckr jgk g¡wA e`rd
ds edku ds if’pe&nf{k.k& mRrj&iwoZ esa pkjks fn’kk esa edkuvkr gSA e`rd ds
edku ds if’pe esa yxh gqbZ [kkyh txg ukFkw jke dh gSA oknh us eq>s ;g ugha
crk;k Fkk fd e`rd ds ifr us mldh e`R;q ls iwoZ tks ,d gtkj :i;s Hksts Fks
og rkysoj yk;k FkkA”
After stating as above, PW-5 admitted that he did not
notice any blood on the cot. He denied the suggestion that
he prepared police Parchas while sitting at the police
station. He also denied the suggestion that he has
submitted a false charge-sheet.
13. PW-6 - Constable Satyendra Singh. He is the
constable of the police station concerned who was handed
over the body for autopsy. He proved that sealed body was
handed over to the Doctor for autopsy. He also stated that
the body was brought by Jugaad (a vehicle) and as the
said vehicle had a breakdown therefore there was delay in
the post-mortem. He stated that till the body was in his
custody, no person was allowed to touch it and it was kept
14. The incriminating circumstances appearing in the
prosecution evidence were put to the appellant for
recording his statement under Section 313 CrPC. The
appellant        denied       the      incriminating      circumstances
appearing in the prosecution evidence and claimed that
the deceased used to reside separate and not in his
house; that he was not present in the house at the time of
the occurrence; he was irrigating his field; and that he has
been falsely implicated.
15. The trial court found that the prosecution was
successful in establishing motive; that the accused was
seen rushing out of the hut wherein, immediately
thereafter, the body of the deceased was noticed lying on
a cot with injury marks on the neck; that the autopsy
report confirmed that the deceased was strangulated on or
about the time the deceased was noticed exiting the hut,
the chain of circumstance stood complete indicating
beyond reasonable doubt that it was the accused-appellant
and none other who committed the murder and as the
explanation tendered by the appellant was found
inadequate and false, he is liable to be convicted.
16. Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the
prosecution evidence fails to establish that information
about the deceased being assaulted by the accused was
provided to PW-1 and PW-2 by Damodar, inasmuch as,
Damodar has not been examined as a witness. Further,
the I.O. was not shown the house of Damodar as being
next to the house of deceased therefore, on what basis
PW-1 and PW-2 arrived at the spot has not been proved
beyond doubt. Hence, the very foundation of the
prosecution case is rendered doubtful. PW-1 and PW-2 in
their deposition though stated that their house is about
15-20 paces away from the spot but, in the site plan,
there are other persons house adjoining the house of the
deceased. In addition to above, the statement of the I.O.
indicates that the house of PW-1 and PW-2 was quite far
from the house of the deceased, inasmuch as, according
to him, the house of the deceased was in one corner of the
village, whereas the house of PW-1 and PW-2 was in the
middle of village Abadi. Therefore, possibility of PW-1 and
PW-2 arriving at the spot immediately after getting
information about the deceased being assaulted by the
accused appears remote. It was also argued that though
PW-1 and PW-2 initially stated that they saw the accused-
appellant exiting the hut and escaping from the house by
using the staircase, as was disclosed in the site plan, but
during cross-examination they stated that the accused
escaped by jumping over the back wall. This is at complete
variance from the initial statement of PW-1 and PW-2
made during the course of investigation. In these
circumstances no reliance can be placed on their
deposition. It has been submitted that it appears to be a
case where the deceased was killed in her own house; no
one witnessed the incident; that as the incident was of
day-time, no one was present in the house; that the FIR
was lodged, after deliberation or guess work, with delay of
over four hours even though the police station was only
five kilometres away. As there is no cogent and reliable
evidence in respect of the presence of the appellant within
the house at the relevant time, the conviction of the
accused-appellant is not sustainable and is liable to be set
17. Per contra, learned AGA, appearing for the State,
submitted that both PW-1 and PW-2 have succeeded in
proving the motive for the crime; that although the
accused-appellant stated that he had a separate residence
but he has not disclosed specifically as to where else he
resided; that the appellant was noticed exiting the hut
where, immediately after appellant’s exit, the deceased
was found dead by PW-1 and PW-2, with injury marks on
her neck and the autopsy confirmed that she could have
died due to those injuries at the time when the appellant
was seen exiting the hut therefore, the chain of
circumstances is complete and in absence of cogent
explanation from the appellant, the trial court was justified
in convicting the accused-appellant and sentencing him as
18. Having noticed the rival submissions as also the
entire evidence on the record, before proceeding to
evaluate the evidence we may observe that this is a case
based on circumstantial evidence. In a case based on
circumstantial evidence, when conviction can be sustained,
the law is settled. The circumstances from which the
conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should in the first
instance be fully established, and all the facts so
established should be consistent only with the hypothesis
of the guilt of the accused. Again, the circumstances
should be of a conclusive nature and tendency and they
should be such as to exclude every hypothesis but the one
proposed to be proved. In other words, there must be a
chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any
reasonable ground for a conclusion consistent with the
innocence of the accused and it must be such as to show
that within all human probability the act must have been
done by the accused.
19. In the instant case, the incriminating circumstances
on which the prosecution placed reliance were as follows :
the appellant was a liquor addict; he used to pester/harass
his sister-in-law (wife of his brother) for money; the
appellant‘s brother used to reside in Delhi in connection
with his work and used to send money to his wife; two
days before the incident, the deceased’s husband had sent
money to his wife; the appellant had been pestering the
deceased for the money and in connection therewith he
assaulted the deceased; that on 23.07.2003, at about
2.00 pm, PW-1 and PW-2 were informed by Damodar that
the deceased was being assaulted by the appellant; on
receipt of this information, PW-1 and PW-2 arrived at the
spot to notice the appellant escaping from the hut; when
they entered the hut on the upper floor of the house, PW-
1 and PW-2 found the deceased lying dead on a cot with
injuries on her neck.
20. In so far as the motive is concerned, the best person
who could have given evidence of having sent money to
the deceased was her husband Narendra. The husband of
the deceased has neither been interrogated nor examined
by the prosecution to ascertain whether any money was
sent by him to the deceased in connection with which she
was allegedly harassed/assaulted by the appellant. No
doubt, it is not necessary for the prosecution to examine
all the witnesses interrogated but the Investigating Agency
did not even interrogate Narendra to confirm whether any
money was dispatched by him to his wife. We did not find
any statement of the I.O. (PW-5) with regard to recording
the statement of deceased’s husband in connection with
sending money to the deceased. Interestingly, in the
evidence of PW-1 it has come that Talewar had delivered
money to the deceased. But, even the statement of
Talewar was not recorded. In these circumstances, we are
of the view that it is not proved beyond reasonable doubt
whether money was sent to the deceased by her husband
two or three days before the incident. Further, except PW-
1 and PW-2, no other person has been examined to
disclose whether the appellant was a liquor addict. In
these circumstances, the motive for the crime has not
been established beyond reasonable doubt.
21. We are conscious of the law that in a case based on
ocular account, motive may not have a crucial role to play
but in a case based on circumstantial evidence, motive
assumes importance and may form part of the chain of
circumstances. However, even if the prosecution was not
successful in establishing the motive for the crime beyond
reasonable doubt, we would have to examine whether the
prosecution was successful in proving beyond doubt that
the accused-appellant was noticed rushing out of the hut
wherein, immediately after his exit, the deceased was
found dead by PW-1 and PW-2. If the prosecution
succeeds in establishing this circumstance beyond
reasonable doubt, the onus would shift on the accused
appellant to explain his presence there at that time, in
absence whereof, an adverse inference in respect of his
guilt might be drawn.
22. To prove the above-mentioned circumstance, the
prosecution has relied on the testimony of PW-1 and PW-
2. Consequently, we would have to evaluate the testimony
of PW-1 and PW-2.
23. In assessing the value of the evidence of an eye
witness there are two principal considerations : (a)
whether, in the circumstances of the case, it is possible to
believe their presence at the scene of occurrence; and (b)
whether there is anything inherently improbable or
unreliable in their evidence.
24. In the instant case, PW-1 and PW-2 were not
residents of the house/hut where the incident occurred.
They claim to have arrived at the spot on receipt of
information from Damodar. Thus, their presence is not
natural. To prove that Damodar provided them information
neither Damodar has been produced as witness nor
location of Damodar’s house enabling him to get
information and pass it on to PW-1 and PW-2 is disclosed
in the site plan. Rather, the prosecution has suppressed
vital information with regard to the distance of the house
of the two witnesses from the house of the deceased.
Interestingly, the site plan does not indicate the presence
of house of PW-1 and PW-2 in the vicinity. There are,
however, several houses shown in the site plan
neighbouring the house of the deceased but the house of
the two witnesses as also of Damodar is conspicuous by its
absence. The two witnesses were cross examined on this
aspect and suggestion was given to them that their house
is located at a distance of about 250 paces from the house
of the deceased. The two witnesses might have denied this
suggestion and claimed that their house is 15-20 paces
away from the house of the deceased but, interestingly,
the I.O. who made spot inspection and prepared site plan
(Exb.Ka-9) at the behest of PW-1 and PW-2 did not
disclose the house of either the informant or of the
witness Damodar in the site plan. Further, the I.O. (PW-5)
stated that though he cannot disclose the exact distance
between the house of the informant and the house of the
deceased but it is correct that the house of the two
witnesses is located in the middle of village Abadi and is at
a distance from the spot. He clarified the above statement
by stating that the house of the informant is in the middle
of village Abadi whereas the house of the deceased is in
the eastern corner of the village. Once this is the position,
the possibility of the witnesses having arrived at the spot
immediately on getting the information that the deceased
was being assaulted appears remote. More so, because
the autopsy report does not disclose presence of injuries
over the body except around the neck. Had there been
injury marks all over the body the possibility of the victim
raising an alarm and inviting attention of neighbours would
have been there. Since only two abraded contusions have
been found around her neck, the probability of her murder
going unnoticed is quite high. Consequently, the possibility
of her neighbours noticing her cries and informing others
appears remote.      Further, both PW-1 and PW-2 have
admitted during their cross-examination that the culprit
had escaped by jumping over the back wall of the house.
If that was so, the site plan prepared at the behest of PW-
1 and PW-2 was at complete variance with their statement
inasmuch as it discloses the accused escaping from the
front of the house by using the same staircase which the
witnesses used to go to the upper floor of the house to
notice the deceased lying dead on a cot in the hut. These
circumstances seriously dent the credibility of the
statement of PW-1 and PW-2 that they noticed the
accused exiting the hut wherein, immediately after his
exit, the deceased was found dead there.
25. Now, we shall examine whether, on account of joint
living, a presumption could be drawn against the
appellant. In this regard we notice that appellant was the
Jeth of the deceased. According to PW-2 the appellant
resided in the same house. The appellant in his statement
under Section 313 CrPC has denied joint living. But, during
cross-examination of PW-2, no specific suggestion was put
to PW-2 that the appellant resided elsewhere at some
other place. Therefore, assuming that the appellant and
the deceased resided in different rooms of the same
house, we would have to examine whether there could be
a presumption drawn against him with the aid of section
106 of the Evidence Act even though the appellant denied
his presence in the house at that time.
26. In Shivaji Chintappa Patil Vs. state of
Maharashtra, (2021) 5 SCC 626, it was observed that
“Section 106 of the evidence Act does not directly operate
against either a husband or wife staying under the same
roof and being the last person seen with the deceased. It
was observed that Section 106 of the Evidence Act does
not absolve the prosecution of discharging its primary
burden of proving the prosecution case beyond reasonable
doubt. It was further observed that only when the
prosecution has led evidence which, if believed, will
sustain a conviction, or which makes out a prima facie
case, that the question arises of considering facts of which
the burden of proof would lie upon the accused”.
27. In the instant case, the appellant has denied his
presence in the house at the relevant time. The deposition
of PW-1 and PW-2, who allegedly saw him exiting the hut,
have not been found trustworthy by us. Other than that , there
is no cogent evidence about the presence of the appellant
in the house at the relevant time. Moreover, it is a case of
day-time occurrence. Ordinarily, during day-time men-folk
are out in connection with their daily chores. The appellant
has claimed that he was not present in the house but was
watering his fields. Thus, in absence of cogent evidence
that the appellant was in the house/hut at the relevant
time, provisions of Section 106 of the Evidence Act can not
be pressed into service to put onus on the accused to
explain as to under what circumstances, the deceased
suffered ante-mortem injuries.
28.    In addition to above, we notice that the       police
station where the report was lodged is at a short distance
of five kilometres from the spot. The FIR though is within
4 and ½ hours of the alleged occurrence but that time is
sufficient to deliberate and implicate a person on the basis
of suspicion. In ordinary circumstances, this delay was not
much but here we are dealing with a case based on
circumstantial evidence where, firstly, the incriminating
circumstances have not been proved beyond reasonable
doubt and, secondly, the person who provided information
to PW-1 and PW-2, namely, Damodar, about deceased
being assaulted by the accused appellant has not been
examined. The sum total of our analysis is that the
prosecution evidence does not inspire our confidence and
the possibility of involvement of some one else in the
crime is not ruled out.
29. In view of the analysis and discussion above, we are
of the view that the prosecution has failed to prove the
charge against the appellant beyond the pale of doubt
therefore, this is a fit case where the accused-appellant is
entitled to the benefit of doubt. Consequently, the appeal
is allowed. The judgment and order of the trial court
convicting and sentencing the appellant is set aside. The
accused-appellant is acquitted of the charge for which he
has been tried and convicted. It is reported that the
appellant is in jail. He shall be set at liberty forthwith,
unless warranted in any other case subject to compliance
of provisions of Section 437-A CrPC to the satisfaction of
the trial court.
30. Let a copy of this order be forwarded to the court
below along with the record for information and
compliance.
Location: High Court of Judicature at