Present:      Mr. Dr. Anmol Rattan Sidhu, Senior Advocate, with
Mr. Pratham Sethi, Advocate, for the petitioner.
assisted by ASI Surjit Singh.
Mr. S.S.Sidhu, Advocate, for the complainant.
(proceedings conducted through video conferencing)
1. The petitioner has approached this Court seeking grant of anticipatory
bail in respect of a case registered vide FIR No.242 dated 07.11.2020 at
Police Station Maur, District Bathinda, under Sections 346 IPC (Sections
302/201/120-B IPC added later on).
2. The matter in hand pertains to death of Lakhvir Singh, who is brother of
petitioner’s husband. Initially, the FIR in question came to be lodged
under Section 346 IPC pursuant to lodging of ‘missing report’ of Lakhvir
Singh dated 03.11.2020. Upon recovery of dead body of Lakhvir Singh
on 09.11.2020, offences under Sections 302/201/120-B IPC were added
on 11.11.2020 vide DDR No.30. The dead body of Lakhvir Singh had
been recovered from Kotla Branch Canal in the area of Village Jodhpur
3. It is the case of the prosecution that subsequently the petitioner suffered
an extra judicial confession before one Naib Singh admitting therein that
she alongwith her husband and son had administered poison to the
deceased and thrown his dead body in Canal. It is further the case of the
prosecution that Sukhbir Singh, who is brother of the deceased as well as
brother of petitioner’s husband, had seen the petitioner and co-accused in
the company of the deceased Lakhvir Singh on the bank of the Canal on
4. Learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has
submitted that it is a case of circumstantial evidence, wherein the entire
family of the petitioner has been involved falsely mainly on account of
the fact that there has been a property dispute amongst the petitioner’s
husband, namely, Rajpal Singh and his two brothers, namely, Lakhvir
Singh and Jasvir Singh. Learned senior counsel has further submitted
that the ‘last seen’ evidence as well as the alleged extra judicial
confession are weak type of evidence and are not sufficient to connect the
petitioner with the alleged death of Lakhvir Singh. It has further been
submitted that the petitioner is a lady aged about 70 years and has a clean
record and as such, deserves the concession of bail.
5. Opposing the petition, learned State counsel assisted by learned counsel
for the complainant has submitted that even though there is no eye-
witness to the alleged occurrence, but the circumstantial evidence
collected by the police during the course of investigation sufficiently
points towards the guilt of the petitioner and other accused inasmuch as
the petitioner and co-accused had been seen in the company of the
deceased immediately before his death and in fact the petitioner had also
confessed her guilt before one Naib Singh. Learned counsel for the
complainant has submitted that the petitioner as well as co-accused had a
motive to eliminate the deceased as they were having a dispute regarding
property with him. Learned counsel for the complainant has further
submitted that at the time of granting interim bail to the petitioner on
21.01.2021, report of the FSL was still awaited, but the said report has
now been received, which clearly substantiates the case of the
prosecution regarding poisoning of the deceased inasmuch as it has been
reported in the report that the viscera was found to contain
‘Organophosphorus’. Learned counsel for the complainant has further
submitted that apparently the deceased after having been administered
poison had been thrown in the canal so as to destroy evidence and as
such, the petitioner does not deserve the concession of bail.
6. I have considered rival submissions addressed before this Court.
7. Admittedly, it is a case of circumstantial evidence. The admissibility of
the extra judicial confession and the ‘last seen’ evidence would depend
upon other evidence to be led by the prosecution, as normally said
evidence is treated as weak type of evidence unless corroborated by other
clinching evidence. In any case, the petitioner is a lady aged about 70
years and has already joined investigation. The co-accused had already
been arrested.
8. Having regard to the aforestated position particularly the fact that the
petitioner is an aged lady of about 70 years and has also joined
investigation, the petition is accepted and the interim directions issued by
this Court vide order dated 21.01.2021 are hereby made absolute subject
to the condition that the petitioner shall join investigation as and when
called upon to do so and cooperate with the Investigating Officer and
shall also abide by the conditions as provided under Section 438 (2)
9. While parting with this order, this Court observes that while the petitioner
was granted interim bail by this Court vide order dated 21.01.2021, the
challan against other co-accused was presented on 08.02.2021.               The
supplementary report under Section 173 Cr.P.C. against the present
petitioner has not been filed till date despite the fact that the petitioner
has since joined investigation pursuant to order dated 21.01.2021 and a
period of almost one year has elapsed since then.              On account of
investigating agency/prosecution not having presented supplementary
report under Section 173 Cr.P.C. against the petitioner, the proceedings
before the trial Court against co-accused have virtually come to a
standstill though they are in custody. The last interim order passed by the
trial Court on 05.01.2022 reads as follows:
“Status report of the Officer Incharge has been received
which shows that accused Sukhwinder Kaur and Rajvir
Kaur have joined the investigation, but their supplementary
challan is to be presented. So awaiting the supplementary
challan and further report of the Officer Incharge, this case
stands adjourned to 17.01.2022.”
10. Though the trial Court in the absence of presentation of supplementary
report under Section 173 Cr.P.C. against the petitioner could have
proceeded against the remaining accused, but at the same time, this Court
cannot lose sight of the fact that in case supplementary challan is to be
filed against the petitioner and the trial Court by that time already
examines some witnesses, the trial Court would have to indulge into
repetitive exercise again of recalling the said witnesses for their fresh
examination, which would result in adding to agony of other co-accused,
who may be behind bars & whose trial would get prolonged.
11. This Court, in fact, has noticed that there is some kind of tendency with
the investigating agency/prosecution not to present report under Section
173 Cr.P.C./supplementary challan during the pendency of an application
for grant of anticipatory bail by an accused even though such accused
may have joined investigation despite the fact that there is no bar for the
same.
12. This Court can, however, visualize certain situations where the
investigating agency/prosecution, keen to subject the accused to custodial
interrogation, would be hoping for dismissal of application for grant of
anticipatory bail so as to subject such accused to custodial interrogation
and thus would prefer to wait for outcome of pending petition for grant of
anticipatory bail.    However, it is not in every case that an accused is
required to be subjected to custodial interrogation. There would be many
such cases where the prosecution is able to complete its investigation
upon the accused joining investigation without there being any necessity
to subject him/her to custodial interrogation.
13. Since a large number of instances have come to the notice of this Court
where the investigating agency/prosecution choses not to present report
under Section 173 Cr.P.C./supplementary challan against an accused
during the pendency of anticipatory bail application, it would be
desirable that before taking such a decision for deferring filing of report
under Section 173 Cr.P.C., the investigating agency/prosecution
thoroughly examines the matter to consider as to whether the case is such
where custodial interrogation would be required in case anticipatory bail
application is dismissed despite the fact that the accused on the basis of
interim directions may have joined investigation.
14. It is, thus, directed that the Director General of Police, Punjab; the
Director General of Police, Haryana and the Director General of Police,
UT Chandigarh, consider the feasibility of issuing appropriate directions
in this regard so as to ensure that merely on account of pendency of an
anticipatory bail application, the filing of report under Section 173
Cr.P.C./supplementary challan against such accused is not deferred for
long period and that wherever the same is deferred, the same be done for
specific and genuine reasons - say, in a case where the modus-operandi of
crime is not completely known and the Investigating Officer is of the
opinion that the case in hand is such where custodial interrogation is
absolutely necessary to unravel the details of crime, though of course the
same would only be possible in case the anticipatory bail is dismissed.
15. A copy of this order be conveyed to the Director General of Police,
Punjab; the Director General of Police, Haryana and the Director General
of Police, UT Chandigarh for necessary compliance.