The   challenge   in   the   present   appeal   is  to  an
order  passed     by   the   National     Consumer   Disputes
Redressal    Commission      [in     short,     “NCDRC”]    on
01.07.2015, whereby the Revision Petition filed by
the respondent- Insurance Company was allowed and the
claim of compensation on account of theft of vehicle
was set aside on the ground that the delay of 78 days
in not informing the Insurance Company of the theft
is fatal.
The appellant had purchased a Mahindra & Mahindra
Major Jeep CL-500 bearing Registration No. HR-19C-
0414, at the cost of Rs. 3,40,000/- on 14.03.2010.
The said vehicle was financed by Mahindra & Mahindra
Financial   Services    Ltd.    The    insurance   cover   was
issued  by   the    respondent,     which   was   valid   from
14.03.2010    till    13.03.2011.         However,    on   the
intervening night of 24-25.04.2010, the vehicle was
stolen outside the office of a liquor shop, in which
the appellant was a partner.          An attempt was made to
trace the vehicle but an FIR was lodged on 01.05.2010
i.e. after 7 days of the incident.            According to the
complainant, he informed the Insurance Company about
the   theft   of   vehicle    on    phone,   but   the  written
complaint was made on 12.07.2010.             It may be noted
that   the   police   had  filed     untraced   report  of   the
vehicle,     which    was     accepted     by    the   Judicial
Magistrate, First Class, Charkhi Dadri, Bhiwani on
The    complaint    was    allowed     by   the   District
Consumer Redressal Forum and an award was passed to
pay the insured amount, i.e. Rs. 3,40,000/- to the
complainant with 12% interest.           The appeal filed by
the  Insurance    Company     against    the   said  order   was
dismissed by the State Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission vide order dated 04.12.2014, however, the
NCDRC set aside the order, relying upon the Judgment
of this Court in Oriental Insurance Company Ltd. Vs.
Parvesh Chander Chadha reported in (2018) 9 SCC 798
and some other orders of the NCDRC.
The learned counsel for the appellant has argued
that the Judgment of two-Judge Bench of this Court in
Parvesh    Chander   Chadha    (Supra)    was   referred   to  a
three-Judge Bench in view of another Judgment of this
Court in Om Prakash Vs. Reliance General Insurance &
Anr., reported in (2017) 9 SCC 724.           The three-Judge
Bench of this Court in Gurshinder Singh Vs. Shriram
General Insurance Company Ltd. & Anr., reported in
(2020) 11 SCC 612, inter alia, held that “when an
insured  has  lodged   the   FIR    immediately     after   the
theft of a vehicle occurred and when the police after
investigation have lodged a final report after the
vehicle    was     not      traced        and     when      the
surveyors/investigators    appointed      by   the   insurance
company  have  found   the   claim    of   the   theft   to  be
genuine, then mere delay in intimating the insurance
company about the occurrence of the theft cannot be a
ground to deny the claim of the insured.”            It is the
case where the FIR was lodged on the same day the
theft had occurred.
The learned counsel appearing for the Insurance
Company has argued that this Court has not approved
the  repudiation   of   claim    only    on   the   ground   of
intimation  to  the   Insurance    Company,     but   delay  in
lodging an FIR is an important step in examining the
claim of the appellant, since as per the appellant
himself, the report was lodged after 7 days of the
incident.   Therefore,     the     claim     filed     by   the
complainant was rightly rejected by the NCDRC.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties
at length and find that the order passed by the NCDRC
cannot be sustained.     The claim of the appellant was
repudiated   by   the   Insurance    Company  on  the  ground
that there is delay of 78 days in intimating the
vehicle being stolen on the intervening night of 24-
25.04.2010.     It is the said ground which was raised
and accepted by the NCDRC.           The NCDRC has returned
the following finding to set aside the orders passed
by  the   District    Forum,   as   affirmed   by  the   State
“7. The delay of 78 days was not explained.
The complainant has failed to make a case
that there was delay in intimation due to
unavoidable circumstances as per the IRDA
circular.”
However, in respect of the argument that the FIR
was delayed, the said arguments need not be examined
in  this    case   as   the   case    of  Insurance   Company
throughout was based upon delay in intimation to the
In view of the said fact, we find that the order
of the NCDRC cannot be sustained in law.          The present
appeal   is   allowed    and   the    order  passed   by   the
District Forum, as affirmed by the State Commission,
is restored.     The amount of compensation as awarded
by  the   District    Forum   and   affirmed   by  the   State
Commission    be   paid   to   the    appellant   within   two
Pending  interlocutory    application(s),   if   any,
is/are disposed of.
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (C)   No(s).   34639/2015
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 01-07-2015
in RP No. 1005/2015 passed by the National Consumers Disputes
Date : 13-09-2021 This petition was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Leave granted.
The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed order.
Pending interlocutory application(s), if any, is/are disposed
(Signed order is placed on the file)