At the inception, we flag the issue of under trial prisoners who continue to be in custody
despite having been granted benefit of bail on account of their inability to fulfill the conditions
of bail. In order to have a realistic estimate of it, each jail authority would be required to convey
to the State Government the data in this behalf and the State Government would then have
to send it to NALSA so that a scheme can be worked out in this behalf. Assistance would
have to be provided seeking variation of the terms of the bail in such cases.
We thus call upon all the State Governments to issue directions to the jail authorities
to submit the details of such cases in a chart form indicating ( a) the name of the under trial,
(b) the offence charged, (c) the date when the bail was granted and ( d) the conditions of bail
which have not been met and how long that period from the date of the bail order till now.
The State will ensure that these details are made available by the jail authorities to them
within a period of 15 days from today and forward the data to NALSA within one week
thereafter, whereafter the NALSA will process for making necessary suggestions how to deal
with this issue and of course provide legal assistance whereever necessary. The assistance
may be obtained from Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS) by NALSA in this behalf as it
is stated that such an endeavour has been made by them already in Maharastra.
Mr. Devansh A. Mohta, learned Amicus Curiae has drawn our attention to the
developments in Karnataka where the Karnataka State Legal Services Authority informed
that e-prison Module has been implemented in all 52 prisons in Karnataka but ”legal aid
information module” was not enabled in Karnataka prisons. The suggestion was that the said
legal module be enabled to facilitate the categorizing of prisoners receiving legal aid.
The steps taken in pursuance thereto with the meeting held with NALSA along with
three Amici assisting us here, has produced a result that eprison module, having important
features, which enable effective monitoring, the e-prison portal is ready to be uploaded
accordingly. The suggestion from the learned Amicus is that this should be implemented
across the country with coordination between State Legal Services Authorities and the prison
authorities. The needful be completed within a period of two months and the compliance be
informed to NALSA so that it can be placed before this Court.
One of the suggestions made is e-prison module can be modified for uploading data
regarding orders granting bail, status of implementation of the orders granting bail and orders
of acquittal.
It is suggested by learned Amicus that if the aforesaid experimentation proves to be
fruitful, the same should be extended across the country in all the States and the NALSA will
specifically inform the State Legal Services Authorities though they are already represented
before us and should start operation forthwith.
Ms. Liz Mathew, learned Amicus Curiae points out that in e-Prisons application suite
is developed by NIC which computerizes and integrates all activities relating to prison
management. It is suggested that in respect of life convicts a field for eligibility of filing
premature application may be incorporated along with another one for status of premature
release application as it would facilitate easy compliance of the timeline directed by this Court
in order dated 07.07.2021.
We are of the view that this is a desirable process and should be forthwith explored by
NALSA in collaboration with the Ministry of Home Affairs and it will be coordinated by Mr.
K.M. Nataraj, learned ASG who is appearing in this matter. It has also been mentioned that
for the special remission in connection with Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, a special module was
developed by NIC and Ministry of Home Affairs and it has been given to understand with
discussion with the authorities that this has not been incorporated with respect to premature
release in normal course.
Thus we consider proper to direct that NALSA and Ministry of Home Affairs may
explore how premature release for life sentences cases can be included in the system for
periodic review so that the matter is not delayed.
List with Suo Moto Writ Petition (Crl.) No. 4 /2021 on 31.01.2023.
We may once again like to re-emphasize the commendable task being done by Mr.
Gaurav Agrawal, Mr. Devansh A Mohta and Ms. Liz Mathew, learned Amici Curiae.