(2 of 9)               [CW-20051/2019]
For Petitioner(s)        :   Ms. Suruchi Kasliwal, Adv. through VC
For Respondent(s)        :   Mr. Vagish Kr. Singh, Adv. for
Mr. Aashish Kr. Singh, Adv. through
1. Vide order dated 11/01/2022, this Court observed as under:-
"On perusal of the cause title of the petition, it
was analyzed that respondent No.1 was titled "Raja
In the light of 26th Amendment in the
Constitution of India and on perusal of Article 363-A is
“363 A. Recognition granted to Rulers of Indian
States to cease and privy purses to be
abolished.— Notwithstanding anything in this
Constitution or in any law for the time being in force
(a) the Prince, Chief or other person who, at any
time before the commencement of the Constitution
(Twenty-sixth       Amendment)          Act, 1971,      was
recognised by the President as the Ruler of an Indian
State or any person who, at any time before such
commencement, was recognised by the President as
the successor of such ruler shall, on and from such
commencement, cease to be recognised as such
Ruler or the successor of such Ruler;
(b) on and from the commencement of the
privy purse is abolished and all rights, liabilities and
obligations in respect of privy purse are extinguished
and accordingly the Ruler or, as the case may be, the
successor of such Ruler, referred to in clause (a) or
any other person shall not be paid any sum as privy
purse.”
“14. Equality before law.—The State shall not deny
to any person equality before the law or the equal
protection of the laws within the territory of India.”
It is analyzed from above Articles of Constitution of
India that recognition, titles granted to the rulers of the
Indian State no more persist and is abolished.
The counsel for the petitioner submits that the said
title was filed before the trial court and as a result of the
same had to be repeated/ generated.
Let limited notices be issued to the Additional
Solicitor General- Shri R.D Rastogi representing Central
Government and learned Advocate General-Shri M.S
Singhvi for the State to address upon the same issue.
Whether after the insertion of Article 363-A and 26th
Amendment in the Constitution of India, the said title of
(4 of 9)            [CW-20051/2019]
Raja,Nawab, Maharaja,Rajkumar as prefix can be filed/
addressed in the constitutional court or the learned trial
court below.
Registry is directed to issue notices of the said
petition as well as certified copy of this order upon the
respective offices of learned ASG and learned AG so that
the issue can be addressed on the next date.
List the matter on 03.02.2022.
Interim order, if any, to continue till the next
date."
2.   In compliance of the above order, necessary records were
duly served upon in the office of learned Advocate General and
3.   The matter was listed for hearing on the instant issue.
4.   The contention raised by Mr. M.S. Singhvi, learned Advocate
General for the State is that in the light of Articles 14, 18 and
363A of the Constitution of India as well as the judgment of the
Apex Court in Raghunathrao Ganpatrao Vs. Union of India:
1994 (Suppl.)1 SCC 191, Paras 66, 108, 109 and 112, the
Constitutional validity of 26th Amendment of the Constitution of
India has been upheld. The State of Rajasthan do endorse the
view that use of prefixes and suffixes, other than military or
academic distinction in terms of Article 18 of the Constitution of
India, are abolished and are violative of Article 14 of the
Constitution     of  India.   As  per    learned  Advocate   General's
submission, the same cannot be used in the public offices,
Constitutional Courts or in public domains. Though he submitted
that the State has a respect for the contribution and the public
welfare, philanthropy offered by the royal families in the past.
5.   The Apex Court in its judgment rendered in Raghunathrao
Ganpatrao (supra) observed in Para 66, 108, 109 and 112 as
"66. After the judgment of Madhav Rao Scindia the
twenty-sixth amendment was brought to overcome
(5 of 9)            [CW-20051/2019]
the effect of the judgment. The objects and reasons of
the twenty-sixth amendment makes the position clear,
"The concept of rulership, with privy purses
and special privileges unrelated to any
current functions and social purposes, was
incompatible with an egalitarian social
order. Government, therefore, decided to
terminate the privy purses and privileges of
the Ruler of former Indian States. It was
necessary for this purpose, apart from
amending the relevant provisions of the
Constitution to insert a new article therein
so as to terminate expressly the recognition
already granted to such Rulers and to
abolish privy purses and extinguish all
rights, liabilities and obligations in respect
of privy purses. Hence this Act."
108. Mr. R.F. Nariman has contended that by
removing the 'real and substantial distinction between
the erstwhile Princes forming a class and the rest of
the citizenry of India the Constitutional amendment
has at one stroke violated the basic structure of the
Constitution as reflected both in Articles 14 and 51(c)
and treated unequals as equals thereby giving a go by
to a solemn treaty obligation which was sanctified as
independent Constitutional guarantee. He has drawn
strength in support of his above argument from the
decisions in Md. Usman and Ors. v. State of Andhra
Pradesh and Ors. : 1971 (Supp) SCR 549 and Ramesh
Prasad Singh v. State of Bihar and Ors. (1978) I LLJ
109. After carefully going through the above decisions
which relate to service matters, we are afraid that
such an argument as one made by Mr. Nariman could
be substantiated on the principles laid down in these
two decisions that Article 14 will be violated if
unequals are treated as equals. In our considered
opinion this argument is misconceived and has no
relevance to the facts of the present case. One of the
objectives of the Preamble of our Constitution is
'fraternity assuring the dignity of the individual and
the unity and integrity of the nation.' It will be
relevant to cite the explanation given by Dr. Ambedkar
for the word 'fraternity' explaining that 'fraternity
means a sense of common brotherhood of all Indians.'
In a country like ours with so many disruptive forces
(6 of 9)              [CW-20051/2019]
of regionalism, communalism and linguism, it is
necessary to emphasise and reemphasise that the
unity and integrity of India can be preserved only by a
spirit of brotherhood. India has one common
citizenship and every citizen should feel that he is
Indian first irrespective of other basis. In this view,
any measure at bringing about, equality should be
welcome. There is no legitimacy in the argument in
favour of continuance of princely privileges. Since we
have held that abolition of privy purses is not violative
of Article 14, it is unnecessary for us to deal with the
cases, cited by Mr. Nariman, which according to him
go to say that any law violating Article 14 is equally
violative of the basic structure of the Constitution,
inasmuch as Article 14 is held to be a basic postulate
of the Constitution.
112. On a careful consideration of the various aspects
of both the writ petitions, we hold that the
Constitution (Twenty-sixth Amendment) Act of 1971 is
valid in its entirety."
6.   Articles 14, 18 and 363A of the Constitution of India provide
14. Equality before law.—The State shall not deny
to any person equality before the law or the equal
protection of the laws within the territory of India.
18. Abolition of titles.—(1) No title, not being a
military or academic distinction, shall be conferred by
the State.
(2) No citizen of India shall accept any title from any
foreign State.
(3) No person who is not a citizen of India shall, while
he holds any office of profit or trust under the State,
accept without the consent of the President any title
from any foreign State.
(4) No person holding any office of profit or trust
under the State shall, without the consent of the
President, accept any present, emolument, or office
of any kind from or under any foreign State.
363A.        Recognition granted to Rulers of
Indian States to cease and privy purses to be
abolished.—Notwithstanding           anything   in    this
Constitution or in any law for the time being in force—
(7 of 9)             [CW-20051/2019]
(a) the Prince, Chief or other person who, at any time
before the commencement of the Constitution
(Twenty-sixth      Amendment)         Act, 1971,     was
recognised by the President as the Ruler of an Indian
State or any person who, at any time before such
commencement, was recognised by the President as
the successor of such ruler shall, on and from such
commencement, cease to be recognised as such Ruler
or the successor of such Ruler;
(b) on and from the commencement of the
privy purse is abolished and all rights, liabilities and
obligations in respect of privy purse are extinguished
and accordingly the Ruler or, as the case may be, the
successor of such Ruler, referred to in clause (a) or
any other person shall not be paid any sum as privy
purse."
7.    The question raised by this Court on prohibition of titles in
the public domain, public offices, Constitutional Courts or in public
was not objected to by the petitioners, respondents or any other
8.    The Office of learned Additional Solicitor General has also not
filed any objection to the order passed by this Court and against
the provisions of Articles 14, 18 and 363A of the Constitution of
India as well as use of the titles which are unconstitutional.
9.    Learned counsel has relied upon the judgment rendered by
the Apex Court in Balaji Raghavan Vs. Union of India: AIR
1996 SC 770 Para 31, which is reproduced as under:-
31. Hereditary titles of nobility conflict with the
principle of equality insofar as they create a separate,
identifiable class of people who are distinct from the
rest of society and have access to special privileges.
Titles that are not hereditary but carry suffixes or
prefixes have the same effect, though, the degree
may be lesser. While other Constitutions also prohibit
the conferment of titles of nobility, ours may perhaps
be unique in requiring that awards conferred by the
State are not to be used as suffixes or prefixes. This
difference is borne out of the peculiar problems that
these titles had created in pre-independent India and
(8 of 9)            [CW-20051/2019]
the earnest desire of the framers to prevent the
repetition     of   these    circumstances     in   Free,
10.   While relying upon the said judgment, learned counsel for
the respondents Mr. Vagish Kr. Singh has submitted that the Apex
Court has upheld the validity of 26th Amendment and Article 363A
of the Constitution of India and has imposed prohibition on the
conferment of titles of nobility and the heredity titles of nobility as
the same are in conflict with the principles of equality.
11.   This   Court    has  considered     the submissions   made     by
respective counsels, learned Advocate General as well as the
judgments cited at bar.
12.   On perusal of Article 14, 18 and 363A of the Constitution of
India as well as the judgments rendered by the Apex Court in
(supra), this Court is of the view that any title awarded to the
citizen of India by a Foreign State cannot be accepted nor used
and no such title, other than the military or academic distinctions,
can be conferred other than by the State. In terms of Article 363A
of the Constitution of India, the heredity titles of nobility being in
conflict with the principles of equality and contrary to Article 14 of
the Constitution of India cannot be used as prefixes or suffixes.
13.   In the light of above, this Court holds that in Constitutional
Courts, all other Courts, Tribunals, public offices of the State etc.,
the use of salutation and titles is prohibited in terms of Articles 14
18 and 363A of the Constitution of India. The said restriction will
also apply in the public domain as well as public documents &
public offices.
14.   Accordingly, the petitioners are directed to file amended
cause title at all respective places.
(9 of 9)           [CW-20051/2019]
13.    Registry to send copy of this order to the office of the
learned Advocate General, Rajasthan; learned Additional Solicitor
General for the Union of India; Registrar General of this Court as
well as the Chief Secretary, Govt. of Rajasthan, Secretariat, Jaipur
for necessary implementation, circulation and to issue necessary
14.    Interim order to continue. Office to proceed.