1.     The Petitioner seeks bail in FIR No.60/2020 dated 25.02.2020
registered     at     PS    Dayalpur      for    offences    under         Sections
186/353/332/323/147/148/149/336/427/302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860
(hereinafter, “IPC”) and Sections 3/4 of the Prevention of Damage to Public
2.     The FIR relates to the violence that took place in the National Capital
Territory of Delhi in the month of February 2020.
3.     The brief facts leading to the instant Bail Application are that a protest
against the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019 (hereinafter, “CAA”) had
been taking place for 1.5 months prior to the incident at Khajuri Square to
Loni Circle at Wazirabad Road, Chand Bagh near 25 Futa Service Road by
the Muslim community.
4.     It is stated in the instant FIR that the Complainant, i.e. Constable
Sunil Kumar, was on duty with the deceased, HC Ratan Lal, and others,
W/HC Savitri, as well as DCP Shahdara District Amit Kumar and his staff.
5.     It is stated that on 24.02.2020, at about 01:00 PM the protestors had
mobilized near the Chand Bagh area and 25 Futa Road, and were moving
towards the Main Wazirabad Road. When they assembled near Main
Wazirabad Road, it is stated that the Complainant and other police officers
present attempted to convince the protestors to not move towards the Main
Wazirabad Road, however, it is stated that the protestors were carrying
sticks, baseball sticks, iron rods and stones. It is stated that ACP Gokalpuri
and DCP Shahdara warned the protestors via loudspeaker of a government
vehicle that lack of adherence to legal warnings would necessitate strict
action against the crowd. It is stated that some people amongst the crowd
started pelting stones at the police officials, and beat them as well as other
passersby with aforementioned weapons that had been hidden.
6.     It is stated that the Complainant received an injury on his right elbow
and right hand due to a huge stone. It is further stated that the crowd even
snatched tear gas balls and lathis from the police, and started beating them
with it. It is stated that ACP Gokalpuri, HC Ratan Lal and DCP Shahdara
Amit Kumar were also beaten with sticks and stones, and as a result, they
fell down and suffered grievous head injuries.
7.     The FIR states that post the incident, the protestors fled away and the
injured were sent to a hospital, with the Complainant receiving treatment at
8.     The Complainant then states that he was informed that HC Ratan Lal
had succumbed to a bullet injury, and some other police officers as well as
public persons had also suffered injuries. It is stated that the protestors had
also set fire to the vehicle of DCP Shahdara and private vehicles of police
officers, and also damaged public and private property.
9.     It is stated that investigation is now completed and chargesheet has
been filed against the Petitioner on 08.06.2020 wherein the Petitioner has
been added. The chargesheet states that there is sufficient material to
proceed       against      the     Petitioner    herein     under      Sections
/201/120-B/34 of the IPC, read with 3/4 of the PDPP Act. Thereafter,
supplementary chargesheets were filed on 30.06.2020, 20.08.2020,
17.11.2020 and 30.12.2020.
10.    Mr. Shahid Ali, learned Counsel for the Petitioner, has submitted that
the Petitioner herein was arrested on 30.03.2020,and he has been falsely and
illegally implicated in FIR No. 60/2020. He has stated that this is the first
bail application which has been preferred before this Hon’ble Court.
11.    Mr. Ali has argued that as per the Injury Report, which is a part and
parcel of the chargesheet, the death of the deceased was due to a gunshot
injury and the same was possibly fired by the gun of a police official. He has
stated that the death has not been caused by the sword which was carried by
the Petitioner, and further, there has not been any allegation that there was a
protestor at the site of the alleged incident with a sword. The learned
Counsel for the Petitioner has submitted that the Petitioner is not visible in
any footage that could prove his presence at the Scene of Crime (SOC), and
therefore, Section 149 read with Section 302 cannot be made out against
12.    He has submitted that the deadly nature of the riots prompted both
Hindus and Muslims to guard their neighbourhoods by carrying various
weapons such as lathis, stones etc., not with the intention to participate in
the protests or riots, but to defend themselves only in the event of an attack
as the police had allegedly become either mere spectators or were helping
the rioters. He has further submitted that the police, instead of being fair and
unbiased, has conducted the investigations with mala fide intentions and
illegally roped in those who had never even participated in the riots, but
were only protecting their neighbourhoods.
13.    Mr. Ali has argued that the Petitioner herein has never participated in
the protest or in the riots at any point of time. He has stated that the material
placed on record by the prosecution itself places the Petitioner nowhere
close to the Scene of Crime, and that the location of Cell IDs around 1 PM
have not been placed on record. On the basis of this, Mr. Ali has submitted
that the involvement of the Petitioner in the gruesome murder of HC Ratan
Lal is ruled out.
14.    The learned Counsel for the Petitioner has submitted that the video
footage procured by the prosecution cannot be relied upon as it is the case of
the police that the Petitioner was seen at 12:02 PM in one of the CCTV
footages installed at F 141 Chand Bagh. However, the Cell ID of the
Petitioner indicates that he was present at New Mustafabad or Village
Ziauddinpur till 12:47 PM. Therefore, the video footage and the Cell ID
location of the Petitioner are contradictory to each other. Mr. Ali has also
submitted that the allegation pertaining to the Petitioner being seen carrying
a sword at F443 Chand Bagh, which is opposite the residence of the
Petitioner, is also contrary to the allegation that the Petitioner was at the
SOC as F443 Chand Bagh is approximately 1 kilometre away from the SOC.
15.    Mr. Ali has submitted that no evidence has been placed on record to
state that the Petitioner was in contact with any of the organisers during the
protest. The learned Counsel for the Petitioner has brought to the Court’s
attention that more than 21 injuries had been found on the person of the
deceased HC Ratan Lal, and that, as per the prosecution, Injury No.1 was
caused by projectile of rifled firearm and that rest of the injuries were caused
by blunt force object/impact. Mr. Ali has submitted that it is evident that
none of the injuries were caused by the sword which the Petitioner was
allegedly holding and that on this basis, it cannot be said that he perpetrated
any act that may have led to the crime.
16.    With regard to the disclosure statement, the learned Counsel for the
Petitioner has submitted that the same has no value as it does not lead to any
discovery of facts or evidence, and that the shirt of the Petitioner which has
been recovered is of no relevance as similar clothing is available in the
17.    Mr. Amit Prasad, learned SPP for the State, has painstakingly taken
this Court through the videos pertaining to the topography of the area where
the incidents had occurred. Mr. Prasad brought to the attention of the Court
three videos that had been found during the course of investigation which
depict the scene of crime - Vishal Chaudhry Video (1.48 minutes) shot from
Gym Body Fit Garage, Skyride Video (1.37 minutes) and Yamuna Vihar
Video (40 seconds), and has submitted that the three videos shed a light on
how the assault on the police personnel was pre-meditated. The learned SPP
has further taken this Court through all the available CCTV footage
displaying timestamps and respective galis (lanes)wherein the accused have
been caught on camera. He has further pointed out the timestamps which
showcase the dislocation and deactivation of the CCTV cameras and has
submitted that the same has been done in a synchronised and planned
18.    Mr. Prasad has submitted to this Court that the Petitioner herein, who
was wearing a skull cap, black Nehru jacket, and salwar-kurta, was
identified on GNCTD Camera ID No.7033301installed at F-443 Chand
Bagh at 12:02:26 PM with a sword in his hand. He was further seen on
Camera ID No. 7033302 installed at F 443 Chand Bagh at 12:02:34 PM with
a sword in his hand, as well as on Camera ID No. 7033462 installed at F
288Gali No. 10 Chand Bagh at 12:02:34 PM with the sword in his hand. The
learned SPP further submitted that the Petitioner was also seen on Camera
ID No. 7033242 installed at F 348 Chand Bagh at 12:03:17 PM, and on
Camera ID No. 7033232 installed at F 155 Chand Bagh at 12:04:08 PM. Mr.
Prasad has further submitted to this Court that the Petitioner herein is a
resident of Mustafabad, and that his residence is at a distance of 1.6 Kms.
from the SOC.
19.    It has been submitted to this Court by the learned SPP that the clothes
which were worn by the Petitioner on the day of the alleged incident and are
visible in the CCTV footage, have been recovered. Furthermore, the analysis
of the CDR indicates that the Petitioner was at the SOC during the time of
the alleged incident. It has also been submitted that the Petitioner was in
contact with the main organiser-cum-conspirator Suleman Siddiqui who is a
Declared PO, and that during the period between 25.01.2020 to 21.03.2020,
he had had 74 telephonic conversations with him. It has further been
submitted that the identity of the Petitioner was confirmed by Ct. Sunil in
the statement recorded on 26.03.2020 under Section 161 Cr.P.C., and by HC
Tejveer in his statement recorded on 31.03.2020 under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
20.    The learned ASG Shri SV Raju, opposing the Bail Application herein,
has submitted that the instant case is regarding the brutal assault on police
officials wherein HC Ratan Lal succumbed to his injuries, and DCP
Shahdara Amit Sharma and ACP Gokalpuri suffered grievous injuries along
with more than 50 police officials also getting injured.
21.    It has been submitted that the death of HC Ratan Lal was the first
death in the North-East Delhi riots, and that the Trial Court has been dealing
with the riot cases since then. It has also been submitted that the Trial Court
has been apprised of the matter and has already dismissed the bail
application of the Petitioner herein, and that the order of rejection of bail
does not contain any legal infirmities.
22.    The learned ASG has iterated that on 23.02.2020, the protestors who
were convened at Wazirabad Main Road, Chand Bagh, unauthorizedly came
onto the road and blocked the same. He submitted that in response to the
same, the local police had issued a proclamation under Section 144 of the
Cr.P.C. in order to bring the law and order under control. He further
submitted that the protestors held a meeting on the night of 23.02.2020 at
Chand Bagh to finalise a plan for 24.02.2020 as the President of the United
States, Donald Trump, was coming to New Delhi. This meeting was
subsequently attended by several of the accused persons.
23.    The learned ASG has submitted that on the morning on 24.02.2020,
CCTV cameras which had been installed by GNCTD for security in the area
were systematically disconnected or damaged or dislocated right from
08:00:41 AM to 12:50:57 PM. He argued before the Court that the protest at
Chand Bagh continued despite the proclamation of Section 144 Cr.P.C.
orders. As a consequence, police officials had been deployed for law and
order arrangements. The learned ASG averred that between 12:30 PM and
1:00 PM, at the behest of the organisers of the protest, a crowd carrying
various weapons such as dandas, lathis, baseball bats, iron rods, and stones
convened at the main Wazirabad Road, and refused to pay heed to the orders
of the senior officers and police force. The crowd soon got out of control
and started pelting stones at the police officers and resultantly, more than
fifty police personnel suffered injuries and HC Ratan Lal was shot dead. It
was further submitted by the learned ASG that the protestors turned violent,
burnt private and public vehicles, as well as other properties in the vicinity,
including a petrol pump and a car showroom.
24.    It was then submitted by the learned ASG that absence of an accused
from a video does not translate into absence of the accused from the scene of
crime. He has stated that identification of an accused in videography was a
Herculean task, and therefore, if an accused has been identified, that would
be a positive point. Additionally, he relied upon Masalti and Ors. v. State of
Uttar Pradesh, (1964) 8 SCR 133, and submitted that by way of application
of Section 149 IPC, the Petitioner herein would be deemed to be a member
of the unlawful assembly and, therefore, would be equally and squarely
liable for the crime committed.
25.    The learned ASG has also contended that the addition of the offence
under Section 302 IPC meant that ordinarily bail should not be granted. He
has argued that it was not a case of a simple offence; if it was a grievous
offence which was specially punishable with death, then bail could not be
granted. On the issue of the parameters of bail, the learned ASG has
submitted that in Gurcharan Singh v. State (Delhi Administration),(1978) 1
SCC 118, the Supreme Court has reiterated that the principle underlying
Section 437 is towards grant of bail except in cases where there appears to
be reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is guilty of an offence
punishable with death or imprisonment for life, and also when there are
other valid reasons to justify refusal of bail. He has argued that the over-
riding considerations in granting bail are, inter alia, the nature and gravity of
the circumstances in which the offence is committed. The learned ASG has
submitted that in P. Chidambaram v. Directorate of Enforcement, (2020) 13
SCC 791, the Supreme Court had held that in addition to the triple test or
tripod test, gravity of the offence had to be considered while making a
decision on grant of bail. Further, one of the circumstances to consider the
gravity of offence would be the term of sentence that is prescribed for the
offence which the accused is said to have committed. The learned ASG has
argued that as the instant case pertains to the offence of murdering of a
police officer and that Section 302 IPC has been invoked, the matter lies
within the four corners of the gravest of grave offences, and therefore, the
accused cannot be entitled to bail.
26.    Mr. Raju, the learned ASG, has then contended that conspiracy had
been established on 23 February, 2020, and that the offence was pre-
planned. He has submitted that meetings were held 1-2 days prior to the
alleged incident wherein the protestors were motivated to gather at the site
of the alleged incident on 24.02.2020 in order to instigate violence, and
therefore, there was a meeting of minds due to which Section 149 and
Section 120B of the IPC were made out. Furthermore, secret codes had been
used, and the Petitioner herein was fully involved.
27.    It was also submitted by the learned ASG that there was only a small
contingent of police officers present, and they were trying to protect
themselves from the frontal attack by the crowd as they were heavily
outnumbered. He argued that had it been a simple protest, the crowd would
not have been required to come with sticks, weapons etc. Furthermore, if
sticks and other weapons were to be utilised for self-defence, then the
damage and dislocation of CCTVs defeated the case because such an action
would only lead to the inference that the accused wished to destroy the
evidence or to ensure that the evidence did not surface. It has additionally
been submitted that during police custody, when the Petitioner was asked to
produce the clothes he had worn on the day of the alleged incident, he had
stated that he burnt the same, and as per the prosecution, this amounts to
deliberate destruction of evidence as stipulated under Section 201 of the
28.    The Court has heard the learned ASG Shri SV Raju with Mr. Amit
Prasad, learned SPP for the State, and Mr. Shahid Ali, learned Counsel for
the Petitioner. The Court has also perused the material on record.
29.    A perusal of the material on record indicates that the Petitioner was
added by way of chargesheet dated 08.06.2020 for offences under Sections
/201/120B/34 IPC, read with Sections 3 and 4 of PDPP Act. The Petitioner
was arrested on 07.12.2020 and has been in judicial custody since then.
30.    It is stated in the chargesheet dated 08.06.2020 that the Petitioner,
who is a resident of Mustafabad, was identified on various CCTV footages
with a sword in his hand, leading other rioters who were coming from the
Mustafabad side. It is also stated that the Petitioner had admitted in his
disclosure statement that he had assaulted the police personnel with his
sword. Furthermore, the chargesheet reveals that the clothes which were
worn by the Petitioner on the day of the alleged incident and were visible on
the CCTV footage have been recovered from the house of the Petitioner at
his instance. The chargesheet further states that the CDR of the Petitioner
places him at the SOC. It also states that the Petitioner was in constant touch
with the main organiser-cum-conspirator Suleman Siddiqui. The Petitioner
herein has further been identified by Ct. Sunil and HC Tejveer in statements
recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. on 26.03.2020 and 31.03.2020.
31.    A perusal of the video footage reveals that the Petitioner, who was
wearing a skull cap, black Nehru jacket, and salwar-kurta, was seen on
GNCTD Camera ID No.7033301 installed at F 443 Chand Bagh at 12:02:26
PM with a sword in his hand. He was further seen on Camera ID No.
7033302 installed at F 443 Chand Bagh at 12:02:34 PM with a sword in his
hand, as well as on Camera ID No. 7033462 installed at F 288 Gali No. 10
Chand Bagh at 12:02:34 PM with the sword in his hand. The learned SPP
further submitted that the Petitioner was also seen on Camera ID No.
7033242 installed at F 348 Chand Bagh at 12:03:17 PM, and on Camera ID
No. 7033232 installed at F 155 Chand Bagh at 12:04:08 PM.
32.    In the instant case, the issue which arises for consideration is whether
a case for criminal conspiracy for an allegation of murder, i.e. Section 120B
IPC read with Section 302, is made out against the Petitioner. In order to
delve into the issue, it would be appropriate to reproduce Sections 120A and
“120A. Definition of criminal conspiracy. –When two
conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement is
pursuance thereof.
illegal act is the ultimate object of such agreement, or
is merely incidental to that object.”
“Section 120B. Punishment of criminal conspiracy. –
imprisonment for life or rigorous imprisonment for a
term of two years or upwards, shall, where no express
provision is made in this Code for the punishment of
such a conspiracy, be punished in the same manner as
if he had abetted such offence.
conspiracy other than a criminal conspiracy to commit
an offence punishable as aforesaid shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term not
exceeding six months, or with fine or with both.”
33.    For a criminal conspiracy to be established, there must be in existence
two or more persons who agree to do, or cause to be done, an illegal act or
an act which is not illegal by illegal means. The Explanation to Section
120A categorically notes that whether or not the illegal act is the ultimate
object of the agreement, or is incidental to it, is completely immaterial. In
Pratapbhai Hamirbhai Solanki v. State of Gujarat, (2013) 1 SCC 613, the
“23. In the said case it has been highlighted that in
evidence. The ingredients of offence are that there
alleged to conspire and the said agreement should be
for doing an illegal act or for doing by illegal means
an act which itself may not be illegal. Therefore, the
essence of criminal conspiracy is an agreement to do
experience that direct evidence to prove conspiracy is
rarely available. Therefore, the circumstances proved
before, during and after the occurrence have to be
34.    In Ram Narayan Popli v. CBI, (2003) 3 SCC 641, the Supreme Court,
while dealing with the question of conspiracy, laid down as follows:
“342. …The elements of a criminal conspiracy have
been stated to be: (a) an object to be accomplished, (b)
a plan or scheme embodying means to accomplish that
object, (c) an agreement or understanding between two
or more of the accused persons whereby, they become
accomplishment of the object by the means embodied
in the agreement, or by any effectual means, and (d) in
the jurisdiction where the statute required an overt act.
The essence of a criminal conspiracy is the unlawful
combination and ordinarily the offence is complete
necessarily follows that unless the statute so requires,
conspiracy, and that the object of the combination
need not be accomplished, in order to constitute an
indictable offence. Law making conspiracy a crime is
encouragement and support which co-conspirators
give to one another rendering enterprises possible
which, if left to individual effort, would have been
conspirators and abettors with condign punishment.
The conspiracy is held to be continued and renewed
member of the conspiracy acts in furtherance of the
Section 120-B, the prosecution need not necessarily
prove that the perpetrators expressly agree to do or
proved by necessary implication. Offence of criminal
commit an offence. A conspiracy consists not merely in
the intention of two or more, but in the agreement of
two or more to do an unlawful act by unlawful means.
So long as such a design rests in intention only, it is
not indictable. When two agree to carry it into effect,
the very plot is an act in itself, and an act of each of the
parties, promise against promise, actus contra actum,
capable of being enforced, if lawful, punishable if for a
criminal object or for use of criminal means.”
35.    Therefore, in order to contend the application of criminal conspiracy
under Section 120-B and for an indictable offence to be accomplished, there
is no requirement for an overt act to be done in furtherance of the
conspiracy. It is the common design which gains utmost importance, and the
conspiracy is held to be continued and renewed with regard to all its
members wherever and whenever any member of the conspiracy acts in
furtherance of this common design. There is also emphasis which is placed
on the encouragement and support which co-conspirators render to such
enterprises because in the absence of the same, accomplishing such a
common design would otherwise be impossible. Furthermore, in order to
discern the complicity of the accused, one needs to examine the
circumstances before, during and after the occurrence.
36.    With regard to the submission that if there appears to be reasonable
grounds that the accused has committed an offence which is punishable with
death or life imprisonment, then there is a bar imposed by Section 437(1)
Cr.P.C on granting of bail, this Court states that the case of Gurcharan Singh
(supra) also acknowledges that it is the Court which has the last say on
whether there exists any reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is
guilty of committing the said offence. However, it is for the Courts to bear
in mind that the judicial discretion in granting bail is to be exercised in a
such a manner which ensures that the liberty of an individual is not
unnecessarily and unduly abridged, and that at the same time, the cause of
justice does not suffer. In Gurcharan Singh (supra), the Supreme Court
“19. Section 437, Cr.P.C. deals, inter alia with two
stages during the initial period of the investigation of a
non-bailable offence. Even the officer incharge of the
police station may, by recording his reasons in writing,
commission of any non-bailable offence provided there
accused has committed a non-bailable offence. Quick
arrests by the police may be necessary when there are
sufficient materials for the accusation or even for
suspicion. When such an accused is produced before
the Court, the Court has a discretion to grant bail in
all non-bailable cases except those punishable with
death or imprisonment for life if there appear to be
offences. The Courts over-see the action of the police
and exercise judicial discretion in granting bail always
bearing in mind that the liberty of an individual is not
unnecessarily and unduly abridged and at the same
time the cause of justice does not suffer. After the
Court releases a person on bail under sub-section (1)
or sub-section (2) of Section 437, Cr.P.C. it may direct
him to be arrested again when it considers necessary
so to do. This will be also in exercise of its judicial
discretion on valid grounds.”
37.    The Supreme Court has also held that, inter alia, the circumstances
which are peculiar to the accused should also be a factor that must be taken
into consideration while granting or refusing bail. There should, further,
exist reasonable grounds for the Court to believe that there exists a genuine
case against the accused. In Prahlad Singh Bhati v. NCT, Delhi, (2001) 4
SCC 280, it had been observed by the Supreme Court as follows:
“8. …While granting the bail, the Court has to keep in
punishment which conviction will entail, the character,
circumstances which are peculiar to the accused,
tampered with, the larger interests of the public or the
State and similar other considerations. It has also to be
kept in mind that for the purposes of granting the bail
the legislature has used the words „reasonable grounds
for believing‟ instead of „the evidence‟ which means
the court dealing with the grant of bail can only satisfy
it (sic itself) as to whether there is a genuine case
against the accused and that the prosecution will be
able to produce prima facie evidence in support of the
evidence establishing the guilt of the accused beyond
reasonable doubt”.
38.    A perusal of the material on record has revealed to the Court that the
Petitioner has been clearly identified on multiple CCTV footages, carrying a
sword and instigating the crowd. The clinching evidence that tilts this Court
towards prolonging the incarceration of the Petitioner is that the weapon
which is being carried by the Petitioner is capable of causing grievous
injuries and/or death, and is prima facie a dangerous weapon. The argument
of the Counsel for the Petitioner that the sword being carried by the
Petitioner was merely for self-defence of the Petitioner in a bid to protect
himself and his family does not hold any water as the video footage places
the Petitioner 1.6 kilometres away from his residence and does not reveal
any immediate impending harm to the Petitioner.
39.    Furthermore, the Petitioner does not satisfy the ingredients to claim
bail on ground of parity with the co-accused of the Petitioner who have been
enlarged on bail vide Orders in Bail Appln. 1360/2021 dated 24.05.2021,
and Bail Appln. 3550/2021 dated 16.02.2021, and Bail Appln. Nos.
774/2021, 2411/2021, 1882/2021, 2487/2021, 2775/2021 dated 03.09.2021
as, unlike the Petitioner herein, none of the co-accused have been caught
with a dangerous weapon capable of inflicting grievous injuries and/or even
causing death which indicate that there was in existence a design to commit
an offence perpetrating the offences mentioned in FIR No. 60/2020.
40.    In Ash Mohammad v. Shiv Raj Singh, (2012) 9 SCC 446, while
dealing with individual liberty and cry of the society for justice, the Supreme
"18. It is also to be kept in mind that individual liberty
cannot be accentuated to such an extent or elevated to
such a high pedestal which would bring in anarchy or
disorder in the society. The prospect of greater justice
civilised milieu. True it is, there can be no arithmetical
formula for fixing the parameters in precise exactitude
application of mind but also exercise of jurisdiction on
accepted and established norms. Law and order in a
society protect the established precepts and see to it
that contagious crimes do not become epidemic. In an
organised society the concept of liberty basically
requires citizens to be responsible and not to disturb
the tranquillity and safety which every well-meaning
41.    The riots which shook the National Capital of the country in February
2020 evidently did not take place in a spur of the moment, and the conduct
of the protestors who are present in the video footage which has been placed
on record by the prosecution visibly portrays that it was a calculated attempt
to dislocate the functioning of the Government as well as to disrupt the
normal life of the people in the city. The systematic disconnection and
destruction of the CCTV cameras also confirms the existence of a pre-
planned and pre-meditated conspiracy to disturb law and order in the city.
This is also evident from the fact that innumerable rioters ruthlessly
descended with sticks, dandas, bats etc. upon a hopelessly outnumbered
cohort of police officials.
42.    This Court is of the opinion that even though the Petitioner cannot be
seen at the Scene of Crime, he clearly was a part of the mob for the sole
reason that the Petitioner had consciously travelled 1.6 kms away from his
neighbourhood with a sword which could only be used to incite violence and
inflict damage. This Court has previously opined on the importance of
personal liberty in a democratic polity, but it is to be categorically noted that
individual liberty cannot be misused in a manner that threatens the very
fabric of civilised society by attempting to destabilise it and cause hurt to
other persons. In light of this, the footage of the Petitioner with the sword is
quite egregious, and is therefore sufficient to keep the Petitioner in custody.
43.    In view of the facts and circumstances of the cases, without
commenting on the merits of the matter, this Court is of the opinion that the
Petitioner is not to be granted bail.
44.    This bail application is, therefore, dismissed, along with the pending
45.    It is made clear that the observations made in this Order are only for
the purpose of denial of bail and cannot be taken into consideration during
the trial.