1.      The present Writ Petition has been filed under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India as a Public Interest Litigation (PIL), and the Petitioner
has shown serious concern with respect to imposition of fine for violation of
various statutory provisions under the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and the
W.P.(C) 13924/2021                                                      Page 1 of 19
subsequent amendment to it, i.e., the Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Act,
2.             The Petitioner’s contention is that the infrastructure in respect of
technology for detection of violation of traffic rules is not in consonance
with international standards. Further, the same is not standardized
throughout the country and no information/ minimal information is available
with respect to the operation/ limitation/ errand/ challenges in respect of the
technology which is being used. The Petitioner has stated that there are
various instances where hefty fines have been levied upon innocent citizens
on account of faulty equipment and technology used by the Traffic Police,
and citizens at large are suffering due to the same.
3.             The Petitioner has further stated that in a large number of developed
countries, there are well-established standards/ rules/ guidelines along with
monitoring agencies which efficiently monitor traffic violations and
implement vehicular law. It has been submitted by the Petitioner that in our
country, the technical equipment purchased and deployed to enforce laws
concerning motor vehicles is done so without considering any standards/
guidelines. Further, several lacunae exist with respect to the manner of
functioning of monitoring agencies as well as when it comes to efficient
implementation of laws.
4.             The Petitioner has further stated that the equipments used to detect
violation of traffic lights are sub-standard. They are not based on updated
technology, which is resulting in erroneous imposition of fines on the
common man.
5.      The Petitioner has further stated that the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988
was previously amended in 1994 and now has been amended through the
Amendment Act of 2019. However, the speed limit violation detection
technology, the drunken driving breath analyzing technology and the red-
light violation technology are not in sync with the changing times. It was
submitted that there is a need for more advanced technology.
6.      The Petitioner has further stated that no guidelines have been
implemented with respect to the technology relied upon by Traffic officials
to detect violations. It is submitted that the same is creating a lacuna in the
infrastructure of the system relied upon. It is stated that the lacunae created
due to the infrastructure and the subsisting system is leading to an arbitrary
imposition of fines upon innocent citizens who in fact abide by traffic rules.
It has been further stated that the equipment used by the Traffic Police is
neither calibrated nor maintained, thereby resulting in errors in detection of
traffic violations.
7.      The Petitioner has stated that after the amendment of the Motor
Vehicles Act in 2019, it was anticipated that the Amendment Act will
provide an efficient, safe and corruption free system in the country.
However, the implementation of the same throughout the country has shown
that there is an increase in instances of faulty systems for detection of speed
violations, red light violations, drunken driving, etc.
8.      The Petitioner has filed various reports stating that the challans issued
have been recalled in bulk. It is stated that the traffic department had to call
back more than 1.5 Lakh challans issued on account of over-speeding on just
one highway stretch in the NCR area alone. It has been further stated that in
W.P.(C) 13924/2021                                                      Page 3 of 19
one case, fine to the tune of Rs. 2,00,500/- was imposed upon a Truck driver
for overloading near Mukarba Chowk in Delhi. It has been further
contended that there are no checks on what basis the challans are issued and
there is no monitoring agency which can effectively monitor implementation
of the statutory provisions under the Act.
9.             The Petitioner has further stated that the documents relating to motor
vehicles such as registration certificate, driving license, insurance can be
made available on Parivahan App or Digi locker App, and they should be
treated as legally recognized proof at par with original documents. The
Petitioner, at the same time, has stated that the documents which are on Digi
locker/ various Apps have been recognized and accepted by the Traffic
Police. However, every police personnel should have a mobile compatible
to access the relevant App to verify the authenticity of the driving license
and other documents. The Petitioner has also pointed out several difficulties
which are being faced by the traffic police personnel and offenders even
though the documents are available on mobile Apps/ Digi Locker and she
has placed newspaper clippings on record to buttress her averments.
10.            The Petitioner has also raised concerns in respect of spot challans
where the offenders are being penalised for violation of Motor Vehicles Act,
1988 and the subsequent amendment which is in force. It is the Petitioner’s
contention that the traffic officials should wear a body camera. She has
stated that though the traffic officials have been ordered to wear body
cameras while issuing challans, the same is not being followed.
11.            The Petitioner has further stated that the speed violation or red light
violation equipments have not been placed at proper locations and they
W.P.(C) 13924/2021                                                           Page 4 of 19
should be placed at proper locations in order to ensure that the public at
large is not made to suffer.       The Petitioner has stated that the Breath
Analyzers used by the Traffic Police suffers from medically and
scientifically established errors and the traffic police have no formal training
for utilizing the same. Therefore, proper steps should be taken in the matter
for standardization/ calibration of such equipments and the Traffic Police
should also be trained.
12.     It has been submitted by the Petitioner that certain Traffic signals are
fixed at such places that they are obstructed and not visible, thereby leading
to people violating the obstructed signal and being imposed a fine upon.
Therefore, steps should be taken to remove all such defects in order to
ensure that the traffic lights are visible to all those persons who are using
motor vehicles. The Petitioner has given some examples of violation of
traffic signals and the difficulty faced by the public at large. In respect of
speed, it has been reiterated by the Petitioner that the Radar Technology
used by the Delhi Traffic Police is not in conformity with the international
standards and there exists a need to revisit the technology and implement
standardization of the same. There are some stray examples given by the
Petitioner in respect of the challans issued by the Traffic personnel and the
Petitioner has also given various suggestions in respect of Red Light
Meters. Further, several other suggestions for improving the infrastructure,
imposition of fine and effective implementation of traffic laws so that the
common man is not wrongly levied a challan upon have also been put forth.
W.P.(C) 13924/2021                                                     Page 5 of 19
13.            In light of the submissions put forth, the Petitioner has prayed for the
following reliefs:
“A.    Issue Writ of mandamus under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India or any other appropriate Writ or
directions to the Respondent to ensure the presence of
proper infrastructure for monitoring the traffic violation
and its effective functioning.
B.     Issue Writ of mandamus under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India or any other appropriate Writ or
directions to the Respondent to remove the faulty system
and deploy the appropriate technology.
C.     Issue Writ of Mandamus under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India or any other appropriate Writ or
directions to the Respondent to set appropriate
guidelines for monitoring of the traffic violations.
D.     Issue Writ of Mandamus under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India or any other appropriate Writ or
directions to the Traffic Police to device a mechanism
where the online traffic challan available on its website
can be accessed only after an OTP Authentication on
registered mobile number or any other verifiable mode.
E.     Issue Writ of Mandamus under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India or any other appropriate Writ or
directions to the Respondent to standardize and upgrade
the technology pertaining to monitoring of traffic
violation equipment in consonance with international
standards and the technology may also be implemented
in sync with international standards.
F.     Issue Writ of Mandamus under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India or any other appropriate Writ or
directions to the Government to put information
regarding the technology being installed to monitor the
traffic       violations       pertaining        to    the
errors/limitations/restrictions.
W.P.(C) 13924/2021                                                            Page 6 of 19
G.      Issue Writ of Mandamus under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India or any other appropriate Writ or
directions to the Respondent to provide appropriate
training and guidelines to the Traffic Police to calibrate
and use the equipment for monitoring of traffic violation
in an efficient manner.
H.      Issue Writ of mandamus under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India or any other appropriate Writ or
directions to the Respondents for formation of a
committee, to re-assess the effectiveness of the
technology already in place and replacement of the
outdated technology in consonance with international
standards, with members having technical know-how.”
14.     A detailed reply has been filed by the Union of India on affidavit and
paragraph 4 of the said affidavit reads as under:
“4. That on a bare perusal of the writ petition, it transpired
that the petitioner is aggrieved by the faulty mechanism of
issuing challans under the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act,
2019 without having proper and reliable technology in place,
and seeking direction to the Respondents to set appropriate
Guidelines/Rules and standardization of technology used for
monitoring traffic violation. As far as question of relief sought
by the petitioner is concerned, the answering respondent
submits as under:-
i)      The Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 is the principal instrument
through which road transport is regulated in the country.
The same has now been amended first time in a
comprehensive way after thirty years by Motor Vehicles
(Amendment) Act, 2019, passed by the Parliament and
published in the Gazette of India on 9th August, 2019.
ii)     The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 intents to
bring reforms in the area of Road Safety, bring citizen
facilitation, transparency and reduce corruption with the
help of information technology and removing
intermediaries.      The Act will strengthen transport
W.P.(C) 13924/2021                                                     Page 7 of 19
safeguard and protect Good Samaritan and reform the
insurance and compensation regime.
iii)   The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 inter alia
provides for enhancement of penalties for offences for
ensuring greater compliance and enhancing deterrence
for violation of traffic rules which is intended to provide
for better Road Safety resulting in reduction of accidents
and fatalities on roads.
iv)    The Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 (as amended by the Motor
Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019) is a Parliamentary
legislation, the State Governments cannot pass any
law/take executive action to lower the penalty/fine below
that prescribed under the statutory provisions of the
Motor Vehicles Act, unless the assent of the president is
obtained to State Law.
v)     As per section 200 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 the
State Government may, by notification in the official
gazette, specify such amount for compounding of certain
offences.
vi)    Through the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 a
new section 136A has been inserted in the Motor Vehicle
Act, 1988 as under: (Copy thereof annexed herewith as
136A. (1) The State Government shall ensure electronic
monitoring and enforcement of road safety in the manner
provided under sub-section (2) on National Highways,
State Highways, roads or in any urban city within a State
which has a population up to such limits as may be
prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall make rules for the
electronic monitoring and enforcement of road safety
including speed cameras, closed-circuit television
cameras, speed guns, body wearable cameras and such
other technology.
Further, Section 137(c), empowers state government(s)
to make rules on the matters under section 136A.
W.P.(C) 13924/2021                                                             Page 8 of 19
vii)    The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has
issued G.S.R 1081 (E) dated 02.11.2018 to amend rule
139 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 vide
which production of certificate of registration, insurance,
fitness and permit, the driving licence and any other
relevant documents in electronic form has been made
valid. A copy of the said G.S.R 1081(E) dated 02.11.2018
is annexed herewith as Annexure R-2.
viii) Further, as per rule 139 of the Central Motor Vehicles
Rules, 1989 if any or all of the documents are not in his
possession, he shall be produce in person an extract or
extract of the documents duly attested by any police
officer or by any other officer or sent it to the officer who
demanded the documents by registered post within 15
days from the date of demand.
ix)     The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways on
17.12.2018 had issued Standard Operating Procedure
(SOP) regarding validation of Driving License,
Registration Certificate and other transport related
documents/ information presented in Electronic form
through IT or mobile app platform and that contains SOP
for Generating Challans for violations as under:-
(i) When an offence is made out against the citizen, the
enforcement officer can create a challan using an on-line
point of Sale or CCTV eChallan facility. An option to
create a challan using the real time database of VAHAN
and SARATHI has been provided.
(ii) After creating a challan, offence history will get
registered in the database in VAHAN for the vehicle and
SARATHI for the driver respectively.
(iii) All offences data is available in real time online
basis and easily available to the enforcement officers
throughout the country.
(iv) Enhanced penalties for repeat violations is reflected
and the action against the violator can be initiated
W.P.(C) 13924/2021                                                         Page 9 of 19
accordingly as the past offence history is available to the
enforcement officer through the database.
(v) Violator can pay the penalty or the compounding
amount on-line and the citizens need not worry for
physical document collection. After the payment or
compounding, the case is disposed and data reflected in
the database.
(vi) If a challan is pending or has not been disposed, then
all transactions involving the vehicle i.e. NOC, Fitness,
Tax etc. and for the Driving License i.e. the renewal,
address change etc. are not permitted and are reflected
to the traffic enforcement agencies across India.
(vii) The violators are required to compound and close
pending cases as early as possible to start or avail
services like tax payment, NOC, fitness etc.
A copy of the said SOP dated 17.12.2018 is annexed
herewith as Annexure R-3.
x)     This Ministry has issued following notification regarding
electronic enforcement and monitoring of Provisions of
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and Central Motor Vehicles
(1)     G.SR. 584(E) dated 25.09.2020 through which:-
(a)     new definition of "Challan "and "Portal" has been
inserted in Rule 2 of CMVRs.
(b)     As per Rule 139 of Central Motor Vehicles Rules,
1989, the production of License and certificate of
registration In physical or electronic form has
been mandated.
(c)     Rule 139A provides provisions regarding Seizure
of documents produced in electronic form.
(d)     Rule 165 provides provisions regarding Use of
handheld device.
(e)  Rule 167 provides provisions regarding Procedure
for issuance of payment of challan through e-
challan facility physical or electronic from.
A copy of the said G.SR. 584(E) dated 25.09.2020 is
annexed herewith as Annexure R-4.
(2)  G.SR 586 (E) dated 25.09.2020 regarding Motor
2020 through which in regulation 38 the words
"documents in original" have been substituted with
the words "documents in physical or electronic
form". A copy of the said G.SR. 586(E) dated
25.09.2020 is annexed herewith as Annexure R-5.
(3)  The Ministry vide notification GSR 575(E) dated
11.08.2021 has inserted Rule 167 A in Central
Motor Vehicle Rules 1989. A copy of the said
G.SR. 575(E) dated 11.08.2021 is annexed
herewith as Annexure R-6 .
" 167 A. Electric Monitoring and Enforcement of
Road Safety: -(1) The electronic enforcement
device used for issuance of a challan shall have an
approval certificate signed by a designated
authority of the State Government certifying that
the device is accurate ad operating properly and
the approval certificate shall be renewed on a
yearly basis.
Explanation.- (1) For the purpose of this rule,
"electronic enforcement device means a speed
camera, closed-circuit television camera, speed
gun, body wearable camera, dashboard camera,
weigh in machine (WIM) and any such other
technology specified by the State Government.
(2) Body wearable camera may be worn by police
officer, transport official or any other official
authorized by the State Government and such
officer or official shall notify to the offender that
W.P.(C) 13924/2021                                                    Page 11 of 19
he is being recorded by the body camera and
similarly. dashboard camera may be place on the
dashboard of any police vehicle or in any other
vehicle as authorized by the State Government for
enforcing the traffic rules and such officer or
official shall notify to the offender that he is being
recorded by the dashboard camera.
(2) State Governments shall ensure that
appropriate electronic enforcement devices are
placed at high-risk and high-density corridors on
National Highways and State Highways, and at
critical junctions at least in major cities with more
than one million population. Further, the
electronic enforcement device shall be placed in
such a manner so as not to cause any obstruction,
line of sight issues or interruption in traffic flow.
(4) (a) State Government shall ensure that
appropriate warning signs are conspicuously
placed before the stretches monitored by electronic
enforcement device, notifying the public that such
device is in use and the concerned authorities shall
ensure that physical markings, physical stop lines
and pedestrian crossing are clearly marked on the
road.
(b) Appropriate fixed and dynamic speed limit
signs may also be used to notify the speed limits on
the road sections during adverse weather
conditions, such as rain, hail, foggy weather etc.
as well as for indicting any obstruction ahead in
the route.
(6) All challans issued under rule 167 in
electronic form using auto-generation of challan
through the electronic monitoring and enforcement
W.P.(C) 13924/2021                                                        Page 12 of 19
system shall be accompanied with the following
information, namely:--
(i) clear photographic evidence highlighting the
offence and the license plate of the vehicle;
(ii) measurement from the electronic enforcement
(iii) Date, time and place of the offence;
(iv) notice specifying the provision of Act that has
(v) certificate as per sub-section (4) of section 65 8
of the Indian Evidence Act 1872 ( I of 1872),
(a) identifies the electronic record and
describes the manner in which it was
(b) gives such particulars of any device
involved in the production of that electronic
record as may be appropriate for the
purpose of showing that the electronic
record was produced by a computer;
(c) is signed by the officer authorized in this
behalf by the State Government.
xi)     The answering respondent no.1 vide letter dated
08.08.2018 and 19.11.2018 has issued advisory 10 all the
States/UTs to accept the documents presented in
electronic form through the Digilocker platform or the
mParivahan App as valid under Motor Vehicles Act,
1988 and be treated at par with the certificates issued by
transport authorities. A copy of the said letter dated
08.08.2018 and 19.11.2018 are annexed herewith as
xii)    The answering respondent no. I vide letter dated
17.12.2018 has circulated an advisory containing the
Standard Operating Procedures to be adopted by traffic/
transport related enforcement agencies to validate or
W.P.(C) 13924/2021                                                        Page 13 of 19
impound documents in case the citizens produce
documents in an electronic form as per the provisions of
rule 139 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989.
xiii) The answering respondent no.1 had received certain
grievances after the implementation of fines related to
traffic violations under new Motor Vehicle (Amendment)
Act, 2019 where citizens have raised the concerns that
the documents available in Digi locker or m-Parivahan
app of this Ministry are not considered valid by
enforcement agencies. Accordingly, an advisory dated
23.09.2019 (copy enclosed) has been issued by this
Ministry to State/UTs, advising them to issue necessary
directions to all the enforcement agencies to accept
documents in electronic form which is also available on
Ministry's website www.morth.nic.in. A copy of the said
advisory dated 23.09.2019 is annexed herewith as
15.            In the affidavit, lastly, it has been stated that implementation of the
provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 and the Central Motor Vehicles
Rules, 1989 comes under the purview of the State Transport Authorities &
Union Territory Administration. Once the Rules are in place, the same have
to be strictly adhered to.
16.            Learned Counsel for the GNCTD has argued before this Court that the
Government of Delhi is ensuring a strict compliance of the Motor Vehicles
Act, 1988 and the subsequent amendment, i.e., Motor Vehicles
(Amendment) Act, 2019 was introduced to bring rules in the area of road
safety. It was submitted that the same was effectuated to bring citizen
facilitation, transparency and to reduce corruption with the help of
Information Technology. He has stated that the amendment which was
brought in the Motor Vehicles Act has been implemented in Delhi and the
most sophisticated equipments are being used by the Traffic Police in the
W.P.(C) 13924/2021                                                          Page 14 of 19
matter of detection of violation of statutory provisions under the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 read with the Motor Vehicles Rules framed there under.
17.     Learned Counsel has vehemently argued before this Court that the
Government of Delhi is strictly adhering to the relevant statutory provisions
and Standard Operating Procedure issued by the Ministry of Road Transport
& Highways on 17.12.2018 in respect of validation of Driving Licenses,
Registration Certificates and other transport related documents. It has been
submitted that the documents are available in electronic form and on Mobile
Application Platforms, and the same are being accepted by the Traffic
Police. At no point of time has any individual been harassed for not having a
physical copy of documents. It has also stated that the notification dated
11.08.2021 issued by the Ministry for electronic monitoring and
enforcement of road safety is also being strictly adhered to and the question
of any deviation from the same does not arise.
18.     Ld. Counsel for the GNCTD has brought to the notice of this Court
that Breath Analyzers are being calibrated from time to time and other
equipments are also subject to periodical check-ups. It has been stated that
even the imposition of fine & payment of fine in Delhi is being done
electronically with a view to reduce human intervention. It has been stated
that the prayers made by the Petitioner vide this PIL have already been
looked into and the Petitioner’s genuine grievances have already been
addressed by the Union of India and the Delhi Traffic Police. He has also
assured this Court that the Traffic Police shall also welcome any other
positive suggestion made by the public at large/ Petitioner in order to further
improve the system which is in place.
W.P.(C) 13924/2021                                                  Page 15 of 19
19.            This Court has carefully gone through the Writ Petition and the reply
filed by the Respondents. Most of the Petitioner’s grievances, as expressed
in the Writ Petition, are genuine. They relate to issuance of safety challans,
safety of the public at large and genuine difficulties which are being faced
by the citizens with respect to the manner of implementation of the Motor
20.            The Petitioner has shown serious concern in the matter of imposition
of fine for violation of statutory provisions of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988
and subsequent amendment Act i.e., Motor Vehicle (Amendment) Act,
2019. To bring transparency in the matter of imposition of challans - high
speed cameras, closed-circuit television cameras, speed guns and body
wearable cameras have been introduced vide amendment of the Motor
Vehicle Act, 1988, through Section 136A.
21.            Section 136A of the Motor Vehicle Act, 1988 reads as under:
“136A. Electronic monitoring and enforcement of road safety
(1) The State Government shall ensure electronic monitoring
and enforcement of road safety in the manner provided under
sub-section(2) on national highways, State highways, roads or
in any urban city within a State which has a population upto
such limits as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
(2) The Central Government shall make rules for the
electronic monitoring and enforcement of road safety including
speed cameras, closed-circuit television cameras, speed guns,
body wearable cameras and such other technology.
Explanation:        For the purpose of this section, the
expression “body wearable camera” means a mobile audio and
video capture device worn on the body or uniform of a person
authorized by the State Government.”
W.P.(C) 13924/2021                                                        Page 16 of 19
22.     The Central Government has amended the relevant Rules too. These
Rules are known as Central Motor Vehicles (Fourteenth Amendment) Rules,
2018. The amendment to the Rules permits the driver to carry documents in
digital form also. The Government of India has subsequently issued a
notification dated 17.12.2018 for accepting driving licenses, registration
certificates and other transport related information presented in electronic
form and the said notification issued is reproduced as under:
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways
Dated, the 17th of December, 2018
1.      Principal Secretaries/ Secretaries, Department of Transport of all
2.      Directors General Police of all States/ UTs;
3.      Transport Commissioners of all States/ UT Administrations
Subject:            Acceptance of Driving License, Registration Certificate
and other transport related information presented in Electronic form.
Subject: Acceptance of Driving Licence, Registration Certificate and other
transport related information presented in Electronic form.
I am directed to refer to this Ministry's letter dated 8th August, 2018 and
19th November, 2018, and to say that this Ministry has received a number of
representations about the mechanism to be adopted by traffic/ transport
related enforcement agencies to validate or impound documents in case the
citizens produce documents in an Electronic Form.
W.P.(C) 13924/2021                                                    Page 17 of 19
2. In view of the above, a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP),as annexed,
may be adopted for ensuring compliance with the provisions of rule 139 of
the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989.
3. This issues with the approval of the Competent Authority.
Yours faithfully,
Under Secretary to the Govt. of India”
23.            Not only this, but a Standard Operating Procedure is also in existence,
also dated 17.12.2018. The same makes it very clear that in case a person
has certificates in a digital form, the same is acceptable to the authorities. A
very exhaustive SOP is in place and the same has been framed so that the
citizens do not face any difficulty in case they have their relevant documents
in digital form.
24.            Various amendments have been issued, as reflected from the short
affidavit filed by Respondent No. 1 to ensure that the driver is not required
to carry original documents with him, and that documents are accepted in
digital form by all the authorities. The reply also reveals that the
Government of Delhi is strictly adhering to all statutory provisions and the
Standard Operating Procedure issued by the Ministry of Road, Transport and
Highways dated 17.12.2018 in respect of validation of driving license,
registration certificates and other transport related documents. The
notification dated 11.08.2021 issued by the Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways has also been issued for electronic monitoring and enforcement of
road safety. The Delhi Government is strictly adhering to the same.
W.P.(C) 13924/2021                                                          Page 18 of 19
25.       It has also been brought to the notice of this Court that so far as the
Union Territory of Delhi is concerned, challans are being issued and fines
are being paid through electronic mode only. The Delhi Model in respect of
recovery of fines is also being adopted by other States in the country. So far
as the State of Delhi is concerned, as reflected from the reply, the use of
Information Technology has been incorporated, in order to ensure that a
citizen is not harassed in the matter of payment of fine and time is not
wasted in the same. Therefore, at this juncture, in light of the aforesaid
discussion, findings, submissions and documents on record, this Court is of
the opinion that no further orders are required to be passed in the present
PIL. However, the GNCTD shall ensure strict compliance of the Motor
Vehicle Act, 1988 and subsequent amendments along with the aforesaid
SOP issued on 17.12.2018.
26.       In light of the aforesaid, the PIL stands disposed of.