Mr. Ankur Mittal, Addl. Advocate General, Haryana with
for the respondent/State.
By way of the present application filed under Section 389
Cr.P.C., applicant/appellant No.1 namely Anil son of Vijay Singh seeks
suspension of sentence, during the pendency of the present appeal.
He has been convicted in FIR No.222 dated 31st August 2013
(registered under Section 147, 148, 149, 302 and 216 of the Indian Penal
Code, at Police Station Bhattu Kalan) and has been sentenced to undergo
rigorous imprisonment for life for commission of offence punishable under
Section 302 read with Section 34 IPC vide judgment and order dated 30th
Custody Certificate has been placed on record. Applicant/
appellant No.1 is stated to have undergone actual sentence of 6 years, 9
months and 4 days.
Counsel for applicant/appellant No.1 submits that keeping in
view the period of custody, the applicant is entitled for the concession of
CRM-19656-2021 in                                                      2
suspension of sentence in the light of ratio of law laid down by this Court in
'Dharampal vs. State of Haryana', 1999 (4) RCR (Criminal) 600.
Further, it has been submitted that applicant/appellant No.1
cannot be said to have actively participated in the crime as no injury on the
body of the deceased has been attributed to him. The only role assigned to
the present applicant/appellant is that he had driven the motor cycle to the
Tehsil complex on which the co-convicts were pillion riders. Thus, he
claims that applicant/appellant No.1 having already undergone custody of
more than 6 years and 9 months deserves concession of suspension of
The prayer made by applicant/appellant No.1 has been
vehemently opposed by the State Counsel as well as the Counsel for the
Ld. State Counsel as well as Counsel for the Complainant have
argued that the nature of the offence and the manner in which it was given
effect to, dis-entitles applicant/appellant No.1 from grant of the concession
of discretionary relief.   It has been further argued that the conduct of the
convict is enough to dismiss the present application.
Having heard counsel for the parties, we find that as per
Prosecution two motorcycles entered the Panchayat Bhawan, one of the
motorcycle was driven by Anil s/o Vijay r/o Bhattu Kalan and Vijay Singh
s/o Nathu Ram and Ravi s/o Vijay Singh were sitting as pillion riders,
whereas the other motorcycle was driven by Chintu @ Sukhdeep s/o
CRM-19656-2021 in                                                      3
Shankar Lal and Suresh s/o Raj Kumar and Shankar Lal s/o Nathu Ram
were sitting as pillion riders.         They all after getting down from their
motorcycles came towards them. Ravi and Vijay were armed with Gandasi.
Shakar and Suresh caught hold of the hands of the deceased from behind
and Shankar exhorted that this advocate be killed, upon which Vijay
attacked the deceased with the Gandasi, which hit the deceased on right
side of his neck and thereafter Ravi also with the Gandasi, which he was
holding in his hand, gave a blow on right side of the neck of the deceased.
A third blow was again given on the neck of the deceased.                  He
(complainant) further got recorded that the neck of the deceased hung on
one side. On their raising alarm, the assailants fled from the spot with their
respective weapons on their respective motorcycles.
It has also come on record that co-convict Ravi i.e. brother of
the present applicant/appellant, attacked sons of deceased on 3rd December,
2008. FIR No.235 dated 3rd December, 2008 was registered against the
offenders for the offences punishable under Sections 435, 323, 506, 452 of
the IPC, at Police Station Bhattu Kalan, District Fatehabad. Ravi was
convicted on 5th August, 2013 in the said FIR and the same was upheld up
to this Court. Ravi while on bail in the said FIR along with his father
attacked Suresh Kumar (now deceased) and caused as many as 21 injuries
on 8th April, 2009. Both Ravi and his father (the co-convicts/ brother and
father of the present applicant) were convicted on 14th December, 2011 in
FIR No.74 dated 8th April, 2009 of Police Station Bhattu Kalan, for the
CRM-19656-2021 in                                                            4
offences punishable under Section 307/34 IPC. Their sentence was
suspended by this Court on 3rd September, 2012.               While on bail the
aforesaid Ravi, Vijay along with present applicant namely Anil gave effect
to the present occurrence in which deceased Suresh Kumar lost his life. It
is matter of record that the present applicant/appellant No.1-Anil along with
his brother Ravi absconded and were declared Proclaimed Offenders on 20th
February, 2014. It was only Vijay who could be put to trial and was
convicted on 14th November, 2014. Thereafter the present applicant Anil
along with his brother were arrested in the present FIR, on 25th June, 2015
and put to trial. After trial the Court convicted both of them for the offences
punishable under Section 302/34 of the IPC for having committed murder
of deceased Suresh Kumar.
Undoubtedly, applicant/appellant No.1 has undergone custody
of more than 6 years and 9 months and the same does fall within the
parameters laid down by this Court in Dharampal's case (supra) but it is
trite that the directions contained in Dharampal's case (supra) are only in
the nature of guidelines and the same should not be observed as an
invariable rule. Apex Court in the case of 'Mahipal vs. Rajesh Kumar',
(2020) 2 SCC 118 held that -
“11. Essentially, this Court is required to analyse whether
there was a valid exercise of the power conferred by Section
439 CrPC to grant bail. The power to grant bail under
Section 439 is of a wide amplitude. But it is well settled that
though the grant of bail involves the exercise of the
CRM-19656-2021 in                                                          5
discretionary power of the court, it has to be exercised in a
judicious manner and not as a matter of course. In Ram
Govind Upadhyay v Sudarshan Singh (2002) 3 SCC 598,
Umesh Banerjee, J. speaking for a two-Judge Bench of this
Court, laid down the factors that must guide the exercise of
the power to grant bail in the following terms:
“3. Grant of bail though being a discretionary order —
but, however, calls for exercise of such a discretion in a
judicious manner and not as a matter of course. Order for
bail bereft of any cogent reason cannot be sustained.
Needless to record, however, that the grant of bail is
dependent upon the contextual facts of the matter being
dealt with by the court and facts, however, do always vary
from case to case. ... The nature of the offence is one of the
basic considerations for the grant of bail — more heinous
is the crime, the greater is the chance of rejection of the
bail, though, however, dependent on the factual matrix of
the matter.
4. Apart from the above, certain other which may be
attributed to be relevant considerations may also be
noticed at this juncture, though however, the same are only
illustrative and not exhaustive, neither there can be any.
The considerations being:
(a) While granting bail the court has to keep in mind
not only the nature of the accusations, but the severity
of the punishment, if the accusation entails a
conviction and the nature of evidence in support of the
accusations.
(b) Reasonable apprehensions of the witnesses being
tampered with or the apprehension of there being a
CRM-19656-2021 in                                                         6
threat for the complainant should also weigh with the
court in the matter of grant of bail.
(c) While it is not expected to have the entire evidence
establishing the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable
doubt but there ought always to be a prima facie
satisfaction of the court in support of the charge.
(d) Frivolity in prosecution should always be
considered and it is only the element of genuineness
that shall have to be considered in the matter of grant
of bail, and in the event of there being some doubt as
to the genuineness of the prosecution, in the normal
course of events, the accused is entitled to an order of
bail.”
12. The determination of whether a case is fit for the grant
of bail involves the balancing of numerous factors, among
which the nature of the offence, the severity of the
punishment and a prima facie view of the involvement of
the accused are important. No straight jacket formula
exists for courts to assess an application for the grant or
rejection of bail. At the stage of assessing whether a case is
fit for the grant of bail, the court is not required to enter
into a detailed analysis of the evidence on record to
establish beyond reasonable doubt the commission of the
crime by the accused. That is a matter for trial. However,
the Court is required to examine whether there is a prima
facie or reasonable ground to believe that the accused had
committed the offence and on a balance of the
considerations involved, the continued custody of the
accused sub-serves the purpose of the criminal justice
system. Where bail has been granted by a lower court, an
appellate court must be slow to interfere and ought to be
CRM-19656-2021 in                                                      7
guided by the principles set out for the exercise of the
power to set aside bail.”
The second limb of the argument raised by the counsel for
applicant/appellant No.1 that since applicant has not been accused of
causing injury to the deceased thus, he cannot be penalized for the offence
punishable under Section 302 read with Section 34 of the IPC also deserves
to be rejected. The same plea was raised before Trial Court also. It has
been analyzed and answered. The evidence has been considered by the Ld.
Trial Court and as per settled law, the findings returned by the trial Court
cannot be interfered at the stage of considering the application under
Keeping in view the aforesaid facts, the applicant is not entitled
for grant of suspension of sentence at this stage. Consequently, the instant
application is dismissed.
However, keeping in view incarceration suffered by the
applicant/appellant No.1, the Registry is directed to list the main appeal
along with connected appeal(s), if any, in the month of July, 2022 for final