1.          By this application the applicant (Accused no1 ) is seeking
bail under section 167(2) of the Criminal Procedure Code (Cr.P.C.) in
Crime no 153/2021 PS Koregaon Park Pune, for the offence
punishable under section 406, 409,420 read with Section 34 of Indian
Penal Code (IPC) and Section 3 and 4 of the Maharashtra Protection of
Depositors Act (MPID Act). The learned Special Judge at Pune by
order dated 07.01.2022 has refused to release the applicant on default
bail under Section 167(2) of CrPC.
2.      The aforesaid crime is registered on the basis of the complaint
dated 27.10.2021 lodged by the intervenor Yogesh Vishnu Dixit. The
applicant is a builder by profession. According to the informant the
applicant with his wife Dimple Somaji (Accused no 2) had induced
him to invest amount in their venture M/s M.G. Enterprises and had
accepted deposits from the informant and others assuring 24% p.a.
returns. The informant claims to have invested a total amount of
Rs.4000000/- for which returns were paid from 2016 to 2018. The
informant had inverted a further amount of Rs. 500000/- in 2019. The
applicant and the co-accused had failed to repay the principle and the
interest amounting to Rs.66,90,000/-. The informant claims that the
applicant and the co-accused had also defaulted in the matter of
repayment of the principle and interest to Kiran Shetty, Maya
Dwarkadas and others.
3.      It appears that the applicant and his wife were arrested at Delhi
Airport on 1.11.2021 and were produced before the Patiala Court at
Delhi on 2.11.2021 and 48 hours transit remand was obtained. On
3.11.2021 they were produced before the Special Court (MPID) at
Pune, when they were remanded to police custody (PCR) till 8.11.2021
which was further extended till 11.11.2021. From 11.11.2021, the
applicant is in magisterial Custody Remand(MCR). The accused no.2
Dimple Somji has been released on temporary bail interalia on
condition of payment of certain amount by the learned Special Court.
4.      It appears that on 3.1.2022 the investigating officer filed a
remand application dt.31.12.2021 intimating the special Court about
addition of Section 409 of IPC on account of following circumstances
which were revealed during the investigation.
(i)   Under a Memorandum of understanding
(MoU) dt 20.6.2015 one Vijay Damechya being
owner of Flat no 6 in building Gagan Utopia at
Pune being part of Palash Cooperative Housing
Society (Said Society) had transferred the rights in
respect of the said flat in favour of co accused
Dimple Somji to which the said Society was a
Consenting    Party.   The       said building  was
constructed by builders Gagan Buidscapes LLP of
which the applicant is one of the partners. Dimple
Somji in turn had executed an allotment letter in
respect of the said flat in favour of one Ritwik
Sanghvi which is signed by the applicant as
promoter/confirming party on behalf of the
builders Gagan Buidscapes LLP (said LLP for
short).
(ii) The statement of Ritwik Sanghavi and his
brother Shailendra Saghavi came to be recorded
during the course of the investigation in which it
was revealed that these witnesses had invested a
total amount of Rs.53,00,000/- in M G Enterprises
of the applicant and his wife in the year 2018 by
transfer in the account of Dimple Somji in Kotak
Mahindra Bank. The applicant and the co-accused
had assured interest @18% p.a. on the said
amount and had failed to pay a total amount of
Rs.1,01,89,886/- to the said witnesses including
interest for the period from June 2018 to
(iii) According to these witnesses, the allotment
letter executed by Dimple in favour of Ritwik
Sanghavi was by way of security for the amount
invested and its return with interest. When a
demand for the amount with interest was made the
applicant avoided to repay the same. These
witnesses claimed that when they went to the site
of the flat they found that the building was
constructed till four floors only as it had no
sanction for higher floors. Thus the said flat which
was supposed to be on the six floor was not even
(iv) The material allegation is that the applicant
without authority or consent of other partners of
the said LLP had signed the allotment letter as
builder/consenting party which according to the
prosecution is an offence under section 409 of
(v) Incidently Gagan Buidscape LLP has in all six
partners namely (i) Sushil Agarwal (ii) Gaurav
(v) Gagan Lifescape LLP and (vi) the applicant,
5.       On 4.1.2022 the applicant filed an application under section
167(2) of CrPC availing his indefeasible right to be released on bail, as
the prosecution had failed to file the chargesheet within the statutory
period of 60 days. The application was opposed on behalf of the
prosecution claiming that on account of the invocation of section 409
of IPC the period for filing chargesheet is 90 days and not 60 days.
6.      The learned Special Court has rejected the application by order
dt.7.1.2022 interalia on the ground that section 409 of IPC is
applicable and the prosecution has filed application invoking the said
section on 3.1.2022 that is prior to the applicant seeking default bail on
7.      I have heard learned Counsel for the parties. Perused Record.
8.      It is submitted by Mr Subodh Desai the learned counsel for the
applicant that admittedly chargesheet has not been filed within the
statutory period of 60 days going by the sections/offences initially
invoked. It is submitted that the invocation of section 409 of IPC on
3.1.2022 is misconceived, as it does not arise on facts. It is submitted
that a partner of a partnership firm cannot be held liable for the offence
under section 409 of IPC inasmuch as there is a communion of
ownership over the partnership property/assets of all the partners and
thus in absence of any entrustment the said offence is not made out as
held by the Supreme Court in Velji Raghavji Patel vs State Of
Maharashtra1. It is submitted that the Special Court has not passed
any order on the application/intimation filed by the prosecution adding
section 409 of IPC permitting such addition/invocation. It is submitted
that there has to be an order passed by the Special Court extending the
period which is not forthcoming in this case. Reliance in this regard is
placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in Achpal @
Ramswaroop & Ors. vs. State of Rajasthan 2. It is submitted that even
otherwise section 409 of IPC is not attracted in facts of the case. It is
submitted that going by the sections invoked initially, the statutory
period for filing the chargesheet upon completion of investigation is 60
days in this case. It is submitted that once the right has accrued to the
applicant which is also availed of before filing of the chargesheet,
within 60 days, the same cannot be defeated by any means, much less,
by any subterfuge. The learned counsel has placed further reliance on
the decision of the Supreme Court in Rakesh Kumar Paul vs. State of
Assam3 and Gautum Navlakha vs. National Investigating Agency 4.
He therefore submitted that the applicant be released on default bail
9.        The learned APP and the learned Senior Counsel for the
respondent/intervenor has submitted that there is no requirement of
any formal order permitting the addition of the new section as it is the
prerogative of the investigating officer and matter of investigation is
within exclusive jurisdiction and domain of the investigating agency. It
is submitted that section 409 of IPC was added/invoked prior to the
applicant seeking bail under section 167(2) of CrPC.          Reliance is
placed on the decision of the Calcutta High Court in Sayantan
Chatterjee vs. The State of West Bengal & anr. 5. It is submitted that
the principle laid down in Veljee Raghavajee has been explained away
by the Supreme Court in subsequent decisions. It is submitted that the
same is qualified and would not apply where there is a special
entrustment. In other words it is submitted that in a case where the
property of the partnership is specially entrusted to one or more of the
partners they can in a given case be held liable for misappropriation of
such property. It is submitted that the magistrate/special court cannot
look into this aspect at the stage of consideration of the application
under section 167(2) of CrPC once the investigating officer invokes a
section admitting 90 days for completion of the investigation.
10.     I have considered the submissions made. It is not in dispute that
going by the initial sections invoked (excluding section 409 of IPC)
the period for completion of the investigation and filing of the
chargesheet was 60 days. It is also not in dispute that charge sheet is no
filed within 60 days. The charge sheet was filed on 21.1.2022 that is
within 90 days. Further it is a matter of record that by the remand
application dt. 31.12.2021 ( filed on 3.1.2022) it was intimated to the
Special Court about addition/invocation of Section 409 of IPC on
which the Special Court has passed an order 'Seen, note be taken'. It is
also a matter of record that the applicant filed application on 4.1.2022
availing the indefeasible right to be released on bail under section
167(2) of CrPC.
11.      It was not disputed during the course of the arguments at bar
that the right conferred by section 167(2) of CrPC is an important
right. The violation of the said right results into illegal detention which
is in violation of the right conferred by Article 21 of the Constitution
of Inia (See the decision in Rajkumar Bhagchand Jain vs. Union of
India & anr6).         It was submitted by the learned counsel for the
applicant that the said right has been practically elevated to the status
of a fundamental right under Article 21 of the Constitution of India as
it affects the personal liberty of the accused.
12.      The provision setting out a time line for completion of the
investigation and the corresponding right of the accused to be released
on bail when the investigation is not completed within the stipulated
period, aims at balancing the interest, both of the investigation and the
personal liberty of the accused.
13.      There is no manner of doubt that the investigation is within the
province and domain of the investigating agency. However that does
not mean that the court, in almost all cases, would be bound by the
invocation of a particular section against the accused by the
prosecuting agency. This is because the label of the section or the
provision invoked would not be decisive. To hold otherwise, would
amount to placing the said right at the mercy of the investigating
agency and would indirectly result in the magistrate abdicating the
duty to enforce the right wherever necessary. Thus the court would be
required to look into the generality of the allegations made and the
material collected. In a given case where exfacie the provision is not
attracted the court may not be bound by the same. Although there is no
requirement for the investigating officer to obtain permission from the
magistrate for such addition, as held by the Calcutta High Court in
Sayantan Chatterjee (supra), the Magistrate is not precluded from
looking into the facts and the material collected, whether the offence is
ex facie made out or not. The matter depends on the facts and
circumstances of each case. For instance, where the investigating
officer invokes section 326 of IPC, however the medical report does
not ex facie show that the victim has suffered a 'grievous injury', within
the meaning of Section 320 of IPC. OR a case where section 409 of
IPC is invoked and admittedly the accused does not fall under any of
the seven categories mentioned in the said section namely the accused
is neither a public servant a banker etc. I would hasten to add that
where however the facts and the material collected prima facie indicate
the ingredients of a particular offence the court obviously cannot
examine or appreciate the same the same at that stage in order to arrive
at a different conclusion.
14.     Coming back, the issue in the present case squarely turns on the
question of invocation/applicability of Section 409 of IPC. If it applies
obviously the period is ninety days within which the charge sheet is
filed. If not the investigation was not completed within the statutory
period entitling the applicant to release on default bail.
15.     As noticed earlier the gist of the offence against the applicant
and the co accused is that the applicant had accepted various amounts
from the informant and others assuring returns in which there was a
default. Thus the said offence is qua the informant and other depositors
and investors. Even the allegation by Ritweek Saghavi and his brother
about the execution of the allotment letter without the flat being found
to be constructed is claimed to be an offence under section 420 of IPC
qua these witnesses. The alleged offence, if any, about the applicant
having signed the allotment letter by Dimple Somji as a consenting
party on behalf of the said LLP is presumably qua the other partners of
the said LLP. It is in this context it is claimed on behalf of the applicant
that the said offence, if any, is an independent offence qua the LLP and
other partners unconnected with the principle offence of failure to pay
the amount deposited/invested with interest.
16.    The learned Senior Counsel for the Intervenor did not dispute
that in a case where the invocation of such a section providing for a
larger period for investigation is found to be malafide i.e. only in order
to frustrate the right of the accused or a case where the offence is not
ex facie made out, the Court would be entitled to look into the same.
However, it is submitted that cases lying in between the Court will
have to abide by the claim of the Investigating Officer.
17.    It was submitted by the learned Senior Counsel for the
intervenor that the allegation insofar as the offence under Section 409
of IPC is concerned, is not only limited to the applicant signing as a
consenting party on the allotment letter but it is also about
misappropriation of the amount deposited by Ritwik Sanghvi and his
18.    I am afraid prima facie this cannot be accepted for the reason
that in the remand application dated 31.12.2021, no such claim has
been made.
19.     The Supreme Court in the oft quoted decision in the case of
Velgee Raghavaji has held that a partner cannot be found to be guilty
of an offence under section 409 of IPC. The contention on behalf of
the intervenor is that this may not apply if there is a special
entrustment. Atleast prima facie it is not shown that there was such
special entrustment in favour of the applicant. The Special court has
not adverted to these aspects except saying that the offence under
section 409 of IPC is attracted.
20.    It can further be seen that till the filing of the chargesheet on
21.01.2022, the Investigating Officer had not recorded statements of
any of the other partners of Gagan Buidscapes LLP. It was submitted
during the course of the arguments that subsequent to the filing of the
chargesheet, such statements are recorded. If that be so, on the date on
which the remand application dated 31.12.2021 was filed invoking
section 409 of IPC, there were no statements of the other partners
claiming that the allotment letter is signed by the applicant as
consenting party without the authority from the other partners. That
apart, it is also pointed out by the learned Counsel for the applicant
that the flat was owned by Mr. Vijay Damechya and not by the said
21.     The Supreme Court in the case of Rakesh Kumar Paul (supra)
has held thus in para 38 and 39 of the judgment, thus :
“38.    This Court also dealt with the decision
rendered in Sanjay Dutt and noted that the
principle laid down by the Constitution Bench is to
the effect that if the charge sheet is not filed and
the right for ‘default bail’ has ripened into the
status of in-defeasibility, it cannot be frustrated by
the prosecution on any pretext. The accused can
avail his liberty by filing an application stating that
the statutory period for filing the charge sheet or
challan has expired and the same has not yet been
filed and therefore the indefeasible right has
accrued in his or her favour and further the
accused is prepared to furnish the bail bond.
39. This Court also noted that apart from the
possibility of the prosecution frustrating the
indefeasible right, there are occasions when even
the   court    frustrates    the     indefeasible right.
Reference was made to Mohamed Iqbal Madar
Sheikh v. State of Maharashtra wherein it was
observed that some courts keep the application for
‘default bail’ pending for some days so that in the
meantime a charge sheet is submitted. While such
a practice both on the part of prosecution as well
as some courts must be very strongly and
vehemently discouraged, we reiterate that no
subterfuge should be resorted to, to defeat the
indefeasible right of the accused for ‘default bail’
during the interregnum when the statutory period
for filing the charge sheet or challan expires and
the submission of the charge sheet or challan in
court.”
22.    I thus find that the indefeasible right accrued to the applicant on
expiry of 60 days on account of failure to file the chargesheet can not
be defeated by mere invocation of section 409 of IPC claiming that the
period for completion of the investigation and filing of the chargesheet
is 90 days.
23.    In the result the following order is passed.
(i) The Applicant Alnesh Akil Somji, be released
on bail on execution of a PR Bond in the sum of
₹ 1,00,000/- with one or two solvent sureties in
the like amount to the satisfaction of the Trial
(ii)   The Applicant shall undertake to remain
present during the course of the trial unless
exempted.
(iii) The Applicant shall surrender his passport, if
any, before the Trial Court.
(iv) The Applicant shall not leave India without
the prior permission of the Special Court.
(v) The Applicant shall not directly or indirectly
make any attempt to contact or to influence the
prosecution witnesses or to otherwise tamper with
the prosecution evidence.
(vi)                    The Applicant shall cooperate with the
Investigating Agency in the further investigation,
if any.
conditions, the bail is liable to be cancelled.
24.           It is however made clear that the observations here in are only
for the limited purpose of deciding the plea for bail on default and the
magistrate shall not be influenced by the same at the trial
Digitally signed by ANDREZA