Case :- PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION (PIL) No. - 523 of
Counsel for Petitioner :- Asok Pande
Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned State
By means of these proceedings, ostensibly filed in public
interest, a prayer has been made to issue a direction to the
respondents to conduct an SIT enquiry regarding alleged
corruption committed by two individual officers in the Public
Works Department, namely, Sri V.K.Singh and Sri S.P. Saxena,
who at the same point of time, were posted at District Unnao. In
the prayer clause, it has been stated by the petitioner that “reports
are that they have earned hundreds of crores by misuse of their
Another prayer made in the writ petition is that a direction
be issued to the respondents to refer the matter to the Central
Bureau of Investigation (CBI) after conducting internal audit
against the aforesaid individuals for alleged loot committed
during their tenure in office.
When we examine the averments made in the writ petition,
what we find is that the writ petition has been filed without any
concrete or reliable evidence in respect of the assertions made by
the petitioner. As a matter of fact, it has been vaguely averred by
the petitioner in the petition that the aforementioned two officers
are guilty of alleged loot and corruption etc. These allegations in
the petition have been made against the said individuals merely
on the basis of some departmental correspondence made by the
departmental officers, that too, way back in the year 2007-2008.
We may also notice that the petitioner nowhere in the writ petition
has disclosed his credentials which may enable this Court to
entertain this Public Interest Litigation filed by him.
In compliance of the judgment rendered by Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the case of State of Uttranchal Vs. Balwant
Singh Chaufal, reported in (2010) 3 SCC 402, Rule (3-A) in
Rule 1 of Chapter XXII was inserted in the Allahabad High Court
Rules. The said Rule 1(3-A) of Chapter XXII of the Rules of the
Court is extracted herein under :
requirements of the other rules in this chapter, the
petition seeking to file a Public Interest Litigation,
should precisely and specifically state, in the affidavit
to be sworn by him giving his credentials, the public
cause he is seeking to espouse; that he has no
personal or private interest in the matter; that there
is no authoritative pronouncement by the Supreme
Court or High Court on the question raised; and that
the result of the litigation will not lead to any undue
gain to himself or anyone associated with him, or any
undue loss to any person, body of persons or the
From the afore-quoted provision of Rule 1 (3-A), it is clear
that a person seeking to file a Public Interest Litigation, should
precisely and specifically state in the affidavit to be sworn by him
giving his credentials. Rule 1(3-A) was added in the High Court
Rules in order to address the concerns raised by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the case of Balwant Singh Chaufal (supra),
wherein the Hon’ble Apex Court on one hand has laid emphasis
that genuine Public Interest Litigation should be entertained by
the Courts where some grievance in relation to some dis-
advantageous section of the Society is raised or violation of basic
human rights are brought to the notice of the court, however, in
the same breath, Hon’ble Apex Court has also put a word of
caution that frivolous vexatious petitions and petitions which seek
to serve personal interest should not be entertained; rather such
petition should be dismissed at the very threshold.
The Division Bench of this Court in the case of Narendra
Kumar Yadav Vs. State of U.P. and others, reported in
[2020(11) ADJ 637 (LB)] has elaborately dealt with the provision
of Rule 1(3-A) of Chapter XXII of the Rules of the Court and has
held that any person approaching the Court by filing Public
Interest Litigation has to specifically establish his credentials.
If we examine the credentials of the petitioner as disclosed
on the touchstone of the law laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in the case of Balwant Singh Chaufal (supra) and Rule
1(3-A) of Chapter XXII of the Rules of the Court, what we find is
that he has utterly failed to establish his credentials so as to
persuade this Court to entertain this petition filed purportedly in
What all has been stated by the petitioner is that he is a
“public spirited citizen” and is involved in “so many activities”
for public good and want that the rule of law should prevail in
governance. As to how the petitioner has described himself to be
a public spirited citizen and as to in what particular activities has
he been engaged for public good, has not been disclosed by the
As observed above, requirement of Rule1(3-A) is that a
person filing Public Interest Litigation should specifically
disclose his credentials.
Regarding credentials of the petitioner to institute these
proceedings purportedly in Public Interest, we may also note that
in relation to alleged irregularities said to have been committed
by Sri V.K. Singh and Sri S.P.Singh, he has not apprised any
departmental higher authority of the alleged corruption. Along
with the petition certain representations said to have been made to
Hon’ble Prime Minister and Hon’ble Chief Minister have been
enclosed, however, none of the said representations were made or
signed by the petitioner. One such representation is signed by
Mohd. Faisal Kidwai and other such representation is signed by
some Vibhau Shankar Tripathi. Along with the petition, an
undated letter of some of the Member of Parliament,
Mohanlalganj, Lucknow has been annexed, however, none of the
representations, as observed above, have been made by the
petitioner, that is to say, except for filing the instant petition the
petitioner, for seeking probe into the alleged corruption, has not
apprised the authorities and has straightaway filed the instant
petition. The petitioner, thus, appears to be acting at the instance
of someone else as he has not made any effort either to apprise
the authorities of the alleged irregularities or even to collect
necessary and credible information or evidence to establish even
a semblance of any corrupt practice or irregularity.
While reciting the facts in the petition as well, the petitioner
has only     stated that Sri V.K.Singh and Sri S.P.Sexena were
posted as Executive Engineer in the Public Works Department at
Unnao and they were responsible for executing certain
construction works relating to certain roads. The roads are said to
have been constructed in the year 2006-7 and certain amount is
said to have been spent in the same and as per averments made in
the petition, Sri V.K.Singh, the then Executive Engineer had spent
some more amount than the amount in respect of which technical
sanction was granted and they ought to have surrendered the rest
of the amount.
The petitioner describes Annexure No.1, appended to the
petition to be an Audit Report, dated 15.05.2008, whereas the
document annexed as Annexure No.1 to the petition is not Audit
Report. It is a letter written by the Superintending Engineer,
Unnao to the Chief Engineer, Central Zone, Lucknow wherein
information has been furnished that as against sanction of Rs.
755.97 lacs, the amount spent is Rs.755.87 lacs and that 10 works
amounting to Rs.28.04 lacs were got executed without technical
sanction which is violation of Financial Hand Book. The
petitioner has, thus, relied upon certain other departmental
correspondence made by the officers of the department, however,
no other credible document or evidence has been enclosed in the
petition so as to arrive at any conclusive or concrete finding about
the alleged irregularities/corruption.
For the reasons aforesaid, we are not inclined to entertain
this Public Interest Litigation petition, which is hereby dismissed.