The petitioner is before this Court calling in question the order
dated 30th July, 2016 passed by the I Additional Civil Judge and
JMFC, Udupi in C.C.2719 of 2016, arising out of Cr.No.387 of 2009.
The wife of the 2nd respondent/complainant had borrowed
finance  from    the  Karnataka State     Finance    Corporation (‘the
Corporation’ for short), and had established Sri Durga Printers and
Sri Durga Printers Conventional Hall in the city of Brahmavar.
Having defaulted in repayment of loan in terms of the conditions of
loan, the property of the 2nd respondent and his wife, was brought
to sale by way of public auction.          The petitioner who was a
participant in the said auction became the highest bidder of the
property and the property was directed to be handed over to the
successful auction purchaser i.e., the petitioner. The complainant
claiming that the property was worth more than Rs.55/- lakhs had
been sold at Rs.29/- lakhs by the Corporation, made a hue and cry
and filed objections to the auction proceedings.
3. All the efforts of the 2nd respondent to stall auction process
or even issuance of sale certificate in favour of the petitioner went
in vain. Thereafter, according to the complainant on 10-11-2009,
at about 4.30 p.m., when he had visited Udupi Branch of the
Corporation, he saw the petitioner coming out after all the
formalities being over and on the ground that the petitioner had
threatened him not to interfere with the auction proceedings, which
was already over and that he had given him life threat, registered a
complaint two days after the issuance of sale certificate and all
further proceedings were over before the Corporation, by handing
over the property in favour of the petitioner. The formalities before
the Corporation had concluded on 11-11-2009, and the complaint is
registered on 13-11-2009.
4. Based on the complaint for the alleging offence punishable
under Section 506 of the IPC, investigation was ordered and the 1st
respondent/Police after conduct of investigation, filed a ‘B’ report.
The petitioner filed a protest petition against acceptance of ‘B’
report under Section 200 of the Cr.P.C.      The learned Magistrate
recorded the sworn statement of the complainant and on perusal of
the report, directed registration of criminal case against the
petitioner for offence punishable under Section 506 of the IPC and
summons issued. It is at this stage, the petitioner approached this
Court in the subject criminal petition.
5. Heard Sri K.N.Nitish, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner and Smt. Namitha Mahesh B.G., learned High Court
Government Pleader appearing for the 1st respondent.
6. Sri K.N.Nitish, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner
submits that the entire allegation against the petitioner would not
make out an offence punishable under Section 506 of the IPC, the
petitioner is innocent of the property that was put to auction and
because the petitioner purchased the property belonging to the
complainant, the complainant to harm the petitioner has registered
the criminal case.     It is his further submission that the learned
Magistrate while rejecting ‘B’ report and directing registration of the
criminal case, did not apply his mind with regard to the offence
alleged or the ‘B’ report and has mechanically ordered registration
of the criminal case.
7. On the other hand, Smt. B.G. Namitha Mahesh, learned
High Court Government Pleader appearing for the 1st respondent
would submit that since the Police have conducted investigation and
the Court has not accepted the ‘B’ report, it is a matter for trial and
the learned Magistrate at this stage need not apply his mind as
everything would be at large in the trial. The petitioner can as well
prove his innocence in the trial Court and this Court at this stage
should not interfere or interject the criminal trial.
8. I have given my anxious consideration to the aforesaid
submissions of the learned counsel appearing for both parties and
perused the records.
9. The above narrated facts being not in dispute, they need
not be reiterated all over again. The Corporation did put the
property belonging to the 2nd respondent/complainant and his wife,
to auction and the petitioner is the auction purchaser. The
proceedings of auction culminated in the property being handed
over to the petitioner after sale and according to the complainant,
the property was auctioned by the Corporation at a very low price.
The    proceedings   of  the   auction  were   also  completed   on
11-11-2009.     The complainant’s version is that, he met the
petitioner, who was the successful auction purchaser, in the office
of the Corporation and that meeting springs out an allegation that
the petitioner had threatened the 2nd respondent not to interfere
with the smooth transition of the property to his name.        This
happened on 10th or 11th November, 2009. The complaint is
registered against the petitioner on 13-11-2009.
10. The sequence of events would clearly indicate that the
property of the 2nd respondent was put to auction by the
Corporation on account of his own default in making repayment of
loan; the default may be for manifold reasons. The petitioner is the
auction purchaser. The petitioner who participated in the auction
became a successful bidder, pursuant to which he was handed over
the property. The aforesaid sequence of events would clearly
indicate that the 2nd respondent, a disgruntled owner of the
property having lost the property in the auction, wanted to teach a
lesson to the auction purchaser i.e., the petitioner and accordingly,
registers a bald complaint alleging offence punishable under Section
506 of the IPC.
11. Offence punishable under Section 506 of the IPC is non-
cognizable and it is an offence punishable for criminal intimidation,
what is criminal intimidation is defined under Section 503 of the
IPC. Therefore, Sections 503 and 506 of the IPC are germane to be
noticed for a consideration of the issue at hand, they read as
“Section 503 - Criminal intimidation:
Whoever threatens another with any injury to his
person, reputation or property, or to the person or
reputation of any one in whom that person is
interested, with intent to cause alarm to that
person, or to cause that person to do any act
which he is not legally bound to do, or to omit to
do any act which that person is legally entitled to
do, as the means of avoiding the execution of
such threat, commits criminal intimidation.
Explanation.—A threat to injure the reputation of
any deceased person in whom the person
threatened is interested, is within this section.
Section 506 - Punishment for criminal
Whoever commits, the offence of criminal
intimidation shall be punished with imprisonment
of either description for a term which may extend
to two years, or with fine, or with both;
If threat be to cause death or grievous hurt,
etc. - And if the threat be to cause death or
grievous hurt, or to cause the destruction of any
property by fire, or to cause an offence
punishable with death or imprisonment for life, or
with imprisonment for a term which may extend
to seven years, or to impute, unchastity to a
woman, shall be punished with imprisonment of
either description for a term which may extend to
seven years, or with fine, or with both.
Section 503 of the IPC, which defines ‘criminal intimidation’ would
direct that whoever threatens another person with any injury to his
person, reputation or property by an act, he is not legally bound to
do and executes certain threats, commits criminal intimidation.
Therefore, the intention of the petitioner ought to have been to do
any injury to the complainant, his reputation or property. If the
complaint is seen qua Section 506 of the IPC, it does not link any
action of the petitioner to Section 503 of the IPC, for an offence
punishable under Section 506 of the IPC.       All that the complaint
would narrate is that, the property of the complainant was sold by
the Corporation for a very less price and the loan was adjusted to
the auction money.       It is only because the petitioner was the
auction purchaser of the property, though, through legal means,
the complaint is registered by the complainant.      Therefore, there
cannot be a better case of giving a criminal colour to a legal act of
the Corporation, putting up the property of the 2nd respondent to
sale and the petitioner buying the property, being the auction
purchaser.    In this view of the matter, it becomes necessary to
consider the aftermath of the complaint that is registered.
12. Investigation was ordered by the learned Magistrate on
registration of the complaint and after investigation, the Police filed
a final report depicting that there was no evidence found in the
investigation for offence punishable under Section 506 of the IPC
and filed a ‘B’ report before the learned Magistrate.     The learned
Magistrate rejecting the ‘B’ report, issued notice to the complainant
on 08-11-2010.      The complainant filed a protest petition after
which, a sworn statement of the complainant was taken under
Section 161 of the Cr.P.C. and the matter was set for orders. The
order that is passed by the learned Magistrate, reads as follows:-
discloses a case against the accused for
the offence punishable under Section 506
accused for the offence punishable under
Section 506 of I.P.C. and issue summons to
the accused, if P.F. paid.
Perused the chargesheet. Cognizance is
taken under Sec. 190(1)(b) of Cr.P.C. for
the offences punishable under Sec. 506
of IPC. Issue summons to accused.
Call on 27- 08- 2016.
A cursory perusal at the order would indicate, blatant non-
application of mind on the part of the learned Magistrate. All that
the learned Magistrate would indicate is that, on a perusal of oral
sworn statement of the complainant and documentary evidence
coupled with complaint averments, in the opinion of the learned
Magistrate, because it prima facie disclosed a case against the
accused for the offence punishable under Section 506 of the IPC,
directs registration of a criminal case and issued summons, thereby
the learned Magistrate takes cognizance, under Section 191(1)(b)
of the Cr.P.C. and sets the criminal trial in motion.
13. The order that sets criminal trial in motion by taking
cognizance under Section 191(1)(b) of the Cr.P.C. should bear the
stamp of application of mind, more so, in the cases like the subject
petition, where an investigation is ordered on the complaint
registered under Section 200 of the Cr.P.C. and a final report is filed
by the Police after investigation. Once the final report is filed, if it
is a ‘B’ report, it is in favour of the accused. The complainant who
would file a protest petition against acceptance of such ‘B’ report,
on registration of the protest petition against ‘B’ report, sworn
statement of the complainant would be taken.
14. There are two materials available before the learned
Magistrate – one being the ‘B’ report, the other being the protest
petition and the evidence of the complainant.            The learned
Magistrate ought to have applied his mind and reasoned out in the
order as to why he does not accept the ‘B’ report and only accepts
the version of the complainant and issues summons setting the
criminal trial in motion. Setting the criminal trial in motion cannot
become a matter of course or done as a routine exercise.           The
order must bear application of mind as to why ‘B’ report is not
acceptable to the learned Magistrate and why the evidence and the
complaint of the complainant is overwhelming.
15. Application of judicious mind is demonstrable only in the
order the learned Magistrate would make, for the order to
demonstrate application of mind it must contain reasons, as
recording of reasons is the only way that one can construe such
application of mind. Reasons are the live links between the mind of
the decision taker, to the controversy in question and the decision
arrived at. Reason and application of mind are impregnable for a
judicial order to sustain the scrutiny of law.      Reasons in every
circumstances need not be elaborate, but nevertheless should bear
application of mind.
16. Not for nothing an investigation is ordered and the Police
would conduct investigation and file a ‘B’ report.     There may be
cases where a ‘B’ report would be filed without proper investigation,
which would require trial on a protest petition being filed by the
complainant or there may be cases where the complainant would be
disgruntled and file a protest petition. Therefore, merely because a
complainant files a protest petition and gives a statement with
regard to his protest petition, the learned Magistrate ought not be
swayed away by such protest petition.      It is incumbent upon the
learned Magistrate to consider ‘B’ report, protest petition and the
evidence on record and record his finding as to why he rejects the
‘B’ report and accepts the protest petition.
17. Application of judicious mind by the learned Magistrate
while setting the criminal trial in motion, in cases particularly where
protest petition is filed against the ‘B’ report by the complainant,
becomes sine qua non, failing which, the order taking cognizance
notwithstanding    the   ‘B’ report,   becomes    a  routine   exercise.
Reasons to be recorded in such circumstances need not be
elaborate but must bear application of mind.
18. The other procedural infirmity in the case at hand is with
regard to acceptance of the complaint and registration of FIR by the
Police being erroneous, as the alleged offence punishable under
Section 506 of the IPC is non-cognizable offence and when
information is received on a non-cognizable offence, the procedure
as stipulated under Section 155 of the Cr.P.C. has to be followed.
Sub-section (1) of Section 155 of the Cr.P.C., reads as follows:
“155. Information as to non- cognizable
cases and investigation of such cases:
(1) When information is given to an officer in
charge of a police station of the commission within
the limits of such station of a non-cognizable
offence, he shall enter or cause to be entered the
substance of the information in a book to be kept
by such officer in such form as the State
Government may prescribe in this behalf, and refer
the informant to the Magistrate.”
In terms of sub-section (1) of Section 155 of the Cr.P.C., when
information is given to an Officer in-charge of a Police Station, of
cognizable offence, he shall enter or cause to enter the information
and refer the informant to the Magistrate. In the case at hand, the
allegation against the petitioner being a non- cognizable offence
punishable under Section 506 of the IPC, the procedure under
Section 155 of the Cr.P.C., ought to have been followed.          The
registration of FIR could not have been done by the Police without
at the outset referring the matter to the learned Magistrate. This is
yet another infirmity in the entire proceedings. Therefore, on the
aforesaid reasons with regard to the application of mind on the part
of the learned Magistrate and registration of FIR being violative of
Section 155 of the Cr.P.C., the entire proceedings stand vitiated.
19. In the normal circumstance, when the order taking
cognizance bears the stamp of non-application of mind, the matter
could be remitted back to the learned Magistrate for consideration
afresh. In the peculiar facts of this case, where there is an error
even in the registration of FIR and the complaint itself not linking
even to the remotest sense to the offence alleged, I deem it
appropriate not to remit the matter back to the hands of the
learned Magistrate for consideration afresh.
20. It is also germane to take note of mushrooming of
registration of criminal cases by handiwork of certain disgruntled
complainants as is found in the case at hand. The observations of
the Apex Court in the case of CHANDRAPAL SINGH AND
OTHERS       v.   MAHARAJ      SINGH    AND    ANOTHER1,     in  the
circumstances, is apposite. The Apex Court observes as follows:-
“14. That leaves for our consideration the
alleged offence under Section 199. Section 199
provides   punishment    for  making   a   false
statement in a declaration which is by law
receivable in evidence. We will assume that the
affidavits filed in a proceeding for allotment of
premises before the Rent Control Officer are
receivable as evidence. It is complained that
certain averments in these affidavits are false
though no specific averment is singled out for
this purpose in the complaint. When it is alleged
that a false statement has been made in a
declaration which is receivable as evidence in
any Court of Justice or before any public servant
or other person, the statement alleged to be false
has to be set out and its alleged falsity with
reference to the truth found in some document
has to be referred to pointing out that the two
situations     cannot    co-exist,    both    being
attributable to the same person and, therefore,
one to his knowledge must be false. Rival
contentions set out in affidavits accepted or
rejected by courts      with  reference    to onus
probandi do not furnish foundation for a charge
under Section 199, I.P.C. To illustrate the point,
appellant 1 Chandrapal Singh alleged that he
was in possession of one room forming part of
premises No. 385/2. The learned Additional
District  Judge    after   scrutinising   all  rival
affidavits did not accept this contention. It
thereby    does   not   become   false. The   only
inference   is  that   the  statement   made    by
Chandrapal Singh did not inspire confidence
looking to other relevant evidence in the case.
Acceptance or rejection of evidence by itself is
not a sufficient yardstick to dub the one rejected
as false. Falsity can be alleged when truth
stands out glaringly and to the knowledge of the
person who is making the false statement. Day
in and day out, in courts averments made by
one set of witnesses are accepted and the
counter averments are rejected. If in all such
cases complaints under Section 199, I.P.C. are to
be filed not only there will open up floodgates of
litigation but it would unquestionably be an
abuse of the process of the Court. The learned
Counsel for the respondent told us that a
tendency to perjure is very much on the
increase and unless by firm action courts
do not put their foot down heavily upon
such persons the whole judicial process
would come to ridicule. We see some force
in the submission but it is equally true that
chagrined and frustrated litigants should
frustration by cheaply invoking jurisdiction
of the criminal court. Complainant herein
is an Advocate. He lost in both courts in the
rushed to the criminal court. This itself
speaks volumes. Add to this the fact that
inescapable that invoking the jurisdiction
of the criminal court in this background is
an abuse of the process of law and the High
Court rather glossed over this important
fact while declining to exercise its power
under Section 482, Cr. P.C.”
Therefore, in the light of the observations of the Apex Court in the
afore-extracted judgment, the 2nd respondent cannot but be held to
be a frustrated litigant, who did want to settle his score against the
petitioner, who was an innocent purchaser in an auction process.
Merely because, the property belonged to the complainant and it
having been sold in public auction, the criminal trial could not have
been set in motion.      It is in such cases, the learned Magistrate
before whom the proceedings are instituted must have exercised
care and caution while taking cognizance on the allegation of such
21. For the aforesaid reasons, the following:
i. The criminal petition is allowed.
ii. The order dated 30.07.2016, passed by the learned
Additional  Civil   Jude    and  JMFC,   Udupi   in  Crime
No.387/2009       and     consequential   proceedings    in
C.C.No.2719/2016, stand quashed.