1. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgments and
orders dated 04.02.2019 and 05.04.2019 passed by the High Court of
Gujarat at Ahmedabad in R/Criminal Appeal No. 1502 of 2018 and
R/Criminal Appeal No.389 of 2019 by which the High Court has
released the respective respondents No.1 – accused, the original
complainant has preferred the present appeals.
2. For the sake of convenience, the facts in Criminal Appeal No.1655 of
2021 arising out of the impugned judgment and order dated
04.02.2019 passed in Criminal Appeal No.1502 of 2018 are
narrated which are as under: -
2.1 As per the case of the prosecution, the original complainant –
appellant herein, her aunt Smt. Savitaben and her husband
Mukeshbhai (deceased) went to collect scrap from the open space
outside a factory. When they were picking scrap on the backside of
the factory area, five persons (accused) came there and started abusing
them and thereafter initially started beating all three of them outside the
factory. That thereafter five accused persons tied Mukeshbhai –
husband of the original complainant to the gate of the factory and started
beating him. As per the case of the prosecution Jayaben – original
complainant and her aunt were asked to leave. They left and
thereafter informed their relatives and friends and when they returned,
they found Mukeshbhai unconscious and seriously injured. He was
taken to the hospital where he was declared dead. A First Information
Report was registered at Police Station, Shapar (Veraval) as C.R.
No. I/38 of 2018 against the five accused including respective respondents
No.1 herein for the offences under Sections 302, 114, 323 of the Indian
Penal Code, Section 135, 37(1) of the Gujarat Police Act and Section
3(2)(5) of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act. Investigation was carried out by the concerned Dy.SP
Gondal division and thereafter by Dy.SP (SC & ST Cell) Rajkot Rural.
After investigation all the accused persons (five in numbers) came to
be chargesheeted for the offences under Sections 302, 342, 354,
323, 143, 147, 148, 149 of the Indian Penal Code 1860, Section
3(1)(r)(s), 3(2)(5) of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 and Section 135 of the Gujarat Police
Act, 1951 having committed the murder of the deceased –
Mukeshbhai – husband of the appellant – Jayaben. That respondent
No.1 herein moved a bail application before the learned Sessions
Court, Gondal seeking release on bail, which came to be dismissed vide
order dated 18.09.2018. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the order
passed by the learned Sessions Court rejecting the bail application
and refusing to release respondent No.1 – accused on bail,
respondent No.1 – accused preferred present Criminal Appeal
No.1502 of 2018 before the High Court. By the impugned judgment
and order dated 04.02.2019, the High Court has released respondent
No.1 – original accused – Tejas Kanubhai Zala on bail in connection
with the aforesaid case. By subsequent judgment and order dated
05.04.2019 in another Criminal Appeal No.389 of 2019 another
accused – Jaysukhbhai Devrajbhai Radadiya - respondent No.1
has been released on bail mainly considering the fact that co- accused –
Tejas Kanubhai Zala has been released on bail and also by
observing that so far as the said accused except the fact that he
was found standing near the place of incident there is no further
material against him.
3. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned judgments and
orders passed by the High Court releasing respective respondents No.1
on bail, the original complainant has preferred the present appeals.
4. We have heard Shri Colin Gonsalves, learned Senior Advocate
appearing on behalf of the appellant, Ms. Aastha Mehta, learned
counsel appearing on behalf of the State and Shri Huzefa Ahmadi
learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of respondent No.1 –
accused - Tejas Kanubhai Zala and Shri Purvish Jitendra Malkan,
learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No.1 – accused -
5. Shri Gonsalves, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of
the appellant has vehemently submitted that in the facts and
circumstances of the case, the High Court has materially erred in
releasing the accused on bail in a case where the husband of the
complainant was murdered brutally.
5.1 It is submitted that the High Court has not at all appreciated
the fact that after a thorough investigation, the accused were
chargesheeted for the offences under Sections 302, 342, 354, 323,
143, 147, 148, 149 of the Indian Penal Code 1860, Section 3(1)(r)(s),
3(2)(5) of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act, 1989 and Section 135 of the Gujarat Police Act,
1951. It is submitted that the manner in which the accused had beaten
the deceased – Mukeshbhai and due to multiple injuries he succumbed
to death, the High Court while releasing the accused on bail, has not
at all considered the gravity of the offences alleged against the
accused and on the grounds which are not tenable the High Court
has released accused on bail.
5.2 It is submitted that the High Court has not at all appreciated
the fact that in fact the complainant and her aunt are the eye
witnesses. It is submitted that even the entire incident was
recorded in mobile as well as by CCTV. Shri Gonsalves, learned Senior
Advocate appearing on behalf of the appellant has taken us to the
relevant material from the charge sheet as well as the photographs
in which it is found that deceased was tied by a rope to the gate
and the accused were beating the deceased.
5.3 It is submitted that so far as the accused Jaysukhbhai Devrajbhai
Radadiya is concerned, it cannot be said that he was just standing
and there is no further overt act by him. It is submitted that as
such he was the person who not only beat the deceased but also
he tied the deceased and ensured that the deceased was not able to
5.4 It is submitted that the High Court has not at all considered
the fact that all the accused were identified in the Test Identification
Parade (TIP) by both the eye witnesses.
5.5 It is submitted that as per the post mortem report, the deceased died
due to ante mortem injuries caused due to shock and haemorrhage on
account of multiple injuries present over head and body caused by
hard and blunt object.
5.6 It is submitted that in any case the High Court ought not to
have brushed aside the statements of eye witnesses at this stage.
It is therefore submitted that the High Court has materially erred in
releasing the accused on bail.
6. Ms. Aastha Mehta, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the State
has supported the appellant. It is urged that the High Court in
the facts and circumstances ought not to have released the
accused on bail in respect of a serious offence where one person
has been killed brutally. When we asked a pointed question to the
counsel appearing on behalf of the State why in such a serious
matter, the State has not preferred appeal, she has fairly conceded
that the State also should have filed the appeal. She has stated that may
be because it takes time in taking decision to prefer appeal, the
State in the present case might not have yet preferred the appeal
challenging the release of the respondents – accused on bail.
7. Shri Huzefa Ahmadi, learned Senior Advocate, appearing on
behalf of the accused Tejas Kanubhai Zala, has submitted that in the
present case accused has been released on bail in the month of
February, 2019 and since then, he is on bail. It is submitted that
after the accused has been released on bail, there are no allegations
of misuse of liberty and therefore this Court may not cancel the bail
granted by the High Court after two and a half years.
7.1 It is further submitted by Shri Ahmadi, learned Senior Advocate,
appearing on behalf of the accused that even thereafter the trial has
further proceeded and except the investigating officer (IO), most of the
witnesses are examined and therefore also the bail may not be
7.2 Shri Purvish Jitendra Malkan, learned counsel appearing on
behalf of the accused – Jaysukhbhai Devrajbhai Radadiya, has adopted
the submissions made by Shri Ahmadi, learned Senior Advocate
appearing on behalf of the co-accused – Tejas Kanubhai Zala and has
requested not to cancel bail after a period of two and a half years.
8. We have heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
respective parties at length.
9. We have also gone through and considered the material on
record. We have also gone through and considered the impugned
orders passed by the High Court releasing accused on bail.
9.1 At the outset, it is required to be noted that the respective
accused are facing charges for the offences under Sections 302,
342, 354, 323, 143, 147, 148, 149 of the Indian Penal Code 1860,
Section 3(1)(r)(s), 3(2)(5) of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 and Section 135 of the
Gujarat Police Act, 1951. That the accused have been chargesheeted
by the investigating officer after a thorough investigation.
9.2 As per the case of the prosecution the accused tied deceased to
the gate when the deceased, complainant and her aunt were collecting
scrap outside the factory premises. The accused have beaten the
deceased when he was tied by pipe and belt. He sustained serious
multiple injuries and while being taken to hospital he succumbed to the
injuries and died. As per the post mortem report, the cause of the
death of the deceased – victim was shock and haemorrhage on account
of multiple injuries present over head and body, caused by hard and
blunt object.
9.3 The appellant herein – original complainant and her aunt and one
another are the eye witnesses who have identified the accused in
Test Identification Parade (TIP). The entire incident has been
captured/recorded in the CCTV footages and the mobile phone.
During the course of the investigation, the punchnama of the place of
the incident has been prepared, statements of the witnesses are
recorded; test identification of the accused has been carried out; CCTV
footages and DVR from the place of incident have been recovered. Pipe
and the belt used in commission of the crime have been recovered. It
can be seen that the deceased - Mukeshbhai was brutally beaten by
the accused and despite the above and without considering the
seriousness of the offences alleged and despite the statements of the
eye witnesses, the High Court by the impugned orders have released the
accused on bail in a most perfunctory and casual manner. The High
Court has not at all considered the gravity of the offences alleged and
the evidence collected during the investigation, which are forming part
of the charge sheet. We refrain from making further observations on
merits as the trial is going on. Suffice it to say that in such a serious
matter and looking to the gravity of the offences and considering the
statements of eye witnesses and that the entire incident has been
recorded in the CCTV footages and the mobile phone, the High Court
has committed a grave error in releasing the respective respondents
No.1 – accused on bail. The judgments and orders passed by the
High Court releasing the accused on bail are unsustainable both, on
facts as well as on law. 9.4 Now so far as the submissions on
behalf of the accused that after the accused are released on bail by the
impugned judgments and orders passed by the High Court, more
than two and a half years have passed and there are no allegations of
misuse of liberty and therefore, the bail may not be cancelled is
concerned, the aforesaid cannot be accepted. As per the settled
preposition of law, cancellation of bail and quashing and setting aside the
wrong order passed by the High Court releasing the accused on bail
stand on different footings. There are different considerations while
considering the application for cancellation of bail for breach of
conditions etc., and while considering an order passed by the Court
releasing the accused on bail. Once, it is found that the order
passed by the High Court releasing the accused on bail is
unsustainable, necessary consequences shall have to follow and
the bail has to be cancelled.
10. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, both
these appeals succeed. The impugned judgments and orders
passed by the High Court releasing the accused on bail in
connection with First Information Report being C.R. No.I/38 of
2018 registered at Police Station, Shapar (Veraval) for the offences
under Sections 302, 114, 323 of the Indian Penal Code, Section 135,
37(1) of the Gujarat Police Act and Section 3(2)(5) of the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, are
hereby quashed and set aside. As the accused are on bail we direct
accused - respondent No.1 – Tejas Kanubhai Zala in Criminal
Appeal No.1655 of 2021 and accused - respondent No.1 –
Jaysukhbhai Devrajbhai Radadiya in Criminal Appeal No.1656 of
2021, to surrender before the concerned jail authority within a period of
one week from today, failing which the non-bailable warrants be
issued against them. The present appeals are accordingly allowed.
11. Before parting, we may observe that by not filing the appeals by
the State against the impugned judgments and orders releasing the
accused on bail in such a serious matter, the State has failed to
protect the rights of the victim. We are of the opinion that this was
the fit case where the State ought to have preferred the appeals
challenging the orders passed by the High Court releasing the
accused on bail. In criminal matters the party who is treated as the
aggrieved party is the State which is the custodian of the social interest
of the community at large and so it is for the State to take all the
steps necessary for bringing the person who has acted against the
social interest of the community to book.
It is reported that in the State there is a Director of Prosecution.
Even the Director of Prosecution has failed to perform his duties in
the instant case. The post of Director of Prosecution is a very
important post in so far as the administration of justice in criminal
matters is concerned. It is the duty of the Director of Prosecution to take
prompt decision. Given that crimes are treated as a wrong against
the society as a whole, the role of the Director of Prosecution in the
administration of justice is crucial. He is appointed by the State
Government in exercise of powers under Section 25A of the Code of
Criminal Procedure. That his is a crucial role is evident from
conditions such as in Section 25A (2) of the Code, which stipulates
a minimum legal experience of not less than ten years for a person to
be eligible to be Directorate of Prosecution and that such an
appointment shall be made with the concurrence of the Chief
Justice of the High Court.
The submissions by Ms. Aastha Mehta learned counsel appearing
on behalf of the State that it takes time to take a decision whether to
prefer an appeal or not is not acceptable. The State ought to have been
very serious even to maintain the rule of law in a serious matter like this
where a person was brutally murdered/killed while he was just collecting
scrap outside the factory with his wife and aunt. It is the duty of the
Director of Prosecution and the State to ensure that the guilty are
booked and punished.
We hope and trust that in future the State Government/legal
department of State Government and the Director of Prosecution
shall take prompt decision in matters such as this and challenge the
order passed by the trial court and/or the High Court as the case
may be where it is found that the accused are released on bail in
serious offences like the present.
We hope and trust that our observations will reach the State
Government/legal department of the State of Gujarat and the
Director of Prosecution of State of Gujarat. We direct the Registry to
send the copy of this order to the Principal Chief Secretary and
Secretary, Home Department and Legal Department, State of
Gujarat to take further corrective steps.