This revision is directed against the judgment and order dated
21.02.2022 passed by Special Judge POCSO Act/Additional District
and Session Judge, Varanai dismissing Criminal Appeal No.17 of
2022 ( Vishal Yadav versus State of UP) filed under Section 101 of the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (for short
‘the Act’) and affirming the order dated 15.01.2022 passed by
Juvenile Justice Board, Varanasi refusing the bail plea to the
revisionist in Case Crime No. 195 of 2020, under Sections 147, 149,
302, 307, 323, 324, 354 and 506 I.P.C. Police Station Lohta, District
Sri Diwan Saifullah Khan, learned counsel for the opposite
party No.2 submits that he does not want to file counter affidavit.
Learned A.G.A. has also not filed counter affidavit.
Heard Sri Birendra Kumar Mishra, learned counsel for the
revisionist as well as Sri Vinod Kant, learned Additional Advocate
General assisted by Sri Viabhav Aaanad, learned A.G.A. for the State,
Sri Diwan Saifullah Khan, learned counsel for the opposite party No.2
and perused the record.
Learned counsel for the revisionist submits that the revisionist
is named in the F.I.R. allegedly lodged by Gauri Shankar Patel on
07.8.2020 for the incident said to have taken place on 06.8.2020 at
20.30 hours against six named persons including the revisionist and
one unknown, with the allegation that Ranjit Kumar (son of the
informant) and Mahendra Patel were coming back after attending call
of nature and enroute they were ambushed by the named accused
persons. Co-accused Kailash Yadav is said to have been armed with
axe whereas the revisionist is said to have been armed with lathi and
other co-accused persons were also attributed with respective
Learned counsel for the revisionist further submits that from the
F.I.R. it is not clear that there was any precise motive or mental
element for committing this offence. A general and sweeping
allegation has been fastened against all accused persons, who are said
to be the men of having chequered past and criminal antecedents.
Besides this, they are also said to be in habit of teasing the womenfolk
of the village. This by itself is a sweeping and general allegation
against all the named accused persons. All the accused persons have
allegedly assaulted and caused injuries to Ranjit Kumar and Mahendra
Patel. Injured Ranjit Kumar succumbed to the injuries sustained by
him and died on 22.8.2020 after 15 days of the incident.
Learned counsel for the revisionist further submits that during
this period no statement of injured Ranjit Kumar was recorded by the
police. Postmortem report of the deceased reveals that he has
sustained 6 injuries over his person, out of which three are on the vital
part of the body (head). It is further contended by learned counsel for
the applicant that so far as the allegation of attributing the role of
assault upon another injured Mahendra Patel is concerned, his injury
report indicates that he has sustained no injury over his persons.
Submission of learned counsel for the revisionist is that keeping in
view of the generality of allegation, where there is no specification of
assault made by assailants over which part of the body of the deceased
and it is difficult to decipher to decide as to who is the real author of
fatal injuries sustained by the deceased, under circumstances, the
revisionist deserves to be bailed out.
Learned counsel for the revisionist further submits that the
revisionist is juvenile and there is no apprehension of reasoned ground
for believing that the release of the revisionist is likely to bring him in
association with any known criminals or expose him to mental,
physical or psychological danger or his release would defeat the ends
of justice. He further submits that except this the revisionist has no
previous criminal history. The father of the revisionist is giving his
undertaking that after release of the revisionist on bail, he will keep
him under his custody and look after him properly. Further, the
revisionist undertakes that he will not tamper the evidence and he will
always cooperate the trial proceedings. There was no report regarding
any previous antecedents of family or background of the revisionist.
There is no chance of revisionist’s re-indulgence to bring him into
association with known criminals.
Learned counsel for the revisionist further submits that it is not
in dispute that the revisionist is a juvenile as he has already been
declared juvenile by Juvenile Justice Board, Varanasi vide order dated
05.03.2021. The revisionist was a juvenile aged 17 Years 3 Months
and 19 Days on the date of occurrence. He is in jail since 15.08.2020
in connection with the present crime and has completed substantial
period of the sentence out of the maximum three years institutional
incarceration permissible for a juvenile, under Section 18(1)(g) of the
Act. It is submitted with much emphasis that co-accused Ajay Yadav
and Pintu, who are adult and similarly circumstanced as the
revisionist, have been admitted to bail by this Court by a common
order dated 18.11.2021 passed in Criminal Misc. Bail Application No.
40104 of 2020 and 5403 of 2021 respectively. It is argued that the
revisionist being a minor, cannot be held in institutional incarceration
any further once co-accused, similarly circumstanced, has been
admitted to bail. Further submission is that the case of the revisionist
is not on worse footing than that of the co-accused, therefore on
principles of parity also the revisionist be released on bail.
Learned counsel for the revisionist further submits that
thereafter the revisionist applied for bail before the Juvenile Justice
Board, Varanasi upon which a report from the District Probation
Officer was called for. The bail application was rejected vide order
dated 15.01.2022, being aggrieved, the revisionist preferred an appeal
under Section 101 of the Act, which was also dismissed vide order
dated 21.02.2022. Hence the present criminal revision has been filed
before this Hon’ble Court mainly on the following amongst other
(i) That the bail application of the revisionist was
rejected by the court below in a very cursory and
arbitrary manner.
(ii) That the revisionist, who is juvenile, is wholly
innocent and has been falsely implicated by the first
informant in the present case.
(iii) That the courts below have not appreciated the
report of the District Probation Officer in its right
perspective.
(iv) That the impugned judgment and orders passed by
the learned courts below are apparently illegal, contrary
to law and based on erroneous assumption of facts and
(v) That there was absolutely no material on record to
hold that the release of the Juvenile would likely to bring
him into association with any known criminal or expose
him to moral, physical or psychological danger or his
release would defeat the ends of justice, yet the courts
below have illegally, arbitrary and on surmises refused
the bail of juvenile.
(vi) That the courts have erred in law in not considering
the true import of Section 12 of the Act, 2015 and thus,
the impugned orders passed by the courts below suffer
from manifest error of law apparent on the face of
record.
(vii) That the courts below have acted quite illegally and
with material irregularity in not properly considering the
case of juvenile in proper and correct perspective which
makes the impugned orders passed by the courts below
non est and bad in law.
(viii) That bare perusal of the impugned orders
demonstrate that the same have been passed on flimsy
grounds which have occasioned gross miscarriage of
justice.
Several other submissions in order to demonstrate the falsity of
the allegations made against the revisionist have also been placed
forth before the Court. The circumstances which, according to the
counsel, led to the false implication of the accused have also been
touched upon at length. It has been assured on behalf of the revisionist
that he is ready to cooperate with the process of law and shall
faithfully make himself available before the court whenever required
and is also ready to accept all the conditions which the Court may
deem fit to impose upon him. It has also been pointed out that in the
wake of heavy pendency of cases in the Court, there is no likelihood
of any early conclusion of trial.
Learned counsel for the revisionist has further argued that the
revisionist has already undergone substantial period of the
imprisonment/institutional incarceration and has placed reliance of
Hon'ble Apex Court judgment in the case of Kamal Vs. State of
Haryana, 2004 (13) SCC 526 and submitted that the Hon'ble Apex
Court was pleased to observe in paragraph no. 2 of the judgment as
"2. This is a case in which the appellant has been convicted
u/s 304-B of the India Penal Code and sentenced to
imprisonment for 7 years. It appears that so far the
appellant has undergone imprisonment for about 2 years
and four months. The High Court declined to grant bail
pending disposal of the appeal before it. We are of the view
that the bail should have been granted by the High Court,
especially having regard to the fact that the appellant has
already served a substantial period of the sentence. In the
circumstances, we direct that the bail be granted to the
appellant on conditions as may be imposed by the District
and Sessions Judge, Faridabad."
Learned counsel for the revisionist has also placed reliance of
Hon'ble Apex Court judgment in the case of Takht Singh Vs. State of
Madhya Pradesh, 2001 (10) SCC 463, and submitted that the
Hon'ble Apex Court was pleased to observe in paragraph no. 2 of the
"2. The appellants have been convicted under Section
302/149, Indian Penal Code by the learned Sessions Judge
and have been sentenced to imprisonment for life. Against
the said conviction and sentence their appeal to the High
Court is pending. Before the High Court application for
suspension of sentence and bail was filed but the High
Court rejected that prayer indicating therein that the
applicants can renew their prayer for bail after one year.
After the expiry of one year the second application was filed
but the same has been rejected by the impugned order. It is
submitted that the appellants are already in jail for over 3
years and 3 months. There is no possibility of early hearing
of the appeal in the High Court. In the aforesaid
circumstances the applicants be released on bail to the
satisfaction of the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Sehore. The appeal is disposed of accordingly."
Learned AGA and learned counsel for the opposite party No.2
have opposed the revisionist's case with the submission that the
release of the revisionist on bail would bring him into association of
some known criminals, besides, exposing him to moral, physical and
psychological danger. It is submitted that his release would defeat the
ends of justice, considering that he is involved in a heinous offence.
This Court has carefully considered the rival submissions
of the parties and perused the impugned orders. The juvenile is clearly
below 18 years of age and does not fall into that special category of a
juvenile between the age of 16 and 18 years whose case may be
viewed differently, in case, they are found to be of a mature mind and
persons well understanding the consequences of their actions. The
provisions relating to bail for a juvenile are carried in Section 12 of
the Act, which reads as under:
"(1) When any person, who is apparently a child and is
alleged to have committed a bailable or non-bailable
offence, is apprehended or detained by the police or appears
or brought before a Board, such person shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or in any other law for the time
being in force, be released on bail with or without surety or
placed under the supervision of a probation officer or under
the care of any fit person:
Provided that such person shall not be so released if there
appears reasonable grounds for believing that the release is
likely to bring that person into association with any known
criminal or expose the said person to moral, physical or
psychological danger or the person's release would defeat
the ends of justice, and the Board shall record the reasons for
denying the bail and circumstances that led to such a
decision.
(2) When such person having been apprehended is not
released on bail under subsection (1) by the officer-in-charge
of the police station, such officer shall cause the person to be
kept only in an observation home in such manner as may be
prescribed until the person can be brought before a Board.
(3) When such person is not released on bail under sub-
section (1) by the Board, it shall make an order sending him
to an observation home or a place of safety, as the case may
be, for such period during the pendency of the inquiry
regarding the person, as may be specified in the order.
(4) When a child in conflict with law is unable to fulfil the
conditions of bail order within seven days of the bail order,
such child shall be produced before the Board for
modification of the conditions of bail."
This Court has, in particular, looked into the role of the various
accused and finds that the aforesaid co-accused who has already been
granted bail by this Court, and the revisionist have identical role.
Once the aforesaid co-accused has been admitted to bail, who is adult,
there seems no justification to additionally test the case of the
revisionist with reference to the requirements of the proviso to sub
Section (1) of Section 12 of the Act. In this connection, I had occasion
to consider the question about the right of a juvenile to be released on
bail where a similarly circumstanced adult offender had been extended
that liberty. In the case of Dharmendra (Juvenile) vs. State of U.P.
and others, [2018 (7) ADJ 864], the High Court was pleased to
"10. The matter can be looked at from another vantage. In
case the revisionist were an adult and stood charged of the
offence that he faces with a weak circumstantial evidence of
last seen and confession to the police, in all probability, it
would have entitled him to bail pending trial. If on the kind
of evidence forthcoming an adult would be entitled to bail,
denying bail to a child in conflict with law may be denying
the juvenile/ child in conflict with law the equal protection
of laws guaranteed under Article 14 of the Constitution.
11. The rule in Section 12(1) of the Act is in favour of bail
always to a juvenile/ child in conflict with law except when
the case falls into one or the other categories denial
contemplated by the proviso. It is not the rule about bail in
Section 12 of the Act that in case a child in conflict with law
is brought before the Board or Court, his case is not to be
seen on merits prima facie about his complicity at all for the
purpose granting him bail; and all that has been done is to
see if his case falls is one or the other exceptions, where he
can be denied bail. The rule in Section 12 sanctioning bail
universally to every child in conflict with law presupposes
that there is a prima facie case against him in the
assessment of the Board or the Court based on the evidence
placed at that stage. It is where a case against a child in
conflict with law is prima facie made out that the rule in
Section 12(1) of the Act that sanctions bail as a rule, except
the three categories contemplated by the proviso comes into
play. It is certainly not the rule, and, in the opinion of the
Court cannot be so, that a case on materials and evidence
collected not being made out against a child at all, his case
has to be tested on the three parameters where bail may be
denied presuming that a prima facie case is constructively
there. Thus, it would always have to be seen whether a case
prima facie on merits against a child in conflict with law is
there on the basis of material produced by the prosecution
against him. If it is found that a prima facie case on the
basis of material produced by the prosecution is there that
would have led to a denial of a bail to an adult offender, in
that case also the Rule in Section 12(1) of the Act mandates
that bail is to be granted to a juvenile/ child in conflict with
law except where his case falls into any of the three
disentitling categories contemplated by the proviso.
12. In the opinion of this Court, therefore, the perception
that merits of the case on the basis of prima facie evidence
is absolutely irrelevant to a juvenile's bail plea under the
Act would not be in conformity with the law. The catena of
decisions that speak about merits of the case or the charge
against a juvenile being irrelevant, proceed on facts and not
an assumption that a case on merits is made out, and, not
where the case is not at all made out prima facie. It is not
that a child alleged to be in conflict with law against whom
there is not iota of evidence to connect him to the crime
would still have bail denied to him because his case may be
placed in or the other disentitling categories under the
proviso to Section 12(1) of the Act. If this kind of a
construction were to be adopted it might expose the
provisions of Section 12(1) of the Act to challenge on
ground of violating the guarantee of equal protection of
laws enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution. It is an
enduring principle that a construction that lends a statute to
challenge about its constitutionality should be eschewed and
one that saves and upholds its vires is to be adopted. In this
context the guidance of their Lordships of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Japani Sahoo vs. Chandra Sekhar
Mohanty, (2007) 7 SCC 394 may be referred to:-
"51. The matter can be looked at from different angle also.
Once it is accepted (and there is no dispute about it) that it
is not within the domain of the complainant or prosecuting
agency to take cognizance of an offence or to issue process
and the only thing the former can do is to file a complaint or
initiate proceedings in accordance with law. If that action of
initiation of proceedings has been taken within the period of
limitation, the complainant is not responsible for any delay
on the part of the Court or Magistrate in issuing process or
taking cognizance of an offence. Now, if he is sought to be
penalized because of the omission, default or inaction on the
part of the Court or Magistrate, the provision of law may
have to be tested on the touchstone of Article 14 of the
Constitution. It can possibly be urged that such a provision
is totally arbitrary, irrational and unreasonable. It is settled
law that a Court of Law would interpret a provision which
would help sustaining the validity of law by applying the
doctrine of reasonable construction rather than making it
vulnerable and unconstitutional by adopting rule of 'litera
legis'. Connecting the provision of limitation in Section 468
of the Code with issuing of process or taking of cognizance
by the Court may make it unsustainable and ultra vires
Article 14 of the Constitution."
This Court in the case of Shiv Kumar alias Sadhu Vs. State of
U.P. 2010 (68) ACC 616(LB) was pleased to observe that the gravity
of the offence is not relevant consideration for refusing grant of bail to
the juvenile.
In the present case there appears to be no distinguishing feature
from the case of the said co-accused, who is adult offender
circumstanced identically as the revisionist. There is no justification to
hold the revisionist not entitled to the liberty of bail. It is also taken
note of by this Court that the revisionist has by now done substantial
period of institutional incarceration. The maximum period for which a
juvenile can be incarcerated in whatever form of detention, is three
years, going by the provisions of Section 18(1)(g) of the Act. Both the
courts below have passed the impugned judgment and orders in
cursory manner without placing due reliance on the report submitted
by the District Probation Officer as well as facts and circumstances of
the case. This Court, thus, finds that the impugned orders cannot be
sustained and are liable to be set aside and reversed.
A perusal of the said provision show that bail for a juvenile,
particularly, one who is under the age of 18 years, is a matter of
course and it is only in the event that his case falls under one or the
other disentitling categories mentioned in the proviso to sub-Section
(1) of Section 12 of the Act that bail may be refused. The merits of the
case against a juvenile acquire some relevance under the last clause of
the proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 12 that speaks about the ends
of justice being defeated. The other two disentitling categories are
quite independent and have to be evaluated with reference to the
circumstances of the juvenile. Those circumstances are to be gathered
from the Social Investigation Report, the police report and in
whatever other manner relevant facts enter the record.
What is of prime importance in this case is that the juvenile,
who is a young boy, less than the age of 18 years, has no criminal
history. There is nothing said against the juvenile, appearing from the
Social Investigation Report that may show him to be a desperado or
misfit in the society. The two courts below have held the juvenile
disentitled to bail on account of his case falling under each of the
three exceptions enumerated in the proviso to sub section (1) of
Section 12, for which no reason has been indicated. That finding, in
both the orders impugned, is based on an ipse dixit, in one case of the
judge and in the other of the Board. Even if it be assumed that the
offence was committed in the manner alleged, it would be rather
strained logic to hold that release of the juvenile on bail would lead to
the ends of justice being defeated. Both the courts below have also
overlooked the statement of the victim recorded under Section 161
and 164 CrPC and further the courts below have also not considered
the radiological age of the victim as per the medical report.
After perusing the record in the light of the submissions made at
the bar and after taking an overall view of all the facts and
circumstances of this case, the nature of evidence, the period of
detention already undergone, the unlikelihood of early conclusion of
trial and also in the absence of any convincing material to indicate the
possibility of tampering with the evidence and the co-accused who are
adult have been granted bail by this Court and in view of the larger
mandate of the Article 21 of the Constitution of India and the dictum
of Apex Court in the case of Dataram Singh vs. State of UP and
another, (2018) 3 SCC 22 and the view taken by the Hon’ble Court in
the cases of Kamal Vs. State of Haryana (supra), Takht Singh Vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh (supra), Dharmendra (Juvenile) vs.
State of U.P. and others (supra), Japani Sahoo vs. Chandra
Sekhar Mohanty (supra) and Shiv Kumar alias Sadhu Vs. State of
U.P. (supra), this Court is of the view that the present criminal
revision may be allowed and the revisionist may be released on bail.
In the result, this revision succeeds and is allowed. The
impugned judgment and order dated 21.02.2022 passed by Special
Judge POCSO Act/Additional District and Session Judge, Varanai in
Criminal Appeal No.17 of 2022 (Vishal Yadav versus State of UP) and
the order dated 15.01.2022 passed by Juvenile Justice Board, Varanasi
are hereby set aside and reversed. The bail application of the
revisionist stands allowed.
Let the revisionist, Vishal Yadav through his natural
guardian/father Kanahiya Lal Yadav be released on bail in Case Crime
No. 195 of 2020, under Sections 147, 149, 302, 307, 323, 324, 354
and 506 I.P.C. Police Station Lohta, District Varanasi upon his natural
guardian furnishing a personal bond with two solvent sureties of his
relatives each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the Juvenile
Justice Board, Varanasi subject to the following conditions:
(i)    That the natural guardian/father Kanahiya Lal Yadav of the
revisionist will furnish an undertaking that upon release on bail the
juvenile will not be permitted to come into contact or association with
any known criminal or allowed to be exposed to any moral, physical
or psychological danger and further that the natural guardian will
ensure that the juvenile will not repeat the offence.
(ii)   The revisionist and his natural guardian/father Kanahiya Lal
Yadav will report to the District Probation Officer on the first
Wednesday of every calendar month commencing with the first
Wednesday of April, 2022 and if during any calendar month the first
Wednesday falls on a holiday, then on the next following working day.
(iii)  The District Probation Officer will keep strict vigil on the
activities of the revisionist and regularly draw up his social
investigation report that would be submitted to the Juvenile Justice
Board concerned on such periodical basis as the Juvenile Justice
Board may determine.
(iv)   The party shall file computer generated copy of such order
downloaded from the official website of High Court Allahabad or the
certified copy issued by the Registry of the High Court, Allahabad.
(v)    The computer generated copy of such order shall be self
attested by the counsel of the party concerned.
(vi)   The concerned Court/Authority/Official shall verify the
authenticity of such computerized copy of the order from the official
website of High Court Allahabad and shall make a declaration of such
verification in writing.
However, considering the peculiar facts and circumstances of
the case, the court below is directed to make every possible endeavour
to conclude the trial of the aforesaid case within a period of four
months from today without granting unnecessary adjournments to
either of the parties.