The instant petition has been preferred under Section 438
Cr.P.C. to seek anticipatory bail in FIR No. 237, dated 28th May, 2022, under
Sections 338, 406, 420 IPC and Section 15 of Indian Medical Council Act,
registered at Police Station Model Town, Panipat, after the said relief has
been declined by learned Additional Sessions Judge, Panipat to the
petitioner vide order dated 01.06.2022 (Annnexure P-13).
The story set forth by the prosecution, as could be made out
from the perusal of FIR in question is that father of the complainant was
suffering from gangrene on the thumb and three fingers of left foot, who
was a diabetic and heart patient as well. During a visit on 27.01.2022 to the
house of complainant's sister at Panipat, a clinic of petitioner-accused came
to the notice in the market on 28.01.2022. An advise of the petitioner-
accused was sought, who had mentioned on the Board outside of her clinic
as Dr. Mamta Kapoor. The petitioner-accused gave all assurance of curing
the diseases and asked to get the father of complainant admitted in her clinic.
The father of the complainant was treated from 28.01.2022 till 06.02.2022,
the date on which he was discharged. At the time of discharge from the
clinic, the petitioner-accused did not give any document despite asking time
and again but promised to give the complete summary of treatment and
discharge, later on. Even thereafter, the petitioner-accused made home visits
till 13.02.2022 at the house of complainant's sister in Virat Nagar, Panipat
and the petitioner-accused charged a sum of Rs.1,00,000/- for the complete
treatment. Thereafter, the complainant along-with his father left for their
house in Amritsar. However, the father of the complainant started having
acute pain in the left foot and got him examined in Gupta Hospital,
Siddharth Nursing Home, Amritsar. It was diagnosed at that stage that
gangrene has infected the entire left leg, which has to be amputated failing
which it will endanger his life. The reasons for such severe infection was
the wrong and negligent medical treatment given by the petitioner-accused.
At this stage inquiries were made by the complainant, which revealed that
various other persons have also been put at risk by the petitioner-accused,
one Rehlan had suddenly died and another patient namely Mrs. Darshan
Rani was noticed to be very serious. The petitioner-accused is already
facing complaints in that regard, who is practising as a 'doctor' without
having any licence as such and is being allowed to play with the life of
innocent people.
Mr. Ashwani Talwar, Advocate appearing for the petitioner
contends that the petitioner-accused is having due qualification to provide
Electro Homeopathy/Acupressure treatment and drew attention of this Court
to the Result-cum-Detailed Mark Certificate (Annexure P-2) issued by the
Council of Electro-Homeopathy System of Medicine (Punjab), apart from a
certificate of M.D.Acu. issued by Acupressure Research, Training &
Treatment Institute, Jodhpur, Rajasthan (Annexure P-6).            It is further
submitted that the petitioner-accused has completed Complimentary
Medicine (Medicine Alternative) through correspondence course from an
institute registered by the Punjab Govt. under S.R. Act & Govt. of India
under T.M. Act, 1999 (Annexure P-7) along-with a Diploma in Community
Medical Services & Essential Drugs (CC) granted by the Para Medical
Council (Punjab) dated 28.07.2011.
It has been further stated by the counsel for the petitioner that
the petitioner has been registered as Community Health Worker with the
Para Medical Council (Punjab) Mohali vide Registration Certificate dated
26.12.2013 (Annexure P-9), which was renewed as well on 25.01.2021 and
in addition thereof, is duly equipped with the course of Diploma in
Acupuncture, vide certificate dated 07.04.2019 (Annexure P-11).
It is denied that the petitioner-accused is running a clinic with a
display as Doctor before her name Mamta Kapoor, who is running a similar
clinic in single storey dwelling unit consisting of three rooms as a small time
alternative medicine therapist. There was no indoor admission arrangement
in the clinic and neither there is any such facility to admit the father of the
complainant. Therefore, FIR, in question, is absolutely false and having no
iota of truth in it.
On the other hand, Ms. Tanisha Peshawaria, Deputy Advocate
General, Haryana appearing on advance notice has vehemently opposed the
prayer made in the present petition by contending that the petitioner-accused
was having a degree of BEMS (Master Degree Certificate in Acupressure)
and is not qualified to treat the patient suffering from disease like gangrene.
Moreover, the petitioner-accused was duly made aware of the other medical
issues like diabetes and heart ailments of the father of the complainant, still
she choose to gave false assurance of curing the disease. As a result of
medical negligence, the father of the complainant lost left leg which had
been amputated below the knee. Even an inquiry was conducted by the
Medical Board, consisting Dr. Sham Lal, SMO, Civil Hospital, Panipat, Dr.
Panipat and Civil Surgeon, Panipat, which opined that the petitioner-accused
was not a recognized medical practitioner and the treatment of already
established disease of gangrene was beyond of her acumen and knowledge
of medical science. The Committee has further concluded observing it to be
a case of negligence on the part of the petitioner-accused due to which the
left leg of the father of the complainant had amputated.
Learned State counsel further submits that prima-facie offences
under Sections 338, 406 and 420 IPC and Section 15 of Indian Medical
Council Act, 1956 are found to be made out against the petitioner-accused.
Till date the petitioner-accused is not traceable and the investigation in the
FIR cannot be conducted until or unless the petitioner-accused is not taken
into custody for interrogation.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties and on perusal of
record, it is evident that the present petition is a second application for
anticipatory bail, which is not maintainable particularly, in view of the fact
that earlier application bearing CRM-M-26032-2022 was withdrawn after
arguing for some time by the counsel for the petitioner on 08.06.2022, i.e.,
only a month back. Admittedly, there is no change in circumstances to
consider the present petition at this stage.
In the present case treatment has been given by the petitioner-
accused for a disease, which was beyond her knowledge and qualification,
for which she was not authorised and none of her educational qualifications
brought to the notice of this Court are recognized by the competent
authorities like Medical Council of India or any State Medical Board to
advance the practising in alternate medicine for the ailment of gangrene. It
is evident from the record and also not disputed by the counsel for the
petitioner-accused that the disease was initially in the thumb and fingers of
the left foot only.
This Court is sanguine of the fact that the petitioner-accused,
even according to her possessed qualification for acupressure and Electro-
Homeopathy Medical System, has a duty to act with a reasonable degree of
care and skill has an implied undertaking of not to give a chance for breach
of such duty, has given a cause of action for negligence which resulted into
huge damage to the father of the complainant, which cannot be compensated
in any manner whatsoever. Such loss will not only disable a person from
routine course of his life but will also keep on pricking in his mind to cause
consistent mental cruelty and harassment apart from embarrassment in daily
In the light of the afore-said discussions and the facts on record,
this Court does not find any merit in the present petition and is fully
convinced that the custodial interrogation of the petitioner is necessary to
move the investigation in the case.
Accordingly, the present petition is dismissed.
Whether speaking/reasoned         Yes/No