and to produce corpus Pritiben before this Hon'ble.
(C) Your Lordships may be pleased to grant any other
and further relief that may be deemed fit and proper
in the interest of justice.”
3.     This Court on 24.01.2022 while issuing notice passed the
following order: -
“1. Ms. Amita Shah, learned advocate represents the
petitioner. The petitioner is the husband of corpus
named Pritiben. It is the case of the petitioner that
the wife is illegally detained by respondent No.4, who
is the father of the corpus. It is also contended that
the corpus is the legally wedded wife of the petitioner
and the certificate, in support of his submissions, is
also annexed. A complaint for detaining the corpus is
also made before the Himmatnagar police station,
2. Considering the submissions, issue notice
returnable on 02.02.2022. Ms. Jirga Jhaveri, learned
Additional Public Prosecutor, waives service of notice
of rule for and on behalf of the respondent-State.
3. Direct service        through  concerned        police        is
permitted.”
4.     Today, the corpus is brought before this Court. She
initially resisted while she was at the office of the lawyer
engaged by her father, but, later the Court had insisted on her
going to the office of Registrar, City Civil and Sessions Court.
The second half when we spoke to her, she had shown her
willingness after talking to the petitioner and the Registrar
Mr. Joshi. She expressed her wish to join the petitioner.
5.     We could notice that she was petrified and was more
familiar by the fact
that the family of hers was hoping for
exchange marriage as her brother is yet to be married. We
called her father who was present at the City Court who was
more adamant about the unsustainability of this marriage
without any basis or foundation. He also confirmed that he is
more inclined to ensure that the marriage of her daughter is
happen in exchange so that her son also gets married.
5.1. Depletion of sex ratio in the State of Gujarat results into
more and more such cases coming up to the Court where on
one hand birth of the daughter is not acceptable and on the
other hand with depletion of the ratio, the marriages are
essentially        the exchange   marriages  which      takes         place
regardless of will, wish, emotion and the age.
6.     Noticing the fact that the marriage is performed with the
will and wish of the corpus and she was not permitted to leave
her parental home because of the extreme pressure of the
family and her concern for her brother, while allowing this
petition and directing the corpus to join the petitioner, we
accede to the request of learned advocate Ms. Amita Shah
that the petitioner and the corpus shall need to be given the
police protection at least for the period of 8 weeks.
6.1. As the petitioner shall be staying with the corpus at
Dhanera, Banaskantha, Mr. Duggal, the Superintendent of
Police,    Banaskantha     will    ensure   providing     the       police
protection without any loss of time which shall, as mentioned,
continue initially for a period of 8 weeks and thereafter the SP
shall take a call and may continue thereafter.
6.2. As for initial period of 5 to 6 days, the couple is staying
at Idar, let the initial police protection shall be provided at
Idar, Sabarkantha. Learned APP shall ensure coordinating
with the SP, Sabarkantha for necessary protection.
6.3. Presently we have made a request to Mr. Joshi,
Registrar, City Civil and Sessions Court to ensure that the
couple is left in police-van at Idar.
Authority shall also render best of the assistance wherever it
is approached by the couple.
7.    We have conveyed very firmly to the father of the corpus
– respondent no.4 that any attempt to take the law in the
hands will be stringently viewed. If anything of that sort is
noticed, the police may take appropriate actions.
8.    It is hoped and learned advocates on both the sides will
ensure that no untoward incident happen merely because two
adult persons have chosen to marry on their own will and are
starting their life together.
9.      The present petition is disposed of accordingly.
10.     Copy of this order be given to learned APP for onward
communication and due execution of the order.