This petition, under Article 226, of the Constitution of India
has been filed seeking issuance of writ in the nature of habeas
corpus or any other suitable writ/order or direction for the
"(I) The, respondent authorities may kindly
be directed to produce the corpus persons
i.e. sister-in-law (Nanad) Aarti and niece
Kajal (Aarti's daughter) before the Hon'ble
High Court, furthermore, the direction for
higher authorities to take punitive action
against the abductee may kindly be issued in
the interest of justice.
(II) That, the Investigation Officer of the
Crime No.241/2021 registered at Police
Station Civil Line, Morena may kindly be
changed or the investigation may kindly be
conducted by any of the superior authorities
in the interest of justice.
absconder and Reward of Rs.5000/- issued
against the present petitioner's husband may
kindly be set aside in the interest of justice.
(IV) That, the respondent authorities may
kindly be directed to provide Police
petitioner to ensure the safety of the life and
liberty of the petitioner and her family
members in the interest of justice.
(V) That, the respondent authorities may
kindly be directed to take the medical
documents of the petitioner's husband on
record in the interest of justice.
(VI) That, the respondent authorities may
complaints may by the petitioner's mother-
in-law as early as possible in the inerest of
(VII) That, the respondent authorities may
compensation of the destroyed crop of the
petitioner in the interest of justice.
(VIII) That, the respondent authorities may
kindly be directed to take punitive action
against the responsible officer, who are in
due collusion of the accused persons of the
Crime No.241/2021 in the interest of justice.
(IX) That, cost of the petition may kindly
be awarded to the petitioner.”
2.     Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that certain
miscreants have abducted sister-in-law of the petitioner namely
Aarti, as well as, Aarti's daughter Kajal from the campus of High
Court. It is alleged that the respondent-Authorities are having all
the information in respect of both of them, but are not providing
any information. It is contended that when mother-in-law of corpus
Aarti had come to High Court in connection with some case, the
accused persons abducted Aarti and her daughter Kajal. Thereafter,
mother-in-law of the corpus lodged a missing person report at
Police Station University, Gwalior, but till date no action has been
taken in that behalf. Hence, this petition.
3.     Shri Sharma, learned Government Advocate raised a
preliminary objection with regard to maintainability of this petition
contending that the writ of habeas corpus cannot be issued in this
matter as there is no allegation that the corpus and her daughter are
in illegal confinement of any private respondent. Petitioner has not
impleaded any suspect as party respondent. Besides, multiple
reliefs, which are not at all in congruence, with the subject matter
of this petition have been claimed. As such, on this count alone the
petition is liable to be rejected at the threshold.
4.     Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, the
question that is germane to the controversy in hand is as to whether
a writ of habeas corpus can be issued against an unknown abductor
5.     On perusal of the pleadings which are on affidavit, it can be
seen that there is no allegation of illegal confinement by any of the
private respondents. It is a condition precedent that there must be
an illegal detention or at least there must be some substantiated
grounds regarding suspicion. In the absence of any such
contention, no habeas corpus petition can be entertained under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India. Habeas Corpus is a writ in
the nature of an order calling upon the person who has detained
another to produce the latter before the Court, in order to let the
Court know on what ground he has been confined and to set him
free if there is no legal jurisdiction for the imprisonment. The
special nature of a habeas corpus petition is to produce the body or
person, for that purpose it must be established that a person is in
illegal detention.    The fundamental right and liberty is to be
protected, only if there is an illegal detention, either by State or by
a private individual.
6.     A Constitution Bench judgment of the Supreme Court in the
matter of Kanu Sanyal v. District Magistrate, Darjeeling and
others ((1973) 2 SCC 674), traced the history, nature and scope of
the writ of habeas corpus. It has been held by Their Lordships that
it is a writ of immemorial antiquity whose first threads are woven
deeply "within the seamless web of history and untraceable among
countless incidents that constituted a total historical pattern of
Anglo-Saxon jurisprudence". Their Lordships further held that the
primary object of this writ is the immediate determination of the
right of the applicant's freedom and that was its substance and its
end. Their Lordships further explaining the nature and scope of a
writ of habeas corpus holding as under: -
"The writ of habeas corpus is essentially a procedural
writ. It deals with the machinery of justice, not the
substantive law. The object of the writ is to secure
release of a person who is illegally restrained of his
liberty. The writ is, no doubt, a command addressed to a
person who is alleged to have another person unlawfully
in his custody requiring him to bring the body of such
person before the Court, but the production of the body
of the person detained is directed in order that the
circumstances of his detention may be inquired into, or
to put it differently, "in the order that appropriate
judgment be rendered on judicial enquiry into the
alleged unlawful restrain". But the writ is primarily
designed to give a person restrained of his liberty a
speedy and effective remedy for having the legality of
his detention enquired into and determined and if the
detention is found to be unlawful, having himself
discharged and freed from such restraint. The most
characteristic element of the writ is its peremptoriness.
The essential and leading theory of the whole procedure
is the immediate determination of the right to the
applicant's freedom and his release, if the detention is
found to be unlawful. That is the primary purpose of the
writ, that is its substance and end. The production of the
body of the person alleged to be wrongfully detained is
ancillary to this main purpose of the writ. It is merely a
means for achieving the end which is to secure the
liberty of the subject illegally detained."
7.      In the matter of Union of India v. Yumnam Anand M.
alias Bocha alias Kora alias Suraj and another ((2007) 10 SCC
190), while explaining the nature of writ of habeas corpus, Their
Lordships of the Supreme Court held that though it is a writ of
right, it is not a writ of course and the applicant must show a prima
facie case of his unlawful detention. Paragraph 7 of the report
"7. Article 21 of the Constitution having declared that no
person shall be deprived of life and liberty except in
accordance with the procedure established by law, a
machinery was definitely needed to examine the
question of illegal detention with utmost promptitude.
The writ of habeas corpus is a device of this nature.
Blackstone called it "the great and efficacious writ in all
manner of illegal confinement". The writ has been
described as a writ of right which is grantable ex debito
justitiae. Though a writ of right, it is not a writ of course.
The applicant must show a prima facie case of his
unlawful detention. Once, however, he shows such a
cause and the return is not good and sufficient, he is
8.      A writ of habeas corpus is not to be issued as a matter of
course. Clear grounds must be made out for issuance of such writ.
(Dushyant Somal v. Sushma Somal ((1981) 2 SCC 277), referred
9.      In the matter of Usharani v. The Commissioner of Police,
Bangalore and others (ILR 2014 Kar 3312), the writ of habeas
corpus has been defined very lucidly as under: -
"The claim (for   habeas corpus) has been expressed and
pressed in terms of concrete legal standards and
procedures. Most notably, the right of personal liberty is
connected in both the legal and popular sense with
procedures upon the Writ of habeas corpus. The writ is
simply a judicial command directed to a specific jailer
directing him or her to produce the named prisoner
together with the legal cause of detention in order that
the legal warrant of detention might be examined. The
said detention may be legal or illegal. The right which is
sought to be enforced by such a writ is a fundamental
right of a citizen conferred under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India.
11. The ancient prerogative writ of habeas corpus takes
its name from the two mandatory words "habeas" and
"corpus". "Habeas Corpus" literally means "have his
body". The general purpose of these writs as their name
indicates was to obtain the production of the individual
before a Court or a Judge. This is a prerogative process
for securing the liberty of the subject by affording an
effective relief of immediate release from unlawful or
unjustifiable detention, whether in prison or in private
custody. This is a writ of such a sovereign and
transcendent authority that no privilege of power or
place can stand against it. It is a very powerful safeguard
of the subject against arbitrary acts not only of private
individuals but also of the executive, the greatest
safeguard for personal liberty, according to all
constitutional jurists. The writ is a prerogative one
obtainable by its own procedure. ... In our country, it is
this prerogative writ which has been given a
constitutional status under Articles 32 and 226 of the
Constitution. Therefore, it is an extraordinary remedy
available to a citizen of this country, which he can
enforce under Article 226 or under Article 32 of the
10. Thus, the writ of habeas corpus is a process by which a person
who is confined without legal justification may secure a release
from his confinement. The writ is, in form, an order issued by the
High Court calling upon the person by whom a person is alleged to
be kept in confinement to bring such person before the court and to
let the court know on what ground the person is confined. If there
is no legal justification for the detention, the person is ordered to
be released {See Kanu Sanyal (supra).}
11.    The High Court of Karnataka, Gulbarga Bench in the case of
Sudharani Vs. The State of Karnataka (ILR 2016 KAR 731)
5. We find there is absolutely no occasion to issue a writ
of habeas corpus, as the writ petitioners do not allege or
aver in the petition that the police or any third party has
held the missing person in illegal custody.
6. A writ of habeas corpus cannot be issued in respect of
any and every missing person more so when no named
person is alleged to be responsible for the illegal
detention of the person for whose production before the
Court a writ is to be issued.
12.    The High Court of Calcutta, in the case of Swapan Das vs.
The State of West Bengal & others, in W.P.No.17965(W) of
2013 dated 28.06.2013, made an observation, which reads as
“A habeas corpus writ is to be issued only when the
person concerning whose liberty the petition has been
filed is illegally detained by a respondent in the petition.
On the basis of a habeas corpus petition the power
under art.226 is not to be exercised for tracing a missing
person engaging an investigating agency empowered to
investigate a case under the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973. The investigation, if in progress, is to be overseen
by the criminal court. Here the petitioner is asking this
court to direct the police to track down his missing son.
For these reasons, we dismiss the WP. No costs.
Certified xerox.
13.    In the backdrop of the aforesaid legal conspectus on the
point in issue, it transpires that the condition precedent for
instituting a petition seeking writ of habeas corpus is that the
person for whose release, the writ of habeas corpus is sought must
be in detention and he must be under detention by the Authorities
or by any private individual. Such writ is available only against
any person who is suspected of detaining another unlawfully. In
the present case, the petitioner has not arrayed any of the suspects
as party respondent. The only assertion that the corpus have been
abducted by some unknown miscreants, is not sufficient to invoke
the extraordinary jurisdiction of this Court for issuance of writ of
habeas corpus, which though a writ of right, is not a writ of course.
Needless to reiterate that the criminal law has already been
triggered in motion by lodging of missing person report.
Accordingly, the question formulated above is answered in the
14.    Now, adverting to the multifarious reliefs claimed in the
petition, it can easily be discerned that they are completely
tangential and incongruous with the subject matter of this habeas
corpus petition and cannot be acceded to.
15.        The petition sans merit and is, accordingly, dismissed.
However, this Court comprehends the flummoxed state of the
petitioner due to abduction of her sister-in-law and, accordingly,
directs the respondents/Police Authorities to bring the investigation
pursuant to missing persons report lodged by mother-in-law of
Aarti, to its logical end, as expeditiously as possible.