This Writ Petition is filed by the defendant No.1 in Original
Suit No.25552 of 2017 on the file of the IV Additional City Civil
and Sessions Judge at Mayohall Unit, Bengaluru, now pending
consideration before the LXXXIV Additional City Civil and
Sessions Judge, Commercial Court, Bengaluru on IA.I of 2017.
2. The relevant facts for adjudication of this Writ Petition
are that, respondent No.1, claims to be owner of the property in
question and the respondent No.1 has entered into a lease deed
dated 13th May, 2011 with the petitioner as per Annexure-B.
The respondent No.1 has filed Original Suit No.25552 of 2017
before the trial Court seeking relief of ejectment, arrears of rent,
damages and consequential injunction to restrain the petitioner
from subletting the suit schedule property.     In the meanwhile,
the suit was transferred to the Commercial court as Com.OS
No.25552 of 2017.      The petitioner, entered appearance in the
suit and filed application in IA.1 of 2017 under Section 8 of
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 seeking referring the
parties to the arbitration in terms of the clause 12 of the lease
deed dated 13th May, 2011.      The respondent No.1 herein filed
objection to the said application.          The trial Court, after
considering the material on record, by impugned order dated
08th August, 2018, rejected the application for referring the
parties to Arbitration proceedings.      Feeling aggrieved by the
same, the petitioner has presented this petition.
3. Heard Sri Dhananjaya Joshi, learned Senior Counsel on
behalf of Sri Vachan, learned counsel for the petitioner and Smt.
G.K. Bhavana, learned counsel appearing for the respondent
4.  Sri Dhajanaya Joshi, learned Senior counsel for the
petitioner argued that the trial Court dismissed the application
following the law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the
case of HIMANGI ENTERPRISES v. AMALJIT SINGH AHULVALIA
made in Civil Appeal No.16850 of 2017 decided on 12th October,
2017, wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that the
issue relating to the lease is not arbitral in nature.   However,
learned senior counsel invited the attention of the Court to the
judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of VIDYA
DROLIA    v.   DURGA    TRADING    CORPORATION        reported in
(2019)20 SCC 406 and contended that the Hon'ble Supreme
Court, held that judgment in HIMANGI ENTERPRISES (supra)
requires re-look by a Bench of three Hon’ble Judges of Hon'ble
Supreme Court and therefore contended that the impugned
order passed following the judgment in HIMANGI (supra) is
incorrect and requires interference in this Writ Petition.
5. On the other hand, Smt. G.K. Bhavana, learned counsel
appearing for the respondent submitted that the Writ Petition is
devoid of merits on the ground that the Writ Petition has been
filed at the belated stage as the impugned order is passed on
08th August, 2018 and the present Writ Petition is filed in the
year 2022 and therefore, there is delay of three years which
disentitles the petitioner to claim relief in the Writ Petition. She
also submitted that the dispute is at the fag end of the
proceedings before the Commercial Court and therefore, taking
into     consideration    the    relief   sought     for    by   the
plaintiff/respondent No1. seeking relief of ejectment and arrears
of rent, she sought to justify the impugned order passed by the
6. Having heard the learned Counsel for the parties I have
carefully considered the impugned order passed by the trial
Court. The Trial Court, by referring to the judgment passed by
the    Hon'ble   Supreme     Court    in  the   case   of   HIMANGI
ENTERPRISES (supra) has arrived at the conclusion that the lis
between the parties is relating to eviction as well as arrears of
rent and therefore, same are non-arbitrable in nature and
accordingly,     dismissed    IA.1     of    2017     filed   by   the
defendant/petitioner herein.       In the light of the conclusion
arrived at the by the trial Court, based on the judgment of the
Apex Court in HIMANGI ENTEPRISES (supra) I have considered
the later judgment of the Apex Court in the case of VIDYA
DROLIA (supra) wherein at paragraph 12 of the judgment it is
“12. While appreciating that a lease is a transfer of
an interest in property, and therefore, a conveyance, in
law, there is nothing in the Transfer of Property Act to
show that a dispute as to determination of a lease arising
under Section 111 cannot be decided by arbitration.
However, what was argued was that Sections 114 and
114A and, which provide for statutory reliefs against
forfeiture for non- payment of rent and for breach of an
express condition, would indicate that the statute itself is
based on a public policy in favour of tenants as a class,
which can be decided by the courts only.”
7. Further, at paragraphs 26 and 34 of the judgment, it is
“26. Equally, merely because a discretion had to be
exercised by the court on whether or not to grant specific
performance,     would   not    militate   against   specific
performance    being   granted   [see    paragraph   44,   in
particular, of Booz Allen (supra)]. It is clear, therefore,
that the judgment in Himangni Enterprises (supra) will
require a relook by a Bench of three Hon’ble Judges of
this Court.
34. In this view of the matter, this case is referred
to a Bench of three Hon’ble Judges.”
8.   In the case of VIDYA DROLIA, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court, taking into consideration the law declared by the Hon'ble
Apex Court in the case of HIMANGI ENTERPRISES (supra),
arrived at the conclusion that the judgment rendered in
HIMANGI ENTERPRISES (supra) requires a re-look by the Larger
Bench by the Hon'ble Apex Court. Thereafter, the Three Judge
Bench of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of VIDYA DROLIA v.
DURGA TRADING CORPORTION reported (2021)2 SCC 1 at
paragraphs 79 and 80 observed thus:
“79.   Landlord-tenant disputes governed by the
Transfer of Property Act are arbitrable as they are not
action sin tem but pertain to subordinate rights in
personam that arise from rights in tem.       Such actions
normally would not affect third-party rights or have erga
omnes effect or require centralised adjudication.         An
award passed deciding landlord-tenant disputes can be
executed and to inalienable and sovereign functions of
the State. The provisions of the Transfer of Property Act
do   not   expressly   or  by   necessary  implication   bar
arbitration.  The Transfer of Property Act, like all other
Acts, has a public purpose, that is, to regulate landlord-
tenant relationships and the Arbitrator would be bound by
the provisions, including provisions which enure and
protect the tenants.
80. In view of the aforesaid, we overrule the ratio
laid down in HIMANGI ENTERPRISES and old that the
landlord-tenant disputes are arbitrable as the Transfer of
Property Act does not forbid or foreclose arbitration.
However,     landlord-tenant     disputes   covered      and
government by rent control legislation would not be
arbitrable when specific court or forum has been given
exclusive jurisdiction to apply and decide special right and
obligations.   Such rights are obligations can only be
adjudicated and enforced by the specified court/forum,
and not through arbitration.”
9. In that view of the matter, I am of the view that the
impugned order passed by the trial Court dated 08th August,
2018 is liable to be set aside, accordingly set aside, resultantly,
Writ petition is allowed.