1. Learned counsel for the applicant and learned AGA are
2. This application u/s 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed by the
applicant with a prayer to quash the notice dated 03.01.2022
issued by Sub Divisional Magistrate (S.D.M.), Bahjoi, Sambhal
U/s 111/110 (G) Cr.P.C. whereby he was asked to show cause
why he may not be required to furnish personal bonds of
Rs.50,000/- and two sureties in the like amount for maintaining
peace and good conduct for a period of one year.
3. It is submitted by learned counsel for the applicant that in the
present case, a notice dated 03.01.2022 under Section
111/110(G) of Cr.P.C. has illegally been issued against the
applicant by the Sub Divisional Magistrate (S.D.M.), Bahjoi,
Sambhal wherein it has been mentioned that applicant is an
addicted gambler and person of criminal in nature and is so
desperate and dangerous as to render is being at large without
security hazardous to the community. It is further submitted that
it has not been mentioned in notice that what criminal charges
are pending against applicant. The essential ingredients of
Sections 111/110 (G) of Cr.P.C. are not made out. The substance
of the information has not been mentioned.
4. The object of Section 110 under Chapter-VIII of Cr.P.C. is to
afford protection to the public against a repetition of crimes
against their person or property. It is not a punishment of the
offender for his past offences but it is for securing good
bahaviour for the future.
5. The power under section 110 Cr.P.C. must be exercised after
observing all the formalities required under the law. The
Magistrate can apply his power only on convincing substance.
It is for the prevention, not the punishment of the crime. The
Magistrate has to exercise its discretion in judicious manner.
6. In the case of Gopalanachari Vs. State of Kerala [AIR
1981 SC 674], Hon'ble the Apex Court observed in para -6 of
"6. The constitutional survival of Section 110 certainly depends
on its obedience to Article 21, as this Court has expounded.
Words of wide import, vague amplitude and far too generalised
constitutionalised in the context of Article 21 unless read down
to be as a fair and reasonable legislation with reverence for
human rights. A glance at Section 110 shows that only a narrow
signification can be attached to the words in clauses (a) to (g),
"by habit a robber......", " by habit a receiver of stolen
property ........", "habitually protects or harbours thieves.....",
"habitually commits or attempts to commit or abets the
commission of....." "is so desperate and dangerous as to render
his being at large without security hazardous to the
community." These expressions, when they become part of the
preventive chapter with potential for deprivation of a man's
personal freedom up to a period of three years, must be
scrutinized by the court closely and anxiously. The poor are
picked up or brought up, habitual witnesses swear away their
freedom and courts ritualistically. commit them to prison and
Article 21 is for them a freedom under total eclipse in practice.
Courts are guardians of human rights. The common man looks
upon the trial Court as the protector. The poor and the
illiterate, who have hardly the capability to defend themselves,
are nevertheless not 'non-persons', the trial Judges must
remember. This Court in Hoskot case has laid down the law
that a person in prison shall be given legal aid at the expense
of the State by the court assigning counsel. In cases under
Section 110 of the Code, the exercise is often an idle ritual
deprived of reality although a man's liberty is at stake. We
direct the Trial Magistrates to discharge their duties, when
trying cases under Section 110, with great responsibility and
whenever the counter-petitioner is a prisoner give him the
facility of being defended by counsel now that Article 21 has
been reinforced by Article 39- A. Otherwise the order to bind
over will be bad and void. We have not the slightest doubt that
expressions like 'by habit', 'habitual', 'desperate', 'dangerous',
'hazardous' cannot be flung in the face of a man with laxity of
semantics. The court must insist on specificity of facts and be
satisfied that one swallow does not make a summer and a
consistent course of conduct convincing enough to draw the
rigorous inference that by confirmed habit, which is second
nature, the counter-petitioner is sure to commit the offences
mentioned if he is not kept captive. Preventive sections
privative of freedom, if incautiously proved by indolent judicial
processes, may do deeper injury. They will have the effect of
detention of one who has not been held guilty of a crime and
carry with it the judicial imprimatur, to boot. To call a man
dangerous is itself dangerous ; to call a man desperate is to
affix a desperate adjective to stigmatize a person as hazardous
to the community is itself a judicial hazard unless compulsive
testimony carrying credence is abundantly available. A
sociologist may pardonably take the view that it is the poor
man, the man without political clout, the person without
economic stamina, who in practice gets caught in the coils of
Section 110 of the Code, although, we as court, cannot
subscribe to any such proposition on mere assertion without
copious substantiation. Even so, the court cannot be unmindful
of social realities and be careful to require strict proof when
personal liberty may possibly be the causality. After all, the
judicial process must not fail functionally as the protector of
7. Learned AGA submitted that applicant has two cases
previous criminal history i.e. Case Crime No. 272 of 2021,
under Sections 354, 452, 323, 506 I.P.C. and second is the
proceedings under Sections 107 and 116 Cr.P.C.
8. The passing of preliminary order under Section 111 Cr.P.C. is
obligatory. As a procedure the first thing that a Magistrate must
do after receipt of the information referred to in Sections 107 to
110 of Cr.P.C. is to apply his mind to such information and, if
he is satisfied that there is ground for proceeding under the
chapter, to pass an order in writing under section 111 Cr.P.C..
The order under section 111 Cr.P.C. must be in a writing and
broadly contain the elements (i) Substance of the information
received under Sections 107 to 110 of Cr.P.C. (as the case may
be), (ii) Upon a consideration of such information he has
formed the opinion that there is a likelihood of a breach of the
peace and that it is necessary to proceed under the relevant
sections (Sections 107 to 110 of Cr.P.C. as the case may be). He
is not bound to draw up an order under Section 111 Cr.P.C.
merely because he has received a Police Report or other
information, ( iii) the amount of the bond to be executed, (iv)
the term for which the bond is to remain in force, (v) The
number, character and class of sureties if any required.
9. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Madhu Limaye
Vs. Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Monghyr and others [1970
(3) SCC 746] has observed that "since the person to be
proceeded against has to show cause, it is but natural that he
must know the grounds for apprehending a breach of the peace
or disturbance of the public tranquility at his hands. Although
the section speaks of the 'substance' of the information it does
not mean that the order should not be full. It may not repeat the
information bodily but it must give proper notice of what has
moved the Magistrate to take the action. This order is the
foundation of the jurisdiction and the word 'substance' means
the essence of the most important parts of the information."
It has been further held by Hon'ble Court that the person
proceeded against show cause notice must be informed of the
allegations made against him, by giving him the substance of
the information so that he may meet such allegations.
10. The order contemplated under Section 111 Cr.P.C. requires
application of mind and has to be prepared and drawn up
cautiously and carefully in compliance with the provisions of
section 111 Cr.P.C. and the order must contain reasons of the
Magistrate satisfaction. The substance of the information is the
matter upon which he has to issue show cause notice. If
substance of information is not given in the order under Section
111 Cr.P.C. the person against whom the order has been made
may remain in confusion and may not be able to give
explanation. The basic object of preliminary order being to give
the person proceeded against an opportunity to meet the
allegation made against him as well as nature of the order
11. In the present case as it has been submitted by learned
counsel for the applicant that applicant is not a habitual
offender. His involvement in offence as submitted by learned
AGA is also not grave. The sections 354. 452, 323, 506 I.P.C.
are triable by the Magistrate. Proceedings under Sections 107
and 116 Cr.P.C. is also not a crime defined in IPC. The so called
notice which is subject matter of this application suffers from
illegality, vagueness of the substance of information received as
set forth is wholly incomplete vague and ambiguous which is
invalid and defective in the eye of law. The Sub Divisional
Magistrate has no jurisdiction to proceed on the basis of void
notice and proceedings pending against the applicant are a
nullity and without jurisdiction. It is well settled that the
objective of setting forth in the order, the substance of
information received by the Sub-Divisional Magistrate is to
inform the person asked to show cause what allegations he has
to answer. If the substance of the information set forth in the
notice is vague and ambiguous, the object of Section 110 Cr. P.
C. is bound to be defeated.
12. In view of above, the petition under Section 482 is allowed
and the order of notice dated 03.01.2022 issued by the Sub
under Section 111/110 (G) Cr.P.C. is hereby quashed. However,
learned Sub Divisional Magistrate is at liberty to draw a fresh
proceedings against the applicant in accordance with provisions
of law.