18:30:35 +0530   High Court of Judicature at Bombay through the           …Petitioner
Mr Shyam Mehta, Senior Advocate, with SR Nargolkar, Amicus
Mr Mathews Nedumpara, Respondent No. 1, present in person.
Mr Subhash Jha, with Rohini M Amin, for Respondent No. 1.
Mr BV Samant, for Respondent No. 2 (Janakalyan Sahakari Bank
1.     We have heard Mr Jha, learned Advocate for the Respondent
Contemnor, Mr M Nedumpara, Mr Nedumpara himself and Mr
Shyam Mehta, learned Senior Advocate, who, along with Mr SR
Nargolkar appears at our request as amicus in Suo Motu Show
Cause Contempt Notice No. 2 of 2017.
2.     The matter immediately arises from an order of 15th March
2017 (Dr Manjula Chellur CJ and GS Kulkarni J) in Writ Petition
No. 2334 of 2013 (Lalita Mohan Tejwani v Special Recovery Officer).
The Writ Petition itself has something of a background. It is of
relevance in a separate Suo Motu Show Cause Contempt Notice
No. 1 of 2013. That was listed before us at Sr. No. 1 today, but we
had perforce to make an order removing it from our list for entirely
different reasons.
3.     While the Writ Petition may be the same, the cause for the
issuance of the present Suo Motu Show Cause Notice No. 2 of 2017
is entirely distinct. This is set out at some length in the five page
order of the Division Bench. It arises on what actually happened in
Court, and which the Court recorded in paragraphs 2, 3, 4 and 5.
We reproduce these below for completeness:
“2. On the above backdrop, we were to further hear the
present petition today. Learned counsel appearing for
respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in compliance with our earlier
order dated 1st March 2017, has placed on record further
affidavit pointing out various proceedings about eleven in
number, filed by the petitioner and her family members.
Learned counsel for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 submits that
this petition is frivolous and an abuse of the process of
court. When we pointed out to Mr Nedumpara that when
earlier petition filed on the same cause of action and for
similar prayers was dismissed, then whether this petition
would be maintainable, on this what has happened and what
transpired in the Court was most disturbing and shocking
and we set out the same hereunder:-
3.     Mr. Nedumpara, learned counsel for the petitioner
replied that he does not want to answer any questions of the
Court as for the petitioner as “dominus litis” he should be
heard. We had not prevented Mr. Nedumpara from arguing
but wanted him to answer the basic issue as urged on behalf
of respondent Nos. 1 and 2. At this stage, the manner in
which Mr. Nedumpara conducted himself and behaved
before the Court to say the least was most abusive,
contemptuous, lowering the dignity of the Court, as also
unbecoming of an advocate and officer of the Court. This
conduct of Mr. Nedumpara, in our opinion, amounts to
contempt on the face of the Court. Not only that but his
demeanor as an officer of the Court was also highly
objectionable. Mr. Nedumpara not only created a scene in
the Court but also made abuses at the learned counsel
appearing for respondent Nos. 1 and 2. In fact, learned
counsel appearing for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 pointed out
that on every occasion Mr. Nedumpara was behaving and
conducting himself in this manner.
4.     What happened thereafter is further shocking. When
the hearing was in progress and the learned counsel for
respondent Nos. 1 and 2 was pointing out to us the details
of the earlier decisions and the similar proceedings, Mr.
Nedumpara walked out of the arguing seat and went behind
and sat in the last row showing utter disregard and
indifference to the sanctity of the court proceedings.
Thereafter, when learned counsel for respondent Nos.1 and
2 and was addressing this Court, Mr Nedumpara came
forward and interrupted the learned counsel for respondent
Nos. 1 and 2 and was again abusive towards the Court, and
vehemently insisted that he be heard and he need not
answer any query of the Court. When we pointed out that
our queries on the basic issues were required to be answered
so that further hearing can be proceeded, Mr. Nedumpara
walked out of the Court and then did not return.
5.     We find that what happened in the Court today is not
only most unfortunate but highly objectionable affecting the
solemnity and sanctity of the judicial proceedings. The
conduct of Mr. Nedumpara has seriously affected not only
the dignity of the Court but also the interest of
administration of justice. We may observe that the solemn
function of the Court is to dispense justice according to law
and, therefore, it is well settled that the proceedings inside
the Court are always expected to be held in a dignified and
an orderly manner. The counsel of the Court is expected to
be a responsible officer of the Court and if such
contemptuous behavior on the part of Mr. Nedumpara is
not seriously dealt with, the same would erode the dignity
of the Court and corrode the majesty of the Court
impairing confidence of the public in the efficacy of the
institution of the Court. This conduct of Mr. Nedumpara,
in our opinion, amounts to a gross contempt of the Court
and, therefore, it is necessary that an action as per the
provisions of the Contempt of Court Act, 1971 is initiated.”
4.    As we can see, what happened in Court that day had nothing
whatever to do with the merits of Writ Petition No. 2334 of 2013,
nor with the substance of Suo Motu Show Cause Contempt Notice
No. 1 of 2013. It was limited to what we can only describe as Mr
Nedumpara’s conduct in Court that day. There is equally no doubt
that the Division Bench was agitated and expressed its grave
displeasure at what happened before it.
5.     Now in response to this, there were two possible courses of
action open to Mr Nedumpara. One was to defend his conduct and
to justify it. The other was to accept that the conduct was
unjustified, to accept the error and to unconditionally and bona fide
apologise for that conduct.
6.     There is an Affidavit in Reply of 2nd May 2017. The first
portion of that Affidavit up to paragraph 4 attempts a linkage on
facts to the other contempt show cause notice. That is entirely
immaterial and irrelevant to the present show cause notice. It serves
as no justification for the conduct in Court. It is not in any sense a
seeking of absolution nor an apology. The attempt there is only to
show that there is some linkage, but that is of no concern to us. To
put it differently, even if we were to proceed in an order in contempt
against Mr Nedumpara, what is stated up to paragraph 4 of that
Affidavit would not enter the discussion because it would be entirely
7.     What is of interest to us is what Mr Nedumpara has to say in
this Affidavit in regard to incident in Court on that date, 15th March
2017. We find this in paragraph 4 and particularly the latter portion
of it and at the forefront in paragraph 11. Those two paragraphs at
pages 7 to 8 and 11 to 12 of the Affidavit read thus:
“4. The order dated 15th March 2017 directing issuance
of notice for contempt of Court against me, I beg to submit,
does not reflect the true sequence of events. It is a
fundamental principle of law that if the minutes of a Court
or Tribunal are erroneous, the only forum before which its
correction could be sought is the very same Court or
Tribunal whose record is erroneous. I beg to submit that the
order dated 15th March 2017 contains many factual errors.
The allegation in the notice that I was abusive towards the
Court and the counsel for the opposite side; that I sat on the
last row of seats in the Court and that I walked out of the
Court and did not return are not factually correct. I say so
not because I am not remorseful of my admitted mistakes;
not because I am argumentative, but because they are
factually incorrect. I did not use any abusive language
towards the Hon’ble Court. All that I said was that being
the lawyer for the Petitioner, I am the dominus litis; I am the
master of the proceeding, I alone have control over it and I
am, therefore, entitled to begin the argument; that the right
of the Respondent is only to reply and that right comes after
my addressing the Court, which I was not permitted to do. I
did not say that I will not answer the questions of the Court;
I said that I will answer all questions but that can happen
only after I am allowed to open my case as, the Respondent
was interested in misguiding the court by quoting the
Petitioner out of context. I also did not use any abusive
language against the opposite side counsel. All that I said
was “My dear friend, be patient, allow me to begin my
case”. I did not sit in the last row. When I was not allowed
to present my case, I took a seat in the second row only to
tell Mrs Rohini Amin, the Advocate on record, that I
preferred not to appear any more in the matter and she
should seek an adjournment to engage some other counsel.
When she tried to submit the same, I only said that if the
Hon’ble Court is not willing to hear me, let me go, and I left
the Court in a moment of mental trauma and palpitation. I
being an Advocate of the Bar for more than 32 years, the
Court being the only temple which I visit, I could not
imagine my demeanor to be disrespectful towards the
Court. But I am a human being with blood, marrow,
emotions and it is possible that the frustration, anger and
palpitation in me might have reflected. That only others can
judge, not me. Having come out of the Court in the
aforesaid mental trauma and after having a glass of water, it
took some time to be consoled myself. I felt so sad and so
pained; so too remorseful for not being able to remain as
cool as a cucumber. I came back to the Court, skipping my
lunch, and tendered profuse apology in the presence of a
large crowd. Though my tendering apology had a soothing
effect on the Hon’ble Judges, still the apology was not
recorded despite my repeated requests in that respect.
Hence, it has become imperative for me to seek correction
of the records. A separate application for the said purpose is
being filed.
11.     While beseeching the mercy, indulgence and
absolution of this Court, as aforesaid, and seeking my
discharge, touching the feet of lady justitia, asking for
forgiveness for whatever lapses and mistakes on my part, if
the contempt of Court proceeding is to be continued, I pray
that I may be heard on my instant application for discharge/
before charges are framed, for which the judgment of the
Full Bench of the High Court of Chattisgarh in Anil Kumar
Dubey v Pradeep Kumar Shukla1 is an authority. It was held
in the said judgment that an order framing charges is one
appealable to the Supreme Court in terms of Section 19(1)
of the Act. A separate application seeking the above
prayers, for which the instant affidavit constitutes evidence,
is filed herewith, which deserves to be allowed in the
interests of justice.”
1 Miscellaneous Appeal No. 45 of 2016, decided on 25th January 2017.
8.     We have deliberately refrained from emphasizing any portion
of the foregoing extract. It must be read as a whole.
9.     We asked Mr Nedumpara today whether he stands by these
statements or wishes to retract them. We asked him to instruct Mr
Jha who appears for him. Mr Nedumpara personally and Mr Jha on
his instructions both say that Mr Nedumpara stands by these
statements. He regrets his conduct. He says there was undoubtedly
a lapse on his part and a momentary failure to observe and maintain
the discipline and decorum necessary in any court of law. But this
was inadvertent; perhaps in the heat of the moment. Mr Nedumpara
claims he apologised that very day. This apology is one that he
repeats today, and also does so on Affidavit and before us through
his counsel.
10.    Everyone has bad days. Counsel — and possibly even judges
— are no exceptions. The question is how such a momentary lapse
should be approached. Courts have available to them the power of
punishing for contempt. Should the full brunt of the law and
especially the stringency of the law of contempt, a formidable power
in the hands of the superior Court, be brought to bear on every
single occasion? Or should, as they say, there be an approach of
justice tempered with mercy. We do not understand this to mean
unwarranted leniency by the court, nor that courts must be timorous
and let themselves be intimidated. But Courts are, after all,
institutions of a great formality. The administration of justice, and
more particularly public faith in the administration of justice,
depends not just upon how it is administered, but also on how it is
seen to be administered. This requires certain standards of conduct
throughout the day. We cannot, therefore, help but deprecate the
conduct that is recorded in the impugned order. Our order today is
not to be seen or read as condoning that conduct in the slightest.
11.    But as Mr Mehta points out, our task today is to see whether
we can exercise our powers under Section 12 and the proviso to sub-
Section (1) and its explanation. Section 12 of the Act in its entirety
“12. Punishment for contempt of court.—
(1)     Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act or in
any other law, a contempt of court may be punished with
simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees, or with both:
Provided that the accused may be discharged or the
punishment awarded may be remitted on apology being
made to the satisfaction of the court.
Explanation.—An apology shall not be rejected
merely on the ground that it is qualified or conditional if the
accused makes it bona fide.
(2)     Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law
for the time being in force, no court shall impose a sentence
in excess of that specified in sub-section (1) for any
contempt either in respect of itself or of a court subordinate
to it.
(3)     Notwithstanding anything contained in this section,
where a person is found guilty of a civil contempt, the
court, if it considers that a fine will not meet the ends of
justice and that a sentence of imprisonment is necessary
shall, instead of sentencing him to simple imprisonment,
direct that he be detained in a civil prison for such period
not exceeding six months as it may think fit.
(4)     Where the person found guilty of contempt of court
in respect of any undertaking given to a court is a company,
every person who, at the time the contempt was committed,
was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for
the conduct of business of the company, as well as the
company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the contempt and
the punishment may be enforced, with the leave of the
court, by the detention in civil prison of each such person:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section
shall render any such person liable to such punishment if he
proves that the contempt was committed without his
knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent
its commission.
(5)     Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section
(4), where the contempt of court referred to therein has
been committed by a company and it is proved that the
contempt has been committed with the consent or
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part
of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer
shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contempt and the
punishment may be enforced, with the leave of the court, by
the detention in civil prison of such director, manager,
secretary or other officer.
Explanation.—For the purposes of sub-sections (4)
(a)   “company” means any body corporate and
includes a firm or other association of individuals;
(b)   “director”, in relation to a firm, means a
partner in the firm.”
12.     That there is an apology by Mr Nedumpara is not once but is
now three times confirmed. Is that apology conditional or qualified
in any way? Mr Nedumpara is at some pains to say that it is not, and
it is the most unqualified apology that is in his power to offer. He
has, as he says, nothing beyond this to give. He has offered this
apology without attempting any explanation — correctly so — and
without instructing Mr Jha to make any explanation linked to any
other facts or even to the other suo motu show cause notice. It is for
this reason that Mr Jha submits that the apology must be accepted.
Nothing more then this can be done, Mr Jha says, to establish that
the apology is indeed bona fide.
13.     Mr Mehta submits that this is all very well, and while it is
possible that Mr Nedumpara suffered a really bad day once, and
even if this is to be allowed to pass with an acceptance of his
apology, it must surely be accompanied with the necessary
undertaking expected of an Advocate of Mr Nedumpara’s standing
of several decades that he will strain every nerve to ensure that there
is no such repetition in any Court in future whatever the
provocation. We appreciate Mr Mehta’s concern, but it is not our
intention to humiliate anyone; and certainly not by an order of a
court. We need no such undertaking to be separately voiced, for the
simple reason that this undertaking is part and parcel of the very
sanad that allows every advocate to practice law.
14.     Having considered the circumstances in their totality, we are
inclined to accept the apology given by Mr Nedumpara. We accept
as bona fide, unconditional and unqualified the statement made by
Mr Nedumpara today. We do so because it is within our power and
remit to accept an apology in these terms, and also because we
believe that the contempt powers of this Court must be exercised
sparingly. Where there is an apology that meets the requirements of
the statute itself, and is to the satisfaction of the Court, surely no
further action is required.
15.   The Contempt Notice is discharged.
16.   We thank all Counsel for their assistance.