The issue raised for consideration in this petition is whether the
prosecution can produce an additional document after completing the
prosecution evidence.
2. Petitioner is indicted for murder in S.C. No.602 of 2012 on the files of
the Additional Sessions Court-III, Thalassery. The prosecution alleges that on
Christmas eve in the year 2010, petitioner caused the death of one Sri. Sathyan
and also attempted to murder PW2 and thereby committed the offences
punishable under sections 302 and 307 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
3. After the prosecution witnesses were examined, two applications were
filed by the Public Prosecutor as CMP No. 4274/2019 and CMP No. 4275/2019
under section 91 and section 311 of the Cr.P.C, respectively. In the first of the
applications, prosecution sought to examine the Sub Inspector of Police of
Kelakam Police Station as an additional witness while in the latter application,
they sought the production of a certified copy of FIR and First Information
Statement in crime No. 54 of 2009 of Kelakam Police Station.
4. According to the prosecution, the motive for the crime in the case under
trial was a previous incident of restraint and assault by the accused that occurred
on 19.04.2009, for which FIR No.54 of 2009 was registered. The prosecution
further contended that, instead of producing FIR No.54 of 2009, by a bonafide
mistake, FIR No.53 of 2009 was produced and marked to prove the motive. The
prosecution prayed that the said document was a vital piece of evidence to prove
its case, and hence it was necessary to issue summons to the Sub Inspector of
Police who registered FIR No.54 of 2009 of Kelakam Police Station to examine
him and also to direct production of the said document.
5. The accused objected to the application and pleaded that the
prosecution is attempting to bring about a change in the prosecution case, and if
the document is permitted to be brought on record, it will prejudice the defence
6. By the impugned order, the learned Sessions Judge allowed the
application after observing that the additional evidence sought to be produced is
essential to render a just decision in the case. It was also observed by the
learned Sessions Judge that the attempt of the prosecution was not to fill up any
lacuna but only to tender and mark the correct documents and whether the
additional documents will prove the motive for the crime or not can be decided
only subsequently.
7. Sri. John S. Ralph the learned Counsel for the Petitioner vehemently
contended that the defence had put questions to the witnesses, especially PW2,
based upon the document produced as FIR No.53 of 2009 and that there was no
mistake in producing the said document, as PW2 himself was a victim in the
aforesaid crime. The learned Counsel argued that the entire defence evidence
was based upon the alleged motive relying upon FIR No.53 of 2009. However,
after realising that the prosecution failed to prove the alleged motive, they are
attempting to bring in new evidence for varying the prosecution case. It was
further submitted that on an earlier occasion also, the prosecution had sought
production of an additional document and despite the objection raised by the
defence, the court had allowed the same. The learned Counsel submitted that
the prosecution's attempt was only to delay the proceedings further and to
overcome the lacuna in its case, which is not permissible under law.
8.   Sri. Vipin Narayan, learned Public Prosecutor on the other hand
contended that the failure to produce FIR No.54 of 2009 was a bonafide mistake
since, instead of the said document, FIR No.53 of 2009 was produced. The
prosecutor further pointed out that the mistake arose since the FIR produced
also related to an incident between the accused and the deceased and therefore
it was a bonafide mistake. According to the learned Public Prosecutor, the
general rule that the prosecution has after investigation, crystalized its case is
subject to an exception that if the prosecution had mistakenly failed to produce
the document, the court could permit such document to be brought on record.
Reliance was placed on the decision in Central Bureau of Investigation v.
R.S.Pai and Another [(2002) 5 SCC 82].
9. Petitioner is being prosecuted for the offence of murder. Admittedly the
prosecution had completed its evidence. During the trial, one of the injured
witnesses was examined as PW2. He deposed that in the year 2009 he was
brutally assaulted by the accused and a prior enmity is the reason for the said
assault. The said witness had also referred to FIR No.53 of 2009 and stated that
the reason for the enmity is based upon the said incident in the aforesaid crime.
However when the investigating officer, gave his evidence, he stated that the
deceased and the injured were the accused in FIR No.54 of 2009 of Kelakam
police station. Therefore in order to prove the motive for the offence, one of the
vital pieces of evidence is FIR No.54 of 2009. However, what was produced
before the court and marked in evidence was FIR No.53 of 2009 instead of FIR
No.54 of 2009. Unfortunately, the prosecution is alleged to have produced and
marked only FIR No.53 of 2009, and now they want to produce and mark FIR
No.54 of 2009.
10. It is trite that the prosecution cannot fill up any lacuna during the trial.
Reference can be made to a recent decision in Arjun Panditrao Khotkar v.
Kailash Kushanrao Gorantyal and Others [(2020) 7 SCC 1].
11.   However, the term lacuna cannot be interpreted to mean the
deficiency of the prosecutor. The term lacuna means an inherent defect or an
inherent flaw in the prosecution case. The lacuna that cannot be permitted to be
filled up can only mean the inherent flaw or defect in the prosecution case. A
defect in the prosecution case is not the equivalent of a human error committed
by the prosecution during the evidence stage either in producing relevant
material or in eliciting answers. An oversight on the part of the prosecutor cannot
be termed as a lacuna in the prosecution case. The principle that prosecution is
not permitted to fill up a lacuna in its case therefore cannot be extended to mean
those errors committed during the conduct of a trial, brought about on account of
human frailties or mistakes.
12. In this context it is relevant to refer to the judgment in Rajendra
Prasad v. Narcotic Cell through its Officer-in-charge, Delhi [(1999) 6 SCC
110]. In the said decision the Supreme Court held that no party in a trial could be
foreclosed from correcting errors and that if proper evidence was not adduced or
relevant material was not brought on record due to any inadvertence, the court
should be magnanimous in permitting the said mistake to be rectified. The
following observations from the aforesaid judgment are apt in the present
“Lacuna in the prosecution must be understood as the inherent
weakness or a latent wedge in the matrix of the prosecution case. The
advantage of it should normally go to the accused in the trial of the case, but an
oversight in the management of the prosecution cannot be treated as
irreparable lacuna. No party in a trial can be foreclosed from correcting errors. If
proper evidence was not adduced or a relevant material was not brought on
record due to any inadvertence, the court should be magnanimous in permitting
such mistakes to be rectified. After all, function of the criminal court is
administration of criminal justice and not to count errors committed by the
parties or to find out and declare who among the parties performed better.”
13. Similarly, in the decision in P.ChhaganLal Daga v. M. Sanjay Shaw
[(2003) 11 SCC 486] the Supreme Court had held that “the power to receive
evidence in exercise of Section 311 of the Code could be exercised "even if
evidence on both sides is closed" and such jurisdiction of the Court is dictated by
the exigency of the situation and fair play”. It was also observed that the only
factor which should govern the court in the exercise of powers under Section 311
should be whether such material is essential for a just decision in the case. Even
a reading of Section 311 of the Code would show that Parliament has studded
the said provision lavishly with the word "any" at different places indicating the
widest range of powers conferred on the court in that matter.
14. Apart from the above, it is worthwhile to observe that when the
prosecution fails to produce a document due to a mistake, an exception can be
carved out from the general rule that the prosecution cannot be permitted to fill
up a lacuna. In the decision in Central Bureau of Investigation v. R.S.Pai and
Another [(2002) 5 SCC 82] the Supreme Court held that it was open for the
investigating officer to produce relevant documents if they had been omitted to
be produced by a bonafide mistake. The following observations are relevant.
“From the aforesaid sub-sections, it is apparent that normally, the investigating officer is
required to produce all the relevant documents at the time of submitting the charge
sheet. At the same time, as there is no specific prohibition, it cannot be held that the
additional documents cannot be produced subsequently. If some mistake is committed
in not producing the relevant documents at the time of submitting the report or the
charge-sheet, it is always open to the investigation officer to produce the same with the
permission of the court. In our view, considering the preliminary stage of prosecution
and the context in which police officer is required to forward to the Magistrate, all the
documents or the relevant extracts thereof on which prosecution proposes to rely, the
word “shall” used in sub-section (5) cannot be interpreted as mandatory, but as
directory. Normally, the documents gathered during the investigation upon which the
prosecution wants to rely are required to be forwarded to the Magistrate, but if there is
some omission, it would not mean that the remaining documents cannot be produced
subsequently…….. Further, the scheme of sub-section (8) of Section 173 also makes it
abundantly clear that even after the charge-sheet is submitted, further investigation, if
called for, is not precluded. If further investigation is not precluded then there is no
question of not permitting the prosecution to produce additional documents which were
gathered prior to or subsequent to investigation.”
15. Thus there is no embargo on the production of additional documents
during a trial if they are essential for arriving at a proper decision. If the
requirements of justice command the production of such a document, the trial
judge can permit such production, based on principles of fair play and good
sense. No fetter can be placed on the right of the party to produce such a
16. On a perusal of the deposition of PW2 and on a consideration of the
circumstances of the case, I am satisfied that the omission to produce FIR No.54
of 2009 was a bonafide mistake which requires to be rectified. Fair play and
good sense demand that the production of a document purported to be vital is
permitted. I am satisfied that the omission to produce FIR No.54 of 2009 is a
bonafide mistake committed by the investigating agency as well as the
prosecution and the accused cannot be permitted to take advantage of the said
omission. The reasons stated in the impugned order for allowing the application
under section 311 of Cr.P.C is totally tenable and does not call for any
17.    In view of the above, this Crl.M.C is devoid of any merit and is hence
dismissed. However, it is clarified that if the prosecution examines any witnesses
or produces any documents, the accused will be at liberty to recall the witnesses
already examined for cross-examination, if so advised. Taking into consideration
the fact that the crime is of the year 2012, the learned Sessions Judge shall take
appropriate steps to complete the trial and dispose of the case in a time-bound
manner preferably within three months from today.