1.     The present petition has been filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. seeking
setting aside of the order dated 07.02.2020 passed by learned Special Judge
(PC Act), CBI-20, Rouse Avenue Courts, New Delhi whereby the
petitioner’s application seeking permission for Sub Inspector Amit Kumar to
assist the main Investigating Officer in conducting investigation, was
2.     Learned SPP for CBI has submitted that the present case bearing
RCBD12019E0002 was registered under Section 120-B read with Sections
420/468/471/477A IPC and Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1)(d) of the
PC Act, 1988 on 05.04.2019 against the respondent company and others. It
is submitted that the officials of the respondent company entered into a
criminal conspiracy in order to cheat banks/financial institutions/Govt.
exchequer, dishonestly and fraudulently diverted huge amount of bank
3.     It is further submitted that the main Investigating Officer Insp. Kapil
Dhanked has been investigating other cases and also looking proceedings
pending before different Courts including this Court as well as the Supreme
Court of India. The present case is a high-ticket fraud requiring investigation
all over the country. Further, the application in question was moved before
the Trial Court seeking permission for SI Amit Kumar to assist Insp. Kapil
Dhanked in conducting investigation as the bank documents are stated to be
voluminous and the investigation is to be conducted speedily.
4.     Ms. Nishtha Chaturvedi, learned counsel for the respondents, submits
that without prejudice to their rights and contentions to challenge the entire
investigation in appropriate proceedings for being contrary to mandate of
Section 32A of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (“IBC”), the
respondents have no objection to the prayer made in the present application.
She has informed that on an application filed by the Punjab National Bank
under Section 7 of the IBC, the NCLT had initiated Corporate Insolvency
Resolution Process (CIRP). Subsequently, the NCLAT has also approved
the Resolution Plan, which now has been implemented on 26.03.2021, when
the new management has taken over.
5.     I have heard learned counsels for the parties.
6.     In the present case, so far, the investigation has been conducted by
Insp. Kapil Dhanked. It has been stated that the documents are voluminous
and the investigation is to be carried out all over India for which reason,
Insp. Kapil Dhanked would need the assistance of SI Amit Kumar.
7.     The short issue involved in the present case is whether a person below
the rank of Inspector can assist the main Investigating Officer in conducting
investigation. The issue in question arises out of interpretation of Section 17
of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 which is contained in Chapter IV
of the Act dealing with investigation into cases under the Act as well as for
the persons who are authorised to investigate and it reads as under:
“17. Persons authorised to investigate- Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no
(a) in the case of the Delhi Special Police establishment, of an
(b) in the metropolitan areas of Bombay, Calcutta, Madras and
Ahmedabad and in any other metropolitan area notified as such under
sub-section (1) of Section 8 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(2 of 1974), of an Assistant Commissioner of Police;
(c) Elsewhere, of a Deputy Superintendent of Police or a police
shall investigate any offence punishable under this Act without the
order of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class,
as the case may be, or make any arrest therefore without a warrant:
Provided that if a police officer not below the rank of an
Inspector of Police is authorised by the State Government in this
behalf by general or special order, he may also investigate any such
offence without the order of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a
Magistrate of the first class, as the case may be, or make arrest
Provided further that an offence referred to in Clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of Section 13 shall not be investigated without the
order of a police officer not below the rank of a Superintendent of
8.     The above provision corresponds to Section 5A of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1947, which came up for consideration in H.N. Rishbud and
Inder Singh v. State of Delhi reported as AIR 1955 SC 196. The Supreme
Court after considering the Scheme of Cr.P.C. observed that it was
permissible for an officer in charge of a Police Station to get the
investigation conducted from a subordinate officer provided that the
responsibility of all such steps remains with the officer in charge of Police
Station and that the subordinate officer reports all the steps taken by him to
“6.    It is in the light of this scheme of the Code that the scope of
a provision like Section 5(4) of the Act has to be judged. When
such a statutory provision enjoins that the investigation shall be
made by a police officer of not less than a certain rank, unless
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Criminal
Procedure Code, it is clearly implicit therein that the investigation
(in the absence of such permission) should be conducted by the
officer of the appropriate rank. This is not to say that every one of
the steps in the investigation has to be done by him in person or
that he cannot take the assistance of deputies to the extent
permitted by the Code to an officer in charge of a police station
conducting an investigation or that he is bound to go through each
of these steps in every case. When the Legislature has enacted in
emphatic terms such a provision it is clear that it had a definite
policy behind it….”
9.    A similar issue again arose before the Supreme Court in Muni Lal
v. Delhi Administration reported as AIR 1971 SC 1525.
“16. The High Court found irregularity in the investigation on
the basis, as pointed out earlier, that some of the statements are in
the hand writing of Ved Prakash. We are of the view that this was
a wrong approach made by the High Court. It is clear front the
evidence that PW 6 was in complete charge and control of the
investigation and he has never withdrawn from the same at any
stage. He was the officer who was controlling and giving
necessary directions in the course of investigation. Though it is
clearly implicit in Section 5-A that the investigation should be
conducted by the officer of the appropriate rank, we do not think it
is absolutely necessary that every one of the steps in the
investigation has to be done by him in person or that he cannot
take the assistance of his deputies or that he is bound to go
through each and everyone of the steps in the investigation in
every case. The above proposition also has been laid down by this
Court in H.N. Rishbud and Inder Singh v. The State of Bihar
1955CriLJ526. We are referring to the above aspect to emphasise
that the mere fact that some of the statements have been written by
Ved Prakash to the dictation of PW 6 will not make the
investigation as one not conducted by PW 6. Therefore, under the
circumstances, we are not inclined to agree with the view of the
High Court that there has been any irregularity or illegality in the
conduct of the investigation.”
10.   Recently, in Union of India and Others represented through
Superintendent of Police v. T. Nathamuni reported as (2014) 16 SCC 285,
where while relying on its earlier decision in H.N. Rishbud and Inder Singh
“10. In the instant case, the only question that needs to be
considered is as to whether the order passed by the Magistrate
permitting the Sub-Inspector, CBI, Chennai to investigate the
matter can be sustained in law. The only ground taken by the
respondent in the quashing petition before the High Court is that
as per the provisions of Section 17 of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1988, no officer below the rank of Inspector of Police is
authorized by the Government to investigate the case without
permission of the court. Further, Section 17 does not confer any
power to the court to grant permission to the Sub-Inspector of
Police to investigate the case. Hence, the order passed by the
Magistrate permitting the Sub-Inspector of Police to investigate
the case is without jurisdiction and against the mandatory
provisions of Section 17 of the Act as well as Article 21 of the
Constitution of India.
12. It is clear that in the case of investigation under the Delhi
Special Police Establishment Act, an officer below the rank of
Inspector cannot investigate without the order of a competent
Magistrate. In the present case, order of the Special Judge was
obtained by filing an application. That order dated 24-9-2009
shows that it was passed on request and in the interest of justice,
investigation pursuant to such order did not suffer from want of
jurisdiction and hence, in the facts of the case, the High Court
erred in law in interfering with such investigation more so when it
was already completed.
13. The question raised by the respondent is well answered by this
Court in a number of decisions rendered in a different perspective.
The matter of investigation by an officer not authorized by law has
been held to be irregular. Indisputably, by the order of the
Magistrate investigation was conducted by Sub-Inspector, CBI
who, after completion of investigation, submitted the charge-sheet.
It was only during the trial, objection was raised by the
respondent that the order passed by the Magistrate permitting
Sub-Inspector, CBI to investigate is without jurisdiction.
Consequently, the investigation conducted by the officer is vitiated
in law. Curiously enough the respondent has not made out a case
that by reason of investigation conducted by the Sub-Inspector a
serious prejudice and miscarriage of justice has been caused. It is
well settled that invalidity of investigation does not vitiate the
result unless a miscarriage of justice has been caused thereby.”
11    The Trial Court by passing the impugned order not only failed to
appreciate the mandate of Section 17 of the PC Act, 1988 but also failed in
its duty to follow the import of above referred exposition of law. The
Special Judge is empowered under Section 17 of the PC Act, 1988 to permit
an officer below the requisite rank to assist the Investigating Officer in
conducting investigation provided the steps taken by him are under direct
supervision of the Investigation Officer who remains in control of the
investigation and shall be responsible for all the steps that are taken by the
subordinate officer.
12.    Consequently, in view of the above referred position of law and the
no objection given by the respondent, the present petition is allowed.