1.     The petitioner has filed present petition under Section 482 of
Cr.P.C. challenging the order dated 24.12.2019 passed by
Judicial Magistrate First Class, Raipur (C.G.) in Complaint
Case No. 1777/2019 wherein learned trial court has allowed
the application filed by the complainant under Section 143A of
the Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881 (for short “the Act, 1881”)
and has directed the petitioner to pay 20% of the cheque
amount, as well as order dated 06.03.2021 passed by 11 th
Additional Sessions Judge Raipur, District- Raipur (C.G.) by
which the criminal revision filed by the petitioner has been
rejected.
2.     The brief facts, as projected by the petitioner, are that
complainant/ respondent has filed complaint against the
petitioner under Section 138 of the Act, 1881 on 09.01.2019
before Judicial Magistrate First Class, Raipur, District- Raipur
(C.G.) mainly contending that the petitioner had given a
cheque dated 26.11.2018 amounting to Rs. 6,50,000/- to the
complainant. The complainant has deposited the cheque on
28.11.2018 in the account maintained by him in Central Bank
of India, Branch- Chhattisgarh College, Raipur. The said
cheque was dishonoured and returned due to insufficient fund
on 14.12.2018, therefore, the offence under Section 138 of the
Act, 1881 has been committed by the petitioner.
3.  The complainant has sent a legal notice to the petitioner on
17.12.2018 as petitioner has not paid the amount of cheque,
therefore, the complainant has filed a Complaint Case No.
1777/2019 before Judicial Magistrate First Class, Raipur, The
learned Judicial Magistrate First Class taking cognizance on
the    complaint,   issued    summon     to  the  petitioner. On
04.05.2019, the complainant has filed an application under
Section 143A of the Act, 1881 contending that the charges
have already been framed wherein he has denied the charges
levelled against him. Further contention of the complainant is
that as per the provisions of Section 143A of the Act, 1881, if
charges have been framed against the accused, the interim
compensation can be ordered by the Court to the extent of
20% of the cheque amount, therefore, he prayed for grant of
20% of the amount as interim compensation.
4.  The learned Judicial Magistrate First Class vide its order dated
24.12.2019 considering the amended provisions of Section
143A of the Act, 1881, directed the accused to pay 20% of the
cheque amount as compensation, failing which proceeding
under sub-section (v) of Section 143A will be initiated against
petitioner, thereafter fixed the case for hearing on 20.01.2020.
5.  Being aggrieved by the aforesaid order, the petitioner
preferred Criminal Revision No. 102/2020 before the Sessions
Judge, Raipur which was transferred to the Court of 11 th
learned 11th Additional Sessions Judge vide its order dated
06.03.2021 dismissed the revision by recording a finding that
there is no illegality and irregularity in the impugned order
passed by the learned Judicial Magistrate First Class, Raipur
and same is inconformity with the amended provisions of
Section 143A of the Act, 1881. Both these orders have been
challenged by the petitioner in the present petition.
6.  Learned counsel for the petitioner would submit that as per
amended provision of Section 143A of the Act, 1881, grant of
interim compensation is not mandatory and it is discretionary,
therefore, it is not necessary in every case to grant 20% of
cheque amount as interim compensation. He has drawn
attention of this Court towards amended provision of Section
143A of the Act, 1881, which is extracted below:-
compensation- (1) Notwithstanding anything
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (2 of 1974), the Court trying an offence
under Section 138 may order the drawer of the
cheque to pay interim compensation to the
(a) in a summary trial or summon case,
where the drawer pleads not guilty to the
accusation made in the complaint; and
charges.
(2) The interim compensation under sub-
section (1) shall not exceed twenty per cent of the
amount of the cheque.
(3) The interim compensation shall be pad
within sixty days from the date of the order under
sub-section (1), or within such further period not
exceeding thirty days as may be directed by the
Court on sufficient cause being shown by the
drawer of the cheque.
(4) If the drawer of the cheque is acquitted, the
Court shall direct the complainant to repay to the
drawer the amount of interim compensation, with
interest at the bank rate as published by the
Reserve Bank of India, prevalent at the beginning
of the relevant financial years, within sixty days
from the date of the order, or within such further
period not exceeding thirty days as may be
directed by the Court on sufficient cause being
shown by the complainant.
(5) The interim compensation payable under
this section may be recovered as if it were a find
under section 421 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).
(6) The amount of fine imposed under section
138 or the amount of compensation awarded
under section 357 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).”
7.    Learned counsel for the petitioner would rely upon the
judgment of Madras High Court in L.G.R. Enterprises &
another Vs. P. Anbazhagan1, and drew attention of this Court
towards para 18 of the judgment, which reads as under:-
“18. A careful reading of the order passed by the
Court below shows that the Court below has
focussed more on the issue of the prospective /
retrospective operation of the amendment. The
Court has not given any reason as to why it is
directing the accused persons to pay an interim
compensation of 20% to the complainant. As held
by this Court, the discretionary power that is
vested with the trial Court in ordering for interim
compensation must be supported by reasons and
unfortunately in this case, it is not supported by
reasons. The attempt made by the learned
counsel for the respondent to read certain
reasons into the order, cannot be done by this
Court, since this Court is testing the application of
mind of the Court below while passing the
impugned order by exercising its discretion and
this Court cannot attempt to supplement it with
the reasons argued by the learned counsel for the
respondent.”
8.    Learned counsel for the petitioner would further submit that
since the legislature has used the word 'may', as such, it is
discretionary and learned trial court should have not granted
20% of cheque amount as interim compensation, therefore,
orders passed by both the courts below, are not just and
proper, which are liable to be quashed by this Court.
9.    Before adverting to the submission made by learned counsel
for the petitioner, it is expedient to see that aims and object of
amended provision of Section 143A of the Act, 1881, which
was enacted to define and amend the law relating
to Promissory Notes, Bills of Exchange and
Cheques. The said Act has been amended from
time to time so as to provide, inter alia, speedy
disposal of cases relating to the offence of
dishonour of cheques. However, the Central
Government has been receiving several
representations from the public including trading
community relating to pendency of cheque
dishonour cases. This is because of delay tactics
of unscrupulous drawers of dishonoured cheques
due to easy filing of appeals and obtaining stay
on proceedings. As a result of this, injustice is
caused to the payee of a dishonoured cheque
who has to spend considerable time and
resources in court proceedings to realize the
value of the cheque. Such delays compromise the
sanctity of cheque transactions.
2. It is proposed to amend the said Act with a
view to address the issue of undue delay in final
resolution of cheque dishonour cases so as to
provide relief to payees of dishonoured cheques
and to discourage frivolous and unnecessary
litigation which would save time and money. The
proposed amendments will strengthen the
credibility of cheques and help trade and
commerce in general by allowing lending
institutions, including banks, to continue to extend
financing to the productive sectors of the
economy.”
10. From perusal of the Act, 1881 as well as amended Section
143A of the Act, 1881, it is clear that the Act, 1881 has played
a substantial role in the Indian commercial landscape and has
given rightful sanction against defaulters of the due process of
trade who engage in disingenuous activities that causes
unlawful     losses   to   rightful recipients  through   cheque
dishonour. Thereafter, the legislature has amended Act, 1881,
which came into force on 01.09.2018 with the aim to secure
the interest of the complainant along with increasing the
efficacy and expediency of proceedings under Section 138 of
the Act, 1881. Section 143A of the Act, 1881 stipulates that
under certain stages of proceedings under Section 138 of the
Act, 1881, the Court may order for the drawer to make
payment upto 20% of the cheque amount during the
pendency of the matter. The order under Section 143A of the
Act, 1881 can be passed only in summary trial or a summons
case, where he pleads not guilty to the accusation made in
the complaint, in any the case upon framing of charge.
11. From perusal of Section 143A of the Act, 1881, it is quite
evident that the act has been amended by granting interim
measures ensuring that interest of complainant is upheld in
the interim period before the charges are proven against the
drawer. The intent behind this provision is to provide aid to the
complainant during the pendency of proceedings under
Section 138 of the Act, where he is already suffering double-
edged sword of loss of receivables by dishonor of the cheque
and the subsequent legal costs in pursuing claim and offence.
These amendments would reduce pendency in courts
because of the deterrent effect on the masses along ensuring
certainty of process that was very much lacking in the past,
especially enforced at key stages of the proceedings under
the Act. The changes brought forth by way of the 2018
amendment to the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 are
substantial in nature and focus heavily on upholding the
interests of the complainants in such proceedings.
12. From perusal of the amended provision of Section 143A of the
Act, 1881, it is clear that the word 'may' used is beneficial for
the complainant because the complainant has already
suffered for mass deed committed by the accused by not
paying the amount, therefore, it is in the interest of the
complainant as well the accused if the 20% of the cheque
amount is to be paid by the accused, he may be able to utilize
the same for his own purpose, whereas the accused will be in
safer side as the amount is already deposited in pursuance of
the order passed under Section 143A of the Act, 1881. When
the final judgment passed against him, he has to pay
allowances on lower side. Section 143A of the Act, 1881 has
been drafted in such a manner that it secures the interest of
the complainant as well as the accused, therefore, from
perusal of aims and object of amended Section 143A of the
Act, 1881, it is quite clear that the word 'may' may be treated
as 'shall' and it is not discretionary but of directory in nature.
13.    The Hon'ble Supreme Court, while examining 'may' used
'shall' and have effect of directory in nature in case of
Bachahan Devi & another Vs. Nagar Nigam, Gorakhpur &
“18. It is well-settled that the use of word “may”
in a statutory provision would not by itself show
that the provision is directory in nature. In some
cases, the legislature may use the word 'may' as
a matter of pure conventional courtesy and yet
intend a mandatory force. In order, therefore, to
interpret the legal import of the word “may”, the
court has to consider various factors, namely, the
object and the scheme of the Act, the context and
the background against which the words have
been used, the purpose and the advantages
sought to be achieved by the use of this word,
and the like. It is equally well-settled that where
the word 'may' involves a discretion coupled with
an obligation or where it confers a positive
benefit to a general class of subjects in a utility
Act, or where the court advances a remedy and
suppresses the mischief, or where giving the
words directory significance would defeat the
very object of the Act, the word 'may' should be
interpreted to convey a mandatory force. As a
general rule, the word “may” is permissive and
operative to confer discretion and especially so,
where it is used in juxtaposition to the word
“shall”, which ordinarily is imperative as it
imposes a duty. Cases however, are not wanting
where the words “may” “shall”, and “must” are
used interchangeably. In order to find out whether
these words are being used in a directory or in a
mandatory sense, the intent of the legislature
should be looked into along with the pertinent
circumstances.
19. “17.       The     distinction   of    mandatory
compliance or directory effect of the language
depends upon the language couched in the
statute under consideration and its object,
purpose and effect. The distinction reflected in
the use of the word `shall' or 'may' depends on
conferment of power. Depending upon the
context, 'may' does not always mean may. 'May'
is a must for enabling compliance of provision but
there are cases in which, for various reasons, as
soon as a person who is within the statute is
entrusted with the power, it becomes [his] duty to
exercise [that power]. Where the language of
statute creates a duty, the special remedy is
prescribed for non-performance of the duty.”
20. If it appears to be the settled intention of the
legislature to convey the sense of compulsion, as
where an obligation is created, the use of the
word “may” will not prevent the court from giving
it the effect of Compulsion or obligation. Where
the statute was passed purely in public interest
and that rights of private citizens have been
considerably modified and curtailed in the
interests of the general development of an area
or in the interests or removal of slums and
unsanitary areas. Though the power is conferred
upon the statutory body by the use of the word
“may” that power must be construed as a
statutory duty. Conversely, the use of the term
'shall' may indicate the use in optional or
permissive sense. Although in general sense
'may' is enabling or discretional and “shall is
obligatory, the connotation is not inelastic and
inviolate." Where to interpret the word “may” as
directory would render the very object of the Act
as nugatory, the word “may must mean 'shall'.
21. The ultimate rule in construing auxiliary verbs
like “may and “shall” is to discover the legislative
intent; and the use of words `may' and 'shall' is
not decisive of its discretion or mandates. The
use of the words “may” and `shall' may help the
courts in ascertaining the legislative intent
without giving to either a controlling or a
determinating effect. The courts have further to
consider the subject matter, the purpose of the
provisions, the object intended to be secured by
the statute which is of prime importance, as also
the actual words employed.”
14.    The Supreme Court in Surinder Singh Deswal alias Colonel
S.S. Deswal & others Vs. Virender Gandhi 3, has examined
provision of Section 148 of the Act, 1881 and held that it is
mandatory provision. The relevant para of the judgment is
“8. Now so far as the submission on behalf of
the Appellants that even considering the
language used in Section 148 of the N.I. Act as
amended, the appellate Court "may" order the
Appellant to deposit such sum which shall be a
minimum of 20% of the fine or compensation
awarded by the trial Court and the word used is
not "shall" and therefore the discretion is vested
with the first appellate court to direct the
Appellant - Accused to deposit such sum and the
appellate court has construed it as mandatory,
which according to the learned Senior Advocate
for the Appellants would be contrary to the
provisions of Section 148 of the N.I. Act as
amended is concerned, considering the amended
Section 148 of the N.I. Act as a whole to be read
with the Statement of Objects and Reasons of
the amending Section 148 of the N.I. Act, though
it is true that in amended Section 148 of the N.I.
Act, the word used is "may", it is generally to be
construed as a "rule" or "shall" and not to direct
to deposit by the appellate court is an exception
for which special reasons are to be assigned.
Therefore amended Section 148 of the N.I. Act
confers power upon the Appellate Court to pass
an order pending appeal to direct the Appellant-
Accused to deposit the sum which shall not be
less than 20% of the fine or compensation either
on an application filed by the original complainant
or even on the application filed by the Appellant-
Accused Under Section 389 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure to suspend the sentence.
The aforesaid is required to be construed
considering the fact that as per the amended
Section 148 of the N.I. Act, a minimum of 20% of
the fine or compensation awarded by the trial
court is directed to be deposited and that such
amount is to be deposited within a period of 60
days from the date of the order, or within such
further period not exceeding 30 days as may be
directed by the appellate court for sufficient
cause shown by the Appellant. Therefore, if
amended Section 148 of the N.I. Act is
purposively interpreted in such a manner it would
serve the Objects and Reasons of not only
amendment in Section 148 of the N.I. Act, but
also Section 138 of the N.I. Act. Negotiable
Instruments Act has been amended from time to
time so as to provide, inter alia, speedy disposal
of cases relating to the offence of the
dishonoured of cheques. So as to see that due to
delay tactics by the unscrupulous drawers of the
dishonoured cheques due to easy filing of the
appeals and obtaining stay in the proceedings,
an injustice was caused to the payee of a
dishonoured cheque who has to spend
considerable time and resources in the court
proceedings to realise the value of the cheque
and having observed that such delay has
compromised the sanctity of the cheque
transactions, the Parliament has thought it fit to
amend Section 148 of the N.I. Act. Therefore,
such a purposive interpretation would be in
furtherance of the Objects and Reasons of the
amendment in Section 148 of the N.I. Act and
also Section 138 of the N.I. Act.”
15.    The Hon'ble Supreme Court in G.J. Raja Vs. Tejraj Surana4,
has examined the amended Section 143A of the Act, 1881
and held that it is prospective effect and not retrospective
effect. The relevant para of the judgment is reproduced
“19. It must be stated that prior to the insertion of
Section 143-A in the Act there was no provision
on the statute book whereunder even before the
pronouncement of the guilt of an accused, or
even before his conviction for the offence in
question, he could be made to pay or deposit
interim compensation. The imposition and
consequential recovery of fine or compensation
either through the modality of Section 421 of the
Code or Section 357 of the code could also arise
only after the person was found guilty of an
offence. That was the status of law which was
sought to be changed by the introduction of
Section 143A in the Act. It now imposes a liability
that even before the pronouncement of his guilt
or order of conviction, the accused may, with the
aid of State machinery for recovery of the money
as arrears of land revenue, be forced to pay
interim compensation. The person would,
therefore, be subjected to a new disability or
obligation. The situation is thus completely
different from the one which arose for
consideration in ESI Corpn. v. Dwarka Nath
23. In the ultimate analysis, we hold Section
143A to be prospective in operation and that the
provisions of said Section 143A can be applied or
invoked only in cases where the offence under
Section 138 of the Act was committed after the
introduction of said Section 143A in the statute
book. Consequently, the orders passed by the
Trial Court as well as the High Court are required
to be set aside. The money deposited by the
Appellant, pursuant to the interim direction
passed by this Court, shall be returned to the
Appellant along with interest accrued thereon
within two weeks from the date of this order.”
16. Therefore, the word “may” be treated as “shall” and is not
discretionary, but of directory in nature, therefore, the learned
Judicial Magistrate First Class has rightly passed the interim
compensation in favour of the complainant.
17. In L.G.R. Enterprises (Supras), the Hon'ble Madras High
“8.     Therefore, whenever the trial Court
exercises its jurisdiction under Section 143A(1) of
the Act, it shall record reasons as to why it directs
the accused person (drawer of the cheque) to pay
the interim compensation to the complainant. The
reasons may be varied. For instance, the accused
person would have absconded for a longtime and
thereby would have protracted the proceedings or
the accused person would have intentionally
evaded service for a long time and only after
repeated attempts, appears before the Court, or
the enforceable debt or liability in a case, is borne
out by overwhelming materials which the accused
person could not on the face of it deny or where
the accused person accepts the debt or liability
partly or where the accused person does not
cross examine the witnesses and keeps on
dragging with the proceedings by filing one
petition after another or the accused person
absonds and by virtue of a non-bailable warrant
he is secured and brought before the Court after a
long time or he files a recall non-bailable warrant
petition after a long time and the Court while
considering his petition for recalling the non-
bailable warrant can invoke Section 143A(1) of the
Act. This list is not exhaustive and it is more
illustrative as to the various circumstances under
which the trial Court will be justified in exercising
its jurisdiction under Section 143A(1) of the Act, by
directing the accused person to pay the interim
compensation of 20% to the complainant.
9.      The other reason why the order of the trial
Court under Section 143A(1) of the Act, should
contain reasons, is because it will always be
subjected to challenge before this Court. This
Court while considering the petition will only look
for the reasons given by the Court below while
passing the order under Section 143A(1) of the
Act. An order that is subjected to appeal or
revision, should always be supported by reasons.
A discretionary order without reasons is, on the
face of it, illegal and it will be setaside on that
ground alone.”
18. The judgment cited by learned counsel for the petitioner also
indicates that the Judicial Magistrate First Class has to pass a
reasoned order for determining quantum of compensation,
which is payable to the victim looking to the facts and
circumstances each case, but does not suggest any iota that
grant of compensation as per Section 143A of the Act, 1881 is
of discretionary in nature.
19. From perusal of provisions of the Act, 1881 considering the
aims behind object of the Act, 1881 and the law laid down by
the Supreme Court, I am of the considered view that the
amendment in Section 143A of the Act, 1881 is mandatory in
nature, therefore, the learned Judicial Magistrate First Class
has rightly passed the order of interim compensation in favour
of the respondent and has not committed any irregularity or
illegality in passing such order. The learned 11 th Additional
Sessions Judge has also not committed any irregularity or
illegality in rejecting the revision filed by the petitioner, which
warrants any interference by this Court.
20. In view of the above, this petition being devoid of merits, is
liable to be and is hereby dismissed. No order as to costs.