Case :- HABEAS CORPUS WRIT PETITION No. - 192 of
Petitioner :- Kavita Gupta (Corpus)
Respondent :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Mithilesh Kumar Gupta
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A,Ashish Kumar Mishra
Hon'ble Rahul Chaturvedi,J.
Shri Ashish Kumar Mishra, learned Advocate has filed his
Vakalatnama on behalf of Ashok Kumar Gupta, Manoj Kumar
Gupta, Dhiraj Kumar Gupta and Vinod Kumar Gupta, who are
brothers of corpus, taken on record.
Pursuant to earlier order dated 31.3.2022, the girl Kavita Gupta
(corpus) and her husband Mahesh Kumar Vishwakarma are
present in the Court. Shri Ashok Kumar Gupta, Shri Manoj
Kumar Gupta, Shri Dhiraj Kumar Gupta and Shri Vinod Kumar
Gupta, brothers of the corpus are also present in the Court. All
these persons are duly identified by their respective counsels.
Heard Shri Mithilesh Kumar Gupta, learned counsel for the
petitioner and Shri Ashish Kumar Mishra, learned counsel for
the respondent and learned A.G.A. Perused the record.
The Court has opportunity to have conversation with the
corpus, who said that her name is Kavita Gupta and her age is
about 24 years; she is pursuing her M.A. from Banaras Hindu
University; during her studies she develped certain amount of
tender relationship with Mahesh Kumar Vishwakarma and both
of them have decided to marry; on 30.4.2021 they got married
in a temple and thereafter got their marriage registered on
21.9.2021 (Annexure-1). She further states that her brothers,
named above, are very cruel to her because she got married
against their wish and desire.
On making inquiry from the brothers of corpus, who are present
in the Court, about cruel-treatment given by them, as a usual
practice, they made denial of any allegation of cruelty qua her
The corpus Kavita Gupta also woefully states that on 26.4.2021
she was brutally assaulted by Mr. Abhishek Kumar, In-charge,
Varanasi and two lady constables, accompanied with him.
                                   This is an unacceptable situation where the police personnel
                                   who are said to be protector have become attacker. Under the
                                   circumstances the S.S.P., Varanasi is hereby directed to inquire
                                   into the matter and if the allegation of assaulting by the
                                   aforesaid police personnel upon the corpus is found to be true,
                                   punitive action against them shall be taken within ten days from
                                   today.
                                   So far as the brothers of corpus, named above, are concerned,
                                   they are required to severe all relationship with their sister and
                                   not to harass or ill-treat her just because she got married with a
                                   boy of her own choice. Since the girl is facing threats from her
                                   brothers regarding the safety and security of herself, her
                                   husband and her in-laws, as such, the S.S.P., Varanasi and
                                   S.H.O., P.S.-Raja Talab, Varanasi are required to provide
                                   adequate security and keep a close vigil over the safety and
                                   security of Kavita Gupta, her husband Mahesh Kumar
                                   Vishwakarma and other members of her in-laws, so that nothing
                                   untoward may happen in future against them.
                                   Under the peculiar facts and circumstances, accepting that
                                   Kavita Gupta is a major girl and she has decided to go with her
                                   husband, she has all right to do so. Kavita Gupta is at liberty to
                                   go with her husband Mahesh Kumar Vishwakarma.
                                   The Habeas Corpus Petition is hereby disposed off.
