The present Criminal Revision Case has been filed against the order
dated 22.07.2022 passed by the learned Judicial Magistrate No.1, Alandur, in
Crl.M.P.No.2227 of 2022.
2. According to the petitioner, in connection with the case in Crime
No.16 of 2022, her mobile phone viz., i-Phone 7, was seized by the respondent
police on 09.07.2022. Seeking return of the said property, she moved
Crl.M.P.No.2227 of 2022 under Section 451 Cr.P.C. before the learned Judicial
Magistrate No.1, Alandur. However, the said petition came to be dismissed by
the Court below by order dated 22.07.2022, which is impugned herein.
3. The learned counsel for the petitioner would submit that the mobile
phone seized from the petitioner contains bank details and also certain
documents, which are necessary for her day-to-day affairs. However, without
considering the same in a proper perspective, the court below erred in
dismissing the petition filed by the petitioner seeking return of the said
property. The learned counsel would further submit that the petitioner
undertakes to produce the subject property before the trial Court as and when
required.
4. Per contra, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor appearing for
the respondent would submit that the petitioner belongs to a political party
and the allegation levelled against her in Cr.No.16/2022 is that she has posted
a message in her twitter account on 20.01.2022, thereby causing disturbance
to the public peace and tranquility. According to the learned Additional Public
Prosecutor, the subject property is essential for the purpose of investigation
and it has to be marked as material object during the course of trial. It is also
submitted that the subject property has been sent to the Forensic Science
Laboratory, for analysis and the report is pending. Taking note of the same,
the Court below rightly dismissed the petition filed by the petitioner.
Therefore, according to the learned counsel, there is no requirement to
interfere with the said order passed by the court below.
5. Heard the learned counsel on either side and perused the materials
available on record.
6. It could be seen that the respondent-Police registered a case        in
Crime No.16 of 2022 against the petitioner for the offences punishable under
Sections 153, 505 (1)(b) and 505(2) IPC. During the pendency of the
investigation, they seized the subject property belonging to the petitioner on
09.07.2022 and the same was produced before the Jurisdictional Magistrate on
15.07.2022 and thereafter, sent to the Forensic Science Laboratory for analysis
on 06.08.2022 at the request of the Investigating Officer. While so, the
petitioner preferred the petition seeking return of the subject property, which
was dismissed by the court below by order dated 22.07.2022 on the premise
that the investigation is at preliminary stage. Aggrieved over the same, the
petitioner is before this court with the present criminal revision.
7. On 07.09.2022, when this matter was taken up for hearing, this Court
directed the Registry to call for report from the learned Judicial Magistrate,
Alandur as regards the date of production of the subject property to the
Jurisdictional Magistrate as well as the date of sending the same to the
Forensic Science Laboratory for analysis. Pursuant to the said direction, the
learned Judicial Magistrate, Alandur sent a report dated 08.09.2022 to the
effect that the cell phone viz., I-phone 7 plus was produced before the Court
only on 15.07.2022 and at the requisition of the Investigating Officer, the same
was sent to the Forensic Science Laboratory, Chennai on 06.08.2022. However,
the report of the Forensic Science Laboratory has not been received, till date.
8. Such being the present position, this Court is of the view that since
the subject property is a material evidence and is very much essential for
investigation of the case and that, the report of the Forensic Science
Laboratory is yet to be received, the order passed by the Court below in
dismissing the petition filed by the petitioner for return of property, does not
call for any interference.
9. In such view of the matter, this Criminal Revision Case fails and is
accordingly, dismissed. However, liberty is given to the petitioner to file a
fresh petition before the learned Magistrate, Alandur, after receipt of the
report from the Forensic Science Laboratory with regard to the subject
property.
10. Before parting, this Court wishes to observe that the Apex Court as
well as the High Courts time and again held that it is mandatory on the part of
the Investigating Officer(s) to produce the materials seized before the
Jurisdictional Magistrate forthwith and the delay in production of the same,
vitiates the entire proceedings. But, in many cases, the Investigating Officers
did not act so. In the present case as well, the subject property was seized by
the Investigating Officer on 09.07.2022 and the same was produced before the
Jurisdictional Magistrate only on 15.07.2022; and the delay in producing the
same was not explained by the Investigating Officer, which cannot be slightly
brushed aside by this court, considering the nature of the offence involved
herein. At this juncture, it would be relevant to refer to the decision in Arjun
Marik and others v. State of Bihar [(1994) Supp (2) SCC 372], wherein, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court dealt with a word 'forthwith' occurring in section 157
Cr.P.C and held that 'forthwith' means 'without any undue delay' and
'immediately'. The relevant portion in para 24 reads as follows:
"24. The matter does not stop here. There is yet another
serious infirmity which further deepens the suspicion and casts
cloud on the credibility of the entire prosecution story and which
has also been lost sight of by the Trial Court as well as the High
Court and it is with regard to the sending of occurrence report
(FIR) to the Magistrate concerned on 22.7.85 i.e. on the 3rd day
of the occurrence. Section 157 of the CrPC mandates that if,
from information received or otherwise, an Officer-in-charge of
Police Station has reason to suspect the commission of an offence
which he is empowered under Section 156 to investigate, he shall
forthwith send a report of the same to the Magistrate empower
to take cognizance of such offence upon a police report. Section
157, Cr. P.C. thus in other words directs the sending of the
report forthwith i.e. without any delay and immediately.
Further, Section 159, Cr. P.C. envisages that on receiving such
report, the Magistrate may direct an investigation or, if he
thinks fit, to proceed at once or depute any other Magistrate
subordinate to him to proceed to hold a preliminary inquiry into
the case in the manner provided in the CrPC. The forwarding of
the occurrence report is indispensable and absolute and it has to
be forwarded with earliest despatch which intention is implicit
with the use of the word "forthwith" occurring in Section 157,
which means promptly and without any undue delay. The
purpose and object is so obvious which is spelt out from the
combined reading of Sections 157 and 159 Cr. P.C. It has the dual
purpose, firstly to avoid the possibility of improvement in the
prosecution story and introduction of any distorted version by
deliberations and consultation and secondly to enable the
Magistrate concerned to have a watch in the progress of the
investigation."
Thus, it is crystal clear that the Investigating Officer should produce the
materials seized/ recovered to the jurisdictional magistrate forthwith, after
following due formalities. However, the Investigating officer of the present
case did not produce the subject property immediately after seizure, and
produced the same with a delay of 6 days, which would detrimental to the
case of the prosecution. No explanation was also forthcoming on his part for
not sending the subject property to the jurisdictional magistrate soon after
recovery. Hence, this court directs the Director General of Police, to take
stringent action against the Investigating Officer of the case in Cr.No.16/2022
for not producing the subject property to the jurisdictional magistrate, soon
after recovery, besides giving instructions to all the Investigating Officers to
produce the material objects to the court concerned immediately; and file a
report to that effect.
11. Post the matter for reporting compliance on 26.10.2022.