This is the second petition filed under Section 439 Cr.P.C for
grant of bail pending trial to the petitioner in case FIR No.117 dated
26.07.2018, registered under Sections 363, 366-A and 34 of the Indian Penal
Code and Section 6 of the POCSO Act (added later on) as per challan, at
On 21.07.2022, this Court has passed the following order:-
“Custody certificate filed by learned State counsel
in this Court is taken on record. As per the custody
certificate, the petitioner is also involved in several other
cases.
Counsel for the petitioner submits that the
petitioner is on bail in all other cases except the present
Adjourned to 25.08.2022 to enable counsel for the
petitioner to produce the orders of bail in cases other
than the FIR involved in the present case.
The State is also directed to examine the
prosecutrix on the next date fixed before the trial Court.
Still further, State will file an affidavit as to why
prosecution witnesses are not being produced despite the
fact that about 04 (four) years have passed since the
registration of the FIR.”
Today, in compliance of the previous order, learned State
counsel has filed affidavit of Sh. Palwinder Singh, Deputy Superintendent of
Police, Sub-Division City, District Hoshiarpur, in Court today, which is
taken on record.
It has been brought to the notice of this Court that prosecutrix
has been partly examined in examination-in-chief. No other witness has
been examined by the prosecution. Thereafter, the Public Prosecutor had
expressed his inclination to move an application under Section 319 Cr.P.C.
so as to array an additional accused.
The petitioner has already been in custody for more then four
years in this case. Despite that, not even a single witness has been examined
by the prosecution so far. The liberty of the petitioner cannot be jeopardized
by casualness of the prosecution, particularly, when the allegations are that
the prosecutrix had gone with the petitioner and remained with him for full
one week; during which she visited several places and stayed in Hotels.
Even if the petitioner is guilty, that has to be so held by a court of law by
conducting Trial in right earnest and due promptitude.               However,
prosecution has abjectly failed in doing its duty of conducting prosecution
proceedings appropriately. At this stage, the petitioner is not required for
any investigation purpose.       He cannot be forced to suffer incarceration
without any effective proceedings being conducted against him by the Court.
In view of the above, but without commenting upon the merits
of the case, the present petition is allowed. It is ordered that the petitioner be
released on bail pending trial on his furnishing bail bonds/sureties to the
satisfaction of the trial Court/Chief Judicial Magistrate/Duty Magistrate
Since the Public Prosecutor and the Investigating Officer of the
case have not performed their duties with due promptitude, therefore, they
deserve to be put under some coercive conditions so as to compel them to
complete the process of the trial as soon as possible. Accordingly, it is
ordered that the payment of salary to the Public Prosecutor, who is
conducting this case, as well as the salary of the Investigating Officer of the
case, shall remain stayed till all the prosecution witnesses are examined
before the Court in the case.
The     Director   (Prosecution),     Punjab    and    the    Senior
Superintendent of Police, Hoshiarpur, are directed to send             report qua
stopping of the salaries of these two officers on or before 15.10.2022.
The case be put up on 15.10.2022 for the limited purpose of
ensuring compliance.