1. In this petition, the Petitioner, who was working as a Chief
Judicial Magistrate (CJM), has questioned the decision of the
High Court not to continue him in service after crossing the age of
58 years.
2. It must be mentioned at the outset that the entire service record
of the Petitioner was produced before the Court and perused by it.
By an order dated 7th July 2022, the Court permitted the Petitioner
to peruse his service record in the chamber of Registrar (Judicial).
W.P.(C) No.12369 of 2016                         Page 1 of 9
The Petitioner perused the record and after the submissions of the
counsel for the parties were heard, order was reserved on 27th
3. The background facts are that the Petitioner was successful in
the examination conducted by the Odisha Public Service
Commission and by a Notification dated 28th January, 1987, he
was appointed as Munsif (on probation) in Orissa Judicial Service
(OJS)-II, Puri and joined in that post on 16th February, 1987. He
became a Judicial Magistrate First Class on 14th March, 1989 and
served in various locations in the State of Odisha. He was
promoted as Senior Civil Judge in 2005 and posted at Rourkela by
an order dated 28th October, 2005.
4. In terms of the relevant provisions of the Orissa Superior
Judicial Service and Orissa Judicial Service Rules, 2007 (‘the
2007 Rules’), the Petitioner was continued in service after
attaining the age of 50 years. By a Notification dated 7th July
2010, he was posted as CJM, Baripada. In 2012, on attaining the
age of 55 years, he was allowed to continue as CJM, Baripada. He
was then transferred as CJM, Jharsuguda by a Notification dated
18th July, 2013. At the meeting of the Review Committee held on
6th October 2015, it was decided to recommend to the High Court
the Petitioner’s compulsory retirement in public interest. The Full
Court accepted the recommendation at its meeting on 15th
October, 2015. The consequential notification compulsory retiring
the Petitioner was issued by the Government on 5th November,
5. This Court heard the submissions of Mr. Budhadev Routray,
learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Petitioner and Mr. P.K.
Muduli, learned Additional Government Advocate for the State.
6. Mr. Routray submitted that throughout the career of the
Petitioner his performance was found satisfactory and that is why
he continued in service on attaining the ages of 50 and 55 years in
terms of Rule 44 of the 2007 Rules. Mr. Routray submitted that in
terms of Rule 41 of the 2007 Rules, the provisions of the Orissa
Civil Services [OCS] (CCA) Rule, 1962 shall mutatis mutandis
apply to the members of the OSJS and OJS. He further submitted
that as far as the Petitioner is aware, there is not a single adverse
entry in his CCRs, so as to hold that his continuation in service
would be against public interest. He further submitted that if at all
the Review Committee was of the view that the continuance of the
Petitioner beyond 58 years was against public interest and,
therefore, he should be removed from service prematurely then in
terms of Rule 41 of the 2007 Rules, he ought to have been given a
7. In the petition, it is mentioned how in 2011, a disciplinary
proceeding     was   initiated    against  the   Petitioner   and    a
memorandum of charge was served on him on 30th July, 2012 to
which he replied. An enquiry was conducted but the Petitioner
was never asked to appear before the Disciplinary Authority and
he was never supplied a copy of the Inquiry Report. Mr. Routray
submitted that although the scope of judicial review in such
W.P.(C) No.12369 of 2016                                 Page 3 of 9
matters is limited, in the present case there does not appear to be
material to justify the decision of the High Court not to continue
the Petitioner in service.
8. Mr. P.K. Muduli, learned Additional Government Advocate
appearing for the State-Opposite Parties, on the other hand,
submitted that the service record of the Petitioner would show that
the recommendation of the Review Committee, which was
accepted by the Full Court is justified. While it was correct that
the Petitioner was retained in service on attaining the ages of 50
and 55, it is not correct that there was no allegation at all against
him during that period. He submitted that although an Inquiry
Report was submitted in the Departmental Enquiry, it was never
acted upon since it was decided to prematurely retire the
Petitioner. The action taken under Rule 44 is not a punishment
unlike disciplinary action taken under [OCS] (CCA) Rule, 1962.
He submitted that the Rule 44 of the 2007 Rules was an
independent provision and did not contemplate the giving of an
opportunity of hearing. Further, the order of compulsory
retirement is not a punishment and, therefore, principles of natural
justice were not attracted.
9. The entries for the years 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014 were
“average and unfit for promotion”, ‘good’, ‘good’ and ‘average’
respectfully. It is pointed out that the Petitioner never had entries
of ‘outstanding’ and ‘very good’ in his CCRs as such claimed by
him. The impugned decision was taken on over all consideration
of not only CCRs of the relevant period under review but the
W.P.(C) No.12369 of 2016                                 Page 4 of 9
entire record of service, the personal files, overall performance,
the yardstick as well as vigilance inputs including the aspect of
integrity and suitability before taking the decision in the matter.
Public interest was definitely of paramount importance. The mere
fact that he was allowed to cross the efficiency bar and granted
ACP would not itself lead to the conclusion that his service was
satisfactory and that there was no basis for the decision to retire
him on his reaching the age of 58.
10. The above submissions have been considered.
11. As already mentioned, the service record of the Petitioner has
been carefully perused by the Court. To begin with the CCRs of
the Petitioner for the years 1989, 1990, 1991, 1993, 1994, 1998,
1999, 2006, 2011 and 2014 reveal that in all these years he got the
‘Average’ grading and an adverse remark in 1990 was
communicated to him as were the adverse remarks for 1992, 1994
and 1995. In some of these years, the Reviewing Authority has
remarked that his knowledge of law was ‘Average’ and that “he
needs improvement” and also that he should “improve upon
English”. The conduct of departmental proceedings and the
submission of the report of enquiry appear to have taken some
time. By the time the inquiry report was placed before the Full
Court, the Petitioner’s case for continuation after the age of 58
came up for consideration and the impugned decision was taken.
12. Rule-44 of the 2007 Rules reads as under:
“44. Retirement in public interest-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in these rules
the Governor shall, in consultation with the High Court,
if he is of the opinion that it is in the public interest so to
do, have absolute right to retire any member of the
service who has attained the age of fifty years, by giving
him/her notice of not less than three months in writing
or three months pay and allowances in lieu of such
notice.
(2) Whether any officer of these service should be
retired in public interest under Sub-rule (1) shall be
considered at least three times, that is, when he is about
to attain the age of fifty years, fifty-five years, and fifty-
Provided that nothing in sub-rule (2) shall be construed
in public interest as preventing the Governor to retire a
member of the service at any time after he/she attains
the age of fifty years on the recommendation of High
Court under sub-rule (1).”
13. The decision whether to continue an officer in service after
attaining the age of 50, 55 and 58 is taken at two levels: At the
first level, there is a Review Committee comprising of Senior
Judges of the High Court including the Chief Justice, which
carefully peruses the entire service record of the officer.
Thereafter it recommends to the Full Court whether such officer
should be retained in service. At the second level, the
recommendation of the Review Committee is deliberated in the
Full Court and then a final decision is taken in that regard. This is
the precise procedure followed in the present case. In taking the
decision to compulsorily retire the Petitioner, the Full Court kept
in view the legal principles as explained in S. Ramachandra Raju
v. State of Orissa, 1994 Supp. (3) SCC 424 in the following
W.P.(C) No.12369 of 2016                                     Page 6 of 9
“9……The entire service record or character rolls or
confidential reports maintained would furnish the back
drop material for consideration by the Government or
the Review Committee or the appropriate authority. On
consideration of the totality of the facts and
circumstances alone, the government should form the
opinion that the government officer needs to be
compulsorily retired from service. Therefore, the entire
service record more particular the latest, would form
the foundation for the opinion and furnish the base to
exercise the power under the relevant rule to
compulsorily retire a government officer. When an
officer reaching the age of compulsory retirement, as
was pointed out by this Court, he could neither seek
alternative appointment nor meet the family burdens
with the pension or other benefits he gets and thereby he
would be subjected to great hardship and family would
be greatly affected. Therefore, before exercising the
power, the competent appropriate authority must weigh
pros and cons and balance the public interest as against
the individual interest. On total evaluation of the entire
record of service if the government or the governmental
authority forms the opinion that in the public interest the
officer needs to be retired compulsorily, the court may
not interfere with the exercise of such bona fide exercise
of power but the court has power and duty to exercise
the power of judicial review not as a court of appeal but
in its exercise of judicial review to consider whether the
power has been properly exercised or is arbitrary or
vitiated either by mala fide or actuated by extraneous
consideration or arbitrary in retiring the government
officer compulsorily from service.”
14. It is now well settled that compulsory retirement is not a
punishment and the necessity of giving a hearing to the Petitioner
prior to such decision being taken does not arise. This has been
explained in a large number of cases including Baikuntha Nath
Das v. Chief District Medical Officer, Baripada (1992) 2 SCC
299, where the legal principles were summarized as under:
W.P.(C) No.12369 of 2016                                Page 7 of 9
“34. The following principles emerge from the above
(i) An order of compulsory retirement is not a
punishment. It implies no stigma nor any suggestion of
misbehaviour.
(ii) The order has to be passed by the government on
forming the opinion that it is in the public interest to
retire a government servant compulsorily. The order is
passed on the subjective satisfaction of the government.
(iii) Principles of natural justice have no place in the
context of an order of compulsory retirement. This does
not mean that judicial scrutiny is excluded altogether.
While the High Court or this Court would not examine
the matter as an appellate court, they may interfere if
they are satisfied that the order is passed (a) mala fide
or (b) that it is based on no evidence or (c) that it is
arbitrary – in the sense that no reasonable person would
form the requisite opinion on the given material; in
short, if it is found to be a perverse order.
(iv) The government (or the Review Committee, as the
case may be) shall have to consider the entire record of
service before taking a decision in the matter – of course
attaching more importance to record of and
performance during the later years. The record to be so
considered would naturally include the entries in the
confidential records/character rolls, both favourable
and adverse. If a government servant is promoted to a
higher post notwithstanding the adverse remarks, such
remarks lose their sting, more so, if the promotion is
based upon merit (selection) and not upon seniority.
(v) An order of compulsory retirement is not liable to be
quashed by a Court merely on the showing that while
passing it uncommunicated adverse remarks were also
taken into consideration. That circumstance by itself
cannot be a basis for interference.
Interference is permissible only on the grounds
mentioned in (iii) above. This aspect has been discussed
in paras 30 to 32 above.”
15. Having perused the entire service record of the Petitioner, the
Court is satisfied that there were materials on record for the Full
Court to have accepted the recommendation of the Review
Committee that it was in public interest and in the interest of
better administration of justice that the Petitioner should not be
continued in service after attaining 58 years of age.
16. Consequently, the Court is not persuaded to grant the relief as
prayed for. The petition is dismissed.