The present proceedings arose on account of an
application    filed    for    anticipatory   bail   on
25.09.2018.   The anticipatory bail was granted and
that was confirmed.    That would normally be the end
of the matter.
The learned Judge dealing with the jurisdiction,
however, proceeded to look into many other aspects
de hors the aspect of anticipatory bail, on account
of the alleged conduct of Dr. Swapan Kumar Sarak who
had conducted the autopsy and was alleged not to
have mentioned that the deceased was pregnant. The
said fact is stated to have come to light only when
the  ultrasound   report   was   filed    along   with   the
anticipatory bail application. It is these nature of
proceedings   which    have    troubled     the   State   of
Jharkhand   which   has   come    up  in     Special   Leave
Learned counsel, in our view, rightly submits that
the orders placed before us do not paint a very
happy  picture   on   account   of   all   officers    being
summoned to Court, more so, in view of this Court
having   cautioned    against     unnecessary     summoning
officers and that too in proceedings of the nature
of anticipatory bail where the issue came to an end.
His further submission is that if the order dated
13.04.2021 is perused, really nothing would survive
as the explanation of the concerned person has been
recorded with the assistance of an Amicus Curiae.
However,  despite   that   in   terms    of   the   impugned
orders  dated   09.04.2021    and   13.04.2021     even  the
personal  presence   has  only   been   deffered    and  the
objective  appears    to  be   “betterment     of   criminal
justice system”.
We have heard learned counsel for the petitioner
and  consider   it   appropriate    to   dispose   of  these
petitions with the following directions:
a) The proceedings arising before the learned
Judge   from  the   anticipatory    bail   application
having been closed, nothing survives in those
b)   Insofar    as   the   betterment    of   criminal
justice system is concerned, at best it would
be a public interest litigation, if something
survives in the same. For that purpose, the
relevant   papers    should  be   placed   before  the
Hon’ble Chief Justice of the High Court on the
Administrative Side for examination whether the
factual scenario calls upon the matter to be
entertained as a public interest litigation or
not.   If it is so entertained then it should be
so   registered     only   as   a   public    interest
c) There is no requirement of appearance of the
officers     in    pursuance     to    the    impugned
directions.
The Special Leave Petitions stand disposed of in
the aforesaid terms.
Pending applications stand disposed of.