1.     Heard learned counsel for the applicant, learned A.G.A. for the
State and perused the material placed on record.
2.     Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No.193 of 2019, under
Sections 363, 366, 504, 506, 376 IPC & Sections 3/4 of P.O.C.S.O.
Act, Police Station Mitauli, District Lakhimpur Kheri, during the
pendency of trial.
3.     The counsel for the victim is regularly absent since last so many
dates. The hearing cannot be stalled on account of non cooperation of
one counsel.
4.     As per prosecution story, the applicant is stated to have enticed
away the minor daughter of the informant in the night of
16/17.05.2018 at about 2:00 am. As per the allegations in the FIR, the
date of birth of the victim is stated to be 13.11.2004 and the applicant
is stated to have left her alone outside the village on 12.12.2018 i.e.
after a period of about six months. The victim was found pregnant at
that time and is stated to have given birth to a female child on
5.     Learned counsel for the applicant has stated that he was madly
love with the victim and out of fear of the villagers had eloped with
the victim and had undergone marriage in a temple although the said
marriage is not registered. Learned counsel for the applicant has
further stated that although the statement of the victim recorded under
Section 164 Cr.P.C. is against the applicant, but the same has been
garnered out of fear of the family members of the girl. The applicant
and the victim belong to the same village and the same community.
He further argued that the applicant proposes to rear his child as he is
the father and he is very much willing to keep his married wife and
the newborn baby with him. Several other submissions have been
made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity of the
allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per
counsel, led to the false implication of the applicant have also been
touched upon at length. The applicant is languishing in jail since
01.10.2019. In case, the applicant is released on bail, he will not
misuse the liberty of bail. There are no criminal antecedents of the
6.     Per contra, Sri Girjesh Kumar Dwivedi, learned A.G.A. has
vehemently opposed the bail application but has not disputed the fact
that out of the said union of the couple, a baby girl was born on
31.12.2018 and she is more than three and half years of age as present,
who is being taken care of by the parents of the victim, although he
has not disputed the fact that the applicant has no criminal history.
7.     The matter shatters the conscious of one and all. What is the
fault of the new born baby who has come to world under such
8.     Admittedly, as per the radiological examination report, the age
of the victim is between 18-20 years, which is on record as filed in
supplementary affidavit dated 13.01.2022. Thus, the victim can be
stated to be major at the time of offence.
9.     In this conservative and non-permissive society, it is true that
marriage in the same village is prohibited and is not customary, and it
may be an after effect of media and cinema. Instances of marriage in
the same village are on the rise. This does adversely affect the social
fabric. Both the accused and the victim are of very young age and
have barely attained the age of majority. A baby girl has been born out
of their wedlock. Though, the marriage may not be described as per
the law of the land, but the Court has to apply a pragmatic approach in
such conditions and indeed both the families are required to act
practically. A lot of water has flown down the Ganges. Now, it's time
to move ahead.
10.     The youth in their tender age become victim to the legal
parameters though rightly framed by the legislature, but here this
Court is being drawn to make an exception in the extraordinary
circumstances of the case. The life of a newborn child is at stake. She
cannot to be left to face the stigma during her life.
11.     The mathematical permutations and combinations have to be
done away with. A hypertechnical and mechanical approach shall do
no good to the parties and why should an innocent baby out of no fault
of her bear the brutalities of the society in the present circumstances.
Human psychosis and that too of the adolescents has to be taken into
12.     This Court in the case of Atul Mishra vs. State of U.P. And 3
others1, has also done away with the stringent provisions of the
P.O.C.S.O. Act under the extra-ordinary circumstances of the case.
13.     Keeping in view the nature of the offence, evidence on record
regarding complicity of the accused, larger mandate of the Article 21
of the Constitution of India and the dictum of Apex Court in the case
of Dataram Singh Vs. State of U.P. and another2, and without
expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, the Court is of the
view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail
application is allowed.
14.    Let the applicant- Ramshankar, who is involved in
aforementioned case crime be released on bail on his furnishing a
personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions.
Further, before issuing the release order, the sureties be verified.
(i) The applicant is being released on bail on the assurance of the
learned counsel for the applicant that he is very much willing to take
care of his wife (victim) and the infant. The applicant shall deposit
(fixed deposit) a sum of Rs.2,00,000/- in the name of new born child
of the victim till her attaining the age of majority within a period of
six months from the date of release from jail.
(ii) The applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall
not seek any adjournment on the date fixed for evidence when the
witnesses are present in Court. In case of default of this condition, it
shall be open for the Trial Court to treat it as abuse of liberty of bail
and pass orders in accordance with law.
(iii) The applicant shall remain present before the Trial Court on each
date fixed, either personally or through his counsel. In case of his
absence, without sufficient cause, the Trial Court may proceed against
him under Section 229-A IPC.
(iv) In case, the applicant misuses the liberty of bail during trial and in
order to secure his presence proclamation under Section 82 Cr.P.C.,
may be issued and if applicant fails to appear before the Court on the
date fixed in such proclamation, then, the Trial Court shall initiate
proceedings against him, in accordance with law, under Section 174-A
(v) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial
Court on dates fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge
and (3) recording of statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the
opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant is deliberate or
without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the Trial Court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him
in accordance with law.
In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground
for cancellation of bail.
It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the
applicant shall not in any way affect the learned trial Judge in forming
his independent opinion based on the testimony of the witnesses.