Present:      Mr. Anil Chawla, Advocate for the appellants.
Mr. Harish Bhardwaj, Advocate for the respondent.
The present appeal is directed against the order of the learned
Single Judge dated 22.07.2022 passed in CWP-10274-2020. The learned
Single Judge had directed to conduct a fresh medical examination of
respondent by constituting a Medical Board at All India Institute of Medical
Sciences or Command Hospital Hissar or PGIMER, Chandigarh or at the
Army Hospital Research and Referral Institute or any other institute and if
found medically fit, then he would be given the benefit of his earlier
selection and deputed for training, in accordance with law.
The writ petitioner was challenging the order dated 04.02.2020
(Annexure P-7) whereby he had been found unfit for enrolment in the Navy
during the medical examination by the Enrolment Medical Officer as well
as by the Classified Specialist. The reason as such for his unfitness that he
has a single testicle and on that account he had been declared unfit.
There is nothing on record to show that the same disability is
such of that kind which would come in his way for serving the Indian Navy.
Neither the said order shows that by virtue of that genetic defect as such,
the writ petitioner would not be in a position to serve the Indian Navy.
Therefore, the directions passed by the learned Single Judge do not suffer
from any illegality. The said rejection order (Anneuxre P-7) was passed on
04.02.2020.     The appellant thereafter on that account had also got his
operation done on 11.02.2020 and it was found that it was a case of
undescended testes on the right side and the surgery of Orchiopexy was
successful by which the said testicle was moved into the scrotum.
In such circumstances, we are of the considered opinion that
the learned Single Judge was justified as such in ordering the re-
examination by the Medical Board and no prejudice has been caused to the
Union of India.
Accordingly, the present appeal is misconceived and is
Let the needful be done within a period of three months from
the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Pending application(s), if any, shall also stand disposed of.
Whether speaking/reasoned:-                                        Yes/No