1.       The challenge in the present appeal is to an order dated 27.10.2016 passed by the
High Court of Punjab & Haryana at Chandigarh holding that the requirement of pre-
deposit under Section 45-AA of the Employees State Insurance Act, 1948 1 is not
mandatory and that the appellate authority is empowered to waive, either partially or
completely, the requirement of pre-deposit in the same circumstances and conditions as
explained in its earlier judgment in Punjab State Power Corporation Limited v. The
State of Punjab & Ors.2
“45-AA. Appellate Authority - If an employer is not satisfied with the order referred to in Section 45-
A, he may prefer an appeal to an appellate authority as maybe provided by regulation, within sixty
days of the date of such order after depositing twenty five per cent of the contribution so ordered or
the contribution as per his own calculation, whichever is higher, with the Corporation. Provided that
if the employer finally succeeds in the appeal, the Corporation shall refund such deposit to the
employer together with such interest as maybe specified in the regulation."
3. Respondent No. 13 suffered an order dated 30.12.2013 passed by the Deputy Director
of the appellant Corporation, calling upon the employer to pay a sum of Rs.48,81,884/-
for a period from October, 2009 to August, 2010 in respect of trainee/apprentices. The
employer filed an appeal along with an application to seek exemption from depositing
25% of the said contribution. Since the employer did not deposit 25% of the
compensation as assessed, the appellate authority passed an order declining such
request inter alia for the reason that there is no provision under the Act to consider an
appeal without the pre-deposit. Thereafter, the recovery certificate was issued to recover
the amount assessed along with interest. However, instead of depositing the amount, the
employer invoked the writ jurisdiction of the High Court. The High Court held as under:
“24. Thus, it is held and declared that the requirement of predeposit under Section 45-AA is not
mandatory and the Appellate Authority is empowered to waive, either partially or completely, the
requirement of pre deposit in the same circumstances and conditions as explained in detail in the
PSPCL case (supra). To summarize, the Appellate Authority is empowered to partially or completely
waive the condition of pre-deposit in given facts and circumstances. It is, however, not to be
exercised in a routine manner or as a matter of course. Only when a strong prima fade case is made
out, will the Appellate Authority consider, whether to grant interim protection/ injunction or not. Partial
or complete waiver will be granted only in deserving and appropriate cases where the Appellate
Authority is satisfied that the entire purpose of the appeal would be frustrated or rendered nugatory
because of the condition of pre-deposit for hearing the appeal and a reasoned order would require
to be passed.”
4.       In Punjab State Power Corporation Limited, the High Court examined the
“(a)     Whether the State is empowered to enact Section 62(5) of the PVAT Act?
(b)      Whether the condition of 25% pre-deposit for hearing first appeal is onerous, harsh,
unreasonable and, therefore, violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India?
(c)      Whether the first appellate authority in its right to hear appeal has inherent powers to grant
interim protection against imposition of such a condition for hearing of appeals on merits?”
5.       The questions (a) and (b) were taken up together. The High Court held that the
State is empowered to enact Section 62(5) of the Punjab Value Added Tax Act, 20054
and that condition of pre-deposit of 25% for hearing first appeal is not onerous, harsh,
unreasonable and violative of the provisions of Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
However, in respect of the third question, the High Court referred to an earlier judgment
of fiveJudges Full Bench of the High Court in Ranjit Singh v. State of Haryana & Ors.5
to hold that even when no express power has been conferred on the first appellate
authority to pass an order of interim injunction/protection, by necessary implication and
intendment in view of various pronouncements, such power to grant interim
injunction/protection is embedded under Section 62(5) of the PVAT Act. The High Court
“40. Before we record our conclusion on question No. (c), noticed hereinbefore, it would also be
apposite to refer to a five Judges Full Bench of this Court in Ranjit Singh v. State of Haryana, (2012)
2 RCR (Civil) 353 to which one of us (Ajay Kumar Mittal, J.) was a member which was dealing with
similar provision i.e. Section 13B of the Punjab Village Common Lands (Regulation) 1961 wherein
entertainment of appeal was subject to deposit of amount of penalty imposed under sub section (2)
of Section 7 of the said Act with the Collector. This court after considering the entire case law on the
point and by reading down the provision held that Section 13 B of the said Act would be read down
to incorporate within it the power in appellate authority to grant interim relief in an appropriate case
by passing a speaking order even while normally insistence may be made on pre-deposit of the
penalty. In such a case, the appellate authority would have to give reasons for granting interim relief
of stay. It is, thus, concluded that even when no express power has been conferred on the first
appellate authority to pass an order of interim injunction/protection, in our opinion, by necessary
implication and intendment in view of various pronouncements and legal proposition expounded
above and in the interest of justice, it would essentially be held that the power to grant interim
injunction/protection is embedded in Section 62(5) of the PVAT Act…”
6.       In Ranjit Singh, the High Court was dealing with Section 13B of the Punjab Village
Common Lands (Regulation) Act, 1961 mandating that no appeal shall lie unless the
amount of penalty is deposited with the Collector. The Court held as under:
“56. In order to save the validity of this proviso, it may have to be read down for which there are
precedents. As observed in Shyam Kishore's case ( supra), the appellate Judge would have
incidental and ancillary power, which should not be curtailed except to the extent specifically
excluded by the statute. There is no indication in the proviso that jurisdiction of the appellate Judge
is excluded altogether to waive the penalty and, thus, the inherent rights of the appellate Judge to
waive the condition in appropriate case can be read into the provision…”
7.       The judgment in Punjab State Power Corporation Limited came up for
consideration before this Court in a judgment reported as Tecnimont Pvt. Ltd. v. State
of Punjab & Ors.6. This Court upheld the decision of the High Court on question Nos. 1
and 2 but reversed the decision of the High Court on question No. 3. It was held as under:
“22. In the light of these principles, the High Court rightly held Section 62(5) of the PVAT Act to be
legal and valid and the condition of 25% of pre-deposit not to be onerous, harsh, unreasonable and
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. Now we turn to question (c) as framed by the High
Court and consider whether the conclusions drawn by the High Court while answering said question
were correct or not.
29. If the inherent power the existence of which is specifically acknowledged by provisions such as
Section 151 of the CPC and Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. is to be read with the limitation that exercise
of such power cannot be undertaken for doing that which is specifically prohibited, same limitation
must be read into the scope and width of implied power of an appellate authority under a statute. In
any case the principle laid down in Matajog Dobey 1955 (2) SCR 925 states with clarity that so long
as there is no express inhibition, the implied power can extend to doing all such acts or employing
such means as are reasonably necessary for such execution. The reliance on the principle laid down
in Kunhi (1969) 2 SCR 65 cannot go to the extent, as concluded by the High Court, of enabling the
Appellate Authority to override the limitation prescribed by the statute and go against the
requirement of predeposit. The High Court was clearly in error in answering question
31. In the premises, we accept the conclusions drawn by the High Court as regards questions (a)
and (b) are concerned but set aside the view taken by the High Court as regards question (c). The
appeals preferred by the assesses are therefore dismissed and those preferred by the State against
the decision in respect of question (c) are allowed. ...”
8.      We find that the view taken by the High Court, while relying on its earlier judgment
in Ranjit Singh, that appellate authority would have the implied power to grant interim
relief is not tenable. Once the statute has fixed the condition of pre-deposit before filing
an appeal, such condition is required to be satisfied. The judgments of the High Court in
Ranjit Singh and Punjab State Power Corporation Limited observing that the
appellate authority has the implied power to waive the amount determined cannot be said
to be in accordance with law. Hence, the condition of pre-deposit, said to be not
mandatory and giving appellate authority a discretion to waive of the amount determined,
is clearly not sustainable and is thus set aside. Consequently, the present appeal is
9.      Since the employer has not deposited 25% of the determined amount which led to
dismissal of the appeal, we grant four weeks’ time to the employer to deposit 25% of the
amount so determined. If the said amount is deposited, the appellate authority shall
consider the appeal on merits in accordance with law.