1.    The present writ petition has been filed under Articles 226 and 227 of
the constitution of India seeking the following reliefs:-
“(i) Call for the record of the case being LD. no. 108 of 2013
from Central Government Industrial Tribunal No. 1;
(ii) Issue a writ, order or direction quashing the award dt.
30.12.2013 passed by the Central Government Industrial
(iii) Issue a writ, order or direction thereby setting aside the
dismissal order dt.08/11.08-1995 issued by Disciplinary
Authority against the Petitioner and consequently allow
the claim of the Petitioner for reinstatement with back
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                       Page 1 of 26
wages, promotion, seniority, consequential benefits
2.      The Petitioner/workman has impugned the award dated 30.12.2013
passed by the CGIT cum Labour Court- 1, Karkardooma Court Complex,
Delhi in I.D. No. 108/2013, titled „Smt. Sneh Aggarwal VS CMD, Punjab
National Bank‟ whereby the claim of the Petitioner/workman for
reinstatement in service was dismissed.
3.      Briefly stated facts, as alleged in the petition, are that the
Petitioner/workman was appointed as Clerk-Cum-Cashier with the
Respondent-bank on 15.09.1978 and rendered service for continuous 13
years. It has been averred that while she was posted as an Advanced Level
Punching Machine Operator ( hereinafter referred to as „ALPM Operator‟)
at Branch Office Parliament Street, New Delhi, Mr. P.S. Bedi, then Branch
Manager at Kallirampur Branch, Meerut approached her and requested her
to give him some deposits to enable him to fulfil the target of deposits in his
branch. It is pertinent to note that prior to her posting at Branch Office
Parliament Street, New Delhi, the Petitioner/workman was working at the
Tilak Nagar Branch, New Delhi under the overall charge of Mr. P.S. Bedi.
Petitioner/workman acceded to the request of Mr. P.S. Bedi and gave him
Rs. 50,000/- and Rs. 10,000/- on 15.11.1990 and 21.11.1990 respectively
along with an application form for issuance of an FDR.
4.      It has been averred by the Petitioner/workman that on 02.02.1991,
FDR No. 20/91 was handed over to her, subsequent to which she applied for
a Demand Loan at Parliament Street Branch pledging the said FDR.
However, later, it was detected by the bank that though the FDR purported
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                   Page 2 of 26
to have been issued for a sum of Rs. 60,000/- on 02.02.1991, only a sum of
Rs. 6,000/- was deposited with the bank on 03.02.1991.
5.      A criminal case was lodged with the Central Bureau of Investigation
and the Petitioner/workman was placed under suspension vide letter dated
30.01.1992. Subsequently, a departmental enquiry was initiated against the
Petitioner/workman and she was charge-sheeted on            07.02.1994 by the
Disciplinary Authority. The charge levelled against her is reproduced below:
"You committed a fraud by misusing your position
as a Staff Member which is a act prejudicial to the
bank's interest which is a misconduct in terms of
6.      The Petitioner/workman submitted her reply denying the charges but
it was not found to be satisfactory and an Enquiry Officer was appointed to
conduct a detailed enquiry into the charges made against the
7.      The respondent/bank examined two witnesses namely Shri. Pradeep
Kumar Aggarwal, who was then posted as Special Assistant at the
Kallirampur Branch, and Shri Babu Lal Gupta, who was then in charge of
the loans at the Parliament Street, Branch. The Petitioner/workman also
produced one witness namely Shri P.S. Bedi.
8.      The enquiry officer submitted his enquiry report dated 14.03.1995 and
held the charge to be proved and established beyond doubt. The Disciplinary
Authority concurred with the findings of the enquiry officer and after a
hearing was accorded to the Petitioner/workman, the Disciplinary Authority
imposed a punishment of dismissal from service vide order dated
08.08.1995. It is pertinent to mention that an appeal filed by the
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                    Page 3 of 26
Petitioner/workman against the order of disciplinary authority was also
dismissed.
9.      The Petitioner/workman thereafter raised an industrial dispute. Since
the conciliation proceedings did not succeed, the matter was referred to the
Learned Industrial Tribunal vide order dated 30.09.1997.
10.     The Central Government, Ministry of Labour vide order dated
30.09.1997 referred the following dispute to the Learned Tribunal for
"Whether the action of the management of PNB in
dismissing the Service of Sneh Lata Aggarwal
Clerk-cum-Cashier w.e.f. 11.8.95 Is just and fair.
If not, to what relief the workman is entitled ?”.
11.     It is pertinent to note that a corrigendum was issued by the Govt. of
India, Ministry of Labour that in line 3 of the schedule the name of the
workman should be read as Sneh Aggarwal instead of Sneh Lata Aggarwal.
12.     The Petitioner/workman filed a statement of claim against the
respondent/bank for a direction to the respondent/bank to reinstate her back
in service with full back wages and continuity in service and other
consequential benefits.
13.     After completion of pleadings, Learned Tribunal framed the issues on
26.02.1998 which reads as follows:
“(i) Whether the domestic enquiry conducted
against the workman is fair and proper?
14.     On having heard the parties, Learned Tribunal passed an award dated
10.08.2011 wherein the enquiry conducted by the bank was held to not be
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                       Page 4 of 26
just, fair and proper. The Learned Tribunal directed the respondent/bank to
reinstate the Petitioner/workman with full back wages and all consequential
benefits such as seniority and promotion etc.
15.     The respondent/bank assailed the award dated 10.08.2011 before this
Court by way of a writ petition bearing no. W.P.(C) 9083.2011. This court
vide order dated 17.04.2013 set aside the award dated 10.08.2011 and the
case was remitted back to the Tribunal to grant an opportunity to the
respondent/ bank to lead its evidence with a right to the Petitioner/workman
to rebut it and make submissions on the aspect of the establishment of the
charge against the Petitioner/workman. This court directed the Tribunal to
pass a fresh award on the basis of further evidence without being influenced
by the observations made in the award dated 10.08.2011.
16.     Pursuant to the order dated 17.04.2013 of this court, the
respondent/bank was called upon by the Learned Tribunal to adduce its
evidence to prove the misconduct of the Petitioner/workman. Ms. Rimi Ray
and Shri Pradeep Kumar Aggarwal were examined by the respondent/bank
and the Petitioner/workman examined herself to rebut the depositions
recorded. She opted not to examine any other witness.
17.     Learned Tribunal inter alia held the enquiry conducted by the
Enquiry office was in consonance with principles of natural justice. It was
concluded by the Learned Tribunal that the enquiry conducted by the
respondent/bank was just and proper.          It was further held that the
respondent/bank was able to prove, beyond doubt, the misconduct by the
Petitioner/workman, which is an allegation that is grave in nature. It was
held that the Petitioner/workman was acting against the interest of the
respondent/bank and the punishment of dismissal from service was held to
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                   Page 5 of 26
be appropriate. The claim of the Petitioner/workmanwas dismissed. Being
aggrieved of the said award dated 30.12.2013, the present writ petition has
been filed.
18.     At the outset, Learned Counsel for the Petitioner/workman submitted
that the impugned order is liable to be dismissed as the same was beyond the
scope of terms of reference. It has been submitted that pursuant to the order
of this court dated 17.04.2014, the Learned Tribunal had no power to deal
with the issue of fairness of domestic enquiry as the same was already
finally decided. He submitted that the Respondent/bank had not impugned
the previous award dated 10.08.2011 challenging the finding of the Tribunal
on the aspect of fairness of domestic enquiry but had only sought to lead
evidence before the Tribunal to establish a charge against the
19.     Learned Counsel for the Petitioner/workman submitted that the
findings of the Tribunal are perverse and contradictory, based on conjectures
and irrelevant material and the same can be interfered with by this court in
the exercise of its writ jurisdiction. Reliance has been placed on the order of
this court dated 03.06.2010 in W.P.(C) 995/199 titled Shri Santosh Sur v.
UOI & Ors. and order dated 21.11.2005 in Crl. A. 546/2003 titled UOI V.
20.     He has submitted that the Learned Tribunal did not appreciate the
evidence led by parties before it, rather it ventured into the evidence led by
parties before the Enquiry Officer which is contradictory to the directions of
this court. It has been submitted that the Learned Tribunal rejected the claim
of the Petitioner/workman in light of the statement of Mr. Bedi that FDR
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                     Page 6 of 26
was for Rs. 6,000/- and inflated to Rs. 60,000/-. Learned Counsel for the
Petitioner/workman submitted that the said statement as relied upon by the
Learned Tribunal was recorded before the Enquiry officer, not before the
Tribunal itself. Further, it has been submitted that it was Mr. Bedi who had
cheated the Respondent/bank in many cases so his statements should not
have been relied upon. He also submitted that the maturity value as alleged
by Mr. Bedi to have been manipulated from Rs.5,622.80/- to Rs.66,228/- is
practically impossible to do as the maturity value would read decimal which
has to be struck as also zero and has to be erased. However, it is an admitted
fact that there was no cutting or overwriting on the FDR, so this statement of
Mr. Bedi is belied. Learned Counsel for the Petitioner/workman also
submitted that Mr. Bedi had stated that the loan amount was taken by him,
which is again a false statement as the Respondent/bank had itself stated in
the charge-sheet dt. 07.02.1994 that a sum of Rs.35,938.10/- was utilized by
the Petitioner/workman for adjusting her demand loan account No. 73/25
and Rs.1000/- to DL account No.74/25.
21.     Learned Counsel for the Petitioner/workman has also submitted that
the Learned Tribunal erred in observing that there was no hue and cry
regarding the issuance of FDR after 74 days. He submitted that
Petitioner/workman had categorically stated during her cross-examination
that she was demanding the FDR but as Mr. Bedi was a senior officer, she
could not take any step against him.
22.     It has been submitted that Learned Tribunal has relied on the ledger
sheet which shows that only an amount of Rs. 6,000/- was deposited against
FDR no. 20/91. Learned Counsel for the Petitioner/workman submitted that
the ledger sheets were manipulated and do not show the true picture. The
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                    Page 7 of 26
attention of this court has been drawn to the cross-examination of Sh.
Pardeep Aggarwal who had prepared the FDR in question when posted at
Kallirampur Branch. He admitted that there was bungling and manipulation
of documents including the ledger sheets at the Kallirampur Branch of the
bank. Furthermore, it has been submitted that Mr. P S Bedi, Pardeep Kumar
Agarwal and Yash Pal Singh issued 30 FDRs and defrauded the
respondent/bank to the tune of more than Rs.65 lac as per reports of CBI and
Police but no case was made out by CBI against the Petitioner/workman
which means she was given a clean chit hence, he submitted that even the
respondent/bank could not have charge-sheeted her.
23.     Learned Counsel for the Petitioner/workman has taken this court
through the Cashier’s Long book and Cashbook of the day when FDR was
issued ie; 02.02.1991 to buttress the contention that the amount of Rs.
6,000/- as alleged by the Respondent/bank for FDR was also not found to be
deposited.
24.     Learned Counsel for the Petitioner/workman also submitted that the
best evidence was withheld by the respondent/bank but the Learned Tribunal
failed to draw an adverse inference in accordance with Section 114(g) of the
Evidence Act. He submitted that the respondent/bank despite orders dated
30.01.2020 and 15.05.2019 did not produce the original record related to the
FDR. The documents that were withheld by the respondent/bank relate to
the record of opening any fixed deposit in favour of the customer as well as
maintaining the cash received for opening the fixed deposit in the name of
the customer. The counter foil of FDR clearly shows the face value and
maturity value calculated and written upon the FDR. The FDR issue register
shows that on a particular day, an FDR of the face value of a certain amount
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                   Page 8 of 26
has been issued by a particular branch. It has been submitted that if these
documents were produced by the Respondent/bank, it could have been seen
that there was no inflation/alteration in the amount of FDR by anyone and
that FDR dated 02.02.1991 was handed over to Petitioner/workman for
Rs.60000/- with a maturity value of Rs.66228/-.
25.     It has been also been submitted that the Learned Tribunal despite
noting that the letter marking the lien was not disputed arrived on its own
finding that the letter of lien was forged. Further, it has been submitted that
it was the duty of the respondent/bank to produce all the documents in
relation to FDR and mark lien on it but the letter was concealed by the bank
and a copy of same was produced by the Petitioner/workman before the
Enquiry Officer. Reliance has been on Sher Bahadur v. UOI
MANU/SC/0682/2022, Delhi Cloth General Mills v. Ludh Budh Singh
MANU/SC/0423/1972and Room Singh Negi v. Punjab National Bank
MANU/SC/8456/2008. Learned counsel for the Petitioner/workman
submitted that it is an undisputed fact that the said document was seized by
CBI     from      possession  of  the  Parliament     Street  Branch    of     the
Respondent/bank. Moreover, Mr. Pradeep Aggarwal and Mr. P S Bedi
during their cross-examination before the enquiry officer admitted that the
face value of FDR was Rs. 60,000/- and the said document had their
signatures.
26.     Learned Counsel for the Petitioner/workman submitted that it is a
well-established proposition of law that conspiracy cannot be attributed to a
single person and that there has to be more than one person. However, in the
present case, he submitted no one except the present Petitioner/workman
was charge-sheeted and dismissed in respect of the FDR in question. He
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                    Page 9 of 26
submitted that Mr. Bedi and Mr. Pardeep Kumar Agarwal were never
charge-sheeted or punished for any such conspiracy involving the FDR in
question. He has placed reliance on the orders of dismissal of Mr. Bedi and
Mr. Pardeep Kumar Agarwal to buttress his contention.
27.     It has been also been submitted that FDR was issued by Kallirampur
Branch, Meerut and Loan was sanctioned by the Loan Department of the
Parliament Street Branch, Delhi. No document was prepared by
Petitioner/workman in any of the two branches relating to either issuance or
loan sanctioning as she was working as officiating head cashier at P.S.
Branch Delhi. The Learned counsel for the Petitioner/workman has
submitted that the Respondent/bank levied a charge of being involved and
misconduct on the Petitioner/workman but did not initiate any enquiry
against the employees that were working in the Department at Parliament
Street Branch Delhi or Kallirampur Branch.
28.     Learned Counsel for the Petitioner/workman has submitted that the
Petitioner/workman has also filed a case before Consumer Forum for the
return of her Original FDR from the Bank, wherein, vide Order dated
23.11.2015, the respondent/bank was directed to return the FDR to
Petitioner/workman with compensation of Rs.50,000/- and Litigation costs
of Rs. 10,000/-. The said order has been challenged by the respondent/Bank
before the State Commission, which is pending.
29.     Learned Counsel for the respondent/bank submits that the impugned
award dated 30.12.2013 has been passed by the Learned Tribunal after a
detailed examination of the witnesses and documents relied upon by the
parties and this court while exercising the writ jurisdiction may not disturb
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                   Page 10 of 26
the findings of fact. Reliance has been placed on Calcutta Port Shramik
Union V Calcutta River Transport Association 1989 I LLN 1 and
30.     He has submitted the charges against the Petitioner/workman were
based upon documentary evidence as well as oral evidence and
circumstantial evidence, prior to the making of the FDR and the conduct of
the Petitioner/workman post making of the FDR.
31.     He has submitted that any normal person would expect his/her FDR
from the Bank soon after making the payments for it. However, in the
present, it is the case of the Petitioner/workman that she gave the money to
Mr. Bedi in Nov. 1990 but the FDR came to her after a delay of almost three
months in Feb 1991. There is no reason why no step was taken by the
Petitioner/workman on account of the delay in handing over the FDR. He
has further submitted that the rate of interest on the OD Account is 11%
whereas the rate of interest on the FDR amount is 10%. He submitted that
the Petitioner/workman had withdrawn the money and paid a higher rate of
interest and invested the same in FDR with a lower rate of interest which is
unbelievable and not normal conduct on the part of any reasonable person
more particularly a banker.
32.     Learned Counsel for the respondent/bank also submitted that the
conduct of the Petitioner/workman was suspicious as when the FDR was
received by the Petitioner/workman, a demand loan was raised by her on the
said inflated FDR and two other demand loans were settled from the
proceeds of the said loan amount. Moreover, when the FDR was about to be
matured in January, 1992 then the entire payment of the FDR was made.
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                     Page 11 of 26
33.     Lastly, the Learned Counsel for the respondent/bank has submitted
that the respondent/bank is a nationalized bank and has to act in accordance
with the Rules, and Regulations and fraudulent conduct on behalf of an
employee cannot be tolerated. He has submitted that the punishment
awarded to the claimant commensurate with the gravity of the charges
levelled and proved against her and therefore, the award passed by the
Learned Tribunal be upheld.
34.     I have heard the submissions of the parties and perused the material
on record. At the outset, it is pertinent to outline the scope of writ
jurisdiction under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India while
examining and adjudicating an impugned order.
35.     It is well settled that the powers conferred under 226 & 227, though
vast, should be exercised sparingly and with great circumspection. While
adjudicating upon an impugned order, the scope of writ jurisdiction is
narrowed down to examining the contents of the order which is before the
Court. Any consideration beyond the assessment of the impugned order,
including an investigation into evidence and question of facts would amount
to exceeding the jurisdiction. It is not for the High Court to constitute itself
into an appellate court over tribunals constituted under special legislations to
resolve disputes of a kind, qualitatively different from ordinary civil
disputes and to re-adjudicate upon questions of fact decided by those
tribunals. Reliance can be placed on Sadhu Ram v. Delhi Transport Corpn.,
(1983) 4 SCC 156 and Sanjay Kumar Jha vs. Prakash Chandra
36.     The Industrial Disputes Act of 1947 is a piece of social welfare and
beneficial legislation. The Industrial Disputes Act of 1947 has conferred
wide powers and jurisdiction to the Labour Courts/Tribunals to make
appropriate awards in determining the industrial disputes presented before it.
In an Award passed by the Labour Courts/Tribunals, the adjudicator may
impose new obligations on the management taking into account the theory
of social justice to strike a balance and secure peace and harmony between
the employer and the workman. Reliance can be placed upon Bharat Bank
Ltd. vs. Employees of the Bharat Bank Ltd. Delhi, AIR 1950 SC 188 and
Bidi, Bidi Leaves vs. The State of Bombay, AIR 1962 SC 4
37.     The legislature in its wisdom has not provided any appeal against the
award of the Labour Court/Industrial Tribunal, thus, making the Labour
Court/ Industrial Tribunal, the final adjudicator of facts. It is a settled
proposition that the award of the Labour Court can be set aside only if there
is an error apparent on the face of the record. It is impermissible for the
High Courts under its writ jurisdiction to re-appreciate evidence and
substitute its view with that of the Labour Court/ Tribunals. High Courts
should refrain from re-entertaining pure questions of facts, which have
already been adjudicated by the courts/ tribunals having the jurisdiction to
do so unless the same is found to be perverse, patently illegal, contrary to
law, or if there is an error apparent on the face of the record. In this regard,
reliance can be placed on Management of Madurantakam Coop. Sugar
Mills Limited v. S. Viswanathan (2005) 3 SCC 193, Indian Overseas Bank
v. I.O.B. Staff Canteen Workers' Union, (2000) 4 SCC 245 and
Dharangadhara Chemical Works Ltd. v. State of Saurashtra (1957) SCR
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                    Page 13 of 26
38.     The writ court must record reasons if it intends to reconsider a finding
of facts. The writ courts time and again have been cautioned not to enter into
the realm of factual disputes and the findings given thereon. Reliance can be
placed on State of Haryana vs. Devi Dutt & Ors.: (2006) 13 SCC 32,
wherein the Apex Court has inter alia held that the writ Court can interfere
in the factual findings of fact only if (1) the Award is perverse; (2) the
Labour Court has applied wrong legal principles; (3) the Labour Court has
posed wrong questions; (4) the Labour Court has not taken into
consideration the relevant facts; or (5) the Labour Court has arrived at
findings based on irrelevant facts or on extraneous consideration
39.     The Supreme Court in Chandavarkar Sita Ratna Rao v. Ashalata S.
Guram (1986) 4 SCC 447 inter alia held that in the exercise of the writ
jurisdiction, the High Court can go into the questions of facts or look into
the evidence if justice so requires it. But the High Court should decline to
exercise its jurisdiction under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution to
look into the facts in the absence of clear cut-down reasons where the
question depends upon the appreciation of evidence. The High Court should
not interfere with a finding within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal or court
except where the finding is perverse in law in the sense that no reasonable
person properly instructed in law could have come to such a finding or there
is misdirection in law or view of fact has been taken in the teeth of the
preponderance of the evidence or the finding is not based on any material
evidence or it resulted in manifest injustice.
40.     The Supreme Court in Union of India vs. P. Gunasekaran, (2015) 2
SCC 610, elaborated upon the extent of the exercise of writ jurisdiction and
inter alia held as under:-
“13. Under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the
High Court shall not:
(ii) interfere with the conclusions in the enquiry, in case the
same has been conducted in accordance with law;
(iii) go into the adequacy of the evidence; (iv) go into the
reliability of the evidence;
(v) interfere, if there be some legal evidence on which
findings can be based.
(vi) correct the error of fact however grave it may appear to
be:….”
41.     Thus, in writ jurisdiction, the High Court can interfere with an Award
of the Labour Court/Tribunal, if there is patent illegality or if the award
rendered is contrary to law as a measure of ‘misplaced sympathy’ and was
thus perverse. If the Tribunal under special legislation is empowered to
decide jurisdictional facts, the High Court cannot adjudicate upon the
question of facts decided by such Tribunals.
42.     Learned counsel for the respondent has taken a position that this court
cannot scrutinise the evidence in the present writ petition and the challenge
laid by the Petitioner/workman relying upon evidence is untenable. The
parameters of consideration by the court into a challenge to disciplinary
authorities on this ground are well settled. Reliance can be placed on the
High Court of judicature at Bombay v. Shashikant S. Patil(2001) 1 SCC
416 wherein the Supreme Court stated that interference with the
departmental authorities can be permitted while exercising jurisdiction under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India if such authority has held the
proceedings in violation of principles of nature or in violation of statutory
regulations prescribing the mode of such enquiry or if the decision of the
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                      Page 15 of 26
authority is vitiated by considerations extraneous to the evidence and merits
of the case or if the conclusion made by the authority on the very face of it,
is wholly arbitrary or capricious that no reasonable person could have
arrived at such a conclusion, or grounds very similar to the above.
43.     In the case of Union of India vs P Gunasekaran (2015) 2 SCC 610,
it was inter alia held as follows:-
“14. In one of the earliest decisions in State of A.P. v. S. Sree
Rama Rao [AIR 1963 SC 1723] , many of the above principles
have been discussed and it has been concluded thus:(AIR pp.
“7. … The High Court is not constituted in a
proceeding under Article 226 of the Constitution as a
court of appeal over the decision of the authorities
holding a departmental enquiry against a public
servant: it is concerned to determine whether the
enquiry is held by an authority competent in that
behalf, and according to the procedure prescribed in
that behalf, and whether the rules of natural justice
are not violated. Where there is some evidence, which
the authority entrusted with the duty to hold the
enquiry has accepted and which evidence may
reasonably support the conclusion that the delinquent
officer is guilty of the charge, it is not the function of
the High Court in a petition for a writ under Article
226 to review the evidence and to arrive at an
independent finding on the evidence. The High Court
may undoubtedly interfere where the departmental
authorities have held the proceedings against the
delinquent in a manner inconsistent with the rules of
natural justice or in violation of the statutory rules
prescribing the mode of enquiry or where the
authorities have disabled themselves from reaching a
fair decision by some considerations extraneous to
the evidence and the merits of the case or by allowing
themselves to be influenced by irrelevant
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                        Page 16 of 26
considerations or where the conclusion on the very
face of it is so wholly arbitrary and capricious that no
reasonable person could ever have arrived at that
conclusion, or on similar grounds. But the
departmental authorities are, if the enquiry is
otherwise properly held, the sole judges of facts and
if there be some legal evidence on which their
findings can be based, the adequacy or reliability of
that evidence is not a matter which can be permitted
to be canvassed before the High Court in a
proceeding for a writ under Article 226 of the
15. In State of A.P. v. Chitra Venkata Rao [(1975) 2 SCC 557 :
1975 SCC (L&S) 349 : AIR 1975 SC 2151] , the principles have
been further discussed at paras 21-24, which read as follows:
“21. The scope of Article 226 in dealing with
departmental inquiries has come up before this
Court. Two propositions were laid down by this
Court in State of A.P. v. S. Sree Rama Rao [AIR 1963
SC 1723]. First, there is no warrant for the view that
in considering whether a public officer is guilty of
misconduct charged against him, the rule followed in
criminal trials that an offence is not established
unless proved by evidence beyond reasonable doubt
to the satisfaction of the Court must be applied. If
that rule be not applied by a domestic Tribunal of
inquiry the High Court in a petition under Article 226
of the Constitution is not competent to declare the
order of the authorities holding a departmental
enquiry invalid. The High Court is not a court of
appeal under Article 226 over the decision of the
authorities holding a departmental enquiry against a
public servant. The Court is concerned to determine
whether the enquiry is held by an authority competent
in that behalf and according to the procedure
prescribed in that behalf, and whether the rules of
natural justice are not violated. Second, where there
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                       Page 17 of 26
is some evidence which the authority entrusted with
the duty to hold the enquiry has accepted and which
evidence may reasonably support the conclusion that
the delinquent officer is guilty of the charge, it is not
the function of the High Court to review the evidence
and to arrive at an independent finding on the
evidence. The High Court may interfere where the
departmental authorities have held the proceedings
against the delinquent in a manner inconsistent with
the rules of natural justice or in violation of the
statutory rules prescribing the mode of enquiry or
where the authorities have disabled themselves from
reaching a fair decision by some considerations
extraneous to the evidence and the merits of the case
or by allowing themselves to be influenced by
irrelevant considerations or where the conclusion on
the very face of it is so wholly arbitrary and
capricious that no reasonable person could ever have
arrived at that conclusion. The departmental
authorities are, if the enquiry is otherwise properly
held, the sole judges of facts and if there is some legal
evidence on which their findings can be based, the
adequacy or reliability of that evidence is not a
matter which can be permitted to be canvassed before
the High Court in a proceeding for a writ under
22. Again, this Court in Railway Board v. Niranjan
Singh [(1969) 1 SCC 502 : (1969) 3 SCR 548] said
that the High Court does not interfere with the
conclusion of the disciplinary authority unless the
finding is not supported by any evidence or it can be
said that no reasonable person could have reached
such a finding. In Niranjan Singh case [(1969) 1 SCC
502 : (1969) 3 SCR 548] this Court held that the
High Court exceeded its powers in interfering with
the findings of the disciplinary authority on the
charge that the respondent was instrumental in
compelling the shutdown of an air compressor at
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                       Page 18 of 26
about 8.15 a.m. on 31-5-1956. This Court said that
the Enquiry Committee felt that the evidence of two
persons that the respondent led a group of strikers
and compelled them to close down their compressor
could not be accepted at its face value. The General
Manager did not agree with the Enquiry Committee
on that point. The General Manager accepted the
evidence. This Court said that it was open to the
General Manager to do so and he was not bound by
the conclusion reached by the committee. This Court
held that the conclusion reached by the disciplinary
authority should prevail and the High Court should
not have interfered with the conclusion.
23. The jurisdiction to issue a writ of certiorari under
Article 226 is a supervisory jurisdiction. The Court
exercises it not as an appellate court. The findings of
fact reached by an inferior court or Tribunal as a
result of the appreciation of evidence are not
reopened or questioned in writ proceedings. An error
of law which is apparent on the face of the record can
be corrected by a writ, but not an error of fact,
however grave it may appear to be. In regard to a
finding of fact recorded by a Tribunal, a writ can be
issued if it is shown that in recording the said finding,
the Tribunal had erroneously refused to admit
admissible and material evidence, or had erroneously
admitted inadmissible evidence which has influenced
the impugned finding. Again if a finding of fact is
based on no evidence, that would be regarded as an
error of law which can be corrected by a writ of
certiorari. A finding of fact recorded by the Tribunal
cannot be challenged on the ground that the relevant
and material evidence adduced before the Tribunal is
insufficient or inadequate to sustain a finding. The
adequacy or sufficiency of evidence led on a point
and the inference of fact to be drawn from the said
finding are within the exclusive jurisdiction of the
Tribunal.(See SyedYakoob v. K.S.Radhakrishnan [AI
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                        Page 19 of 26
24. The High Court in the present case assessed the
entire evidence and came to its own conclusion. The
High Court was not justified to do so. Apart from the
aspect that the High Court does not correct a finding
of fact on the ground that the evidence is not
sufficient or adequate, the evidence in the present
case which was considered by the Tribunal cannot be
scanned by the High Court to justify the conclusion
that there is no evidence which would justify the
finding of the Tribunal that the respondent did not
make the journey. The Tribunal gave reasons for its
conclusions. It is not possible for the High Court to
say that no reasonable person could have arrived at
these conclusions. The High Court reviewed the
evidence, reassessed the evidence and then rejected
the evidence as no evidence. That is precisely what
the High Court in exercising jurisdiction to issue a
writ of certiorari should not do.”
44.     The Supreme Court in Sarvepalli Ramaiah vs. District Collector,
Chittoor, (2019) 4 SCC 500, while examining the scope of Article 226 of
the Constitution of India, observed as under:-
“41. In this case, the impugned decision, taken pursuant to
orders of Court, was based on some materials. It cannot be
said to be perverse, to warrant interference in exercise of
the High Court's extraordinary power of judicial review. A
decision is vitiated by irrationality if the decision is so
outrageous, that it is in defiance of all logic; when no
person acting reasonably could possibly have taken the
decision, having regard to the materials on record. The
decision in this case is not irrational.
42. A decision may sometimes be set aside and quashed
under Article 226 on the ground of illegality. This is when
there is an apparent error of law on the face of the
decision, which goes to the root of the decision and/or in
other words an apparent error, but for which the decision
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                       Page 20 of 26
43. Judicial review under Article 226 is directed, not
against the decision, but the decision-making process. Of
course, patent illegality and/or error apparent on the face
of the decision, which goes to the root of the decision, may
vitiate the decision-making process. In this case there is no
such patent illegality or apparent error. In exercise of
power under Article 226, the Court does not sit in appeal
over the decision impugned, nor does it adjudicate hotly
disputed questions of fact.”
45.     Thus, in light of the aforesaid settled law, it becomes pivotal to
examine the impugned award to ascertain whether the award passed has an
infirmity which so requires the interference of this Court.
46.     The Learned Tribunal has adjudicated the issues framed by it in
favour of the respondent/bank. Learned Tribunal has categorically held that
the services of the workman have been legally and justifiably terminated
based on oral submissions and documentary evidence produced by the
parties before it.
47.     The Learned Tribunal examined the facts as testified by the Shri. P.C.
Jain, Manager (Ex. MW1/1). Shri P.C Jain testified in his affidavit that on
the first date of enquiry, the charge was read over to the Petitioner/workman,
who denied all the allegations. Thereafter, a list of documents and witnesses,
relied upon by the bank to substantiate the charges were supplied her.
During the course of cross-examination, he denied the fact that the defence
assistance as well as the opportunity for adducing evidence was not given to
48.     The Learned Tribunal also examined the facts testified by the
Petitioner/workman in her affidavit (Ex. WW1/1) wherein she stated that
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                      Page 21 of 26
she had no role in the functioning of the Kallirampur Branch of the bank.
She stated that the enquiry was conducted in an illegal manner and the
Enquiry Officer was illegally changed on 27.10.1994. She also deposed that
the confessional statement was obtained under duress on 29.01.2002. She
further claimed that the enquiry officer did not take into consideration the
confessional statement made by Shri P.S. Bedi and the original FDR,
alleged to have been inflated, was not produced before the Enquiry Officer.
49.     Further, the Learned Tribunal to ascertain whether the enquiry
conducted was in consonance with the principles of natural justice examined
the enquiry proceedings placed on record before it.
50.     A plain reading of the chargesheet makes it clear that there was no
ambiguity in it. It was observed by the Learned Tribunal that the
proceedings dated 28.11.1994 and the testimony of Mr. P.C Jain makes it
clear that the Petitioner/workman appeared before the enquiry officer and
the charge was duly explained to her. The Petitioner/workman was clearly
told that she was free to take assistance from a defence assistant, in terms of
provisions of Bipartite Settlement.
51.     A bare perusal of the enquiry proceedings also crystallises that due
and reasonable opportunities were given to the Petitioner/workman to
defend herself. It is pertinent to note that on 01.02.1995, a request was made
to the enquiry officer to record the statement of Mr. P.S. Bedi in the defence
of the Petitioner/workman and the enquiry officer recorded the statement of
52.     The Learned Tribunal has also considered the contention of the
Petitioner/workman that the cash book dated 02.02.1991 relating to FDR
No.20/91 prepared at the Kallirampur branch, cashier's long book dated
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                     Page 22 of 26
02.02.1991, photocopy of FDR register, counterfoil of FDR and copy of
AOF pertaining to FDR No. 20/91 were not supplied to her and by non-
supply of the documents, she was not allowed to defend herself. The
Learned Tribunal observed that these documents were duly inspected by her
at the Kallirampur branch on 23.12.1994. It was held that in the banking
business absolute devotion, diligence, integrity and honesty need to be
preserved by every bank employee. If this were not to be observed, then the
confidence of the public/depositors would be impaired. Since the inspection
of the documents was duly granted, it cannot be held that any prejudice had
been caused to him on account of the non-furnishing of the inquiry
report/findings to him
53.     Furthermore, the Learned Tribunal observed that the documents that
were sought by the Petitioner/workman were required to show that the FDR
in question was issued for a sum of Rs. 60,0000/- and not for a sum of Rs.
6,000/-. However, the said dispute can be put to quietus in view of the facts
as unfolded by Mr. P.S. Bedi which were wholeheartedly relied on by the
Petitioner/workman. In his testimony, he admitted the issuance of FDR for
Rs. 6,000/- and inflation of the amount to Rs. 60,0000/-. It was held that
whatever the Petitioner/workman testified before the Enquiry Officer was in
contrast to the evidence unfolded by Shri Bedi.
54.     Learned Tribunal held that the Enquiry Officer did not ignore any
material while recording his conclusion. It cannot be said that he ignored the
version projected by the Petitioner/workman and Shri Bedi. Accordingly, it
was held that the enquiry conducted by the bank was just and proper, the
findings recorded by the Enquiry Officer were held to be based on evidence
and his report cannot be vitiated at all.
55.     The Learned Tribunal relied on a plethora of cases including the case
of Firestone Tyre and Rubber Company (1973 (1) LLJ 278) and the case of
Delhi Cloth and General Mills Company (1972 (1) LLJ 180) and observed
that when enquiry is found to be fair and proper, the Tribunal should
proceed to appreciate evidence adduced before It by the bank as well as the
workman on the merits of the charge. However, in view of the directions
issued by this Court in the order dated 17.04.2013, the Learned Tribunal
proceeded further to appreciate evidence brought over the record and to
record findings on the count as to whether charges stood proved against the
claimant or not and whether the services of the Petitioner/workman were
illegally and unjustifiably terminated.
56.     Learned     Tribunal    scanned    the    evidence    adduced    by     the
respondent/bank to prove the misconduct along with the evidence brought
over the record in rebuttal by the Petitioner/workman.
57.     Even at the cost of brevity it may be reiterated that the High Court can
only interfere with the order of the Tribunal if it is manifest on the record
that the proceedings against the employee were conducted in a manner in
consistent with the principles of natural justice. The Learned Tribunal in the
present case, pursuant to the order of this court has examined the issue of
adherence to principles of natural justice while conducting the enquiry.
It is also a settled proposition that if the enquiry is properly held the
departmental authorities are the sole judge of facts. The employee cannot
challenge the findings on the grounds of adequacy or reliability in a
proceeding under Article 226 of the Constitution.
58.     The High Court in the writ jurisdiction cannot review the evidence to
arrive at an independent finding of the evidence. Thus this court cannot re-
W.P.(C) 4852/2014                                                      Page 24 of 26
appreciate the evidence. Hence the discussion of evidence in the present
proceedings would be an exercisein futile. Particularly, in view of the fact
that the petitioner has not been able to demonstrate any perversity, illegality
or error of law in the appreciation of evidence. The finding of facts arrived
at on by the Tribunal after due appreciation of evidence cannot be re-opened
or questioned in writ proceedings.
59.     After examining the impugned order as well as the material on record,
it is clear that the charges against the Petitioner/workman were duly proved
by the respondent/bank. The Learned Tribunal has passed a detailed order
after considering all the material and evidence on record before it.
60.     In the instant case, the Petitioner/workman has only raised disputed
questions of facts which were examined by the Learned Tribunal as the fact-
finding court. The Tribunal and before that the departmental authorities i.e;
the disciplinary authority and appellate authority have all concluded that the
Petitioner/workman misconducted herself and was not a reliable person to
be kept in the employment of the bank. In the banking business absolute
devotion, integrity and honesty are a sine qua non for every bank employee.
It requires that the employees maintain good conduct and discipline as they
deal with the money of the depositors and the customers and if it is not
observed, the confidence of the public/depositors would be impaired. The
banking system is the backbone of the Indian economy. An officer who is
found to have been involved in financial irregularities while performing his
duty as a bank officer, cannot be let off even if there is a minor infraction in
the inquiry report. This court considers that there is no material to interfere
with the order of the Learned Tribunal.
61.     This court does not find any infirmity, perversity, illegality, or
jurisdictional error in the impugned order and thus does not deem fit to
interfere with the finding of fact as returned by the Learned Tribunal to the
extent of the finding of the Tribunal holding the petitioner guilty for
misconduct. However, it is a matter of record that the petitioner had served
the Bank for 13 years and there was no complaint during this period. It is
also a matter of record that no criminal proceedings were initiated against
the petitioner. Recently Hon’ble Supreme Court in Umesh Kumar Pahwa
Vs. Board of Directors Uttarakhand Gramin Bank and Others (2022) 4
SCC 385 taking into account attendant facts reduced the punishment of
removal from service to compulsory retirement.
62.     Thus in view of the peculiar facts and circumstances, the quantum of
punishment is modified to the extent of substituting the punishment of
removal from service to that of compulsory retirement. The petitioner thus
shall be entitled to all benefits which may be available to her by correcting
the punishment from that of removal from service to that of compulsory
retirement. The present petition is thus allowed to the aforesaid extent.