A husband, who lost his case for divorce, is before us.
2. Brief facts necessary for the appeal could be stated
The husband filed OP (Div) No.620 of 2018 before the
Family Court, Alappuzha, under Section 10(1)(x) of the
Divorce Act, 1869, for dissolving his marriage with the
respondent, on the ground of matrimonial cruelties.           He
married the respondent on 09.02.2009 as per Christian rites
and custom and three girl children were born in their lawful
wedlock. Both of them were employed in Saudi Arabia, and
their marital relationship was very smooth.       But later, she
developed some behavioral abnormalities, and she picked up
quarrel with him for no reason, alleging illicit relationship
with other women.       She failed to perform her duties and
responsibilities as a wife and mother.     On 14.05.2018, she
Mat. Appeal No.456 of 2020          3
slapped on his face and on 16.05.2018 she pointed a knife at
him and threatened him with death. He was assaulted and
humiliated in front of his children and public, and she made
his close-relatives to turn against him. She compelled him to
transfer the properties purchased by him into her name.
Because of the indifferent, abusive and violent behavior of
the respondent, he became mentally stressed and physically
ill.  According      to him,  their  marital  relationship was
irretrievably broken and so he wanted a decree of divorce.
3.       The respondent-wife vehemently opposed his
petition. According to her, the appellant was concocting
reasons to keep himself away from his wife and children.
She was never cruel to the husband and she never assaulted
or threatened him. The appellant had no financial discipline
and    the     respondent  herself  purchased   properties and
constructed the house.       She needs her husband, and her
children their father.
4.    After formulating necessary issues by the Family
Mat. Appeal No.456 of 2020          4
Court, the parties went on trial. PWs 1 to 3 were examined
and Exts.A1 & A2 were marked from the side of the
appellant.       RWs1 to 7 were examined and Exts. B1 to B7
were marked from the side of the respondent.         The Family
Court, on analysing the facts and evidence, found that the
appellant failed to prove the allegations of cruelty against the
respondent so as to dissolve their marriage, and hence the
OP was dismissed, against which, the appellant has come up
with this appeal.
5.    We are called upon for a re-appraisal of the facts
and evidence to find out whether any interference is called
for in the impugned judgment and decree.
6. Admittedly, the appellant married the respondent on
09.02.2009 at St.Joseph’s Church, Kayalpuram.           Both of
them were employed in Saudi Arabia and three girl children
were born in their lawful wedlock.       The appellant also is
admitting the fact that they were leading a very cordial and
smooth marital relationship till 2018.      He is alleging that
Mat. Appeal No.456 of 2020            5
thereafter      the  respondent   developed   some  behavioural
abnormalities, and she often picked up quarrel with him for
no reason. If so, as a responsible husband, he was bound to
know the reason for such behavioural changes of his wife,
whether it be physical, mental or psychological. He has no
case that he ever took his wife to a psychologist or
psychiatrist      to  know   the  reason  for   her behavioural
abnormalities.
7. The respondent wife deposed that she was working
as a Nurse in Delhi and at that time, the appellant was
working there in a Jewelry and they fell in love and decided
to marry.       The appellant was not ready even to admit the
pre-marital affair between them, though his own mother
RW2 and his own close-relative RW3 admitted that fact
before Court. According to respondent, her marital life with
the appellant was so smooth till 2018 and thereafter, he was
trying to avoid her and her children. The mother and
close-relatives of the appellant categorically deposed before
Mat. Appeal No.456 of 2020         6
Court that in the year 2017, the appellant developed some
illicit intimacy with a lady named Anjali and thereafter, he
wanted to avoid his wife, children and even his own mother.
The case of the appellant is that the respondent picked up
quarrel with him alleging illicit relationship with other ladies.
That seems to be the behavioural abnormality attributed
against the wife by the appellant. Of course, the wife might
have been worried about the extra-marital relationship of her
husband spoken to by his mother and relatives.
8. The respondent deposed that there were no serious
issues between them so as to dissolve their marriage, and
she wanted her husband back to her life. According to her,
she was not alleging any kind of illicit relationship against the
appellant. Even when his mother and close-relatives were
aware of the unholy alliance between the appellant and
Smt.Anjali, it cannot be believed that the respondent was not
aware of that fact.    She was the first person to sense the
change in the attitude of her husband.        But may be out of
Mat. Appeal No.456 of 2020           7
fear that, if she was attributing such an allegation, it may be
termed as cruelty from her part, she denied to have such an
allegation.
9. The testimony of RWs 2 to 7 will clearly show that
the appellant wanted to avoid the respondent and her
children to continue his unholy alliance with another woman.
RW2 mother identified Ext.B5 photograph to be that of the
appellant       and  Smt.Anjali,  sharing  intimate  moments.
According to her, Smt.Anjali belongs to her own parish and
she knows her well.       RW2 identified the photograph of the
appellant in Ext.B6 photograph also, driving a car owned by
Smt.Anjali. There is no person better than a mother to
identify her own son.
10.       The appellant contended that the respondent
threatened to complain against him before Saudi Police to
put him behind the Bars and also threatened him with
suicide. In the appeal memorandum, ground No.‘I’. is to the
effect that “the evidence adduced from the side of the
Mat. Appeal No.456 of 2020             8
respondent through other witnesses and documents are to
the effect that the appellant is having illicit relationship with
another lady.        If that be so, it cannot be believed that the
respondent did not pick up quarrel with the appellant as the
same is not the normal human conduct.” So, the appellant
also is admitting that, if he had any illicit relationship with
another lady, there was every possibility for his wife to pick
up quarrel with him, as it was the normal human conduct.
The case of the appellant that while their marital relationship
was going very smoothly, the respondent developed some
behaviuoral abnormalities assumes significance here. Without
any solid reason, there was no chance for any such
behavioural changes from the part of a wife, unless there
were some physical, mental or psychological issues.            The
appellant has no case that the respondent was suffering from
any mental or physical ailments leading to behavioural
abnormalities. When the wife had reasonable grounds to
suspect the chastity or fidelity of her husband, and if she
Mat. Appeal No.456 of 2020         9
questions him, or expresses her deep pain and sorrow before
him, it cannot be termed as a behavioural abnormality, as it
is the natural human conduct of a normal wife. The normal
human reactions or responses from a wife, on knowing that
her husband was having illicit connection with another lady,
cannot be termed as behavioural abnormality or cruelty from
the part of the wife, so as to dissolve their marriage.     The
available facts and circumstances clearly point to the fact
that in the year 2017 the appellant developed some illicit
intimacy with another lady and he wanted to avoid his wife
and children from his life, so as to live with that lady. The
testimony of his own mother and relatives will speak against
him. RW2, the mother of the appellant, deposed that even
after the appellant neglected and abandoned the respondent
and her children, she is taking care of RW2, and the entire
affairs of the family. The close-relatives of the appellant are
all admitting that the respondent is a good natured lady,
loving her husband and family.      The incidents of physical
Mat. Appeal No.456 of 2020       10
assaults deposed by the appellant seems to be exaggerated
stories to suit his claim for divorce on the ground of
matrimonial cruelties.   RW2 deposed that, since she is
supporting the respondent, the appellant, who is her own
son, is not happy with her.     There is ample evidence to
support that contention from her testimony itself.       The
appellant was not hesitant, even to question the chastity of
his own aged mother, as she was supporting the respondent.
11. The learned counsel Sri.P.Pramel appearing for the
respondent submitted that only to marry the other woman
with whom the appellant was keeping illicit intimacy, he
wanted to avoid the respondent, and for that purpose, he
filed the divorce OP, though there was no valid grounds to
dissolve their marriage.   The testimony of RWs 2 to 7
coupled with Exts. B1 to B6 documents substantiate the case
of the respondent. RW2, the mother, produced copy of her
passport to show that she was often living with the appellant
and respondent in Saudi Arabia from 2010 to 2016, and
Mat. Appeal No.456 of 2020            11
according to her, at that time, they were leading a very
happy married life.       So, the motive of the appellant behind
the divorce petition is obvious.
12. Courts cannot come to the aid of an erring person
to legalise his activities, which are per se illegal. If the
husband having unholy alliance with another woman wants to
avoid his lawfully wedded wife and his three little children, he
cannot seek the assistance of a court of law to get his
present      relationship  legalised  by  dissolving  his  lawful
marriage, without any valid reasons for the same.
13. According to the appellant, there is no meaning in
continuing his marital tie with the respondent, and from 2018
onwards they are living separate, and their marriage is
practically dead due to long years of separation.
14.     In Dr.Uthara vs. Dr.Sivapriyan [2022 (2) KLT
175], we had occasion to deal with a similar question of
non-co-habitation and long separation as a ground for
divorce.      In that decision we have held that ‘the period of
Mat. Appeal No.456 of 2020            12
non-co-habitation however long it may be, if it was due to
deliberate avoidance or due to pendency of cases filed by one
party, the other party cannot be found fault with, when that
party is still ready to continue his/her matrimonial life, and
no grounds recognized by law are established against that
party to break their nuptial tie. So legally, one party cannot
unilaterally decide to walk out of a marriage, when sufficient
grounds are not there justifying a divorce, under the law
which governs them, saying that due to non-co-habitation for
a considerable long period, their marriage is dead practically
and emotionally. No one can be permitted to take an
incentive out of his own faulty actions or inactions.’
15.    In the case on hand, the parties are Christians
governed by the Divorce Act 1869. Section 10(1)(X) of the
Divorce Act, 1869 reads thus:
marriage.--(1) Any marriage solemnized,
whether before or after the commencement of
the Indian Divorce (Amendment) Act, 2001,
may, on a petition presented to the District
Mat. Appeal No.456 of 2020              13
Court either by the husband or the wife, be
dissolved   on   the   ground   that  since  the
(x) has treated the petitioner with such cruelty as
to cause a reasonable apprehension in the
mind of the petitioner that it would be harmful
or injurious for the petitioner to live with the
respondent.”
16.       The appellant has to establish that since the
solemnisation of the marriage, the respondent has treated
him with such cruelty as to cause a reasonable apprehension
in his mind that it would be harmful or injurious for him to
live with the respondent.          Without establishing cruelty to
such an extent, no divorce can be granted under Section
10(1)(X) of the Divorce Act.
17. From time immemorial marriage was considered as
solemn, and sanctity attached to the relationship of a man
and wife united in marriage was considered inseparable, and
Mat. Appeal No.456 of 2020              14
it was the very foundation of a strong society. Marriage is a
socially or ritually recognized union, or legal contract
between spouses, that establishes rights and obligations
between them, between them and their children, and
between them and their in-laws. Family is the basic unit of
the society, from where we learn virtues, values, skills and
behaviour. Marriage is not a mere ritual or an empty
ceremony for licencing the sexual urge of the parties.
“Marriage is the union
18.     Kerala, known as God’s own Country, was once
famous for its well knit family bondage. But the present trend
it seems to break the nuptial tie on flimsy or selfish reasons,
or for extra-marital relationships, even unmindful of their
children. The wails and screams coming out of disturbed and
destroyed families are liable to shake the conscience of the
society as a whole. When warring couples, deserted children
and     desperate     divorcees     occupy   the  majority of  our
population, no doubt it will adversely affect the tranquility of
our social life, and our society will have a stunted growth.
Now-a-days, the younger generation think that marriage is
an evil that could be avoided to enjoy free life without any
liabilities or obligations. They would expand the word ‘WIFE’
as ‘Worry Invited For Ever’ substituting the old concept of
‘Wise Investment For Ever’.           The consumer culture of ‘use
Mat. Appeal No.456 of 2020              16
and throw’ seems to have influenced our matrimonial
relationships also. Live-in-relationships are on the rise, just
to say good-bye when they fell apart.
19. The law and religion consider marriage as an
institution by itself and parties to the marriage are not
permitted to walk away from that relationship unilaterally,
unless and until they satisfy the legal requirements to
dissolve their marriage through a court of law or in
accordance with the personal law which govern them.
20.     Mere quarrels, ordinary wear and tear of
matrimonial        relationships   or  casual   outburst  of  some
emotional feelings cannot be treated as cruelties warranting
a divorce. From the facts of the case on hand, it is obvious
that the unholy alliance of the husband with some other lady
has caused some disturbances in the family life of the
appellant and respondent, which they were sailing smoothly
with their three girl children. Even according to the mother
and    close-relatives      of  the   appellant,  such   an  unholy
Mat. Appeal No.456 of 2020             17
relationship was started in the year 2017, and in the year
2018 itself, the husband moved for divorce. The parties are
living    separately     from  2018   onwards.  Even   now,  the
respondent is ready for a reunion as she wants her husband,
and her children their father. Learned counsel Sri.Mathew
Kuriakose for the appellant submitted that it is only a drama
played by the respondent as she is also aware of the fact that
their relationship is emotionally dead due to long separation.
The respondent was never separated from the appellant
because of any fault from her part. Still she is living with the
mother of the appellant, whenever she comes down from
Saudi Arabia.        It was the appellant who walked out of their
marital relationship, and now he says that due to long
separation, their marriage has become defunct.
21. Since, no act of cruelties, able to cause a reasonable
apprehension in the mind of the appellant that it would be
harmful or injurious for him to live with the respondent was
proved by the appellant, he is not entitled to get a decree of
Mat. Appeal No.456 of 2020             18
divorce on the ground of matrimonial cruelties. RWs 2 to 7
categorically deposed before the Court that the appellant and
respondent were leading a happy married life, and they still
want to see them live together along with their children. If
the appellant is ready to come back to his wife and children,
they are ready to accept him, and there is nothing to show
that the chances of an amicable reunion is foreclosed forever.
So the finding of the Family Court, Alappuzha, that the
appellant is not entitled for a decree of divorce on the ground
of matrimonial cruelties is liable to be upheld.
In the result, the appeal is dismissed. No order as
to costs.