      HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE FOR RAJASTHAN AT
                S.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 3660/2019
 Kalu Ram Jangid S/o Late Shankar Lal, Aged About 26 Years,
 Vpo Kathoti, Tehsil Jayal, District Nagaur, Rajasthan.
                                                        ----Petitioner
 1.      State Of Rajasthan, Through Secretary Department Of
         Revenue, Government Of Rajasthan, Jaipur, Rajasthan.
 2.      The Registrar, Board Of Revenue, Ajmer, District Ajmer,
         Rajasthan.
 3.      The District Collector (Land Record), District Nagaur,
         Rajasthan.
 4.      The Additional District Collector, Nagaur, District Nagaur,
         Rajasthan.
 5.      The Tehsildar, Office Of Tehsil Merta, District Nagaur,
         Rajasthan.
 For Petitioner(s)        :  Mr. M. S. Shekhawat
              HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE REKHA BORANA
      The present writ petition has been filed against the order
dated 01.01.2019 (Annex.-13), whereby the application of the
petitioner for compassionate appointment after the death of his
brother, who was a government servant, has been rejected.
        Petitioner is the brother of the deceased government
servant, Ramesh Jangid who expired on 22.05.2018. After his
death, petitioner, being his brother, applied for compassionate
appointment. The said application was rejected on the premise
that in terms of Rule 2(c)(v) of the Rajasthan Compassion
                                    (2 of 2)           [CW-3660/2019]
Appointment of Dependants of Deceased Government Servants
Rules, 1996 (‘the Rules of 1996’), the married brother of a
deceased government servant being not a ‘dependant’ is not
entitled for compassionate appointment. The Rules provide for the
compassionate appointment to a dependant of the deceased
government servant and an unmarried brother of an unmarried
deceased government servant does not fall within the definition of
‘dependant’. Admittedly, the petitioner is married and therefore, in
terms of the Rules of 1996, the petitioner cannot be held to be a
dependant and to be entitled for compassionate appointment.
       In view of the specific provisions of law, this Court is not
inclined to interfere with the order dated 01.01.2019. Hence the
present writ petition is dismissed.
