Writ Petition is filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, praying for the issuance of a Writ of Mandamus, directing the first
and third respondents to grant necessary transport permits in favour of the
petitioner for mining and transporting mined minerals in terms of the
mining lease granted vide G.O.No.3(D) No.23 dated 22.02.1999 and
G.O.3(D) No.67 dated 01.06.1998 in respect of lands situated at Therani
Village, Kunnam Taluk, Perambalur District to its factory at Dalmiapuram,
Trichy District in respect of the petitioner's mining lease areas.
For Respondents-1 and 3       : Mr.R.Shanmugasundaram,
Advocate General Assisted by
The relief sought for in the present writ petition is to direct the
first and third respondents to grant necessary transport permits in favour of
the petitioner for mining and transporting mined minerals in terms of the
mining lease granted vide G.O.No.3(D) No.23 dated 22.02.1999 and
G.O.3(D) No.67 dated 01.06.1998 in respect of lands situated at Therani
Village, Kunnam Taluk, Perambalur District to its factory at Dalmiapuram,
Trichy District in respect of the petitioner's mining lease areas.
2. The learned counsel for the petitioner-Company made a
submission that the Mining Operations in the subject field has already been
suspended and further the mined minerals are also unable to be transported
on account of various other reasons. However, the petitioner has to submit
necessary 'Environmental Clearance Certificate' for grant of lease.
3. The learned Advocate General made a submission that
Environmental Clearance Certificate becomes mandatory pursuant to the
judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Common
Cause vs. Union of India and Others [(2016) 11 SCC 455]. Thus, in the
absence of furnishing the Environmental Clearnce Certificate, the State will
not be in a position to consider the case of the petitioner for grant of lease.
4. This apart, the petitioner-Company is bound to comply with all
other requirements under the provisions of the Act and the Rules, which all
are mandatory.
5. In view of the said submission made by the learned counsel for
the petitioner and the learned Advocate General appearing on behalf of the
State, the petitioner-Company is at liberty to submit all the required
documents, including the Environmental Clearance Certificate and comply
with the norms and requirements as contemplated under the provisions of
the Act and the Rules, enabling the Authorities to consider the case of the
petitioner for grant of lease by strictly following the procedures as
contemplated under law.
6. The learned Advocate General made a submission that the
question of suspension of mining operations does not arise in view of the
fact that no lease was granted in favour of the petitioner-Company by the
State. If at all, any such lease has been granted or the lease expired, it is for
the petitioner-Company to submit the documents to the State Authorities for
consideration.
7. While considering the writ petitions relating to Mining
Operations, this Court would able to trace out number of instances, where
excess mining operations were carried on without adhereing to the Rules
and Regulations and in some cases by virtue of interim orders granted by
this Court and by keeping the writ petitions long years, undue advantages
are taken by the Mining Operators. All these things are to be seriously taken
note of by the State also, as it involves the State Revenue, which is of
paramount importance.
8. When large scale State Revenues are involved, more
specifically, in mining operations, wherever writ petitions are entertained,
the State must ensure that counter-affidavits and vacate stay petitions are
filed immediately and the matter is taken up for hearing as expeditiously as
possible by the High Court for early disposal as Nation's interest and Public
Revenue is the consideration to be shown by all concerned, including the
9. The growing tendency on writ side is that such writ petitions
involving large scale revenue, more specifically, Income Tax, Customs,
Excise, Mines and Minerals etc., interim orders are in force for several years
and the Nation's properties are being looted or misused or taken undue
advantge of. Such a situation is absolutely unconstitutional and further
anything under the earth belongs to the Government and it is the Nation's
property, which belongs to 'We the People of India'. Thus, no one can be
allowed to extract without adhering to the Act, Rules and Regulations and
any violations are to be treated seriously and all these persons must be liable
for all consequences.
10. This being the spirit to be followed, when such writ petitions
are filed, there are many such instances, this kind of writ petitions are not
even listed for hearing before the Courts, and it is yet another issue, which
is to be taken note of by the Registrar General of High Court of Madras.
There are several allegations that these writ petitions are not listed on
account of bundles misplaced or on various other reasons, including corrupt
activities and if these things are noticed, then serious actions are to be
initiated against all officials, who all are responsible for lapses, negligence
and dereliction of duty.
11. There is a Grouping Section, which is functioning in the High
Court. The said Section must be utilised for collecting large scale revenue
involved cases now pending before the High Court for many years and the
Registry must place all those cases before the Hon'ble The Chief Justice for
speedy disposal. Considering the fact that large scale State Revenues are in
stake and many persons are taking undue advantage of the pendency of the
writ petitions for unjust gains, which can never be tolerated and allowed by
the Courts. Thus, the Registrar General of the Madras High Court is
directed to issue appropriate instructions to the Registry to collect all those
writ petitions, where large scale State and Central Revenues are involved
and list those matters, without causing any undue delay by obtaining
necessary orders from the Hon'ble The Chief Justice, if necessary by
constituting Special Benches for speedy disposal of those cases..
12. With the abovesaid directions, the writ petition stands
disposed of. However, there shall be no order as to costs. Consequently, the
connected miscellaneous petition is closed.
13. Copy of this order to be communicated to the Registrar-
General, High Court, Madras for necessary actions.
1.The Secretary to Government,
State of Tamil Nadu,
Represented by the Secretary to Government,
Ministry of Mines,
3.The Commissioner of Geology and Mining,