1. This matter is taken up through hybrid mode.
2. Heard learned counsel for the Petitioner and learned
counsel for the State.
3. The grievance of the Petitioner, insofar as payment
of arrears is concerned, has already been redressed
but the interest component of the amount which has
been held up for the last twenty-one years, is required
to be paid.
WPC (OA) No.1553 of 2017            Page 1 of 8
4. Learned Counsel for the Petitioner submitted that
the Petitioner joined service as the Headmaster in
Panchayat High School, Chandanbhati, in the district
of Bolangir which was a non-Government aided
educational institution. However, the school was taken
over by the Government with effect from 07.06.1994
and, therefore, the       Petitioner was   rendering his
services     as   a     Government    servant     till  his
superannuation on 28.02.2001.
5. Further, the learned counsel for the Petitioner also
submitted that the Petitioner, being a 74-year-old man,
was made to run from pillar to post to get his
legitimate dues but owing to administrative latches,
the same couldn’t materialize. Therefore, the redressal
of grievance of the Petitioner would remain incomplete
if he were to be denied of the interest component that
is payable to him as a result of delay.
6. Having heard learned counsel for the respective
parties, the court is of the opinion that as there was a
delay in the payment of arrears of salary for which the
Petitioner is not at all responsible, he is entitled to the
interest on the delayed payment. Because of the
administrative latches, there was a delay in the
payment of arrears of salary and/or settling the dues
and hence, the retired employee should not be made to
suffer for no fault of his.
WPC (OA) No.1553 of 2017             Page 2 of 8
7. It is well-settled that salaries and pensions are due
as a matter of right to employees, and, as the case
maybe, to former employees who have served the State.
Since,     the     petitioner  rendered    his   services  till
superannuation          as   a   government     servant,  his
entitlement to the payment of salary is intrinsic to the
right to life under Article 21 and to right to property
which      is    recognized    by   Article   300A     of the
8. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of State of
Andhra Pradesh & Anr v. Smt. Dinavahi Lakshmi
Kameswari1, observed that:
“The direction for the payment of the
deferred portions of the salaries and
pensions is unexceptionable. Salaries are
due to the employees of the State for
services rendered. Salaries in other words
constitute the rightful entitlement of the
employees and are payable in accordance
with law. Likewise, it is well settled that
the payment of pension is for years of past
service rendered by the pensioners to the
State. Pensions are hence a matter of a
rightful entitlement recognised by the
applicable rules and regulations which
govern the service of the employees of the
9. There is no dispute about the delayed payment as it
was withheld for insufficient reasons. There is no
material justification to take such time for fixing
arrears of the petitioner. On this undisputed position,
WPC (OA) No.1553 of 2017                  Page 3 of 8
the court is not inclined to accept the submissions of
the Opposite Party regarding non-payment of interest
without         any      specific   provisions  in   the   service
conditions. The late decision taken by the opposite
party is attributable to administrative latches across
different levels and the same cannot be the reason to
withheld the payment to the employees who admittedly
worked at the relevant time. The fact remains that
there was delay in making payment of arrears of salary
and other benefits with or without intention, is
immaterial. In view of the admitted position on record
that the payment was not made on due dates
according to service conditions, there is no disputed
question of facts involved.
10. Moreover, the employees cannot be allowed to
suffer because of inaction on the part of the employer
for no fault of the employees. The employee is definitely
entitled to get the payment as per the service
conditions on due dates and/or in a given case within
reasonable time. The employees, had the payment
received within time and/or on due dates, could have
utilised the same for various purposes.
11. Highlighting the need for consideration on grounds
of equity in cases of deferred payments, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court, in the case of Union of India & Ors
v. Dr. J.K Goel2, observed that:
WPC (OA) No.1553 of 2017                     Page 4 of 8
“Before any interest can be granted on
equitable considerations, it is necessary
that the facts of the case should be
examined to ascertian whether there are
any special equties which would justify
the grant of such interest although there is
no provision in law for such grant.”
12. Similarly, in the case of D.D. Tewari vs. Uttar
Haryana Bulivitran Nigam Limited and others3, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court held that:
“…...denial of interest from the date of
entitlement till the date of actual
disbursement would take away the
valuable rights of the retired government
servant. It was reiterated in that decision
that pension and gratuity are not bounty to
be distributed by Government to its
employees on their retirement, but are
valuable rights and property in its hands
and any culpable delay in settlement and
disbursement thereof is to be visited with
penalty of payment of interest.”
13. In S.K. Dua v. State of Haryana4, the appellant
therein was served with three charge sheets/show
cause notices in June 1998, few days before his
retirement. However, he retired on 30.06.1998 on
reaching the age of superannuation. He was paid
provisional pension, but other retiral benefits were not
given to him, which included commuted value of
pension, leave encashment, gratuity, etc. They were
withheld      till   the finalisation of  the   disciplinary
WPC (OA) No.1553 of 2017                Page 5 of 8
proceedings. While answering the issue as to whether
the appellant therein was entitled to interest on
delayed payment of retiral benefits, in the absence of
any statutory rules/administrative instructions or
guidelines, the Supreme Court held as follows:
“In the circumstances, prima facie, we are
of the view that the grievance voiced by the
appellant appears to be well founded that
he would be entitled to interest on such
benefits. If there are statutory rules
occupying the field, the appellant could
claim payment of interest relying on such
rules.    If    there    are    administrative
instructions, guidelines or norms prescribed
for the purpose, the appellant may claim
benefit of interest on that basis. But even in
the     absence       of   statutory     rules,
administrative instructions or guidelines, an
employee can claim interest under Part III of
the Constitution relying on Articles 14, 19
and 21 of the Constitution. The submission
of the learned counsel for the appellant,
that retiral benefits are not in the nature of
"bounty" is, in our opinion, well founded
and needs no authority in support thereof.
In that view of the matter, in our considered
opinion, the High Court was not right in
dismissing the petition in limine even
without issuing notice to the respondents."
14. Applying the ratio laid down by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the above cases to the facts of this
case, there is a delay of about 21 years in settling the
salary arrears payable to the petitioner. It is contended
by    the    petitioner     that   even    after    multiple
representations to the opposite party, his claim was
WPC (OA) No.1553 of 2017                Page 6 of 8
not entertained, owing to the callous attitude of the
opposite party. Therefore, this Court is of the view that
the delay on the part of the opposite party in settling
the arrears of salary payable to the petitioner for about
21 years purportedly due to administrative latches
cannot be accepted.
15. The present case is a clear example of inexcusable
departmental delay. Even if it is assumed that the
representations made by the petitioner were actively
catered to, this cannot be an excuse for lethargy of the
department because rules/instructions provide for
initiation of process much before retirement. The
exercise which was to be completed much before
retirement was in fact started long after petitioner's
retirement. It is imperative that an interest @ 6% per
annum is to be made bearing in mind the decision of
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of State of
Andhra Pradesh & Anr v. Smt. Dinavahi Lakshmi
16.       Accordingly, insofar as the   interest rate is
concerned, this Court is of the view that the relief
sought at the rate of 18% per annum be suitably
scaled down. This Court, accordingly, directs the State
to pay simple interest computed at the rate of 6% per
annum on account of deferred salaries within a period
of 30 days from today.
WPC (OA) No.1553 of 2017             Page 7 of 8
17.     Having      considered   the  matter   in   aforesaid
perspective        and    guided by  the   precedents   cited
hereinabove, this Court allows the petition.
18. The Writ Petition is, accordingly, disposed of in
terms of the above directions. There shall be no order
as to costs.
Dated the 27th of May, 2022/B. Jhankar
WPC (OA) No.1553 of 2017                 Page 8 of 8