The four appellants stand convicted under Sections 395 and
397,              IPC  having  been  sentenced     to  seven  years  with  a  default
stipulation.
A dacoity took place on 28.08.1992 at about 7.30 p.m. in the
house              of  the  informant  Hukumchand.      Seven  accused  intruded  and
looted cash and jewelry while the family was watching television
along with a neighbour Rajendra, and fled away. The FIR was lodged
by Hukumchand at 8.30 p.m.                 At about 10.30 p.m. in the night, the
appellants are stated to have been apprehended at the police check
post travelling in a Maruti van. They are stated to have confessed
having committed dacoity at the house of Hukumchand and to have
looted cash and jewelry which were recovered from them along with
weapons on their person. During the pendency of the trial the
informant Hukumchand and Rajendra have been deceased. The primary
witnesses are PW-1, the wife of Hukumchand and PW-2 the son of
Hukumchand who was about 13 years of age at the time of occurrence.
The appellants are stated to have been identified in a test
identification   parade   (TIP)    and    on   the   basis  of   which   their
conviction has followed. The recovery not having been proved as the
original seizure memo was never produced, they have been acquitted
of the charge under Section 412, IPC. The appellants have also been
acquitted of the charge under the Arms Act. The acquittals have
attained finality as it was not questioned by any.
Ms. Vibha Datta Makhija, learned Senior Counsel appearing for
one of the appellants, submitted that conviction based on the TIP
is unsustainable as no TIP has been proved to have been held in
accordance with law. Repeated TIPs have been held only after which
the appellants are stated to have been identified. PW-1 did not
identify any of the appellants. PW-2 is stated to have identified
the appellants in the third or fourth round. Repeated TIP parades
nullify  the   whole    identification.        The   appellants    have   been
acquitted of the charge under Section 412 IPC. The TIP being only
corroborative  evidence,    in   absence     of  any   substantive   evidence
connecting them to the crime, the conviction is not sustainable.
One other accused has been acquitted by the Trial Court itself for
lack of identification. Two others who were tried separately have
also been acquitted.
Mr.  D.S.    Matya,   learned       counsel    for  other    appellants,
submitted that in the trial of two acquitted accused PW-2 turned
hostile  denying   identification       of   the   recovered   items   or  the
accused in the TIP, stating that his signature was obtained on it
by the police. It was also contended that some of the accused were
shown to the witnesses even before the TIP thus vitiating the same.
Dr. Rajiv Nanda, learned counsel for the State relied on the
TIP to sustain the conviction. PW-2 identified the appellants in
the TIP as also in the dock. Acknowledging that acquittal under
Section 412 IPC has not been questioned, it was submitted that it
would  not   be  very   relevant     once    the  identification     of  the
appellants stood established in the TIP which was held properly
after covering the face of the accused relying on the evidence of
the police officer PW-3 as also certain observations in the Trial
Court judgment.
We have considered the submissions on behalf of the parties.
The FIR was registered against unknown persons. The case of the
prosecution   solely  rests    on    identification     in   the   TIP.  The
acquittal of the appellants under Section 412, IPC and Arms Act has
attained  finality.  No  doubt    the   test   identification    parade  was
conducted within about a month of the occurrence. It has also to be
kept in mind that PW-2 was a minor aged about 13 years at the time
of occurrence.
A test identification parade under Section 9 of the Evidence
Act is not substantive evidence in a criminal prosecution but is
only  corroborative   evidence.     The     purpose  of    holding   a  test
identification parade during the stage of investigation is only to
ensure that the investigating agency prima facie was proceeding in
the right direction where the accused may be unknown or there was a
fleeting glance of the accused. Mere identification in the test
identification parade therefore cannot form the substantive basis
for  conviction   unless   there     are   other    facts  and   circumstances
corroborating the identification.
But more important than that, the test identification parade
being  a  part   of   the investigation,        has   to  be   proved  by  the
prosecution as having been held in accordance with law. The onus
lies on the prosecution to establish that the TIP was held in
accordance with law. It is only after the prosecution prima facie
establishes    a  valid   TIP    having     been    held,   the   question  of
considering any objection to the same arises. If the prosecution
has failed to establish that a TIP was properly held by examining
the witnesses to the same, there is nothing for the accused to
disprove. In the present case, a Magistrate is stated to have
conducted   the  TIP.   The   Magistrate       has   not  been   examined.  No
explanation is forthcoming why the Magistrate was not examined.
The only evidence available is that of PW-4 the Station House
Officer that during the investigation the TIP was held in the
District Jail, Nainital and he identifies the proceedings in the
Court.  The   identification    of    the    proceedings    is  irrelevant  as
obviously he could not have been present during the TIP. The TIP, a
part of the investigation, therefore cannot be said to have been
proved much less that it was held in accordance with the law.
Secondly there cannot be repeated TIPs till such time that the
prosecution   is   successful     in    obtaining     identification   of  the
We find it extremely disturbing that both the Trial Court and
the High Court did not go into this aspect at all to satisfy
themselves if any TIP had been proved to have been held at all and
that too in accordance with the law.
If that were not enough, in the TIP, PW-1 who is the mother of
PW-2, and both of them are stated to have been present in the house
when  the  occurrence  took  place,     did   not  identify any  of  the
appellants.    What we have before us is identification by a minor
boy and that too in the 3rd and 4th rounds insofar as the present
appellants are concerned.     In the nature of the TIP held it is
completely non est in the law and the benefit has to go to the
We regret to note that even the original seizure memo was not
produced by the prosecution which speaks volumes about the nature
of investigation done by the police.       We cannot help but notice the
very casual manner in which the police conducted the investigation
by TIP supported by a claim of recovery to link the two events but
failed miserably to establish either.
On the same set of evidence two of the accused, one of whom
was also identified in the 4th round and in the 2nd round while the
other was never identified have been acquitted in separate trials.
PW-2 turned hostile in that trial denying identification of the
accused also of the recovered goods.
There is a marked similarity on facts in the present case with
Iqbal and Another vs. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2015) 6 SCC 623.
Doubting the identification in the TIP, coupled with failure to
produce corroborative substantive evidence like recovery of the
stolen  goods  or  the  weapons,     the   conviction   was held  to  be
In the facts and circumstances of the case, we are unable to
uphold the conviction of the appellants.    The appeals are allowed
and the appellants are directed to be released forthwith unless
wanted in any other case.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand(s) disposed of.
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.)    No(s).   4399/2019
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 13-02-2019
in CRLA No. 62/2003 passed by the High Court of Uttarakhand at
Date : 11-08-2021 These matters were called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
The appeals are allowed in terms of signed order.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand(s) disposed of.
(Signed order is placed on the file)