Mr.A.R. Patil, AGP for the Respondent No.1.
Mr.Surel Shah i/b MDP Partners for Respondent No.2.
Mr.Hare Krishna Mishra for Respondent Nos.3 and 4.
.             By this Application, purportedly filed, under Article
227 of the Constitution of India, the Applicant-husband is
seeking transfer of D.V. case No.6 of 2020 from the file of the
learned 40th Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate at
Girgaon, Mumbai to the Family Court at Bandra where Petition
No.A-156 of 2021 filed by the Applicant, for dissolution of
marriage and for custody of the children is pending.
2.            The brief facts necessary for the disposal of the
Application may be stated thus.
3.             The Applicant married with the Respondent No.2 on
12 February 2011. They were blessed with twins on 5 September
2014. However, the marriage thereafter ran into rough weather
and as a result thereof, the parties are litigating before different
4.             On 13 February 2020 the Respondent No.1-wife
filed a complaint under Section 12, 18, 19, 20, 22 and 23 of the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act, 2015 (‘the act
of 2005’ for short) against the Applicant and the Respondent
Nos.3 and 4 who are the parents of the applicant and which is
registered as D.V. Case No.6 of 2020 (D.V. case for short). That
case is pending before the learned Additional Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate at Girgaon, Mumbai. Indisputably the applicant has
filed an application under Section 21 of the said act, in those
proceedings, seeking visitation rights which application is said to
be pending.
5.             The Respondent Nos.3 and 4 have also filed an
application under the Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and
Senior Citizens Act, 2007 against their daughter-in-law i.e.
6.             On 17 January 2021 the applicant filed Petition
No.A-156 of 2021 against the Respondent No.2 for dissolution
of marriage, inter alia on the ground of cruelty and for custody of
the children. That Petition is pending before the Family Court at
7.                It may be mentioned that a protection order was
passed by the Additional Chief learned Metropolitan Magistrate
in the D.V. case in favour of the respondent No.2 on 29 February
2020. The respondent No.2 has filed an application claiming
breach of the said order against the applicant and the Respondent
Nos.3          and   4  which   is registered  as   Summons         Case
No.869/SS/2020, which is pending before the learned
Metropolitan Magistrate at Girgaon, Mumbai. According to the
Respondent No.2 the learned Additional Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate has taken cognizance of the said case on 24 November
2020 and verification of the Respondent No.2 was recorded
under Section 200 of Criminal Procedure Code on 13 August
2021. It is a matter of record that subsequently the learned
Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate has passed an order,
issuing process against the Petitioner and the Respondent No.3
under Section 31 of the Act of 2005 on 30 September 2021.
8.                For the limited purpose of deciding the present
application for transfer, it is not necessary to set out the other
cases, where the parties are litigating against each other.
9.            According to the applicant, he is required to
prosecute the Petition for dissolution of marriage before the
Family Court and the D.V. case before the learned Additional
Chief Metropolitan Magistrate which is causing inconvenience
and prejudice. It is submitted that both these cases essentially
arise out of the matrimonial discord, between the parties and raise
similar/connected issues of law and fact.           It is therefore,
contended that for the purposes of convenience of the trial and to
avoid any conflicting decisions, it is necessary to transfer the D.V.
case to the Family Court.
10.           The Respondent No.2 has filed a detailed reply and
has resisted the application on various grounds.
11.           It is contented that this Court in exercise of the
supervisory jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of
India, cannot direct such transfer from the file of the
Metropolitan Magistrate to the Family Court. It is contended
that apart from the D.V. case there is also a summons case
No.869/SS/20 initiated by the Respondent No.2 seeking action
against the applicant and the Respondent Nos.2 and 3 for breach
of the protection order. It is submitted that these proceedings
under Section 31 of the Act of 2005 are clearly of a
Criminal/penal nature, which cannot be transferred to or
entertained by the Family Court.         It is contended that the
marriage petition is only between the applicant and the
Respondent No.2 and the Respondent Nos.3 and 4 are not
parties before the Family Court. It is contended that the D.V. case
and the summons case seeking action for breach of the protection
order have to be tried together and therefore, the D.V. case cannot
be transferred, once the learned Additional Chief Metrotpolitian
Magistrate has taken cognizance and issued process in the
Summons case.
12.             I have heard Ms.Amin, the learned counsel for the
applicant and Mr.Shah, the learned counsel for the Respondent
No.2. With the assistance of the learned counsel for the parties, I
have gone through the record.
13.             The learned counsel for the applicant has submitted
that the dispute is essentially arising out of the matrimonial
discord and looking to the issues involved in both cases, it is
necessary that the D.V. case is transferred to the Family Court. It
is submitted that otherwise it would result into conflicting
14.             On behalf of the applicant reliance is placed on the
decision of Supreme Court in Kunapareddy V/s. Kunapareddy
Chakrabarty and Ors.5, Mr.Rushabh H. Zaveri and Anr. V/s.
Ashmi R. Zaveri and Anr.6, Minoti Subhash Anand V/s. Subhash
Manoharlal Anand7 and Pramodini Vijay Fernandes V/s. Vijay
15.             It is submitted that this Court in several cases has
directed such transfer and the contention raised about the
jurisdiction and powers of this Court to direct such transfer and
the jurisdiction of the Family Court to entertain the D.V. case has
been considered by this Court and cannot be revisited.
16.             The learned counsel for the Respondent No.2, has
strenuously urged that this Court in exercise of the supervisory
jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India,
cannot direct such transfer. It is submitted that under Article 227
of the Constitution of India this Court exercises supervisory
jurisdiction over the Courts and Tribunals subordinate to it,
which jurisdiction is aimed at ensuring that the Courts and
3  Misc. Civil Application 47 of 2020 Decided on 14.12.2020
Tribunals subordinate to this Court, act within the bounds of
their authority. It is submitted that there is no order passed by
such Court which is subject matter of challenge in this Petition,
in order to exercise jurisdiction under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India. In short according to the learned counsel,
the power of Superintendence under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India, does not take into its ambit, the power to
direct transfer. It is submitted that the Court of the Metropolitan
Magistrate may be administratively subordinate, however, it is not
a Court subordinate to the High Court even under Section 24 of
the Code of Civil Procedure. It is contended that the D.V. case is
not only between the Petitioner and the Respondent No.2 but
also against the Respondent Nos.3 and 4 who are not parties in
the matrimonial petition filed by the Petitioner. It is submitted
that there is also a summons case seeking action for breach of the
protection order in which the Additional Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate has taken cognizance and issued process on 30
September 2021 and the D.V. case has to be tried with the
summons case.
17.            On behalf of the Respondent No.2 reliance is placed
on the decision of the Supreme Court in Manmohan Attavar V/
s. Neelam Manmohan Attavar9, State of West Bengal and Others
V/s. Samar Kumar Sarkar10 and the decision of this Court in
18.            It is submitted that such transfer if ordered would also
result into a loss of Appellate remedy which is not permissible for
which reliance is placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in
Thakur Jugal Kishore Sinha v/s. Sitamarhi Central Co.Op. Bank
19.            I have given my anxious consideration to the rival
circumstances and the submissions made. It is now well settled
that the proceedings under the Domestic Violence Act are
predominantly of a civil nature. In the case of Kunapareddy
(Supra), the issue before the Supreme Court was whether
amendment of the complaint can be permitted. The Supreme
Court inter alia held that most of the reliefs that can be granted
by the final order, or by an interim order, under the said Act of
2005 are of civil nature and therefore, the amendment was rightly
allowed by the Trial Court which was confirmed by the High
Court. Thus merely because the Act requires the complaint to be
tried by a Metropolitan or a Judicial Magistrate, does not make
any difference and the proceedings do not cease to be civil in
20.           The next issue is whether the Family Court can
entertain a complaint under the Act of 2005. This issue also may
not detain me long, as it is covered by multiple decisions of the
learned Single Judge of this Court in the case of Minoti Subhash
Mr.Rushabh H. Zaveri and Anr. V/s. Ashmi R. Zaveri and Anr. 13
The learned counsel for the Petitioner pointed out that the
decision of this Court in Hitesh Mehta has attained finality, as the
Special Leave Petition against the same has been dismissed, by the
Supreme Court on 25 March 2021.
21.           It hardly needs to be stated that I am bound by the
said decisions of the coordinate Bench of this Court . Thus, it is
not possible to revisit the said contention and issue about the
jurisdiction of the Family Court to entertain an application to
grant relief which the Magistrate can grant under section 18 to 22
of the Act of 2005.           This Court in the case of Hitesh
Prakashmalji Mehta has noticed that there is consistent view
taken by this Court that Section 7(1)(b) of the Family Courts Act
read with Section 26 of the Act of 2005 confers jurisdiction and
powers on the Family Court to entertain application seeking
reliefs under the provisions of Section 18 to 22 of the Act of
22.           The contention that under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India this Court cannot direct transfer also to my
mind cannot be accepted. It is now well settled under the Article
227 of the Constitution of India this Court exercises supervisory
jurisdiction both judicial as well as administrative over the Courts
and Tribunals subordinate to this Court. That such a power to
transfer can also be traced to Section 24 of the C.P.C.              For
instance in Sanket Khanolkar, this Court had directed such
transfer, in an application under Section 24 of the C.P.C., while in
Minoti Anand, it was an application under Section 24 of the
C.P.C. along with Article 227 of the Constitution of India. In my
considered view the lable under which the Petition is filed may
not be decisive and the question would be one of the existence of
the jurisdiction and power to direct transfer. In several decisions
which have been noted above, such transfer has been directed by
the learned Single Judge even under Section 24 of the Code of
Civil Procedure.     At the cost of repetition it is necessary to
emphasize that I am bound by these decisions of the coordinate
23.           Coming to the contention based on the pendency of
the summons case, the Petitioner has not sought the transfer of
the said case to the Family Court. Therefore strictly speaking the
said issue does not arise for consideration. However, according to
the Respondent No.2 it is necessary that the summons case is
tried with the complaint case under the Act of 2005 which
contention cannot be accepted, for the reason that the only
question in the said summons case is whether there is a breach of
the protection order dated 29 February 2020 by the Petitioner
and the Respondent Nos.3 and 4.          Except this there is no
adjudication of any other dispute in the said case arising out of
the matrimonial discord between the parties.
24.          A brief reference may now be made to the decisions
on which reliance is placed on behalf of the respondent No.2. In
Manmohan Attavar the Respondent was claiming to be the wife
of the Appellant and had initiated proceedings under Section 12
of the Act of 2005 for various reliefs. At the request of the
Respondent the proceedings were transferred from the file of the
Metropolitan Magistrate 6th Court to Court of Metropolitan
Magistrate-II at Bengaluru. The application was finally dismissed
by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate. The Respondent-Lady
challenged the same in an appeal under Section 29 of the Act
before the learned Sessions Judge. The Respondent again sought
transfer of the said Appeal which was transferred to another
Court. It appears that the Respondent-lady feeling aggrieved by
the conduct of the proceedings during the hearing of the Interim
Application submitted a complaint to the High Court of
Karnataka. In terms of the administrative order of the Registrar
General the interim application was directed to be decided in a
time bound manner. The application was finally rejected as not
maintainable. The application filed by Respondent-lady for
additional evidence also was dismissed.           It is in these
circumstances that the respondent-lady filed a Writ Petition
before the High Court for transfer of Criminal Appeal No.1070
of 2015 to the High Court on the ground that the order rejecting
the Application for additional evidence “did not inspire faith”.
The learned Single Judge directed transfer of the Appeal to the
High Court, which order was subject matter of challenge before
the Supreme Court. It is in these peculiar circumstances, that the
Supreme Court, held that the Appeal could not have been
transferred by the High Court to itself resulting into a loss of
remedy. In my humble view the facts in the said case are clearly
25.           In Samar Kumar Sarkar the High Court, in exercise
of the jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India
had withdrawn a Petition from the Administrative Tribunal to
itself, which was found to be impermissible.
26.          In Thakur Jugal Kishor Singh the issue was whether
the Assistant Registrar of Co-operative Societies, was a ‘Court’
within the meaning of the contempt of Courts Act 1995 and even
if it was a Court whether it was a Court subordinate to the Patna
High Court. The third issue was pertaining to the factual dispute
in that case. It can thus be seen that the case clearly turned on its
own facts.
27.             In Sandip Marinmoy Chakrabarty the issue which
fell for determination before the Division Bench was whether an
Appeal under Section 19(1) of the Family Courts Act, 1984, is
maintainable also in respect of reliefs granted by the Family Court
under the provisions of the Domestic Violence Act along with
reliefs granted in the divorce proceedings under the Special
The Division Bench held that since the reliefs granted
by the Family Court in the application filed by the respondent
under the provisions of the Domestic Violence Act were of civil
nature the appeal was maintainable.
It is difficult to see as to how the said judgment can
come to the aid of the Respondent No.2. Quite to the contrary,
the remedy of an appeal subsists.
28.             Insofar as the loss of a forum of appeal is concerned,
this Court has refused to accept a similar contention in the case of
Santosh Mulik in which this Court has observed as under:-
Learned Counsel for the Respondent further
submits that transfer of the Criminal proceeding
curtails the right of the Respondent-wife to file an
appeal, which she ordinarily would have had if the
proceeding were to be decided by the criminal
court. We are concerned in the present case
essentially with the justice of the case in having the
two matters heard together. On the one hand, we
have a situation where two different courts would
be required effectively to consider the same set of
circumstances and could have arrived at two
different conclusions or, even possibly, conflicting
conclusions, and on the other hand, if this
situation were to be avoided, and it appears to be
imperative that it be avoided, one particular stage
of challenge would be missed. In any event, since
from the domestic violence proceeding that may
be heard along with the matrimonial proceeding
before the Family Court, an appeal would lie to
this court, and in that sense, no party can be said
to be loosing his/her right of appeal, what is lost is
a further right of revision. That, however, is no
ground to deny transfer of proceedings on the
basis of the principle of justice noted above.
I am in respectful agreement with the view as taken.
29.             I have considered the nature of the dispute and the
grounds in both matrimonial Petition and the proceedings under
the Act of 2005. Essentially the dissolution of marriage is sought
by the Petitioner on the ground that he has been treated with
cruelty by the Respondent No.2. In the DVA proceedings the
Respondent No.2 is claiming that she has been subjected to
Domestic Violence arising out of the matrimonial relationship. In
my considered view common and connected questions would
arise in both these petitions and therefore it would be appropriate
if the proceedings pending before the Metropolitan Magistrate
are transferred to the Family Court.                  The application is
accordingly allowed. The D. V. Case No.6/2020 is withdrawn
from the file of the learned 40th Additional Chief Metropolitan
Magistrate at Girgaon, Mumbai and is transferred to the Family
Court at Bandra, Mumbai, for disposal according to law.
In the circumstances, there shall be no order as to
30.          At this stage, the learned counsel for the Respondent
No.2 sought stay of this order in order to enable the Respondent
No.2 to decide about further course of action.
31.          The prayer is opposed on behalf of the Applicant.
32.          However, looking to the circumstances and the nature
of the dispute, there shall be stay of the present order for a period
of three weeks from today. This shall be subject to the statement
made on behalf of the Respondent No.2 that she will seek
adjournment of the D. V. case before learned Magistrate. If such
adjournment is sought, the learned Magistrate shall adjourn the
D. V. case beyond three weeks.