Dated this the 14th          day of March, 2023
The petitioner is the first accused in Crime
No.1568       of    2022    of  Thrissur     Town  East  Police
Station, registered for offences punishable under
Sections 22(c) and 29 of the Narcotic Drugs and
prosecution         allegation     is   that,   on  10.08.2022,
based on the secret information that                 contraband
articles procured from other States are kept for
retail      sale,      the   Sub   Inspector    of  Police  and
party raided the suspected location near to the
guardroom of the KSRTC bus stand, Thrissur. Upon
such      raid,      97    grams    of   Methamphetamine    was
recovered         and     the    accused     arrested.   During
interrogation,           the   accused     revealed   that  the
contraband articles were received from New Delhi
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
through DTDC courier. Thereupon, the DTDC Hub at
Ernakulam          was   inspected      and    400   grams   of
Methamphetamine was seized. As the investigation
could not be completed within the 180 days of
petitioner's arrest,            the Public Prosecutor filed
Annexure 2 petition under Section 36A(4) of the
NDPS Act, seeking extension of the period for
completing the investigation by two months. By
Annexure 3 order dated 09.02.2023, the Sessions
Court allowed the petition and extended the time
for completing the investigation by two months.
This Crl.M.C is filed seeking to quash Annexure 3
order       and     for   a    direction    to    release   the
petitioner on statutory bail.
2.    Learned      Counsel      for    the    petitioner
assailed        Annexure     3   on   three    grounds;     (i)
Annexure         2    petition     does    not    satisfy   the
requirements of Section 36A(4),               (ii) The Public
Prosecutor          acted   as   a    mere   post   office   by
submitting           the     report      prepared      by   the
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
investigating officer after converting it as a
petition under Section 36A(4). (iii) The court
below committed gross illegality in mechanically
ordering        extension      of     period    for   completing
investigation, in spite of the prosecution having
failed to indicate the progress of investigation
and to provide specific reasons for detaining the
accused beyond the period of 180 days.
3.    In      elaboration        of   the    contention,
reference was made to the statements in Annexure
2, it is contended that, rather than indicating
the      progress       of   investigation,       the   petition
reveals         the     failure    of   investigation.    It  is
argued that , failure of the investigating agency
to identify the source of contraband articles and
to     find     out     the   whereabouts      of   an   African
citizen,       who     is    alleged      to  be  the   kingpin,
cannot result in the petitioner's valuable right
to liberty being curtailed.               Moreover, instead of
specifying          the     reason      for    continuing    the
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
petitioner's detention beyond 180 days, only a
general        statement      that   trade   of   contraband
articles        may     harm  normal   well  being   of  the
society and          release of the accused on completion
of statutory remand period will adversely affect
the progress of investigation, is made. In order
to buttress the challenge against the impugned
order,      reliance      is  placed   on  the  decision  in
Ubaid A.M v State of Kerala               [2022 SCC OnLine
4.    Learned       Public    Prosecutor    submitted
that, Annexure 2 read as a whole,            shows that the
requirements under 36A(4) are satisfactorily met.
The attempt of the Counsel for the petitioner is
to pick stray sentences from Annexure 2 and             make
it appear that the progress of investigation is
not being indicated and reasons for continuing
the detention, not specifically stated.
5.    In order to consider whether Annexure 2
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
satisfies the requirements of Section 36A(4), it
is also essential to understand the scheme of
Section 167 Cr.P.C, the relevant portion of which
is extracted below;
“167.    Procedure     when    investigation     cannot  be
completed in twenty-four hours.—
(1)    Whenever   any    person    is  arrested  and
detained in custody, and it appears that the
investigation       cannot   be    completed    within  the
period of twenty-four hours fixed by section 57,
and there are grounds for believing that the
accusation or information is well founded, the
officer in charge of the police station or the
police officer making the investigation, if he
is not below the rank of sub-inspector, shall
forthwith       transmit   to     the    nearest   Judicial
Magistrate a copy of the entries in the diary
hereinafter prescribed relating to the case, and
shall at the same time forward the accused to
such Magistrate.
(2)    The   Magistrate      to   whom   an  accused
person     is   forwarded    under     this   section  may,
whether he has or has not jurisdiction to try
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
the    case,    from    time   to  time,    authorise   the
detention of the accused in such custody as such
Magistrate thinks fit, for a term not exceeding
fifteen days in the whole; and if he has no
jurisdiction to try the case or commit it for
trial,       and      considers      further      detention
unnecessary,      he    may  order   the   accused   to  be
forwarded       to      a    Magistrate      having    such
jurisdiction: Provided that—          (a) the Magistrate
may    authorise     the    detention    of   the   accused
person, otherwise than in custody of the police,
beyond the period of fifteen days, if he is
satisfied that adequate grounds exist for doing
so,    but    no    Magistrate    shall    authorise    the
detention of the accused person in custody under
this paragraph for a total period exceeding—
(i) ninety days, where the investigation
relates     to   an   offence   punishable     with  death,
imprisonment for life or imprisonment for a term
of not less than ten years;
(ii) sixty      days,   where   the   investigation
relates to any other offence, and, on the expiry
of the said period of ninety days, or sixty
days, as the case may be, the accused person
shall be released on bail if he is prepared to
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
and does furnish bail, and every person released
on bail under this sub-section shall be deemed
to    be   so   released   under    the  provisions  of
Chapter XXXIII for the purposes of that Chapter;
(b) no Magistrate shall authorise detention
of the accused in custody of the police under
this    section    unless   the   accused  is  produced
before him in person for the first time and
subsequently every time till the accused remains
in the custody of the police, but the Magistrate
may extend further detention in judicial custody
on production of the accused either in person or
through the medium of electronic video linkage;
(c) no Magistrate of the second class, not
specially empowered in this behalf by the High
Court, shall authorise detention in the custody
of the police.
Explanation I.—For the avoidance of doubts, it
is    hereby    declared  that,    notwithstanding  the
expiry of the period specified in paragraph (a),
the accused shall be detained in custody so long
as he does not furnish bail.
Explanation II.—If any question arises whether
an    accused     person  was    produced   before  the
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
Magistrate      as  required     under   clause   (b),    the
production of the accused person may be proved
by    his    signature     on   the    order   authorising
detention      or  by   the    order   certified     by   the
Magistrate      as   to   production     of   the   accused
person through the medium of electronic video
linkage, as the case may be.
Provided    further     that   in   case   of    woman
under eighteen years of age, the detention shall
be authorised to be in the custody of a remand
home or recognised social institution.”
6.    A close reading of the provision shows
that      the      thrust      is     on    ensuring        that     the
investigation           is    completed       at    the      earliest.
Ideally,       the    investigation         should    be     completed
within the first 24 hours fixed by Section 57 of
Cr.P.C.       If    the   investigation         is   not    completed
within      24    hours,     the    officer      concerned       should
transmit the entries in the diary relating to the
case       to     the     jurisdictional          Magistrate         and
simultaneously           forward        the    accused        to    such
Magistrate.          Thereupon,         the    Magistrate        should
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
consider        the     materials    available  and   decide
whether the accused should be remanded to custody
or not. If the Magistrate decides to remand the
accused, that can only be for a maximum period of
15 days at a stretch. As per Sub-section (2) of
167, the period of custody, even if extended from
time to time, cannot exceed 60 days or 90 days as
the case may be. On expiry of the period of 60 or
90 days, the accused shall be released on bail,
if the investigation is not completed and              final
report submitted in court by then.
7.    As per Section 36A(c) of the NDPS Act,
the Special Court can exercise the same power
which a Magistrate having jurisdiction to try a
case exercises under Section 167 of the Code. By
virtue       of    sub-section     4  of  Section   36A,  in
respect of persons accused of offences punishable
under      Sections       19,  24,   or  27A,  or   offences
involving commercial quantity, the reference in
sub-section 2 of Section 167 shall be construed
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
as 180 days. Thus, the right to default bail of
an accused in custody for the offences mentioned
in       Section        36A(4)      would     arise     if   the
investigation is not concluded and final report
not filed within 180 days. Unlike the Code, which
does not contain a provision for extending the
statutory        time     limit    of  60   or   90   days,  the
proviso       to    Section    36A(4)    confers    the  Special
Court with the power to extend the period of 180
days up to one year. For granting such extension,
the       Public        Prosecutor      should      submit    an
application,             indicating      the     progress     of
investigation           and   specifying     the   reasons   for
seeking detention of the accused beyond 180 days.
8.    In this context, it is pertinent to note
the       distinction        between   the   terminology    used
while      setting      out   the   twin   requirements    under
Section 36A(4), based on which alone, the time
limit of 180 days for completing investigation
can be extended. For convenience, Section 36A(4)
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
“36A. Offences triable by Special Courts. -
In   respect    of    persons    accused    of  an
offence    punishable under       section 19    or
section 24 or section 27A or for offences
involving       commercial        quantity     the
references in sub-section (2) of section
167 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973    (2   of   1974)    thereof    to  “ninety
days”,     where     they     occur,   shall    be
construed     as reference      to “one   hundred
and eighty days:
Provided that, if it is not possible
to complete the investigation within the
said    period   of   one   hundred   and   eighty
days, the Special Court may extend the
said period up to one year on the report
of the Public Prosecutor indicating the
progress     of  the   investigation     and   the
specific reasons for the detention of the
accused    beyond    the   said   period   of  one
hundred and eighty days.”
9.    Even     on   a   plain      reading    of   the above
provision, it is clear that, while the Public
Prosecutor need only indicate about the progress
of investigation,              he should specifically state
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
the reason for extending the period of detention
of the accused beyond 180 days. Therefore, the
Public Prosecutor is not expected to state every
minute       details       of    the      investigation         for  the
purpose       of      satisfying          the     court      about   the
progress of investigation.                     In     the     case    at
hand,      the     progress       of     investigation         has  been
indicated in Annexure 2, as revealed from the
paragraphs extracted              below;
“The gist of the case is that on 10.08.2022,
based   on   the   secret    information    that   some
contraband articles are procured from other
states    and  kept    in   possession     for   retail
sale, team lead by Sub Inspector of Police,
Town East raided the suspected location which
were   near   to  the   Guard    Room   of  KSRTC   Bus
Stand,     Thrissur.      Upon     the     raid,    the
respondents      were     seized     with    97gm    of
Methamphetamine         and       subsequently       on
10.08.2022 itself, arrest were done by the
Police Force and both accused were remanded
to Judicial Custody.
During     interrogation      by   the   Police,
accused    have   informed     that   the   contraband
articles were received by them through DTDC
Courier from New Delhi, and based on their
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
deposition     DTDC    Hub    of   Kerala     State    at
Ernakulam were inspected by the Police Force
and seized 400gm of Methamphetamine and the
substance    were   produced     before   the    Hon'ble
Court.    Even   though   Police    Squad    have    done
subsequent     inspections     at   premises     of   the
Accused    and   in   New  Delhi    for   finding     the
source of illegal drugs, so far there is no
progress.    During    investigation     it    is   found
that   the   accused     has   collected     money    for
purchase of contraband articles through HDFC
Bank Account bearing SB A/c No 50100294125451
and   collected     amount     were   transferred      to
another HDFC Bank Account bearing SB A/C No
5020053506418     in   New   Delhi   and   drugs     were
collected and transported to Kerala State for
retail sale. The transactions were done by
using UPI Payments.
During investigation it is also revealed
that the source of contraband articles are
from an African Citizen and whereabouts of
the   individual     are   not    available      by   the
Police at the moment and investigation has to
be conducted about the African Citizen who is
k  dealer    of   the   articles    seized     from   the
accused.
As per the information collected during
investigation      it   is    found    that    all    the
illegal money dealings by the accused were
through various banks using UPI Payments like
Google    Pay,   PAYTM,    IMPS    etc   and    as   such
details of all such transactions are to be
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
collected    as    part   of   investigation     and  to
ascertain the source of money of the accused.
As the investigation of the case is not
completed,     and   nature     of   the  case   reveals
that such illegal trade of Government banned
contraband      articles     in     society   may   harm
normal well being of Society, releasing the
accused    on    completion      of   statutory   remand
period will adversely affect the progress of
investigation.
Based    of    the   contentions     laid   above,
humbly     request     to     kindly     consider    the
averments and pass orders to extend 2 months
time   for   filing     the    final    report   of  the
case.”
It is stated in the petition that inspection was
conducted at the premises of the accused in New
Delhi. It is also stated that the accused were
found to have conducted illegal money dealings
through       various        banks     using      UPI    payments   like
Google Pay, PAYTM, IMPS etc. The investigation
also      revealed         that     the      source     of    contraband
articles is an African citizen, whose whereabouts
are not available.
10. The         next       question         is      whether   the
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
specific reason for extending the detention of
the accused beyond 180 days is stated in Annexure
11. The said requirement is incorporated to
ensure       that     the   accused's     valuable   right  to
statutory        bail,    is   not    defeated   in  a  casual
manner. Here, the right to liberty of a citizen
which       is      sacrosanct     and    the   well   settled
principles that bail is a right and jail, an
exception comes into play.                  Unfortunately, in
Annexure 2, except for a general statement that,
releasing the accused will adversely affect the
progress of investigation, no               reason, let alone
in specific reason, is stated, so as to convince
the court about the necessity of continuing the
petitioner's            detention       beyond    180    days.
Surprisingly, this           crucial defect was not taken
note of by the             court below. Hence, I am left
with no alternative but to set aside Annexure 3.
It is seen that as per Annexure 4 order, the
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
petition        for     statutory     bail     filed   by   the
petitioner was dismissed for the reason that the
petition for extension of period for completing
investigation was allowed as per Annexure 3. As
Annexure 3 is quashed, Annexure 4 is also liable
to be set aside. I do so.
In the result, the Crl.M.C is allowed and
Annexure 3 order is quashed. Consequently, the
Sessions           Court    is   directed    to   release   the
petitioner         on   bail   subject    to   the  petitioner
satisfying the following conditions;
(i) The petitioner shall execute a bond for
Rs.1,00,000/-          (Rupees   one    lakh  only)   with  two
solvent       sureties     for    the   like   amount   to  the
satisfaction of the Sessions Judge.
(ii)     The     petitioner     shall    surrender   his
passport, if any, before the Sessions Court on
the date of execution of bond, or within a period
of three days thereafter, after getting exemption
in this regard from the Sessions Court.                  If the
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
petitioner does not have a                 passport, he shall
file     an    affidavit     stating      so  on  the   date  of
execution          of   bond    or      within    three    days'
(iii)        The petitioner shall co-operate with
the      investigation         and      shall    make    himself
available for interrogation by the investigating
officer as and when required.
(iv)         The petitioner shall not commit any
offence during currency of the bail.
Sitting       in  this   jurisdiction      I   have  come
across a few cases, where               laxity on the part of
the      investigating        officers       and    the   Public
Prosecutors         in  properly      framing   and   submitting
petitions under Section 36A(4) has resulted in
the     accused      being   benefited.      The  necessity   of
clearly       setting     out  the     twin   requirements   for
seeking extension of detention of accused beyond
180 days cannot be overlooked or dealt with in a
Crl.M.C.No.1904 of 2023
casual manner under any circumstance.          This is an
aspect that should engage the attention of the
Director General of Prosecution and the Director
General        of     Police.  Requisite   training   and
refresher courses on the above aspect ought to be
imparted to the investigating officers and the
Public Prosecutors. The Registry shall forward a
copy of this order to the Director General of
Prosecution and the Director General of Police
for appropriate action.