There can never be more graver and heinous crime than the
father committing rape on his own daughter. The protector then
becomes the predator. The father is the fortress and refuge of his
daughter. Charged of raping his own daughter under his refuge
and fortress is worst than the gamekeeper becoming a poacher
and treasury guard becoming a robber (State of Himachal
Pradesh v. Asha Ram : AIR 2006 SC 381).
2.    The prosecution case is that, the accused, the father
of the victim girl, repeatedly committed sexual assault and rape
on her, on many days during the period from June, 2012 to
January, 2013. The girl got pregnant. She delivered a male child
3.    The victim girl was aged 16 years when she became a
prey to her father. She was then studying in Standard IX.
4.    On 20.03.2013, the victim girl went to the police
station, along with her mother and reported the matter. PW13
Sub Inspector recorded Ext.P1 statement given by the victim girl.
On the basis of that statement, he registered Ext.P17 F.I.R.
PW15 Circle Inspector conducted the investigation of the case.
He filed final report against the accused for the offences
punishable under Sections 376 and 506 of the I.P.C and also
under Section 6 of the Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Act, 2012 (for short 'the Act').
5.    The trial court framed charge against the accused for
the offences punishable under Sections 376 and 506(ii) of the
I.P.C and also under Section 6 of the Act. The accused pleaded
not guilty and he claimed to be tried.
6.    The prosecution examined the witnesses PW1 to PW15
and marked Exts.P1 to P21 documents and MO1 to MO5 series
material objects. No evidence was adduced by the accused.
7.    The trial court found the accused guilty of the offences
punishable under Sections 376 and 506(ii) of the I.P.C and also
under Section 6 of the Act. The trial court sentenced the accused
to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of two years and
to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/- and in default of payment of fine, to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of one month for the
offence punishable under Section 506(ii) of the I.P.C. The trial
court sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a
period of fourteen years and to pay a fine of Rs.1,00,000/- and in
default of payment of fine, to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
a period of one year for the offence punishable under Section 6
of the Act. The trial court also directed that the substantive
sentences of imprisonment shall run concurrently.        No separate
sentence was awarded for the offence punishable under Section
376 of the I.P.C.
8.    Conviction entered against and the sentence imposed
on him by the trial court are challenged in this appeal preferred
by the accused from the jail.
9.    Heard Adv.Sri.Sujith Kumar, who was appointed as
State Brief and the learned Public Prosecutor and also perused
the records.
10.   Out of the 15 witnesses examined by the prosecution,
the material witnesses are PW1, PW5, PW7 and PW9. PW1 is the
victim girl. PW5 is the doctor who attended the delivery of PW1
and issued Ext.P5 certificate. PW5 had also collected the blood
samples of PW1 and her child for DNA analysis.         PW7 is the
doctor who collected blood samples of the accused for DNA
analysis. PW9 is the Headmaster of the school in which PW1 was
11. PW1, the victim girl, gave evidence in examination-in-
chief as follows:    She was residing along with her parents and
two younger sisters. She was studying in Standard IX. She had
given Ext.P1 first information statement to the police. Her date of
birth is 19.01.1997. Her father used to commit sexual assault on
her, by taking her to the coffee plantation in the neighbourhood,
on threatening her that he would kill her. He used to commit such
act till January, 2013, two or three times. He used to put his
penis in her mouth. She got pregnant and then she told the
matter to her mother.     Her mother took her to a doctor.     The
doctor informed them that she was pregnant. She delivered a
male child in the hospital on 04.05.2013.
12. On cross-examination, PW1 has stated as follows :
When the police recorded her statement, she was alone and her
mother was waiting outside. It was Kalyani, her aunt, who first
gave the complaint to the police. The facts stated in Ext.P1
statement are true. When she gave the complaint, Kalyani was
not in the police station. One week before giving the complaint,
she was got examined by the doctor and then she knew that she
was pregnant. She had sexual relationship with a person by
name Binu. It is true that her father committed rape on her.
13. PW1 denied the suggestion made to her that her father
was falsely implicated in the case at the instance of Kalyani. In
answer to a specific question in the cross examination, she stated
that her father had not threatened her. However, subsequently, she
stated that, the truth is what she has stated in examination- in-chief
that her father threatened her.
14.   No contradiction or omission has been brought out in
the evidence of PW1 with reference to Ext.P1 first information
statement given by her to the police.
15. The evidence of PW1 is that her father used to commit
sexual assault on her till January, 2013. Ext.P1 first information
statement was given to the police only on 20.03.2013, when she
came to know that she was pregnant.
16. However, the delay in making the complaint to the
police    was   quite natural.  The   circumstances   of   the   case
themselves justify the delay. No girl would have wanted the world
to know that she was a person subjected to sexual assault by her
own father. Further, in Ext.P1 statement itself, she had given
explanation for the delay. She had stated to the police that her
father used to threaten her that he would kill her and it was the
reason for the delay in reporting the matter to the police.
17. Delay, per se, is not a mitigating circumstance for the
accused in a case of sexual assault. Delay in lodging the F.I.R
cannot be used as a ritualistic formula for discarding the
prosecution case and doubting its authenticity. It only puts the
court on guard to search for and consider if any explanation has
been offered for the delay. Once there is explanation for the
delay in lodging the F.I.R, the court is only to see whether such
explanation is satisfactory or not. Mere delay in lodging the F.I.R
does not in any way render the prosecution version brittle.
18. Merely because the complaint was lodged less than
promptly does not raise the inference that the complaint was
false. The reluctance to go to the police is on account of the
attitude of the society which casts doubt and shame upon the
victim rather than comfort and sympathy. The courts cannot
overlook the fact that in sexual offences delay in the lodging of
the FIR can be due to variety of reasons particularly the
reluctance of the prosecutrix or her family members to go to the
police and complain about the incident which concerns the
reputation of the victim and the honour of her family.
19.   Moreover, when PW1 was in the witness box, no
question was put to her in the cross-examination by the defence,
with regard to the delay in reporting the matter to the police.
When the defence did not put any question to the witness in the
cross-examination on a material point, it cannot subsequently
raise any grievance on such point. It is a settled legal proposition
that in case question is not put to the witness in cross-
examination who could furnish explanation on a particular point,
the correctness or legality of the said fact/issue could not be
raised (See Paulmeli v. State of Tamil Nadu : (2014) 13 SCC
20.   It cannot be even imagined that it is a false case
registered against the accused at the instance of Kalyani, the
aunt (sister of the mother's father) of PW1. No girl would have
preferred to put her honour and dignity at stake and make a false
complaint against her own father at the instance of some other
person who had enmity towards the father.
21.   True, PW1 admitted in cross-examination that she had
sexual relationship with another person. It does not in any way
affect the credibility of the testimony of PW1. As noticed earlier,
no girl would falsely accuse of her own father of committing rape
on her. Even in a case where it is shown that the victim is a girl
of easy virtue or a girl habituated to sexual intercourse, it may
not be a ground to absolve the accused from the charge of rape.
Even assuming that the victim is previously accustomed to sexual
intercourse, that is not a decisive question. On the contrary, the
question which is required to be adjudicated is, did the accused
commit rape on the victim on the occasion complained of. It is
the accused who is on trial and not the victim (See State of U.P
22. A prosecutrix of a sex offence cannot be put on par with
an accomplice. She is in fact a victim of the crime. Her evidence
need not be tested with the same amount of suspicion as that of
an accomplice. The nature of evidence required to lend assurance
to the testimony of the prosecutrix must necessarily depend on
the facts and circumstances of each case. Only if the court finds
it difficult to accept the version of the prosecutrix on its face
value, it may search for evidence, direct or circumstantial, which
would lend assurance to her testimony.
23.   In the instant case, the testimony of PW1 that she was
subjected to sexual assault can be accepted on its face value. If
at all any corroboration is required, the result of DNA analysis of
the blood samples of the child born to PW1 and the accused,
lends such corroboration or assurance. The result of the DNA
analysis reveals that the accused is the biological father of the
child born to PW1.
24.   The evidence of PW5 doctor, who attended the delivery
of PW1, shows that PW1 delivered a male child on 04.05.2013.
25.    PW5 doctor has given evidence that she collected the
blood samples of PW1 and the newly born child and entrusted the
samples with the investigating officer. She has stated in detail the
procedure adopted by her for collecting the blood samples and
packing and sealing the same. Nothing has been brought out in
her cross-examination to show that the blood samples were not
properly collected or packed and sealed.
26.   PW7 is the doctor who conducted the potency test of
the accused and issued Ext.P8 certificate. He had also collected
samples of blood for DNA analysis from the accused.         Nothing
was brought out in the cross-examination of PW7 also to show
that the procedure adopted by him for collecting samples of
blood was improper.
27.   Ext.P20 is the copy of the forwarding note prepared by
the investigating officer for sending the blood samples to the
Forensic Science Laboratory, Thiruvananthapuram for conducting
DNA     analysis.  The    forwarding   note  bears   the   specimen
impression of the seals affixed on the packets of blood samples
which were sent for analysis.
28.   Ext.P21 is the report received from the Forensic
Science Laboratory with regard to the DNA analysis of the blood
samples. The result shown in Ext.P21 is that the accused is the
biological father of the male child delivered by PW1.
29.   The report of DNA analysis shows that the seals on the
sample packets were intact. Therefore, there was no question of
manipulation      of  the  samples.   Further, when   PW15    Circle
Inspector was examined, no question was put to him in the
cross-examination with regard to any irregularity or impropriety
in sending the blood samples for analysis.
30.   Learned counsel for the appellant contended that there
was undue delay in sending the blood samples for DNA analysis.
There is no merit in this contention. The child was born to PW1
on 04.05.2013.       Only thereafter the blood samples of the child
were taken. Ext.P20 forwarding note shows that the samples
were sent for analysis through the court on 17.05.2013.
31. DNA report deserves to be accepted unless it is
absolutely dented. For non-acceptance of the same, it is to be
established that there had been no quality control or quality
assurance. If the sampling is proper and if there is no evidence
as to tampering of samples, the DNA test report is to be accepted
(See Mukesh v. State (AIR 2017 SC 2161).
32.   The result of DNA analysis mentioned in Ext.P21
report corroborates the testimony of PW1 that her father had
sexual intercourse with her and the male child was born in that
relationship. Nothing more is required to accept the testimony of
PW1 that her father committed sexual assault and rape on her.
33.   PW1 has stated in examination-in-chief that her date
of birth is 19.01.1997. Her evidence in that regard was not
challenged in the cross-examination.
34.   PW9 is the Headmaster of the school in which PW1 was
studying. Ext.P12 extract of the admission register kept in the school,
which was produced by PW9, shows that the date of birth of PW1 is
35. PW9 has stated on cross-examination that he could not
state on what basis the date of birth of the victim was
incorporated in Ext.P12 document. He has also stated that it was
in Standard V that PW1 was admitted in that school and she was
earlier studying in another school.
36. The evidence of PW9 reveals that Ext.P12 extract of the
admission register is not from the school in which PW1 was first
admitted and the school in which she first attended.
37. In Jarnail Singh v. State of Haryana: AIR 2013 SC
3467, the Supreme Court has held that, sufficient proof for
determining the age of a child, who is a victim of a crime, is the
extract of the admission register from the school which was first
attended by the victim. Following this decision, in Alex v. State
of Kerala: 2021 (2) KLD 434, a Division Bench of this Court
has held that, the document produced to prove the date of birth
or the age of the child victim, shall be the certificate from the
school which the child first attended.
38. Ext.P12 certificate produced by the prosecution in this
case does not satisfy the above requirement. The fact that, when
PW1 was cross-examined, the evidence regarding date of birth
mentioned by her in examination-in-chief was not challenged,
does not come to the rescue of the prosecution to prove her age.
The accused has no obligation to invite the prosecution to
establish the date of birth of the victim. It is the bounden duty of
the prosecution to establish every material fact and circumstance
before the trial court (See Alex v. State of Kerala: 2021 (2)
39. In the above circumstances, it has to be found that the
prosecution has not proved the date of birth or the age of the
victim girl at the time of the alleged incidents. It follows that, the
prosecution has not proved that the victim girl was aged below
18 years or 16 years at the relevant time.
40. The consequence of not proving the age of the victim
girl is that the accused cannot be found guilty of any offence
under the Act.
41. Learned counsel for the appellant would contend that
once the prosecution failed to prove that the victim girl was aged
below 18 years, the prosecution has to prove that the sexual
assault was made on her without her consent.
42. Even if it is assumed that the victim was more than 16
or 18 years of age, it cannot be a ground to hold that she was a
consenting party (State of U.P v. Manoj Kumar Pandey : AIR
43. It is not for the victim to show that there was no
consent. The question of consent is really a matter of defence by
the accused and it is for him to place materials to show that
there was consent. Plea of consent shall be taken or made
during cross examination and the statement recorded under
Section 313 Crl.P.C (See State of U.P v. Sree Kant Shekari :
44. In the present case, the plea of consent is too shallow
to even need detailed analysis or consideration. One cannot even
imagine that the victim girl consented to have sexual intercourse
with her father. There is gulf of difference between consent and
submission.      Every  consent involves   a   submission but  the
converse does not follow. Helplessness in the face of inevitable
compulsion clouded by fear cannot be considered to be consent
as understood in law. Exercise of intelligence based on the
knowledge of the significance and the moral effect of the act is
required to constitute consent.
45. In the present case, not even a suggestion was made to
PW1 in the cross examination that she was a consenting party.
46.   The prosecution has not been able to establish beyond
reasonable doubt that the accused had criminally intimidated
PW1. Of course, he would have compelled her to submit to his
lust. He would have also threatened her with dire consequences if
she told about his act to any other person.         PW1 stated in
examination-in-chief that her father had threatened that he
would kill her. However, on cross-examination, in answer to a
specific question, she stated that her father did not threaten her.
Again, she would say that what she stated in examination-in-
chief was correct. Though the statement of PW1 that her father
used to threaten her can be considered as a reason for the delay
in reporting the matter to the police, in view of the varying
statements given by PW1 before the court, conviction against the
accused for an offence under Section 506(ii) of the IPC cannot be
based on such statement.
47.   The discussion above leads to the conclusion that the
prosecution could establish beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused committed rape on the victim girl, which is an offence
punishable      under Section  376(1)   of  the  I.P.C.  But,  the
prosecution could not establish beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused committed any offence under the Act. The prosecution
could not also prove beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
committed an offence punishable under Section 506(ii) of the
48.   Now, the question arises what is the sentence to be
imposed on the accused for committing the offence punishable
under Section 376(1) of the I.P.C.
49.   In Asha Ram (supra), the Apex Court has observed
“Here is the case where the crime committed by
the respondent not only delicts the law but it has
a deleterious effect on the civilized society.
Gravity of the crime has to be necessarily
assessed from the nature of the crime. A crime
may be grave but the nature of the crime may
not be so grave. Similarly, a crime may not be so
grave but the nature of the crime may be very
grave. Ordinarily, the offence of rape is grave by
its nature. More so, when the perpetrator of the
crime is the father against his own daughter it is
more graver and the rarest of rare, which
warrants a strong deterrent judicial hand. Even in
ordinary criminal terminology a rape is a crime
more heinous than murder as it destroys the very
soul of hapless woman. This is more so when the
perpetrator of the grave crime is the father of the
victim girl. Father is a fortress, refuge and the
trustee of his daughter. By betraying the trust
and taking undue advantage of trust reposed in
him by the daughter, ....... he ravished the
chastity of his daughter, jeopardized her future
prospect of getting married, enjoying marital and
conjugal life, has been totally devastated. Not
only that, she carries an indelible social stigma on
her head and deathless shame as long as she
lives”.
50. In Madan Gopal Kakkad v. Naval Dubey : (1992) 3
SCC 204, the Apex Court has observed as follows:
“Before parting with the judgment, with deep
concern, we may point out that though all sexual
assaults on female children are not reported and
do not come to light yet there is an alarming and
shocking increase of sexual offences committed
on children. This is due to the reasons that
children are ignorant of the act of rape and are
not able to offer resistance and become easy
prey    for  lusty   brutes    who    display   the
unscrupulous, deceitful and insidious art of luring
female children and young girls. Therefore, such
offenders who are menace to the civilised society
should be mercilessly and inexorably punished in
the severest terms. We feel that Judges who
bear the Sword of Justice should not hesitate to
use that sword with the utmost severity, to the
full and to the end if the gravity of the offences
so demand”.
51.   The accused was a person who was duty bound to
provide     the   victim girl protection and   support.   But, he
perpetrated sexual assault and rape on her. One cannot even
imagine the trauma the victim would have suffered. The indelible
imprint which the incestuous act has left in her mind cannot be
ignored. She may feel the mental agony and pain for years to
come. It is a case in which on account of rape committed on her
by her own father, she has delivered a male child. The sufferings
endured by the victim girl would be beyond imagination. In such
circumstances, the accused is not entitled to any leniency in the
matter of punishment.
52.   Even before the amendment of Sections 375 and 376
of the I.P.C in the year 2013, imprisonment for life was the
maximum punishment and imprisonment for a period of seven
years was the minimum punishment provided under Section
376(1) of the I.P.C. Considering the facts and circumstances of
the case, a sentence of rigorous imprisonment for a period of
twelve years and fine of Rs.50,000/- shall be sufficient.
53.   Consequently, the appeal is allowed in part and it is
(i).  Conviction   as   well   as  sentence   against    the
appellant/accused by the trial court under Section 506(ii) of the
IPC and also under Section 6 of the Protection of Children from
Sexual Offences Act, 2012 are set aside.
(ii)  Conviction of the appellant/accused by the trial court
under Section 376 of the IPC is confirmed.
(iii) The   appellant/accused   is sentenced   to  undergo
rigorous imprisonment for a period of twelve years and to pay a
fine of Rs.50,000/- (Rupees Fifty Thousand only) and in default
of payment of fine, to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a
period of one year for the offence punishable under Section
376(1) of the I.P.C.
(iv) The appellant/accused is entitled to get set off under
(v)   If the fine amount is realized, it shall be paid as
compensation to PW1 under Section 357(1) Cr.P.C.
54.   The Registry shall send a copy of this judgment to the
Superintendent of the jail in which the appellant/accused is