[1]          The appellant-husband has come up in appeal before this
Court seeking setting aside of judgment and decree dated 26.02.2013
passed by the District Judge, Rohtak, whereby petition filed by him under
Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 (for short ‘the HMA’) for
dissolution of marriage by a decree of divorce, has been dismissed.
[2]          Brief facts of the case are that appellant-husband filed a
petition under Section 13 of the HMA for dissolution of marriage by a
decree of divorce pleading therein that marriage between the parties was
solemnized on 19.11.1998 and the same was registered on 23.11.1998 at
Rohtak.     At the time of marriage, appellant-husband was posted at
Srinagar and they lived there upto March, 2000. Respondent-wife insisted
that delivery of the child should take place at Rohtak, therefore, appellant
acceded to her request and they went to Rohtak, where they were blessed
with a son, namely, Jalaj on 24.08.1999.           Thereafter, appellant was
transferred to Jammu and parties lived together there upto April, 2002.
The appellant remained posted at Jammu upto September, 2002 and then
was transferred to Lucknow. It is alleged by the appellant-husband that
from the beginning of the marriage, conduct, behaviour and attitude of the
respondent-wife had been cruel, unwarranted and harsh and she used to
pick up quarrels over trifles without any justifiable cause. The respondent
deserted the appellant in April, 2002 and since then she had not returned
to matrimonial home, whereas appellant had always been giving love and
affection to the respondent and his son. In the beginning of December,
1999 appellant had taken the respondent along with his son to his place of
posting at Srinagar and at the request of respondent her mother was also
taken there and appellant provided proper food, clothing and every good
lodging facility to the respondent, her mother and the son.           In mid
December, 1999, respondent suffered with breast abscess and she was got
treated and operated at Army Hospital, Srinagar. In December, 1999,
respondent was again operated at PGIMS, Rohtak, as the said ailment had
re-developed. In April, 2002, respondent went to the house of her parents
at Rohtak and thereafter in spite of best efforts of the appellant, she did
not return to her matrimonial home. Appellant had also written several
letters from the place of his posting requesting respondent and her parents
to send the respondent and his son to him but in vain.          Whenever,
appellant came on leave at Rohtak and tried to meet his wife and the
child, respondent’s parents did not allow him to meet them. Rather,
Pawan, brother of the respondent, misbehaved with the appellant
whenever appellant visited the house of his in-laws. Appellant also met
the respondent in April, 2006 and requested her to accompany him and
apprised her that he had booked seats for journey but she flatly refused to
accompany him and threatened that if he tried to take her with him, she
would commit suicide. It is further alleged that respondent failed to
discharge her matrimonial duties and obligations and rather she ill-treated
and mal-treated the appellant, caused physical and mental cruelty upon
him, did not cooperate in married life and made his life hell.         The
respondent even failed to give any respect and regard to the parents of the
appellant. When respondent expressed her desire to do a job, appellant
agreed to her request and she had worked at Army Public School, Jammu,
from July, 2001 to March, 2002. As in spite of best efforts made by the
appellant, respondent did not join the matrimonial home, he was
compelled to institute a divorce petition bearing No.58 of 2006. The
matter was referred to Lok Adalat/mediation. During the course of these
proceedings, respondent agreed to withdraw her complaint made to the
Air Force authorities as well as the application for maintenance filed
before the Senior Air Force Officer, on withdrawal of said petition by the
appellant.   The matter was compromised on the basis of separate
statements dated 21.12.2008 and the petition filed by the appellant was
dismissed as withdrawn. Appellant further alleged that respondent was
working as lecturer in mathematics in Matu Ram Institute of Engineering
and Management at Rohtak. Even during vacations she never joined the
company of the appellant. Despite having given undertaking before the
Court in her statement dated 21.12.2008, she had not withdrawn her
complaint and maintenance application filed before the Senior Air Force
Officer and did not join the company of the appellant at the matrimonial
home at the place of his posting i.e. at M.E.T. Flight Air Force Station,
Sirsa (Haryana). Therefore, appellant sought decree of divorce on the
ground of cruelty and desertion.
[3]          Respondent-wife contested the petition admitting the factum
of solemnization of her marriage with the appellant and the birth of the
son out of their wedlock. Respondent denied that she insisted that the
delivery of the child should take place at Rohtak. It was also denied that
from the beginning of the marriage, her conduct, behaviour and attitude
had been cruel, unwarranted, harsh and she used to pick up quarrels with
the appellant without any good cause and reason. It was also denied that
she deserted the appellant in April, 2002 whereas the appellant had caused
mental as well as physical cruelty to her. In the beginning of December,
1999 she was taken to Srinagar by the appellant and the mother of the
respondent had to accompany her as there was no one else to look after
her and her son.      There respondent suffered with breast abscess in
December, 1999 but the appellant refused to consult the doctors at Air
Force Hospital being male staff and pressurized her to consult a nurse and
due to the delay, the respondent had to undergo an operation at Srinagar
Army Base Hospital and her mother had to look-after her. Since she was
not fully recovered, she had to undergo another operation in December,
1999 at PGIMS, Rohtak. As her mother-in-law refused to look after her,
therefore, her sister stayed there to look after her and her mother took care
of the child. The appellant did not avail leave at that time to join her in
such painful moments.        In march, 2000 respondent returned to the
matrimonial home and went to appellant’s place of posting at Jammu,
however, appellant started teasing her by hurting her physically and
mentally. On several occasions, respondent was thrashed by the appellant
and in the midnight of June 19, 2000 she was turned out of the
matrimonial home.        Appellant levelleved false allegations about her
character. Therefore, her brother had to come to Jammu to patch up the
matter. On 27/28 August, 2000, appellant repeated his behaviour and left
the respondent and her son at Ambala at her brother’s house forcibly. He
came in November, 2000 and had taken the respondent and their son back
on 18.11.2000. However, after a few days, appellant again started treating
the respondent like a slave and demanded money to pay his loan taken for
purchase of a car. As a result, respondent had to go back to her parental
home as it was not possible to live in such isolation where she was
compelled to keep even every window shut with curtains and not to talk to
any person. After reaching Rohtak, it was revealed that the respondent
had conceived again but appellant forced her to abort the pregnancy
alleging that the same did not belong to him. After that appellant went to
the house of the respondent and apologized for his mis-behaviour.
Respondent denied that she did not allow the appellant to meet his son
Jalaj. She also denied that she deserted the company of the appellant
continuously since April, 2002. She joined the company of the appellant
after April, 2002 and lived together at Lucknow and they along with their
son Jalaj visited Imambara and other historical places of Lucknow. They
also visited Nainital and enjoyed picnic and photographs were snapped at
those places.      Respondent alleged that marriage of her brother was
solemnized in February, 2003 and appellant and her family members
attended the said marriage. Respondent admitted the factum of filing of
earlier divorce petition by the appellant but after compromise, the same
was got dismissed as withdrawn and thereafter respondent joined the
company of the appellant. She was ready to withdraw her complaint
moved by her before the Air Force authorities, however, appellant turned
her out of his place of posting and deserted her. It is further alleged that
in fact appellant had withdrawn his earlier divorce petition because he
wanted the respondent to withdraw the complaint filed before the Air
Force authorities. While denying all other allegations, respondent-wife
sought dismissal of the petition.
[4]           Appellant-husband         filed   replication controverting the
contents of the written statement and reasserted the contents of the
[5]           From the pleadings of the parties, following issues were
framed by the Family Court on 07.01.2010: -
“1.   Whether the petitioner is entitled for a decree of
divorce on the ground of cruelty, harassment
and desertion, as alleged in the petition? OPP
2.    Whether          the   present   petition   is not
3.     Whether the petitioner is estopped from filing
the present petition by his own act and conduct?
4.     Whether the petitioner has no cause of action to
file the present petition? OPR.
[6]          In order to prove his case, appellant-husband stepped into
witness box as PW1, besides examining his mother Usha Yadav as PW2.
He tendered his duly sworn affidavit Ex.PW1/A.
[7]          On the other hand, respondent-wife herself appeared as RW1
besides examining her father Bhagat Singh Malik as RW2. She tendered
her duly sworn affidavit Ex.RW1/A.
[8]          The Family Court has returned the findings against the
appellant-husband and decided issue No.1 in favour of the respondent-
wife observing that appellant had not been able to prove the ground of
cruelty, harassment and desertion, as alleged in the petition. Therefore,
petition under Section 13 of the HMA filed by the appellant was
[9]          Learned counsel for the appellant vehemently has contended
that impugned judgment and decree passed by the Family Court
dismissing the petition filed by the appellant-husband under Section 13 of
the HMA is erroneous and contrary to the material on record as during her
stay at matrimonial home, respondent treated the appellant with cruelty
and she herself deserted the appellant-husband in April, 2002 without any
reasonable cause. Efforts of the appellant to bring back the respondent to
her matrimonial home went in vain since she refused to join the company
of the appellant-husband. Learned counsel has further contended that
respondent-wife made complaints to the senior officers of the appellant-
husband in the Air Force, which caused great mental cruelty to him and
affected his service career. Learned counsel has contended that on a false
complaint filed by the respondent-wife, FIR No.644 dated 20.10.2010
under Sections 498-A, 406, 313, 323, 506 IPC was registered at Police
Station Civil Lines, Rohtak, against the appellant-husband and his parents.
During investigation, parents of the appellant were found innocent
whereas appellant was tried for the offences under Sections 498-A, 406,
313, 323, 506 IPC and during the pendency of present appeal the trial
Court, finding the allegations against the appellant-husband false,
acquitted him of the charges vide judgment dated 16.04.2015 (Annexure
P-A). The false complaint leveling serious allegations against the
appellant is itself a cruelty by the respondent. Learned counsel has, thus,
contended that there is no possibility of reconciliation of the marriage and
the marriage is irretrievably broken and they are residing separately for
the last about 20 years (11 years on the date of order of the Family Court)
which aspect has not been considered by the Court below while passing
the impugned judgment and decree. In support of his contentions, learned
counsel for the appellant placed reliance on the judgments in the cases of
K. Srinivas Rao vs. D.A. Deepa, (2013) 5 Supreme Court Cases 226;
FAO-1767 of 2017-Smt. Veena v. Shri Naveen decided on 23.09.2021
(P&H); FAO-M-261 of 2008-Santro Devi v. Virender Kumar alias
Virender Singh decided on 18.02.2015 (P&H); FAO-326 of 2007-Soma
Banerjee v. Subhrojyoti Banerjee decided on 05.08.2009 (Calcutta High
Court); K. Srinivas v. K. Sunita, (2014) 16 Supreme Court Cases 34 and
Civil Appeal No.4905 of 2012-Vishwanath v. Sau. Sarla Vishwanath
Agrawal decided on 04.07.2012.
[10]          Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent-wife sought to
justify the impugned judgment and decree passed by the Court below and
has contended that the appellant had not made out any ground to grant
divorce.    The appellant failed to prove cruelty on the part of the
respondent. Learned counsel has further contended that respondent-wife
has never deserted the appellant-husband, therefore, he is not entitled for
decree of divorce on the grounds of cruelty, desertion or on the ground of
irretrievable break down of the marriage.         Earlier also the appellant-
husband had filed divorce petition in the Court of Additional District
Judge, Rohtak. However, the matter was compromised on 21.12.2008
according to which parties mutually agreed to resolve all their disputes
and appellant agreed to withdraw the divorce petition whereas
respondent-wife assured that she would withdraw the application for
maintenance filed before the senior Air Force officers. Learned counsel
for the respondent has further contended that factum of lodging of FIR
against the appellant and his family members was not pleaded in the
petition under Section 13 of the HMA, therefore, appellant cannot be
allowed to take benefit of the judgment of acquittal dated 16.04.2015,
which is subsequent to the judgment and decree dated 26.02.2013
dismissing the petition under Section 13 of the HMA filed by the
appellant. Only vague and baseless allegations have been levelled against
the respondent. Therefore, he sought dismissal of the present appeal. In
support of his contentions, learned counsel for the respondent placed
reliance on the judgments of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Seth
Ramdayal Jat v. Laxmi Prasad, 2009(11) SCC 545 and Mangayakarasi
[11]         We have considered the rival submissions made by learned
counsel for the parties and perused the records.
[12]         Matrimonial cases are matters of delicate human and
emotional relationship. It demands mutual trust, regard, respect, love and
affection with sufficient play for reasonable adjustments with the spouse.
The relationship has to conform to the social norms as well. The
matrimonial conduct has now come to be governed by statute framed,
keeping in view such norms and changed social order. It is sought to be
controlled in the interest of the individuals as well as in broader
perspective, for regulating matrimonial norms for making of a well-knit,
healthy and not a disturbed and porous society. The institution of marriage
occupies an important place and role to play in the society, in general.
[13]         It is undisputed fact that the marriage between the appellant
and respondent was solemnized on 19.11.1998 and the same was
registered on 23.11.1998. On 24.08.1999 a child, namely, Jalaj was born
out of the wedlock. According to the appellant, in the month of April,
2002, the respondent left the company of the appellant and went to her
parents' house and the efforts made by the appellant to bring her back
went in vain. It is the specific case of the respondent-wife that she never
deserted the appellant nor caused any cruelty to him. The Family Court,
considering the averments of both the parties, dismissed the petition filed
by the husband under Section 13 of the HMA.
[14]           In view of the above circumstances, before proceeding with
the appeal on merits, taking into consideration the fact that the parties
were residing separately for about 12 years, vide order dated 28.04.2014,
the parties were directed to appear before the Mediation and Conciliation
Centre of this Court on 19.05.2014.         However, on several occasions
parties did not appear before the mediator. Therefore, due to lackadaisical
approach of both the parties to settle the matter and due to expiry of the
stipulated period, mediator referred back the matter to this Court on
14.08.2014. Thus, the appeal was admitted on 20.02.2015.
[15]          Being fed up of the behavior of the respondent-wife, earlier
also appellant had instituted a petition for divorce bearing No.58 of 2006,
which was referred to the Lok Adalat. The matter was compromised on
21.12.2008 and on assurance of the respondent to withdraw her complaint
made to the Air Force authorities and the application for maintenance
filed by her before the senior Air Force officer, appellant had withdrawn
the said petition for divorce.
[16]          To prove her case, respondent-wife Meenal appeared as RW1
in the witness box. In her cross-examination she has stated that it is
correct that earlier the matter was compromised in Lok Adalat and it was
agreed by her that she would withdraw her application for maintenance
as well as application/complaint moved by her against her husband to the
higher authorities of Air Force. Application for maintenance was not
withdrawn. I worked in Army Public School, Jammu from July 2001 to
March 2002. I also worked at M.K.J.K. College, Rohtak, from August,
2002 to February, 2003. Now, I am working in Matu Ram Institute since
July, 2008. I am getting salary of Rs.18,000/- to Rs.20,000/- per month.
My son Jalaj is studying in Indus Public School in 8th standard. I have a
driving licence and a PAN card. It is correct that I do not write name of
my husband along with my name. It is correct that I had given complaint
against my husband before his senior officers because he was not keeping
me with him. I met my husband in October, 2010. My husband also
visited me in October, 2010.           I have been residing separately since
20.04.2009. It is correct that we know each other prior to marriage and it
was a love-cum-arranged marriage. It is correct that I remained in
Srinagar upto March, 2000.           While working in Army Public School,
Jammu, I used to go with my husband on picnic etc. It is correct that our
joint statement was recorded before the Lok Adalat on 21.12.2008. I
visited Sirsa 7/8 times. It is correct that my husband has been paying the
maintenance to me and my child as per orders of the Air Force
Authorities. It is correct that in my affidavit I have shown address of my
parents’ and not the address of my sister, who is residing in H. No.2507,
[17]          From the above deposition of the respondent-wife it is
axiomatic that entire case set up by her stands demolished from her own
statement wherein she has admitted in so many words that despite
compromise, as assured, she had not withdrawn the complaint filed by her
before the Air Force authorities and the application for maintenance
before Senior Air Force officer. It is also clear from her statement that
even after compromise she had not resided with the appellant rather
visited him at Sirsa 7/8 times.
[18]         RW2 Bhagat Singh Malik, father of respondent-Meenal, also
deposed in the similar manner.           He stated that petitioner (appellant
herein) never gave beatings to the respondent in any manner in my
presence. I cannot tell the date, month and year when she was abused by
the petitioner. I do not know if the respondent had lodged any complaint
to the senior officers of the petitioner in the Air Force about his conduct.
The alleged incident of threatening my daughter with knife had taken
place at my house at Rohtak. I did not see the said incident of threatening
by showing knife by the petitioner to the respondent. However, my wife
had seen the said incident. The child goes to the school sometimes from
my house and sometimes from the house of my elder daughter namely
Pushpa. I cannot tell since which year my daughter is residing with me at
[19]         During the pendency of the present appeal, learned counsel
for the appellant has placed on record judgment dated 16.04.2015
(Annexure P-A), whereby appellant has been acquitted of the charges
under Sections 498-A, 406, 313, 323 and 506 IPC.               The FIR was
registered on the basis of complaint dated 13.10.2010 of respondent-wife
against the appellant-husband and his parents, namely, B.S. Yadav
(father) and Usha Rani (mother). During investigation, parents of the
appellant were found innocent.           After facing trial about 4½ years
appellant has been acquitted of the charges as the allegations levelled by
the respondent against the appellant were found to be false.
[20]         Another argument which has been articulated on behalf of
the learned counsel for the respondent is that the filing of the criminal
complaint has not been pleaded in the petition itself. As we see it, the
criminal complaint was filed by the wife after filing of the husband’s
divorce petition, and being subsequent events could have been looked into
by the Court. In any event, both the parties were fully aware of this facet
of cruelty which was allegedly suffered by the husband.                We are,
therefore, not impressed by this argument raised on her behalf.
[21]          Respondent wife also bent upon destroying the career and
reputation of the appellant-husband as she made complaints against him to
his senior officers in the Air Force.
[22]          At this juncture, it is important to make reference to the
judgment passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Raj Talreja vs. Kavita
Talreja, Civil Appeal No.10719 of 2013, decided on 24.04.2017, wherein,
it was held that a false complaint was registered against the husband by
the wife, after wife herself inflicted injuries on her person. In criminal
proceedings, the husband had been acquitted and thereafter, proceedings
against the wife were launched. On this account, the husband was held
entitled to decree of divorce, on the ground of cruelty. It was further
observed as herein given:-
“9. This Court in Para 16 of K. Srinivas Rao v. D.A.
Deepa, 2013 (2) RCR (Civil) 232 has held as follows:
“16. Thus, to the instances illustrative of mental
cruelty noted in Samar Ghosh v. Jaya Ghosh,
2007 (4) SCC 511, we could add a few more.
allegations against the spouse or his or her
relatives in the pleadings, filing of complaints or
issuing notices or news items which may have
adverse impact on the business prospect or the
job of the spouse and filing repeated false
complaints and cases in the court against the
spouse would, in the facts of a case, amount to
causing mental cruelty to the other spouse.”
In Ravi Kumar v. Julmidevi, 2010 (2) RCR (Civil) 178,
this Court while dealing with the definition of cruelty
“19. It may be true that there is no definition of
cruelty under the said Act. Actually such a
definition is not possible. In matrimonial
relationship, cruelty would obviously mean
absence of mutual respect and understanding
between the spouses which embitters the
relationship and often leads to various outbursts
of behaviour which can be termed as cruelty.
Sometime cruelty in a matrimonial relationship
may take the form of violence, sometime it may
take a different form. At times, it may be just an
attitude or an approach. Silence in some
20. Therefore, cruelty in matrimonial behaviour
defies any definition and its categories can
never be closed. Whether the husband is cruel to
his wife or the wife is cruel to her husband has
to be ascertained and judged by taking into
account the entire facts and circumstances of
the given case and not by any predetermined
rigid formula. Cruelty in matrimonial cases can
be of infinite variety-it may be subtle or even
brutal and may be by gestures and words. That
possibly explains why Lord Denning in Sheldon
v. Sheldon, (1966) 2 WLR 993 held that
categories of cruelty in matrimonial cases are
never closed.
10. Cruelty can never be defined with exactitude. What
is   cruelty     will depend    upon     the  facts   and
circumstances of each case. In the present case, from
the facts narrated above, it is apparent that the wife
made reckless, defamatory and false accusations
against her husband, his family members and
colleagues, which would definitely have the effect of
lowering his reputation in the eyes of his peers. Mere
filing of complaints is not cruelty, if there are
justifiable reasons to file the complaints. Merely
because no action is taken on the complaint or after
trial the accused is acquitted may not be a ground to
treat such accusations of the wife as cruelty within the
meaning of the Hindu Marriage Act 1955 (for short
‘the Act’). However, if it is found that the allegations
are patently false, then there can be no manner of
doubt that the said conduct of a spouse levelling false
accusations against the other spouse would be an act
of cruelty. In the present case, all the allegations were
found to be false. Later, she filed another complaint
alleging that her husband along with some other
persons had trespassed into her house and assaulted
her. The police found, on investigation, that not only
was the complaint false but also the injuries were self-
inflicted by the wife. Thereafter, proceedings were
launched against the wife under Section 182 of IPC.”
[23]        Likewise in Joydeep Majumdar vs. Bharti Jaiswal
Majumdar, Civil Appeal Nos.3786-3787 of 2020, decided on 26.02.2021
(Law Finder Doc Id #1813316), where defamatory complaints had been
made by wife to husband's superior officers and the complaint so made by
the wife was held to have affected the career progress of the husband, the
Hon'ble Apex Court held that it amounted to 'mental cruelty' as the
husband had suffered adverse consequences, in his life and career, on
account of allegations, made by wife. The Family Court, had granted
divorce to the husband, on the ground of cruelty. However, the High
Court had reversed the finding of the Family Court. The Hon'ble Apex
Court, while deciding the matter, referred to another judgment passed in
Samar Ghosh vs. Jaya Ghosh, 2007 (4) SCC 511, wherein, it was
observed that in order to make out a case of mental cruelty, no uniform
standard can be laid down and each case will have to be decided, on its
own facts. Further, in Joydeep Majumdar's case (supra), it was observed
“11. The materials in the present case reveal that the
respondent had made several defamatory complaints
to the appellant’s superiors in the Army for which, a
Court of inquiry was held by the Army authorities
against the appellant. Primarily for those, the
appellant’s      career progress     got affected.  The
Respondent was also making complaints to other
authorities, such as, the State Commission for Women
and has posted defamatory materials on other
platforms. The net outcome of above is that the
appellant’s career and reputation had suffered.
12. When the appellant has suffered adverse
consequences in his life and career on account of the
allegations made by the respondent, the legal
consequences must follow and those cannot be
prevented only because, no Court has determined that
the allegations were false. The High Court however
felt that without any definite finding on the credibility
of the wife’s allegation, the wronged spouse would be
disentitled to relief. This is not found to be the correct
way to deal with the issue.
13. Proceeding with the above understanding, the
question which requires to be answered here is
whether the conduct of the respondent would fall
within the realm of mental cruelty. Here the
allegations are levelled by a highly educated spouse
and they do have the propensity to irreparably damage
the character and reputation of the appellant. When
the reputation of the spouse is sullied amongst his
colleagues, his superiors and the society at large, it
would be difficult to expect condonation of such
conduct by the affected party.”
[24]         No doubt, criminal complaint was made by the respondent-
wife after filing of the divorce petition by the appellant-husband,
however, the fact remains that earlier also she filed complaints against the
appellant before his senior officers in the Air force, which she assured to
withdraw after withdrawal of the said petition for divorce by the
appellant-husband.     Filing of the complaint and initiation of criminal
proceedings which were found to be baseless and false, do cause
harassment and torture to the husband and his family.               One such
complaint is sufficient to constitute matrimonial cruelty. In this regard,
reference is made to K. Srinivas v. Sunita (supra).
[25]         In K. Srinivas Rao vs. D.A. Deepa (supra), the Hon'ble
Supreme Court had examined a complaint, where the wife had raised
allegation that mother of her husband had asked her to sleep with father of
her husband. This allegation was found to be false and it amounted to
extreme mental cruelty to the husband. Ultimately, divorce was granted to
the husband. The Hon'ble Supreme Court therein observed as herein
“28. In the ultimate analysis, we hold that the
respondent-wife has caused, by her conduct, mental
cruelty to the appellant-husband and the marriage has
irretrievably broken down. Dissolution of marriage
will relieve both sides of pain and anguish. In this
Court, the respondent-wife expressed that she wants to
go back to the appellant-husband, but, that is not
possible now. The appellant-husband is not willing to
take her back. Even if, we refuse decree of divorce to
the appellant-husband, there are hardly any chances
of the respondent-wife leading a happy life with the
appellant-husband because a lot of bitterness is
created by the conduct of the respondent-wife.”
[26]          The conduct of the respondent-wife in filing a complaint
making unfounded, indecent and defamatory allegations against her
husband and parents-in-law indicates that she made all attempts to ensure
that appellant and his parents are put in jail and the appellant is removed
from his job.       We have no manner of doubt that this conduct of
respondent-wife has caused mental cruelty to the appellant-husband.
[27]          The issue for consideration in the present appeal would be
whether the relationship of the husband and wife has come to an end and
if the respondent-wife is not ready to give mutual divorce to the appellant-
husband, whether this act of her, would amount to cruelty towards
husband, keeping in view the fact that she is not staying with her husband
for the last twenty years and there is no scope that they can cohabit as
husband and wife again. Reference at this stage can be made to a
judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court of India in a case of Chandra
Kala Trivedi vs. Dr. S.P.Trivedi, 1993 (4) SCC 232 wherein Hon'ble the
Supreme Court was considering a case where marriage was irretrievably
broken down and held that in these cases, the decree of divorce can be
granted where both the parties have levelled such allegations against each
other that the marriage appears to be practically dead and the parties
cannot live together.
[28]          Reference at this stage can be made to a judgment of three
Judge Bench of Hon'ble the Supreme Court of India in case of A
Jayachandra vs. Aneel Kaur, 2005 (2) SCC 22 wherein Hon'ble the
Supreme Court was having an occasion to consider the case of divorce on
the basis of cruelty including mental cruelty. While examining the
pleadings and evidence brought on record, the Hon’ble Supreme Court
emphasized that the allegation of cruelty is of such nature in which
resumption of marriage is not possible, however, referring various
decisions, the Hon’ble Supreme Court observed that irretrievable breaking
down of marriage is not one of statutory grounds on which Court can
direct dissolution of marriage, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has with a
view to do complete justice and shorten the agony of the parties engaged
in long drawn legal battle, directed in those cases dissolution of marriage.
In para 17, it has been observed as under:-
“17. Several decisions, as noted above, were cited by
learned counsel for the respondent to contend that
even if marriage has broken down irretrievably decree
of divorce cannot be passed. In all these cases it has
been categorically held that in extreme cases the court
can direct dissolution of marriage on the ground that
the marriage had broken down irretrievably as is clear
from para 9 of Shyam Sunder case. The factual
position in each of the other cases is also
distinguishable. It was held that long absence of
physical company cannot be a ground for divorce if
the same was on account of the husband's conduct. In
Shyam Sunder case it was noted that the husband was
leading adulterous life and he cannot take advantage
of his wife shunning his company. Though the High
Court held by the impugned judgment that the said
case was similar, it unfortunately failed to notice the
relevant factual difference in the two cases. It is true
that irretrievable breaking of marriage is not one of
the statutory grounds on which court can direct
dissolution of marriage, this Court has with a view to
do complete justice and shorten the agony of the
parties engaged in long- drawn legal battle, directed
in those cases dissolution of marriage. But as noted in
the said cases themselves, those were exceptional
cases.”
[29]         Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of Naveen Kohli vs.
Neetu Kohli, 2006 (4) SCC 558 was considering a case of irretrievable
break down of marriage. In this case, wife was living separately for long
but did not want divorce by mutual consent, only to make life of her
husband miserable. Thus, the decree of divorce was granted and held it a
cruel treatment and showed that the marriage had broken irretrievably. In
para 62, 67, 68 and 69, it has been observed as under:-
“62. Even at this stage, the respondent does not want
divorce by mutual consent. From the analysis and
evaluation of the entire evidence, it is clear that the
respondent has resolved to live in agony only to make
life a miserable hell for the appellant as well. This type
of adamant and callous attitude, in the context of the
facts of this case, leaves no manner of doubt in our
mind that the respondent is bent upon treating the
appellant with mental cruelty. It is abundantly clear
that the marriage between the parties had broken
down irretrievably and there is no chance of their
coming together, or living together again. The High
Court ought to have visualized that preservation of
such a marriage is totally unworkable which has
ceased to be effective and would be greater source of
misery for the parties.
67. The High Court ought to have considered that a
human problem can be properly resolved by adopting
a human approach. In the instant case, not to grant a
decree of divorce would be disastrous for the parties.
Otherwise, there may be a ray of hope for the parties
that after a passage of time (after obtaining a decree
of divorce) the parties may psychologically and
emotionally settle down and start a new chapter in life.
68. In our considered view, looking to the peculiar
facts of the case, the High Court was not justified in
setting aside the order of the Trial Court. In our
opinion, wisdom lies in accepting the pragmatic reality
of life and take a decision which would ultimately be
conducive in the interest of both the parties.
69. Consequently, we set aside the impugned judgment
of the High Court and direct that the marriage
between the parties should be dissolved according to
the provisions of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. In the
extra-ordinary facts and circumstances of the case, to
resolve the problem in the interest of all concerned,
while dissolving the marriage between the parties, we
direct the appellant to pay Rs.25,00,000/- (Rupees
Twenty five lacs) to the respondent towards permanent
maintenance to be paid within eight weeks. This
amount would include Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees five lacs
with interest) deposited by the appellant on the
direction of the Trial Court. The respondent would be
at liberty to withdraw this amount with interest.
Therefore, now the appellant would pay only
Rs.20,00,000/- (Rupees Twenty lacs) to the respondent
within the stipulated period. In case the appellant fails
to pay the amount as indicated above within the
stipulated period, the direction given by us would be of
no avail and the appeal shall stand dismissed. In
awarding permanent maintenance we have taken into
consideration the financial standing of the appellant.”
[30]         In the present case, the marriage between the parties had
broken down irretrievably and there is no chance of their coming together,
or living together again. Further, not to grant decree of divorce would be
disastrous for the parties.
[31]         The three-Judge Bench of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in a
case of Samar Ghosh (supra) passed the decree on the ground of mental
cruelty but the concept of irretrievable breakdownof marriage has been
discussed in detail referring the 71st report of the Law Commission of
[32]         Hon'ble the Supreme Court in a case of K. Srinivas Rao vs.
D.A. Deepa (supra) has observed that though irretrievable breakdown of
marriage is not a ground for divorce under the Hindu Marriage Act,
however, marriage which is dead for all purposes, cannot be revived by
Court's verdict, if parties are not willing since marriage involves human
sentiments and emotions and if they have dried up, there is hardly any
chance of their springing back to life on account of artificial reunion
created by court decree.
[33]          Now, once the respondent-wife who is not staying with the
appellant for the last about 20 years and is not ready to give mutual
divorce to the appellant-husband, reference at this stage can be made to
Naveen Kohli's case (supra), which was a case of cruelty (physical and
mental) where Hon'ble the Supreme Court considered the concept of
irretrievable breakdown of marriage. In this case as well, the parties were
living separately for the last 10 years and the wife was not ready to give
divorce to the husband. Hon'ble the Supreme Court granted decree of
divorce but directed the husband to pay a sum of Rs.25 lacs towards
permanent maintenance. In para 58, it has been observed as under:-
“58. The High Court ought to have considered the
repercussions, consequences, impact and ramifications
of all the criminal and other proceedings initiated by
the parties against each other in proper perspective.
For illustration, the High Court has mentioned that so
far as the publication of the news item is concerned,
the status of husband in a registered company was
only that of an employee and if any news item is
published, in such a situation, it could not, by any
stretch of imagination be taken to have lowered the
prestige of the husband. In the next para 69 of the
judgment that in one of the news item what has been
indicated was that in the company, Nikhil Rubber (P)
Ltd., the appellant was only a Director along with
Mrs. Neelu Kohli whom held 94.5% share of Rs.100/-
each in the company. The news item further indicated
that Naveen Kohli was acting against the spirit of the
Article of the Association of Nikhil Rubber (P) Ltd.,
had caused immense loss of business and goodwill. He
has stealthily removed produce of the company,
besides diverted orders of foreign buyers to his
proprietorship firm M/s Navneet Elastomers. He had
opened bank account with forged signatures of Mrs.
Neelu Kohli and fabricated resolution of the Board of
Directors of the company. Statutory authority-
Companies Act had refused to register documents filed
by Mr. Naveen Kolhi and had issued show cause
notice. All business associates were cautioned to avoid
dealing with him alone. Neither the company nor Mrs.
Neelu Kohli shall be liable for the acts of Mr. Naveen
Kohli. Despite the aforementioned finding that the
news item was intended to caution business associates
to avoid dealing with the appellant then to come to this
finding in the next para that it will by no stretch of
imagination result in mental cruelty is wholly
untenable.”
[34]          It is well settled that once the parties have separated and
separation has continued for a sufficient length of time and anyone of
them presented a petition for divorce, it can well be presumed that the
marriage has broken down. The Court, no doubt, should seriously make
an endeavour to reconcile the parties; yet, if it is found that the breakdown
is irreparable, then divorce should not be withheld. The consequences of
preservation in law of the unworkable marriage which has long ceased to
be effective are bound to be a source of greater misery for the parties.
[35]          In the present case, the appellant-husband and the
respondent-wife are living separately since April, 2002. Firstly, efforts
were made to resolve the matrimonial dispute through the process of
mediation, which is one of the effective mode of alternative mechanism in
resolving the personal dispute but in vain.
[36]          Applying the ratio of the above-mentioned judgments to the
facts of the present case and keeping in view the extra-ordinary facts and
circumstances of the case, the appeal is allowed, judgment dated
26.02.2013 passed by the District Judge, Rohtak, is set aside and decree of
divorce is granted accordingly in favour of the appellant-husband. Decree-
sheet be prepared accordingly. However, we direct the appellant-husband
to make an F.D. of `20 lakhs as permanent alimony in the name of the