The Allahabad High Court has restrained the UP Government, block-level officers, and various other departments from passing any orders for the engagement of Anganwadi Workers in any other work/duty including election duty.
"...this Court is of the considered view that work which is being discharged by Anganwadi Workers is of considerable importance, looking into the fact that in one block there is only one worker and in case that one Anganwadi Worker is assigned duty in elections or any other work then entire nursing and lactating woman including pregnant women would not be taken care of and would adversely affect the health of public at large," the Bench of Justice Alok Mathur observed
Further, the Court directed that the copy its order be served upon the Chief Secretary, Government of U.P., Lucknow so that appropriate instructions could be given to the District Magistrates of the State.
Essentially, the Court was hearing a writ plea filed by Manisha Kanojia and another, who are working as Anganwadi Workers in the Barabanki district and who were deputed by the administration on the duty of Booth Level Officer (BLO) in the local body elections. 
Challenging the same, they moved the Court arguing that their deputation on the poll duty was against the orders and instructions of the Central and State Governments as the same would affect the health care of children and mothers in the area. The petitioners also argued that other village-level personnel could be engaged in the election work.
A categorical direction was sought from the Court to the official authorities to comply with the order of the Chief Secretary, Government of U.P. dated 19.11.2019 and 03.05.2017, as well as Government Order, dated 09.11.2013, which restrains Anganwadi Workers/Helpers to be engaged in non Integrated Child Development Services Schemes (I.C.D.S.) related tasks
In view of these submissions and acknowledging the importance of work rendered by the Anganwadi workers, the Court allowed the writ petition and directed the block-level officers and various other departments to restrain themselves from passing any orders engaging Anganwadi Workers in any other work/duty including election duty and to comply with Government Order dated 19.11.2019 and 03.05.2017 as well as Government Order dated 09.11.2013.
Case title - Smt. Manisha Kanaujia And Another v. District Magistrate And Another [WRIT - A No. - 6428 of 2022]



