1. Heard Ms. Abhilasha Pandey, learned counsel for the
petitioner as well as learned Standing Counsel for the
2. Counter affidavit filed by District Programme Officer,
Barabanki is taken on record.
3. The petitioners are working on the post of Angan Wadi
Workers at Anganwadi Centre City Guleria Garda, District -
Barabanki in Integerated Child Development Scheme, which is
Government of India sponsored scheme. Relief sought by the
petitioner in the present writ petition is for a direction to the
respondents to comply with the orders passed by the Chief
Secretary, Government of U.P., Lucknow dated 19.11.2019 and
03.05.2017 as well as Government Order dated 09.11.2013,
which restrains Anganwadi Workers/Helpers to be engaged in
related tasks and also directions to the respondents to forthwith
comply with the guidelines issued by the Government of India
dated 15.06.2010 and 05.11.2019 regarding restraining
utilization of Anganwadi Workers/Helpers in local body
elections etc.
4. It has been submitted by learned counsel for the petitioners
that they were engaged in Booth Level Officers duty (BLO's)
which is election related full time work and is non departmental
task. The care taking and all round development of young
children of 3-6 age group, the services rendered to pregnant and
lactating mothers are adversely hampered by such duty which is
in clear violation to child rights for getting at least 300 days in a
year free nutrition, health care and education as envisaged in
Food Security Act, 2013, New Education Policy, 2020 and
National Policy for Children, 2013.
5. It is next submitted by learned counsel for the petitioners that
there are many village level employees such as Panchayat
Mitra, Shiksha Mitra, Rozgar Sewak and Sanitation workers
and village secretaries who can undertake such election related
duties of BLO. It is submitted that Government Order dated
09.10.2013, which prohibits engagement of Anganwadi
Workers and Helpers in non-departmental activities as Child
Welfare is considered supreme priority under Centrally
sponsored Schemes. Even the State Government has issued
order dated 31.05.2017, by Chief Secretary which is addressed
to all the District Magistrates to not to engage Anganwadi
Workers/Helpers in non departmental tasks. The Chief
Secretary, Government of U.P. has also issued order dated
19.11.2019, citing strong objection by Central Government
regarding deployment of Anganwadi Workers in non ICDS
activities, which include nutritional, educative and health care
of children, barring exceptional and inevitable circumstances.
6. It is further submitted that the issue involved in the present
writ petition is also engaging attention of Hon'ble Supreme
Court and by means of order dated 08.03.2020, rendered in the
case of Suo-moto Writ Petition (C) No. 2 of 2020, following
"Closure of Anganwadi Centers due to spread of COVID-19
Pendemic situation may lead to large scale malnourishment
among beneficiaries, particularly the Children and Lactating
and Nursing Mothers in Rural as well as Tribal areas are prone
to such mal-nourishment ...... While dealing with one crisis, the
situation may not lead to creation of another crisis."
7. The aforesaid order of Apex Court has been referred to in
order dated 23.03.2020, passed by the Director (ICDS),
Government of India, who in his order has recorded that in case
Anganwadis are shut down, the children as well as the lactating
& nursing mothers would be deprived of the nutritional food.
Non-supply of nutritional food to the children as well as
lactating and nursing mothers may lead to large-scale
malnourishment. Particularly, the children and the lactating and
nursing mothers in rural as well as tribal area are prone to such
mal-nourishment. Such malnutrion may affect their immunity
system and as such, children and lactating and ursing mothers
would be more prone to catch the infection.
8. It is in the aforesaid circumstances, the work done by the
Anganwadi Workers cannot be undermined by passing any
direction for discharge of duties by departments and specially
during elections. It is noticed that Central and State
Governments are vigilant in this regard and have passed various
Government Orders restraining the District Magistrates and
other Officers not to engage Anganwadi Workers in other works
including election duty.
9. In the counter affidavit it has only been stated that since work
of elections is of supreme importance in a Democracy and all
the officers have to act and assist during such process, but in the
counter affidavit there is no answer to the various Government
Orders issued either by the Chief Secretary, Government of U.P.
or by Government of India and also directions issued by the
Apex Court in this regard.
10. In the light of above, this Court is of the considered view
that work which is being discharged by Anganwadi Workers is
of considerable importance, looking into the fact that in one
block there is only one worker and in case that one Anganwadi
Worker is assigned duty in elections or any other work then
entire nursing and lactating woman including pregnant women
would not be taken care of and would adversely affect the
health of public at large.
11. In the light of above, present writ petition is allowed.
12. It is provided that let Government Order dated 19.11.2019
and 03.05.2017 as well as Government Order dated 09.11.2013,
the block level officers and various other departments are
restrained from passing any orders engaging Anganwadi
Workers in any other work/duty including election duty.
13. Let a copy of this order be served upon the Chief Secretary,
Government of U.P., Lucknow, so that he may pass necessary
orders and direct the District Magistrates accordingly.