This Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India was filed seeking to issue a writ of habeas corpus to
produce before this Court Sri.Abdul Raoof (‘the detenu’) who
is under detention under the provisions of the Conservation of
Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act,
1974 [hereinafter referred to as 'the COFEPOSA Act'] and to
set him at liberty forthwith; and to issue a writ of certiorari
declaring that Ext.P8 Detention Order, as well as Ext.P19
Confirmation       Order,  as   unconstitutional,  illegal,  and
unsustainable in law.
2.     Ext.P8 is the Detention Order issued by the second
respondent under Section 3(1) of the COFEPOSA Act for the
detention of Sri.Abdul Raoof. Exhibit P19 is the Confirmation
Order issued by the authorised representative of the 1 st
respondent under Section 8(f) read with Section 10 of the
COFEPOSA Act directing to detain him for a period of one
year from the date of detention, 06.03.2022.
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
3.     The incidents which culminated in the issuance of
Exts.P8 and P19, gatherable from the narration of facts in the
Writ Petition, are the following:
3.1    The unaccompanied baggage of one Althaf Moosan
Mukri, was checked on 20.04.2021 and inside the compressor
of the refrigerator amongst the baggage, contraband gold
weighing 14763.300 Grams valued at Rs.7,16,16,768/- was
found and seized. Based on the statement of the passenger,
three      persons,     the  father-in-law    of   the    detenu,
Sri.Mohammed Ali, the brother of the detenu, Sri.Abdulla S.S.
and the Customs G Card holder, Sri.Biju V. Joy were
summoned        on   20.04.2021   and   their  statements   were
recorded under Section 108 of the Customs Act, 1962. On
21.04.2021       another    statement    was     recorded    from
3.2. The Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI)
recorded further statements from them in which they
reiterated their earlier statements and gave further evidence
from which complicity of the detenu was established. In their
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
statements, they admitted that the detenu who was residing
in Dubai, UAE was running a cargo handling and forwarding
business      and     was   scouting   passengers     who    had
unaccompanied cargo to be sent to India. The contraband
gold concealed in the compressors of refrigerators of the
detenu was thus sent along with his unaccompanied baggage
which was cleared in Cochin by Sri.Biju V Joy. The baggage
was received by Sri. Mohammed Ali, and was later handed
over to the passenger after retrieving smuggled gold from the
compressors. They also admitted that apart from the detenu,
Sri. Mohammed Ali, Sri.Abdulla S.S. and Sri.Biju V. Joy had
invested money to procure the contraband gold and after
selling the contraband gold money would be sent back to the
detenu through hawala channels.
3.3    Although bail applications filed by Sri. Mohammed
Ali, Sri. Abdulla S.S. and Sri. Biju V. Joy were dismissed by
Ernakulam; they were granted bail by the Sessions Court,
Ernakulam on 11.05.2021.
3.4. On 27.07.2021 the detenu was served through the
Indian     Consulate,   Dubai the summons     issued   by   the
Sponsoring Authority to appear before the investigating
officer. But he did not appear before the investigating officer.
However, he sent a letter stating that he was unable to
appear in terms of the summons.
3.5. On 18.10.2021 on completion of the investigation
Show Cause Notice dated 18.10.2021 was issued to many
persons including the detenu. The detenu engaged a Counsel
to participate in the adjudication proceedings to prove his
innocence. Still, he did not appear and participate in the
adjudication proceedings.
3.6. In order to understand whether there was any
Detention Order issued against him, the detenu sent a letter
to the DG, CEIB as well as the Detaining Authority on
31.12.2021 by Speed Post requesting each of them to inform
him whether any Detention Order was issued against him.
3.7. The detenu came to India on 27.12.2021 and he
claims that thereafter he has been living in his family house
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
and attending to his normal day-to-day activities. However,
neither the respondents nor any officer under them serve the
Detention Order against him.
3.8. On 05.03.2022 forenoon the detenu was taken into
custody by police officers deputed by the seventh respondent.
Ext.P8 order dated 24.08.2021 issued under Section 3(1) of
the COFEPOSA Act was served on the detenu. The detenu
was taken to the Central Prison, Poojappura where he is
under detention. Copies of the Grounds of Detention were
served on the detenu on 7.3.22, a copy of which is Ext.P9.
Copies of the documents relied upon by the Detaining
Authority were also served along with Ext.P9.
3.9. On 24.03.2022 the 1st respondent referred the
case of the detenu under Section 8(b) of the COFEPOSA Act
to the fourth respondent, the Advisory Board.
3.10 The detenu saying that the voluminous documents
served on him contained extremely technical jargon and were
beyond his comprehension and he was unable to fathom and
that many materials on which the Detaining Authority had
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
placed reliance for his conclusions were not supplied to him;
he addressed the Detaining Authority and the DG, CEIB on
05.04.2022 requesting for further materials, documents and
information. Copies of those requests are Exts.P12 and P13.
3.11. Ext.P12 addressed to the Detaining Authority was
treated as a representation and was disposed of by him on
07.04.2022. The Memorandum dated 07.04.2022 issued by
the Director (COFEPOSA) conveying the rejection of the
representation is Ext.P15 and a copy of the same was served
on the detenu on 07.04.2022 itself.
3.12.    On    07.04.2022 and  22.04.2022    the  detenu
addressed representations to the Advisory Board informing it
about the withholding of information and documents requested
in Exts.P12 and P13 and requesting to adjourn the hearing till
he gets those information and documents. He further requested
to furnish him with a copy of the para-wise comments
submitted before the Advisory Board by the DG, CEIB.
3.13. After the Advisory Board submitted its opinion, the
first respondent took the view that there were sufficient
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
reasons for the continued detention of the detenu and
thereupon confirmed the Detention Order under Section 8(f)
of the COFEPOSA Act. The detenu under Section 10 of the Act
was directed to be in detention for a period of one year from
06.03.2022, the date of his detention. A copy of the
Confirmation Order issued on 24.05.2022 is Ext.P19. On
27.05.2022 the Deputy Secretary to the 1st respondent issued
a Memorandum dated 27.05.2022 informing the detenu that
his representation, Ext.P13 was rejected and a copy of the
same is Ext.P20. It was served on the detenu on 28.05.2022
by email and by post on 02.06.2022.
4.     The petitioner set out grounds (a) to (kkk) to
attack Exts.P8 and P19 orders. On a concision of the grounds
in the light of the submissions of the learned counsel
appearing     for   the   petitioner and   the written  note  of
arguments submitted by him, the grounds, broadly, are
summarised as follows:
i)    Subjective satisfaction of the Detaining Authority has
been     vitiated   for   want  of  production  of  all the
documents which are relevant in the matter;
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
ii)   Inordinate delay occurred in execution of the Detention
Order and that discredited the finding of the Detaining
Authority that there is propensity and potentiality for
the detenu indulging in smuggling activities, abetting
the smuggling of goods and dealing in smuggled goods,
necessitating his detention;
iii)  The Sponsoring Authority did not produce necessary
documents before the Advisory Board, namely, the
representation submitted by the detenu; and
iv)   Right of the detenu to make representation before the
Detaining Authority and the Government was scuttled
due to non supply of materials/documents demanded by
the detenu whereby he was denied his right guaranteed
under Articles 14, 21 and 22(5) of the Constitution of
5.     Respondents No.1 and 2 filed a counter affidavit
wherein the contention and allegations of the petitioner are
denied. It is contended that every document which is relevant
has   been     considered  by  the  Detaining  Authority  and
subjective satisfaction was arrived at on the basis of
necessary and sufficient materials. Detention order could not
be executed in time solely because the detenu evaded the
process of law. He was abroad. He reached India not through
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
a proper channel for travel. He came to India along the Nepal
border whereby he could conceal himself from the notice of
the authorities and bypass the look out circular issued against
the detenu. He did not appear before the authorities, despite
issuing the look out circular. He hid himself and kept aloof. He
created documents to camouflage that he has been available
in the station. The authorities had taken all possible steps to
arrest him but it was not possible since he was absconding. It
is incorrect that the representation of the detenu was not
placed before the Advisory Board. The documents demanded
by the detenu were not relied upon documents. Totally
irrelevant documents were asked for. Screenshots of the
whatsapp chats of Sri.Biju V. Joy alone were obtained by the
revenue officials. No audio chats were retrieved or relied
upon     by    the    Detaining Authority.  Accordingly,  these
respondents contended that there is no reason to interfere
with Exts.P8 and P19 orders.
5.1. The 3rd respondent also filed a counter affidavit.
The contentions are more or less the same as that of
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
respondent Nos.1 and 2. It is further contended that steps
under Section 7(1) of the COFEPOSA Act were initiated
against the detenu, but he evaded the process of law.
6.     The petitioner filed a reply affidavit in answer to
the affidavits filed by respondent Nos.1 to 3.
7.     Heard the learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner,    the   learned Central  Government     Pleader for
respondent Nos.1 and 2, Deputy Solicitor General of India for
respondent No.3 and the learned Government Pleader for
respondent Nos.5 to 7. The relevant files were made available
for our perusal.
Ground No.i) Subjective satisfaction of the Detaining
Authority has been vitiated for want of production of all the
documents which are relevant in the matter.
8.     The 2nd respondent in exercise of the powers under
section 3(1) of the COFEPOSA Act issued Ext.P8. It was
ordered that the detenu Sri.Abdul Raoof would be detained
and kept in central jail, Poojappura, Thiruvananthapuram. The
2nd respondent recorded satisfaction that the detenu would
again indulge in activities of smuggling of goods, abetting the
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
smuggling      of   goods   and   engaging   in transporting  or
concealing or keeping smuggled goods. The learned counsel
appearing for the petitioner would submit that the subjective
satisfaction arrived at by the Detaining Authority is vitiated
since all documents and materials having relevance and
serious impact in the matter were not considered. It is
submitted that the documents, particularly whatsapp audio
chats between the detenu and Sri.Biju V Joy, who is one of
the co-accused in the crime relating to the smuggling of gold
in question, on the days preceding the day of seizure ie.,
20.04.2021 and also the orders remanding Sri.Althaf M.M,
Sri.Muhammed Ali K.T, Sri.Abdulla S.S and Sri.Biju V.Joy who
were the co accused, were not produced before the Detaining
Authority. It is the submission of the learned Counsel for the
petitioner     that    had   those   documents/materials   been
produced, the 2nd respondent would not have arrived at such
a subjective satisfaction against the detenu. It is further
submitted      that   by   withholding   those  documents    the
Sponsoring Authority violated the mandate of Article 22(5) of
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
the Constitution of India and that resulted in infringement of
rights of the detenu under Articles 14 and 21 as well.
9.    In Motilal Jain v. State of Bihar [AIR 1968 SC
1509] a Six-Judge Bench of the Apex Court held that
individual liberty is a cherished right, one of the most
valuable fundamental rights guaranteed by our Constitution
to the citizens of this country. If that right is invaded,
excepting strictly in accordance with law, the aggrieved party
is entitled to appeal to the judicial power of the State for
relief. It further held that the interest of the society is no less
important than that of the individual and our Constitution has
made provision for safeguarding the interests of the society.
Its provisions harmonise the liberty of the individual with
social interest. The authorities are obliged to act solely on the
basis of those provisions and they cannot deal with the liberty
of the individual in a casual manner.
10.   In Kamaleshkumar Ishwardas Patel v. Union
of India [(1995) 4 SCC 51] a Constitution Bench of the
Apex Court held that although the harmful consequences of
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
the activities in which the detenus are alleged to be involved
is   a matter of concern, while discharging constitutional
obligation to enforce the fundamental rights of the people,
more especially the right of personal liberty, the court cannot
allow it to be influenced by such considerations. It has been
said that the history of liberty is the history of procedural
safeguards. The Framers of the Constitution being aware that
the preventive detention involves a serious encroachment on
the right to personal liberty, took care to incorporate, in
Clauses (4) and (5) of Article 22, to ensure minimum
safeguards for the protection of persons sought to be
preventively detained.       These safeguards are therefore
required to be "zealously watched and enforced by the court".
11.    The learned Counsel appearing for the petitioner
would submit that the Constitutional mandate being so, the
detenu need only to point out the illegality of the detention
order, and not necessary for him to establish any and every
flaw in that order. Whether the subjective satisfaction arrived
at by the Detaining Authority was on the basis of sufficient
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
and reliable materials is a matter to be convinced by the
Detaining Authority. When the question is whether the order
of detention satisfies the requirements of Section 3(1) of the
COFEPOSA Act and Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India is
cropped up, the burden to answer the question to the
satisfaction of the court is on the respondents.
12.    In Icchu Devi Choraria v. Union of India
[(1980) 4 SCC 531] the Apex Court held that when a rule is
issued, it is incumbent on the detaining authority to satisfy
the court that the detention of the petitioner is legal and in
conformity      with   the mandatory    provision of the   law
authorising such detention. It has also been insisted by this
court, in answer to this rule, the detaining authority must
place all the relevant facts before the court which should
show that the detention is in accordance with the provisions
of the Act. The burden of proof to show that the detention is
in accordance with the procedure established by law has
always been placed by this court on the detaining authority
because Article 21 of the Constitution provides in clear and
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
explicit terms that no one shall be deprived of his life or
personal     liberty   except   in   accordance  with  procedure
established by law.
13. The parameters for arriving at the subjective
satisfaction have been delineated by the Apex Court in
Gurdev Singh v. Union of India [(2002) 1 SCC 545]. It
was held that the subjective satisfaction arrived at by the
Detaining Authority shall be on consideration of all the
relevant    materials    placed   before   it by the  Sponsoring
Authority. In that case, the detainee had no case that the
Sponsoring Authority did not place before the Detaining
Authority any material in its possession which is relevant and
material and if considered by the Detaining Authority, might
have resulted in taking a different view in the matter. The
contention was that the Detaining Authority should have taken
further steps before being satisfied that a case for detention
under the COFEPOSA Act has been made out against the
detenu. The Apex Court observed that whether the detention
order suffers from non application of mind by the Detaining
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
Authority is not a matter to be examined according to any
straight jacket formula or set principles. It depends on the
facts and circumstances of the case, the nature of the
activities alleged against the detenu, the materials collected in
support of such allegations, the propensity and potentiality of
the detenu in indulging in such activities, etc. The Act does
not lay down any set parameters for arriving at the subjective
satisfaction by the Detaining Authority. It was accordingly held
that keeping in view the purpose for which the enactment is
made and the purpose it is intended to achieve, the
Parliament in its wisdom, has not laid down any set standards
for the Detaining Authority to decide whether an order of
detention should be passed against a person. The matter is
left to the subjective satisfaction of the Competent Authority.
14.   In A. Sowkath Ali v. Union of India [(2000) 7
SCC 148] the Apex Court considered the question whether
withholding of a retraction statement where confession
statement is produced would vitiate the decision of the
Detaining Authority. The Apex Court held in Paragraph No.20
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
“20. There can be no doubt, it was not necessary, while
considering the case of the petitioner-detenu, to place all
or any of the document which is relevant relied in the
proceedings of a co-accused, but where the Sponsoring
Authority opts out of his own volition to place any
document of the other co-detenu, not merely as a
narration of fact but reiterating in details the confession
made by him, then it cannot be said it would not
prejudice the case of the detenu. If this has been done it
was incumbent for the Sponsoring Authority to have
placed their retraction also. xxxxx What was the
necessity of reproducing the details of the confessional
statement of another co-accused in the present case? If
the Sponsoring Authority would not have placed this then
possibly no legal grievance could have been made by the
detenu. But once the Sponsoring Authority having chosen
to   place  the  confessional   statement,    then  it was
incumbent on it to place the retraction also made by
them. In our considered opinion, its non-placement
affects the subjective satisfaction of the Detaining
Authority. This Court has time and again laid down that
the Sponsoring Authority should place all the relevant
documents before the Detaining Authority. It should not
withhold any such document based on his own opinion.
All documents, which are relevant, which have bearing
on the issue, which are likely to affect the mind of the
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
Detaining Authority should be placed before him. Of
course a document which has no link with the issue
cannot be construed as relevant.”
15.    As held by the Apex court whether the documents
allegedly withheld by the Sponsoring Authority, want of which
is said to have vitiated the detention order, is a question to be
decided in the facts and circumstances of each case. The
contention of the petitioner is that although the Sponsoring
Authority produced the screenshots from the mobile phone of
Sri.Biju V. Joy, failed to produce voice chats sent to the
detenu on 19.04.2021 and nearby dates. It is contended that
those voice chats, if produced, would have established the
innocence of the detenu. The learned counsel thus would
contend that the findings of the Detaining Authority that the
propensity of the detenu indulging in continuous smuggling
activities was established is vitiated. Similarly it is contended
that the orders dated 21.04.2021 and 04.05.2021 of the
Ernakulam were not produced and that also vitiated the
subjective satisfaction arrived by the Detaining Authority.
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
16.    Ext.P9 is the grounds on which Ext.P8 detention
order was issued. The statements of not only the co accused,
Sri.Althaf    A.M.,   the passenger   in  whose   baggage    the
contraband was carried, but also Sri.Muhammed Ali K.T.,
Sri.Abdulla S.S. and Sri.Biju V. Joy, are the materials
essentially seen relied on by the Detaining Authority to arrive
at the subjective satisfaction. It is true that they have
retracted the said statements. The empowered officer of the
revenue intelligence sent rebuttal letters in regard to such
retraction. After releasing on bail also those persons gave
statements confirming their earlier statements.
17.    The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner at
this juncture raised a contention that the co accused after their
arrest were produced before the Magistrate only through video
whatsapp call and therefore they could not complain that
under threat and coercion statements were extracted from
them. It is alleged that they did not realise even that they
really were produced before a Magistrate. How           can the
detenu, who resorted to the excuse of Covid restrictions not to
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
appear before the investigating officer in spite of receipt of
summons, complain that his co accused were produced before
the Magistrate only through video conferencing, a practice
which     was   in   vogue   due   to   Covid   related  restrictions
throughout the country. Similarly, there is no basis for his
contention that the co accused could not realise that they were
being produced before the Magistrate. That is a fact not in his
direct knowledge. In the absence of any material that
contention has no legs to stand.
18.    Besides    the   statements     of    the  co-accused,
statements of Sri.Abdul Jaseed and Sri.Abeez Faizal in whose
baggage gold was transported at the instance of the detenu
on   previous     occasions   were    also  produced    before    the
detaining     authority.   The    documents      regarding   money
transaction between Sri.Biju V. Joy and other co accused were
part   of   relied   upon   documents.     Those    documents     got
confirmation       from     various     other     documents       and
circumstances. Sri.Biju V.Joy was the customs agent who
cleared the baggage of not only Sri.Althaf, the passenger in
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
the present case, but also three passengers in whose
baggage gold was transported earlier. The communications
between him and the detenu and also documents pertaining
their travel placed on record before the detaining authority
give support to those facts. On going through the grounds of
detention and the relied upon documents, it can be seen that
materials     sufficient  to arrive  at   a  finding   regarding
involvement of the detenu in the repeated activities of
smuggling of gold to India were produced before the
Detaining Authority. When such materials were available on
record, the contention that audio clippings in the Whatsapp
chats between the detenu and Sri.Biju V.Joy and two remand
orders of the Magistrate, which never reached in the
possession      of   the  Sponsoring   Authority,  vitiated   the
subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority is not able to
be appreciated.
19.    Exts.P17 and P18 are the explanations submitted by
the detenu before the Advisory Board. One of the specific
contentions taken up in Ext.P17 was that the detenu had
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
requested      the  Detaining    Authority  and   the   Government
information, materials which were required for him to submit
effective    explanation   and    representations.   He   requested
postponement of proceedings also on that ground. The Advisory
Board considered the said contention and rendered its opinion
without waiting for such documents. The Board concluded that
there was sufficient materials to justify the detention even in
the absence of such documents and materials.
20.    As held by the Apex Court in Ankit Ashok Jalan
v. Union of India [(2020) 16 SCC 127] the qualitative
examination of the detention order is the responsibility of
the Advisory Board. When the matter concerning the detenu
was considered the Advisory Board did not consider such
additional documents were necessary for the Detaining
Authority      to  reach   a  subjective    satisfaction  that  the
detenu was liable to be detained. That would further
establish     that   the  petitioner’s   challenge   that  Ext.  P8
detention order is vitiated for want of such additional
documents is untenable.
Ground No.ii) The inordinate delay occurred in execution of
the Detention Order and that discredited the finding of the
Detaining Authority that there is propensity and potentiality
for the detenu indulging in smuggling activities, abetting the
smuggling of goods and dealing in smuggled goods,
necessitating his detention.
21.    On 20.04.2021 the co-accused of the detenu were
arrested. The detenu was then in Dubai. He received the
summons issued by the DRI through the Consulate General of
India on 27.07.2021. He did not appear. Instead, on
02.08.2021 he sent a letter stating that he could not travel
from the UAE because of Covid situation. His statement could
not, therefore, be recorded and the proceedings were
completed with the available materials. Ext.P8 Detention
Order was accordingly passed on 24.08.2021.
22.    It is the contention of the detenu that he returned
to India on 29.12.2021 after taking care of his businesses in
Nepal. He reached New Delhi by road and from New Delhi to
Kochi by air on 29.12.2021. The detenu claims that on
31.12.2021 he addressed Exts.P1 and P2 letters to the
Director General, CEIB and the Detaining Authority querying
if any detention order had been issued against him. But there
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
was no response. He therefore, on 04.02.2022 addressed
Exts.P3 and P4 to them, but that also evoked no response.
23.    The respondents contended that the documents
now projected by the detenu are engineered by him to
support his false claim that he was available at his residence,
but in reality he was hiding. It is further contended that on
11.02.2022 a notification under Section 7(1)(b) of the
COFEPOSA Act was published in the Official Gazette requiring
the detenu to surrender before the 6th respondent. The
petitioner, in answer to that, would        contend that the
respondents did not state in the counter affidavits about the
issuance of the notification and therefore that plea raised by
them now only cannot be reckoned with. The learned counsel
for the petitioner would contend that if the detenu knew
about the notification, he would not have sent Exts.P5 and
P6 reminders referring to Exs.P1 and P2        to the Director
General, CEIB and the Detaining Authority.
24.    The learned Counsel for the petitioner accordingly
would contend that no plausible explanation is offered by
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
respondents 1 to 3 or respondents 6 and 7 as to why the
detenu was not arrested till 05.03.2022 on which date he
was arrested from his house at Kothamangalam and
non-explanation of the delay throws considerable doubt on
the genuineness of the subjective satisfaction of the
Detaining      Authority. It is  also  contended  that  such
unexplained and inordinate delay entails an inevitable
assumption that the live and proximate link between the
reason for detention and the purpose of detention is
25.    In Sk.Serajul v. State of West Bengal [1975] 2
SCC 78] a Four-Judge Bench of the Apex Court held that if
there is any delay in making the Order of detention or in
arresting the detenu which is prima facie unreasonable, the
State must give reason explaining the delay. In Bhawarlal
Ganeshmalji v. State of Tamil Nadu [(1979) 1 SCC 465],
the Apex Court followed and explained that principle. It was
held that there must be a live and proximate link between the
grounds of detention alleged by the Detaining Authority and
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
the purpose of detention, namely, the prevention of smuggling
activities. The link would be treated as snapped if there is a
long and unexplained delay between the date of the order of
detention and the arrest of the detenu. In such a case the
order of detention may have to be struck down unless the
grounds indicate a fresh application of the mind of the
Detaining Authority to the new situation and the changed
circumstances. It was also held that where the delay is not
only adequately explained but is found to be the result of the
recalcitrant or refractory conduct of the detenu in evading
arrest, there is warrant to consider the 'link' not snapped but
26.    The    aforesaid view    was reiterated  in  Abdul
Rahman v. State of Kerala [(1989) 4 SCC 741], SMF
Sultan      Abdul     Kader   v.    Joint Secretary     to  the
Government of India [(1998) 8 SCC 343] and Manju
Ramesh Nahar v. Union of India [(1999) 4 SCC 116].
Again in Naresh Kumar Goyal v. Union of India [(2005) 8
SCC 276] a Three-Judge Bench of the Apex Court emphasised
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
that view. It was held that inordinate delay, for which no
adequate explanation is furnished leads to the assumption
that the live and proximate link between the Ground of
Detention and the purpose of detention is snapped. The same
was the view taken by the Apex Court in Mukesh Tikaji Bora
v. Union of India [(2007) 9 SCC 28] and Saeed Zakar
Hussain Malik v State of Maharashtra [(2012) 8 SCC
233]. The principle, therefore, is that unexplained and
inordinate delay in executing the detention order leads to an
inference that the live and proximate link between the reason
for the detention and the purpose of detention is snapped and
therefore the order of detention becomes invalid. The question
immediately      arises   is whether  the  respondents    could
substantiate that there is sufficient explanation for the delay
in executing the detention order. The detention order was
issued on 24.08.2021. The detenu was admittedly abroad till
29.12.2021. He was arrested on 05.03.2022. Hence the
explanation required is for the period from 29.12.2021 till
27.    In Syed Farooq Mohammad v Union of India
[(1990) 3 SCC 537] the facts were that two notices were
served, one on the detenu's mother and another on the
petitioner's brother directing the petitioner to appear before
the Detaining Authority. The petitioner has intentionally
absconded and thereby evaded arrest. It was held that, in
such circumstances, the delay was properly explained and the
link between the grounds of detention and the avowed
purpose of detention has not been snapped.
28.    In Waheeda Ashraf and others v. Union of
India and others [ILR 2021 (3) Ker.751], this Court relied
on the principle of law laid down by the Apex Court in Malwa
Shah v. State of West Bengal [(1974) 4 SCC 127] and
Mukesh Tikaji Bora v. Union of India [(2007) 9 SCC 28].
It was held that, insofar as an absconding detenu is
concerned, the live link between the incident and the purpose
of detention was not snapped but strengthened on account of
the conduct of the detenu.
29.    As pointed out above Ext.P8 detention order was
issued on 24.08.2021. Indisputably, the detenu was abroad at
that time. During the proceedings leading to Ext.P8, a
summons was issued to the detenu on 23.04.2021, to which
he replied that he was abroad and therefore he was unable to
appear in person before the authorities. The co-accused in
the case, Sri.Muhammad Ali. K.T is his father-in-law and Sri.
Abdulla S.S is his brother. Both of them were detained in
connection with this incident. He had received show cause
notice in the adjudication proceedings. In the circumstances,
it cannot be said that the detenu was not aware of the
proceedings going on against him. The detenu had come to
India on 29.12.2021. He did not travel by air across the
border. He went to Nepal, from where he travelled by bus to
cross the border and reached India. It is his contention that
from Delhi international airport he travelled to Kerala and
therefore it cannot be said that he tried to conceal himself.
30. A lookout circular was issued for procuring the
presence of the detenu. When all his co-accused were
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
detained, and a summons to attend before the Investigating
Officer and show cause notice in the detention proceedings
were already received by the detenu, the intention behind his
avoiding travel by air to India was obvious. He wanted to
bypass the immigration screening. The contention of the
respondents in this regard is sound and acceptable.
31.    It is the contention of the detenu that after coming
back home, he has been available at his residence at
Nellikuzhi, Kothamangalam in Ernakulam district. He has
produced Exts.P21 to P26 to substantiate that he was
physically available at his residence and the authorities did
not make any effort to apprehend him. The clandestine
nature of these documents is evident on a perusal of those
documents. EXt.P26 is a rent agreement entered into
between himself and his mother. What was the purpose of
entering into such a rent agreement by the detenu for him to
live in his mother’s residence. The facts that he underwent
Covid test in a laboratory, that he maintains an account in a
bank at Kothamangalam, and he went to court to sign a bail
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
bond are not sufficient indications to show that he has been
permanently residing at his own residence and available for
being apprehended.
32.    He produced Exts.P1 to P6 to show that he was
available at his residence. But, only due to the lethargy on
the part of the authorities, the detention order was not
executed. Those letters were sent in the name of the
detenu. He signed the letters and hence he personally
might have sent them also. The postal receipts affixed on
Exts.P1 and P2 would show that not from the post office
where he claimed to have been residing, but from a
different post office, those letters were sent. Be that as it
may, those documents would not show that he was
available at his residence for being intercepted by the
revenue authorities or the police.
33.    It may be noted that the 2nd respondent published
the   order     of   detention in   the official gazette dated
11.02.2022. It was a notice asking the detenu to appear
before the police for the execution of the detention order.
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
Invoking the provisions of Section 7(1)(b) of the COFEPOSA
Act, such a notification was published. The detenu would
contend that he was not aware of such gazette notification
and the respondents did not state the particulars of that
notification in their counter affidavit. That is not correct. It is
stated in the counter affidavit filed by respondents 1 and 2
that repeated summons were sent to the detenu and steps
under Section 7(1)(b) of the COFEPOSA Act was taken, but
the detenu did not turn up.
34.    A person residing in India cannot resort to a
contention that he was not aware of the gazette notification.
Although the notification was published on 11.02.2022, the
detenu did not surrender nor could he be arrested until
05.03.2022. A person who was given summons and show
cause notices to appear before the authorities and, as
admitted in Ext.P1 dated 31.12.2021, aware of the detention
of his brother and father-in-law in relation to the same
incident cannot take shelter to a contention that he did not
know about the gazette notification.
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
35.    The Apex Court in Kartarey and others v. The
State of Uttar Pradesh [(1976) 1 SCC 172] held that to be
an 'absconder' in the eye of law, it is not necessary that a
person should have run away from his home, it is sufficient if
he hides himself to evade the process of law, even if the
hiding place be his own home.
36.    In Union of India v Chaya Ghoshal [(2005) 10
SCC 97] the Apex Court held:
“16. Where, however, a person alleging infraction of
personal liberty tries to act in a manner which is more
aimed at deflecting the course of justice than for
protection of his personal right, the Court has to make
a deliberate balancing of the fact situation to ensure
that the mere factum of some delay alone is made use
of to grant relief. If a fraud has been practiced or
perpetrated that may in a given case nullify the
cherished goal of protecting personal liberty, which
obligated this Court to device guidelines to ensure such
protection    by  balancing   individual rights and  the
interests of the nation, as well.”
37.    Observation of an Honourable Judge of the Apex
Court in the concurring judgement of the majority in Subhash
Popatlal Dave v. Union of India and another [(2014) (1)
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
SCC 280] is also relevant here. It says,
“98. Therefore, I am of the opinion that those who have
evaded the process of law shall not be heard by this
Court to say that their fundamental rights are in
jeopardy. At least, in all those cases, where proceedings
such as the one contemplated under Section 7 of the
COFEPOSA        Act  were    initiated  consequent   upon
absconding of the proposed detenu, the challenge to the
detention     orders  on    the    live nexus  theory    is
impermissible. Permitting such an argument would
amount to enabling the law breaker to take advantage
of his own conduct which is contrary to law.”
38.    On considering the facts of the case in the light of the
law laid down in the aforesaid decisions, we conclude that the
contention of the petitioner that the delay in execution of Ext.P8
detention order resulted in invalidating the same is untenable
and rejected.
Ground No.iii) The Sponsoring Authority did not produce
necessary documents before the Advisory Board, namely, the
representation submitted by the detenu.
39. The detenu submitted Ext.P12 representation before
Government of India, New Delhi and Ext.P13 before the Joint
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
Secretary, COFEPOSA, Government of India, New Delhi. The
petitioner would allege that those representations along with
parawise comments thereon were not submitted before the
Advisory Board and therefore the detention order gets
40.    In K.M. Abdulla Kunhi and B.L. Abdul Khader
v. Union of India [(1991) 1 SCC 476], a Constitution
Bench of the Apex Court held that the representation may be
received before the case is referred to the Advisory Board, but
there may not be time to dispose of the representation before
referring the case to the Advisory Board. In that situation the
representation must also be forwarded to the Advisory Board
along with the case of the detenu. The representation may be
received after the case of the detenu is referred to the Board.
Even in this situation the representation should be forwarded
to the Advisory Board provided the Board has not concluded
the proceedings.
41.    In Ankit Ashok Jalan v Union of India [(2020)
16 SCC 127] a Three-Judge Bench of the Apex Court
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
explained the rationale of the law laid down in Abdulla Kunhi
(supra) and the majority decision on the above aspect is as
“A)     If the representation is received well before the
reference is made to the Advisory Board and can be
considered      by   the   appropriate  Government,     the
representation must be considered with expedition.
Thereafter the representation along with the decision
taken on the representation shall be forwarded to and
must form part of the documents to be placed before
the Advisory Board.
B)      If the representation is received just before the
reference is made to the Advisory Board and there is
no sufficient time to decide the representation, the
representation must be decided first and thereafter the
representation and the decision must be sent to the
Advisory Board. This is premised on the principle that
the consideration by the appropriate Government is
completely independent and also that there ought not
to be any delay in consideration of the representation.
C)     If the representation is received after the reference
is made but before the matter is decided by the Advisory
Board, the representation must be decided. The decision
as    well   as  the   representation  must   thereafter  be
immediately sent to the Advisory Board.
D)     If the representation is received after the decision
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
of the Advisory Board, the decisions are clear that in
such    cases   there is no   requirement to  send  the
representation to the Advisory Board.”
42.    The aforesaid principles were affirmed by the Apex
Court in Sarabjeet Singh Mokha v District Magistrate,
Jabalpur and others [2021 SCC OnLine 1019].
43.    It is seen from Ext.P15 that the Detaining Authority
considered Ext.P12 representation and rejected the same on
07.04.2022. Ext.P15 was submitted before the COFEPOSA
Advisory Board vide letter addressed to the Secretary of the
Board dated 07.04.2022. It is seen that Ext.P13, the
representation submitted to the Government along with the
para-wise comments were also submitted before the Advisory
Board as per the same letter dated 07.04.2022.           Ext.P16
produced by the petitioner is a copy of that letter. Of course,
Ext. P12 was not seen submitted although the order rejecting
it was submitted. When Ext.P13, the representation submitted
to the Government along with the para-wise comments and
Ext.P15 the order rejecting Ext.P12 representation were
submitted before the Advisory Board, non-production of
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
Ext.P12 which is a similar representation has no relevance.
That cannot have the effect of vitiating the whole process and
the contention of the petitioner in that regard has no merits.
Ground No.iv) Right of the detenu to make representation
before the Detaining Authority and the Government was
scuttled due to non supply of materials/documents demanded
by the detenu whereby his right guaranteed under Articles
14, 21 and 22(5) of the Constitution of India was infringed.
44. Exts.P12       and  P13   are   the   representations
submitted by the detenu to the detaining authority and the
Government. He requested in the said representations to
supply the following documents:
i)    Audio chats between the detenu and Sri.Biju V.Joy
retrieved and copied in a pen drive or a similar
electronic gadget from the mobile phone of Sri.Biju V
ii)   Copies      of    orders  remanding     to   Sri.  Althaf,
Sri.Muhammed Ali, Sri.Abdulla S.S and Sri.Biju V Joy on
21.04.2021 and 04.05.2021 by the Additional Chief
iii)  Copies of Exts.P2, P3 and P6 which are the letters sent
by the detenu himself to the detaining authority and the
Sponsoring Authorities on 31.12.2021, 04.02.2022 and
iv)   Show      cause     notices    for  initiating  adjudicating
proceedings      issued  against   the   detenu  and   other
persons.
v)    Reply sent to such show cause notices by such other
persons.
45.    The nature and extent of right to representation
under Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India has been a
subject for serious deliberation for long. In State of Bombay
v. Atma Ram Sridhar Vaidya [AIR 1951 SC 157] a Six-
Judge Bench of the Apex Court held that;
“In our opinion, it is therefore clear that while there
is a connection between the obligation on the part of
the detaining authority to furnish grounds and the
right given to the detained person to have an
earliest opportunity to make the representation, the
test to be applied in respect of the contents of the
grounds for the two purposes is quite different. As
already pointed out, for the first, the test is whether
it is sufficient to satisfy the authority. For the
second, the test is whether it is sufficient to enable
the detained person to make the representation at
the earliest opportunity."
46. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner
placed before us the following decisions also where the
aforesaid principle was followed and explained in:
i.    Puranlal Lakhanpal v. Union of India [AIR 1958 SC
ii.   Naresh Chandra Ganguli v. State of West Bengal
iii.  Motilal Jain v. State of Bihar [AIR 1968 SC 1509]
iv.   Bhawarlal Ganeshmalji v. State of Tamil Nadu
47.    As to the right to get the documents a Constitution
Bench of the Apex Court in State of Punjab v. Jagdev
Singh Talwandi [(1984) 1 SCC 596] held that if the order
of   detention    refers  to   or  relies upon any   document,
statement, or other material, copies thereof have, of course,
to be supplied to the detenu.
48.    Relying on Powanammal v. State of Tamil Nadu
and another [(1999) 2 SCC 413], which is a Three-Judge
Bench decision of the Apex Court, the learned Central
Government Counsel contended that the detenu has the right
to get documents which have not been relied upon in the
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
Grounds of Detention only if such documents have live
proximity to the detention and relevance to the grounds for
detention. The learned counsel for the petitioner would submit
that when the detenu demands documents, which in his
estimation,     are    required for  his making   an   effective
representation, non-supply of the same would fail his right
guaranteed under Articles under not only 22(5) but also 14
and 21 of the Constitution of India. Reliance has been made
in this regard on the decision in Kamla Kanyalal Kushlani v.
State of Maharashtra [(1981) 1 SCC 478] where the Apex
Court held that preventive detention has to conform to
Articles 14 and        21 in addition to Article 22(5) of the
Constitution of India.
49.    In Ramachandra A. Kamat v. Union of India
[(1980) 2 SCC 270] a Three-Judge Bench of the the Apex
Court held that it is the duty of the Detaining Authority to
satisfactorily explain the delay, if any, in furnishing of the
documents. It was explained that the Court did not mean
thereby the statements and documents not referred to in the
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
grounds of detention for, it may be that they are not in the
possession of the Detaining Authority and that reasonable
time may be required for furnishing copies of the relevant
documents, which may not be in his possession. The intention
is therefore clear that the statements and documents which
are referred to in the grounds of detention and which are
required by the detenu and are expected to be in possession
of   the    Detaining    Authority   should   be     furnished   with
reasonable expedition. In paragraph No.10 it was held:
"It may not be necessary for the detaining authority to
supply copies of all the documents relied upon in the
grounds of detention at the time when the grounds are
furnished to the detenu but once the detenu states that
for effective representation it is necessary that he
should have copies of the statements and documents
referred to in the grounds of detention, it is the duty of
the detaining authority to furnish them with reasonable
expedition.”                        (underline supplied)
50.    The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner
would submit that decision of a co-equal Bench of this Court
wherein legality of detention orders relating to the co-
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
accused, Sri.Muhammed Ali K.T, Sri.Abdulla S.S and Sri.Biju V
Joy which is reported in Nushath Koyamu v. Union of
India and others [2022(3) KLT 885] has a binding
bearing in this case. This Court, after taking into account the
principle of law laid down in a long line of decisions of the
Apex Court held that non-supply of audio chats in electronic
form seen in the print out of the screenshots taken from the
mobile phone of Sri.Biju v Joy has prejudicial effect on the
right of the detenues and that amounted to violation of Article
22(5) of the Constitution of India. The Court accordingly held
their detention orders illegal. The learned counsel for the
petitioner    would    submit that  the   said  decision    being
inter partes, has to be followed and this Writ Petition allowed.
51.    It may be noted that in Nushath Koyamu (supra)
this court observed in paragraph No.19 that the decisions
relied on by the respondents were rendered in different set of
facts and therefore could not be acted upon. That implies
that the applicability or not of the decisions on the point has
to be considered independently and in the light of the facts of
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
each case. Needless to say that a decision is an authority for
what it decides.
52.   The decision in Nushath Koyamu (supra) cannot be
said inter partes. It is true that one of the detenues therein was
represented by the petitioner in this case. Detenus are different.
The matters in issue in Nushath Koyamu were regarding the
legality of the orders of detention of Sri.Muhammed Ali K.T, Sri
Abdulla S.S and Sri Biju V Joy. On a reading of the said decision,
it is seen that all relating to the same incident, but grounds for
the detention of different persons are different. The detenu
Sri.Abdul Raoof was the person who contracted with the
passenger Sri.Althaf and sent the baggage from Dubai to India.
If so, he is the person who said to have personally involved in
originating the consignment, whereas the other detenus were
part of the contingent who said to have dealt with the
consignment in India. Therefore the reasons for detention of
Sri.Abdul Raoof cannot be equated with the reasons for
detention of the other detenus. In that view of the matter, the
facts of Nushath Koyamu (supra) and this case are different.
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
Hence the principle in Nushath Koyamu is not applicable to the
facts of this case.
53.    In J. Abdul Hakeem v. State of Tamil Nadu and
others [(2005) 7 SCC 70] the Apex Court held that the
detenu has a right to be supplied with the material documents
on which the reliance is placed by the Detaining Authority for
passing the detention order but the detention order will not be
vitiated, if the document although referred to in the order is
not supplied which is not relied upon by the detaining
authority for forming its opinion or was made basis for
passing the order of detention. Crux of the matter lies in
whether the detenu's right to make a representation against
the order of detention, is hampered by non-supply of the
particular document.
54.    In Kirti Kumar Chamanlal Kundaliya v. Union
of India [(1981) 2 SCC 436] it was held that the question
as to whether the materials supplied are sufficient to enable
the detenu making an effective representation, which is a
right guaranteed under the Constitution, will depend upon the
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
facts of each case. There is no charm in the expressions
"relied on", "referred to", or “based upon” documents. The
Court proceeded to hold that the detenu has the right to
receive all documents which are relied upon in the grounds of
detention and such other documents/materials which are
necessary to enable him to make an effective representation
against the order of detention.
55.    As could be seen from Ramachandra A.Kamath
(supra), the detenu has a right to get, apart from the relied
upon documents, the documents which are referred to in the
grounds and not already furnished to the detenu, if demanded
to. It was explained that the detenu was entitled to ask for
copies of statements and documents referred to in the
grounds of detention for enabling him to make an effective
representation. Once the detenu makes a request for such
relevant documents, he has to be furnished the same. On the
delay aspect, it was explained that the documents claimed by
the detenu stating that those are referred to in the grounds of
detention may not be in the possession of the detaining
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
authority and in such a situation, the authority may take
reasonable time to make available such documents. The Apex
Court, however, emphasised that the obligation of the
authority is only to provide copies of those documents, which
are relevant. This principle of law is explained by the Apex
Court in Kirit Kumar Chaman Lal Kundaliya and J.Abdul
Hakeem (supra) is essentially the same. Therefore the right
of the detenu to demand relevant documents, besides the
relied upon documents, is now well recognised in law.
56.    The question is whether the detenu can ask for any
and every document. After referring to the previous decisions
where the aforesaid principle was laid down, the Apex Court in
Powanmal (supra) held that every document and materials
which finds a passing reference in the course of narration of facts
in the ground of detention need not be supplied. But such
documents, non-supply of which would prejudice the detenu in
making an effective representation are to be supplied to him. The
reason is that non-supply of such documents would amount to
denial of the right of being communicated the grounds and being
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
afforded the opportunity of making effective representation
against the detention order.
57.    The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner
brought to our attention a few decisions of both the Apex
Court and different High Courts, where the question, whether
non supply of various documents amounted to denial of the
right of the detenu having the effect of vitiating the order of
detention, was considered. We do not propose to deliberate
upon those decisions since those are decisions on facts and no
proposition of law different from what has been enunciated in
the aforesaid decisions was evolved.
58.    In Ankit Ashok Jalan v. Union of India and
others [2020 (16) SCC 127] the Apex Court held that the
consideration for revocation of a detention order is limited to
examining whether the order conforms with the provisions of
law whereas the recommendation of the Advisory Board is on
the sufficiency of material for detention, which alone is either
confirmed or not accepted by the appropriate Government.
Therefore the detenu cannot be heard to contend that the
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
documents which were not placed before the detaining
authority and found not to have a vitiating effect on the
subjective satisfaction of that authority should have been
supplied to the detenu.
59.    In the above background only demand of the
detenu for the documents can be considered. The grievance of
the petitioner is about non-supply of five items of documents
enumerated in paragraph No.43 above. Those are not relied
upon documents. No reference to document No. 1, recording
of audio chats between the detenu and Sri. Biju V Joy is there
in the grounds of detention. Item No.3, Exts.P2, P3 and P6
are post detention order documents and there could not be
any mention of them in the grounds of detention. The other
three    documents      do have  casual  mentioning,  but  the
Detaining Authority did not rely on them. Of course, the
learned counsel appearing for the petitioner would submit that
the audio chats between Sri.Biju V. Joy and the detenu are
referred documents inasmuch as those audio clippings are
reflected in the screenshots retrieved from the mobile phone
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
which are relied upon documents. It is not so. Although the
audio chats reflect in the screen shots, the same have never
been mentioned or discussed by the Detaining Authority. The
detenu herein is the person who had sent the consignments
from Dubai. Statements recorded under Section 108 of the
Customs Act of the co-accused and passengers in whose
baggage gold was earlier imported, were considered by the
Detaining Authority. There were other materials also. The
retraction statements and rebuttal letters were all placed
before the Detaining Authority. After considering all such
materials, the Detaining Authority arrived at the subjective
satisfaction and all such documents were furnished to the
detenu. In such circumstances, the finding of this Court in
Nushath       Koyamu      (supra)  that the audio chats  have
relevance in the case of the detenus therein, cannot be
followed in this case.
60.    As far as the show cause notices sent the co-
accused and their replies are concerned there is only passing
reference in the grounds in support of Ext.P8 detention order.
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
In such circumstances, the detenu can resort to the plea of
invalidity of the detention order for non-supply of those
documents only if he substantiates that the non-supply
caused prejudice to him. It is also his obligation to explain in
what way those documents are relevant for his making
61.   Exts.P12     and P13   are   the   representations
submitted by the detenu in which he made requests for those
documents as well as Exts.P2, P3 and P6. The detenu did not
state in what way those documents were relevant in the
matter of his making representation. In this Writ Petition also,
it is not explained how his right has been prejudiced as a
result of non-supply of those documents. When Exts.P2, P3
and P6 were produced by him in this Writ Petition, his demand
for those documents appears fallacious. In the case of
documents which are relied upon by the Detaining Authority,
it is the absolute right of the detenu to get copies within the
time prescribed in Section 3(3) of the COFEPOSA Act. If the
documents, which are discussed in the course of arriving at
W.P.(Crl.) No.596 of 2022
the subjective satisfaction, are demanded, the authority is
bound to furnish. But, if the documents/materials demanded
have only a casual connection with the cause for the
detention, the detenu shall explain the relevance and the
prejudice that may cause to him if the documents are denied.
The detenu did not state in what way such documents are
relevant for him to make his representation and how the non-
supply has affected his right to make a meaningful and
effective representation. In such circumstances, his attack to
the   detention     order on  the  ground   of  non-supply   of
documents also fails.
62.    In conspectus, none of the grounds raised by the
petitioner to challenge validity of Ext.P8 detention order and
Ext.P19 confirmation order can be accepted. The Writ Petition
therefore fails and the same is dismissed.