petitioner            Krupa    and         her   husband              were
legally married and two daughters Devanshi
aged 21 years and Yana aged 15 years were
born out of their wedlock. Because of the
major accident that had taken place, the
husband          of    the  petitioner           had      lost          the
memory upto 95%. The serious accident of
31.12.2018             changed       the       lives        of          the
parties, where corpus was in the hospital
for more than four months and eventually,
he    was         taken    for      taking       care        by         him
parents, which resulted into the dispute
and       the        petition         is      preferred               with
following prayers:
(A)        YOUR LORDSHIPS may be pleased to admit this
(B)        YOUR LORDSHIP may be pleased to issue a writ
of habeas corpus or a writ in the nature of habeas corpus
or a writ in the nature of habeas corpus or any other
appropriate writ, order or direction directing respondent-
State of Gujarat through police authorities to produce her
husband-Chiragbhai Chandubhai Patel before this Hon’ble
Court from the wrongful confinement of respondent Nos.4
& 5 herein in the interest of justice;
(C) Pending admission, hearing and final disposal of the
petition, YOUR LORDSHIPS may be pleased to direct
respondent-State of Gujarat through the police authorities
to produce her husband – Chiragbhai Chandubhai Patel
before this Hon’ble Court from the wrongful confinement
of respondent Nos.4 and 5 herein in the interest of justice;
(D) YOUR LORDSHIPS may be pleased to grant any other
and further reliefs as may be deemed fit and proper in the
interest of justice.”
3.    On      various        different        dates      different
orders came to be passed by this Court.
Serious attempts were also made attempting
the amicable settlement the reference was
also       made      to     the     mediation        centre            and
observers also were appointed for placing
the report before this Court.
4.    During the course of this petition, it
was brought to the notice of the Court that
the petitioner passed away, she ended her
life by committing suicide on 14.10.2021.
As the petition would abate unless replace
by her heirs, we had chosen to meet both
the daughters and certain details were also
obtained by the Court from them. Therefore,
we chose to pass an order on 24.01.2022,
which was as under:
“1. After having spoken to both the girls on the last
occasion, we deem it appropriate to get certain details in
relation to the properties of both the parents of the girls
and also have chosen to make a request to learned Senior
Advocate Mr. I.H.Saiyed in relation to those properties,
which are exclusively in the name of the mother of the
girls and which are exclusively in the ownership of father
so also in the joint names of both the parents i.e. the
mother and the father of the girls, and with regard to
other issues, more particularly, considering the kind of
health the father of these girls has. Learned advocate for
the petitioner has ensured to revert back to the Court
after taking necessary instructions in this regard.
2. We may place the matter on 27.02.2022.”
5.    We note expressing our satisfaction and
happiness that pursuant to the order passed
by     this          Court        on       24.01.2022          and          the
proposal           made      by     the       Court    in     the         best
interest of all concerned, learned senior
advocate             Mr.I.H.Syed                assisted        by          the
learned advocate, Mr.Dhruv Toliya responded
quite        positively            and         before     this         Court
affidavit on behalf of the respondent No.4-
grandfather               has      come,          which      would            be
necessary to be reproduced:
“1.        I state that I am the Respondent No.4 herein and
Respondent No.5 namely Mrs. Neeruben Chandubhai Patel
is my wife. I and Respondent No.5 herein are the parents
of the alleged corpus herein namely Mr. Chirag Patel and
the parents-in-law of the Petitioner herein.
2. I state that we have perused the memo of the present
application with the annexures and documents filed hereto
rather carefully and therefore, I am competent to file the
present    Affidavit-in-Reply      to oppose     the      present
application and the reliefs prayed therein.
3.At the outset, I state and submit that I do not admit
any of the averments made and contentions raised in the
present application as the same being misleading &
incorrect and the same may be treated as traverse,
seriatim and denied in toto, and my not dealing with any
of the averments specifically may not be construed as
having been admitted by me.
4. I state and submit that the petitioner has deliberately
suppressed certain material facts from this Hon'ble Court
and the application filed by the petitioner is ex-facie
bogus, based on inferences, fictitious and baseless hence,
the present application deserves to be rejected with costs
on that ground alone.
5. With respect to the contents of paragraph no. 1, I say
and submit that the contents are formal in nature and
therefore I do not offer any comments on the same.
6.With respect to the contents of paragraph no. 2, I say
and submit that the petitioner has raised vague and
unsupported questions and therefore, I do not offer any
comments on the same. It is further submitted that a
petition of Habeas Corpus can only lie if the detention of
the     corpus is  illegal     or   contrary   to   law.     In     this
connection, I submit that the fact that Chiragbhai is
staying with his parents i.e., Respondent No.4 and 5, in
view of his peculiar mental health, cannot, under any
circumstances be stretched to say that the Chiragbhai is
said to be illegally detained. I, therefore submit that the
petition is required to be rejected on this ground alone. I
say and submit that the present petition of Habeas Corpus
would also not be maintainable in law because it seeks to
take custody of person who's not been illegally detained.
7.I further submit that in a case of person with mental
health issues as in the case of Chiragbhai, there are
special laws which govern the subject of custody and
which remedy have already been availed of by the
present deponent. The competent authority to decide the
custody of the person under mental illness or disability
are governed by Special. statues or Special procedures.
The authorities under the said act are experts in the field
to whom the legislature has thought it fit to be able to
decide the issue of appointing a representative for
Chiragbhai. I also submit that on this ground also the
application is required to be rejected. I further say and
submit that assuming without admitting. and only for the
sake of argument this Hon'ble Court has the authority to
appoint a guardian or representative of Chiragbhai to take
care of his person without following the procedure laid
down under the Special Acts then also it is submitted that
looking to the financial capacity as well as other
capacities of the Deponent, the said Chiragbhai should not
been removed from his present place of residence where
said Chiragbhai is being provided the best of medical
facilities, best of healthcare, best of physical support, and
where all his needs and requirements are being taken
care of by none other than the parents (Resp.. No. 4 and
5) of Chiragbhai. It would not be in the interest of justice
to change the situation which would definitely result in
grave hardship to the corpus Chiragbhai. I say that I have
never prevented the Petitioner who's my daughter in law
and her children who are my Grandchildren to come and
visit Chiragbhai and even stay with us. The petitioner
does not have adequate financial support and man power
to take care of my son in this hour of grave crisis. To the
best of my knowledge, the value of Income Tax returns
filed by Chiragbhal and the Petitioner both are yet
another. validation of the fact that the financial capacity
of the Petitioner who is a housewife, would not suffice
the budgetary needs to assure best of healthcare to
Chiragbhai. I further say and submit that the petitioner
spends considerable time after her daughter (who is also
my granddaughter) but she also has to attend other
commitments. The deponent does not complain about the
same but petitioner would not be able to devote sufficient
time to Chiragbhai. The Resp. 4 and 5 are devoting
almost 24x7 hours/weel behind Chiragbhai and have also
engaged 4 attendants round the clock. It is therefore in
the interest of justice and in the paramount interest of
Chiragbhai that considering his physical position as on
today, he may not be shifted and the present status may
continue. That Chiragbhai, since, more than 3 to 4
months, has regularly been taken for treatment, medicines
on time, daily medical reports are to be submitted.
Moreover, Resp. No. 5 is required to regularly feed him
as he is not in a position to consume food by his own
hands. That the care of the mother i.e., Resp. No. 5 at
this crucial juncture could give a healing touch to his
son. I say and submit that I have never prevented and
will never prevent the Petitioner coming to my place,
visiting Chiragbhai and taking care of him if she wants
to. It is pertinent to note that the Petitioner has only
complained after 4 months about the issue in hand and
also, the Petitioner has never preferred a complaint
earlier about the same which shows that had the
Petitioner been really concerned, that Chiragbhai is not
been taken care of properly, she would have moved
before this Hon'ble Court at the earliest. In fact, in the
entire petition, the Petitioner has not made a grievance
that the Chiragbhai has not been taken care of properly
or he's not been given medicines, food etc. regularly or
he has not been taken to the hospital when required etc.
In addition to that, the Petitioner has never joined the
Respondent to their follow up visits to the hospital.
Despite the condition of Chiragbhai, she's sought to
entangle the Respondents in frivolous legal battles. The
Petitioner not only preferred a Special Civil Suit before
the Ld. Court below but also during the pendency of the
present petition, the Petitioner has filed a FIR against the
Respondent No.4 which clearly shows mala fide on the
part of the Petitioner to divest and divert the Respondent
No.4 from being able to take Chiragbhai's care and take
an     unfair  advantage     of     the same   in    the     present
application which act in itself is in the worst interest of
Chiragbhai. The Ld. Court below has been pleased to
grant an anticipatory bail to the Respondent No.4 in
connection with the said concocted FIR.
8. With respect to the contents of paragraph no. 3, I say
and submit that the contents are factual in nature and
therefore I do not offer any comments on the same.
9. With respect to the contents of paragraph no. 4 of the
present application, I say and submit that the petitioner
has sought to mislead this Hon'ble Court and therefore, I
deny the same. It is hereby clarified that the petitioner
has deliberately attempted to point this Hon'ble court in
the wrong direction by stating that the Respondent No.4
and 5 and Chiragbhai use to have frictions. In fact, the
Respondents herein and my son namely Chiragbhai have
always     had   a   smooth-sailing   and    an     untroubled
relationship. Moreover, the legality of the partition deed i
signed in the year 2011 is a subject matter of a Special
Civil Suit No. 560/2019 before the District Court at
Mirzapur, Ahmedabad (Rural) filed by the petitioner
herein before the concerned Ld. Civil Court. Thus,
advancing an averment regarding the partition deed is not
just immaterial but also premature in nature. Although, it
is vital to put forward before this Hon'ble Court that said
partition deed is not pertaining to the partitioning of the
properties   but   the    dissolution of  the    HUF        being
Respondent No.4. Since, the said civil dispute is irrelevant
to the adjudication of the present application, the same
has not been dealt with in detail without prejudice to the
rights and contentions of the Respondents No.4. Copy of
the case status of the Special Civil Suit No.560/2019
before the District Court at Mirzapur, Ahmedabad (Rural)
whereby the said partition deed of the year 2011 is under
challenge is annexed hereto and marked as "ANNEXURE-
6.    We also noticed that both the daughters
are presently pursuing their studies and
Devanshi the elder daughter 21 years of age
is currently pursuing her under graduation
studies at UMASS Amherst University, United
States of America and Yana is pursuing her
secondary            education             at    J.G.Internation
School.          She   has     agreed         that   her       tuition
fees, hostel fees and other expenditures
are born by the grand parents and from the
time the mother has passed away, they have
been      staying        with       the       grandparents.              The
best medical treatment is also provided to
her father and she and her younger sister
wish to live with the grandparents. She has
no objection to the joint custody of the
father           being     given         to   her      and           the
grandfather and when Yana becomes major she
also would have joined custody.
7.    Noticing          this    amicable        end       to         the
dispute as ensured to this Court as the
names of both the grand daughters are to be
added to all the properties solely owned by
the late mother or self required properties
of     the           corpus-the         father     and          every
properties jointly owned by the mother and
the father namely Krupa and Chirag Patel,
let that process which has been started be
ended by producing before this Court those
documents where the names of daughters are
mutated. Let that be completed as far as
possible within a period of 10 weeks.
8.    Respondent          Nos.4        as   the    grandparent
since has already undertaken this exercise,
he shall be assisted by the authorities in
completing this on expeditious basis.
9.    Joint custody of the corpus shall be of
respondent            No.4   and          that    of       daughter
Devanshi           and  once    Yana        also   attains             the
majority, she would have the joint custody
of her father and if, by then the father
has        completely          cured          and        medically
released, they can continue to look-after
the father.
10. Petition is being disposed of with a
note       of       appreciation         of   learned           senior
advocate,            Mr.I.H.Syed           assisted        by          the
learned advocate, Mr.Dhruv Toliya in this
11. We         also     noticed         that    the       role           of
Learned              advocate,       Mr.Vishrut          Jani           and
learned advocate, Mr.JayPrakash Umot, who
had represented the petitioner earlier was
of guiding both the young girls positively.
12. Petition is disposed of with no order
as to costs.
13. Once the papers of mutation of entries
in the name of both the daughters of corpus
are       received,         the    Registry       shall        let        it
form        a      part    of   record.        If   the       parties
require certified copy of the same to be
given to them. They shall be also shared
with both the daughter, Devanshi and Yana.
14. Over             and   above      the     regular       mode          of
service,               direct     service        is       permitted
through speed post as well as e-mode.