01.        The present petition has been filed by the petitioner under
Section 561-A, now 482 Cr. P.C. for quashing the challan in case titled
“State of Jammu & Kashmir (now) UT Vs Gauri Devi,” arising out of FIR
No.152/2010 dated 14.08.2010 registered with Police Station Nowabad,
Jammu for offences under Section 306 of the RPC, pending before the
Court of learned 2nd Additional Sessions Judge, Jammu (hereinafter
referred to as the “trial Court”) and also the order dated 12.03.2011, by
virtue of which the charge for commission of offence under Section 306
has been framed against the petitioner.
02.        It is stated that on 07.12.2009 at 01.30 p.m., the Police Post,
Canal Road, received information from some reliable sources that one
person, namely, Ghan Shyam, S/o Ajay Kumar, R/o Krishna Nagar,
Jammu has seriously injured himself by stabbing himself in the chest and
was taken to GMC, Jammu, who died en route. Since the matter pertained
to the death of a human and cause was unknown, so the police after
recording the said information as report No. 13 in the Roznamcha dated
07.12.2009 started inquest proceedings under Section 174 Cr. P.C. The
dead body was recovered and the post-mortem was also conducted and
thereafter the body of the deceased was handed over to the relatives of the
deceased. The statements of the witnesses were recorded under Section 175
Cr. P.C. and it was found that the deceased Ghan Shyam, aged 35-36 years
was a street vendor and his mother-in-law i.e the petitioner herein, was also
in the same business. The deceased had allegedly given Rs. 73,000/- as
loan to his mother-in-law for the sake of her business and was himself
indebted to many people, as he had also borrowed money from them for
his business. The deceased used to be harassed by his lenders to clear his
debts. Due to this reason, on 07.12.2009, the deceased demanded from the
petitioner the money, which he had given to given to her as a loan and it
led to verbal altercation between the deceased and his mother-in-
law/petitioner and the deceased said that if the petitioner did not clear her
dues towards him, he would kill himself, as he is being harassed by the
debtors. On this, the petitioner told that at that point of time she had no
money to return to the deceased and this prompted the deceased to take the
extreme step by inflicting injury with knife in the chest.
03.        After the conclusion of the inquest proceedings, FIR bearing No.
152/2010 dated 14.08.2010 was registered against the petitioner for
commission of offence under Section 306 of the RPC. After the completion
of the investigation, challan was filed and the same is pending before the
Court of learned 2nd Additional Sessions Judge, Jammu. It is further stated
that the learned trial Court vide order dated 12.03.2011 framed the charges
for commission of offences under Section 306 RPC against the petitioner.
The petitioner has challenged the challan as well as the order dated
a. That the FIR impugned has been registered after the
delay of almost a year from the date of death of the
deceased and deserves to be quashed.
b. That the offence under Section 306 is not made out at
all in light of the various judgements of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court and the Hon’ble High Courts.
04.        Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that there is not even
an iota of evidence on record that the petitioner at any point of time abetted
the commission of suicide by the deceased, as such, the proceedings
pending before the learned trial Court are nothing but an abuse of process
of law.
05.        Per contra, Mr. Sawhney, learned AAG submits that the learned
trial Court has passed the order of framing the charges on the basis of
evidence before the Court and the instant petition deserved to be dismissed.
06.        Heard learned counsel for the parties.
07.       The perusal of the charges framed by the learned trial Court on
“That on 07.12.2009, you were called by your son-in-law
Ghan Shyam at his home and you were told by him to
return loan of Rs.73,000/- to him as he had to return his
loan to his lenders. On this you started quarrelling with
him and abused him. Thereafter, you refused to return
the amount, as a result of which, he committed suicide
and you forced him to do so.”
08.       The bare perusal of the allegations in the challan as well as the
charges framed against the petitioner, it is evident that the deceased
committed suicide when the petitioner refused to return the amount of
Rs. 73,000/- to the deceased, which she had taken from Ghan Shyam, who
happens to be her son-in-law.
09.       Now it is to be seen whether the allegations against the petitioner
constitutes an offence under Section 306 RPC. In order to charge a person
for commission of offences under Section 306 RPC, there must be
evidence on record that the accused abetted the commission of suicide by
the deceased. The abetment has been defined by Section 107 of the RPC,
First - Instigates any person to do that thing; or
Secondly - Engages with one or more other person or
persons in any conspiracy for the doing of that thing, if an
act or illegal omission takes place in pursuance of that
conspiracy, and in order to the doing of that thing; or
Thirdly - Intentionally aids, by any act or illegal omission,
the doing of that thing.”
10.        One can be charged for the offence of abetment only when he
instigates any person to do that thing or intentionally or engages with one or
more other person in conspiracy for the doing of that thing or intentionally aids,
by any act or illegal omission, the doing of that thing.
11.        The allegation against the petitioner is that she refused to return
the money to the deceased, as a result of which he committed suicide. In
order to constitute an offence of abetment, the act committed by the
accused must be of such nature so that the deceased must be left with no
other option but to take extreme step of ending his life. Though the
different persons may react or respond to a particular situation differently
but this court is of the considered opinion that mere refusal to repay the
loan cannot in any way can be considered to be an act of abetment to drive
the deceased to commit suicide.
12.        In Madan Mohan Singh v. State of Gujarat and another,
(2010) 8 SCC 628 the deceased was a driver who had undergone a bypass
surgery and was advised against performing any stressful duties. The
accused was a superior officer who had rebuked the deceased harshly and
threatened to suspend him when the deceased had failed to comply with his
directions. The deceased thereafter committed suicide and left behind a
suicide note stating that the accused was solely responsible for his death. In
these facts, Apex Court held that there must be allegations to the effect that
the accused had either instigated the deceased in some way to commit
suicide or had engaged with some other person in conspiracy to do so or
that the accused had in some way aided any act or illegal omission to bring
about the suicide. The prayer for quashing preferred by the accused was
accepted by Apex Court and the proceedings were quashed.
13.       In Swamy Prahaladdas v. State of M.P. & Anr. 1995 Supp. (3)
SCC 438, the appellant was charged for an offence under Section 306
I.P.C. on the ground that the appellant during the quarrel is said to have
remarked the deceased to go and die. Apex Court was of the view that
mere words uttered by the accused to the deceased to go and die were not
even prima facie enough to instigate the deceased to commit suicide.
14.       Further   in   Vaijnath    Kondiba     Khandke     Vs   State    of
Maharashtra and another, 2018 5 Supreme 345, the accused therein
assigned some work to his employee and further the said employee was
called at odd hours and even on holidays to get the work done and the said
accused had stopped his salary for one month and also threatening that his
increment would be stopped. Apex Court held that the same cannot be held
to be an offence under Section 306 of the IPC and the FIR for commission
of the offences under Section 306 of the IPC was quashed by the Hon’ble
15.       Viewed thus, this Court is of the considered opinion that the
ingredients of offence under Section 306 of the RPC are absolutely lacking
in the instant case and the learned trial Court has not considered this vital
aspect of the case and as such the order impugned is set aside. The
petitioner is discharged for commission of offences under Section 306 RPC
and the challan stands dismissed.
Disposed of accordingly.