:   (Per the Hon’ble the Chief Justice Satish Chandra Sharma)
The petitioners before this Court, who are advocates,
have filed the present writ petition by way of Public Interest
Litigation stating that they are owners of motor vehicles,
they have paid road tax at the time of purchase of the
vehicles and the respondents are compelling them to pay toll
tax, which is in addition to the lifetime tax paid by the
petitioners. The petitioners’ contention is that the collection
of toll tax at National Highway Toll Booths is a mafia type
operation controlled by top rank politicians belonging to the
Government in power and therefore, payment of toll tax be
declared as illegal and unjust.
2.    The petitioners have also raised a grievance in respect
of non-payment of toll tax by certain dignitaries and the
contention of the petitioners is that the exemption from
payment of toll tax by certain dignitaries is in violation of
Article 14 of the Constitution of India. The petitioners have
given certain examples of collection of toll tax at GMR –
Vijayawada Expressway. It has been further stated that in
and around Hyderabad also, toll tax is being collected and
the action of the respondents in collecting toll tax even after
seventy two years of Independence in a democratic country
deserves to be quashed. The petitioners have prayed for the
“It is therefore prayed that this Hon’ble Court may be
pleased to issue an appropriate Writ, Order or Direction,
more particularly one in the nature of Writ of Mandamus,
declaring the action of the respondents herein in notifying
majority of the roads connecting various places in the
country    as    National/State     Highways     and   thereby
compelling the petitioners several other crores of common
people like such to use only highways by paying huge
amounts towards toll taxes in addition to the life tax (road
tax) paid during the purchase of mechanical vehicle under
the guise of facilitating the raising of additional sources for
development of Highways without providing an alternative
way/road as being illegal and arbitrary and consequently to
struck down the collection of toll system or collection of life
tax from the citizens of this country in the interest of
justice and to pass such other order or orders as are
deemed fit and property in the circumstances of the case.”
3.     The petitioners have subsequently filed Additional
Affidavit furnishing a list of officials/dignitaries who are
exempted from paying toll tax and the contention of the
petitioners is that keeping in view the Report of the
Committee of Secretaries on Review of Toll Policy for National
Highways submitted to the Government of India in May,
2009, alternative road (toll free road) should be made
available to a common man. In the Additional Affidavit, again
a prayer has been made for quashment of the system of
collecting toll fee on State and National Highways.
4.    A detailed and exhaustive counter affidavit has been
filed by the National Highways Authority of India (NHAI). It
has been stated that keeping in view the financial crunch,
which     was  coming    in   the   way   of  development  of
Highways/Highway       Projects    by   NHAI,    the  Central
Government took a policy decision in order to ensure that
funds are made available and created National Level
Infrastructure   of  Roads   and    accordingly  the National
Highways Act, 1956 was amended and Section 8A was
incorporated vide Act No.26 of 1995 with effect from
16.06.1995. The amendment empowered the NHAI to enter
into an agreement with any person in relation to the
development and maintenance of the whole or any part of a
National Highway. Section 8A further provided that any
person with whom an agreement has been entered into can
collect and retain fees for services or benefits rendered by
him as the Central Government may provide by Notification,
having regard to the expenditure involved in building,
maintenance,    management       and   operation  of National
Highways, interest on the capital invested, reasonable
return, the volume of traffic and the period of such
5.    It has been further stated that the Government of India
has launched a National Highways Development Project
(NHDP) which is the largest development project undertaken
by a single Authority in the world i.e., NHAI with an aim and
object    of   widening,    upgradation,   strengthening   and
rehabilitation of about 55,000 kilometres of roads and most
of the projects are on the basis of Public Private Partnership
(PPP). The respondents have further stated that the levy of
fees   is    governed    by    the   National  Highways    Fee
(Determination of Rates and Collection) Rules, 2008, the
National Highways (Collection of fees by any person for the
use    of     section    of   National    Highways/Permanent
Bridge/Temporary Bridge on National Highways) Rules,
1997 and the National Highways (Fees for the use of
National Highways section and permanent bridge – Public
6.    The    contention   of  the   respondents   is  that  the
Government of India in exercise of powers conferred under
Section 9 of the National Highways Act, 1956 has issued
G.S.R.950 (E), dated 03.12.2010, whereby to amend the
National     Highway    Fee   (Determination   of   Rates  and
Collection) Rules, 2008 and exemption is available only for
NHAI or any other Government Organisation using such
vehicles for inspection, survey, construction of National
Highways and maintenance thereof. Rule 11 of the aforesaid
Rules exempts certain class of persons from payment of fees
and the issue in the matter of grant of exemption has
already been adjudicated by Karnataka High Court in the
case of Narasimha Vasudeva Mahale v. Executive Engineer,
National Highway Division1. Reliance has also been placed
upon the Judgment delivered by the Madras High Court in
the case of State Lorry Owners’ Federation, Tamilnadu v. the
Superintending Engineer2, wherein it has been held that “the
collection of tax under the Motor Vehicles Taxation Act and
levy of fees under the National Highway Rules do not amount
to double taxation”. The respondents in the counter affidavit
explained the formula for calculating the toll tax. The
respondents have prayed for dismissal of the writ petition.
7.      Heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused
the record. The matter is being disposed of at motion hearing
stage itself with the consent of the parties.
8.      The petitioners before this Court, who are advocates
and owners of Hyundai Creta and Hyundai I-20 and they
have stated that while purchasing the cars, they have paid
taxes as required under the Motor Vehicles Act and they
cannot be forced to pay toll tax, which amounts to double
taxation. The petitioners have also raised a serious objection
in respect of exemption granted to certain class of persons
from paying the toll tax. The undisputed facts reveal that the
Government of India took a policy decision in order to
provide road infrastructure throughout the country through
the mechanism of Public Private Partnership (PPP) in the
matter      of    construction,        widening,    upgradation        and
strengthening of roads and based upon the policy decision of
the Government of India, amendment was carried under the
National Highways Act, 1956. Section 8A of the aforesaid Act
“8A. Power of Central Government to enter into
agreements      for  development      and   maintenance       of
National     Highways:-      (1)   Notwithstanding    anything
contained in this Act, the Central Government may enter
into an agreement with any person in relation to the
development and maintenance of the whole or any part of a
national highway.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 7,
the person referred to in sub-section (1) is entitled to collect
and retain fees at such rate, for services or benefits
rendered by him as the Central Government may, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify having regard to
the expenditure involved in building, maintenance, interest
on the capital invested, reasonable return, the volume of
traffic and the period of such agreement.
(3) A person referred to in sub-section (1) shall have
powers to regulate and control the traffic in accordance
with the provisions contained in Chapter VIII of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988) on the national highway
forming subject matter of such agreement, for proper
management thereof.”
9.     The aforesaid statutory provision of law empowers the
NHAI to enter into an agreement with any person in relation
to the development and maintenance of the whole or part of
a National Highway. It also empowers any person, with
whom such agreement has been entered into, to collect and
retain fees for services or benefits rendered by him as the
Central Government may provide by Notification having
regard to the expenditure involved in building, maintenance,
management and operation of the whole or part of such
National      Highway,       interest     on   the   capital  invested,
reasonable return, the volume of traffic and the period of
such agreement. The facts also make it very clear that NHAI
has developed various sections of the National Highways by
private financing under Public Private Partnership (PPP)
broadly under the following framework:-
“(i) Build, Operate and Transfer (BOT)/Design, Build,
Finance, Operate and Transfer (DBFOT) – Investment by
private firm and return through levy and retention of use
(ii) Build, Operate and Transfer (Annuity) – BOT
(Annuity) – Investment by private firm and return through
semi-annual payments from NHAI as per bid.”
10.   The Rules framed under the National Highways Act
provides for collection of toll tax. The following Rules have
“(i)     The National Highways (Collection of fees by any
person       for   the    use    of    section  of   National
Highways/Permanent Bridge/Temporary Bridge on
(ii)     The National Highways (Fees for the use of National
Highways section and permanent bridge – Public funded
(iii)    The National Highways Fees (Determination of Rates
and Collections) Rules, 2008.”
11.   The petitioners have not challenged the constitutional
validity of Section 8A of the National Highways Act, 1956 or
the constitutional validity of the Rules framed thereunder
and therefore, this Court, once the constitutional validity of
the Rules have not been challenged, is of the opinion that
the action of the NHAI, which is in consonance with the Act
and the Rules framed thereunder, cannot be interfered with.
12.   Rule 11 of the National Highways Fee (Determination of
Rates and Collection) Rules, 2008 provides for exemption in
respect of certain dignitaries and the same reads as under:-
No fee shall be levied and collected from a mechanical
(vi)   the Speaker of the House of People;
(vii)  the Cabinet Minister of the Union;
(x)    the Minister of State or the Union;
(xi)   the Lieutenant Governor of a Union Territory;
(xii)  the Chief of Staff holding the rank of full General or
(xiii) the Chairman of the Legislative Council of a State;
(xiv)  the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of a State;
(xv)   the Chief Justice of a High Court;
(xviii) the Army Commander or vice-Chief of Army Staff
(xix) the Chief Secretary to a State Government within
(xx)    the Secretary to the Government of India;
(xxi) the Secretary, Council of States;
(xxii) the Secretary, House of People;
(xxiii) the Foreign dignitary on State visit;
(xxiv) the Member of Legislative Assembly of a State and
the Member of Legislative Council of a State within
their respective State, if he or she produces his or
her identity card issued by the concerned Legislature
(xxv) The awardee of Param Vir Chakra, Ashok Chakra,
Maha Vir Chakra, Kirti Chakra, Vir Chakra and
Shaurya Chakra, if such awardee produces his or
her photo identity card duly authenticated by the
appropriate or competent authority for such award;
(i)    the Ministry of Defence including those which
are eligible for exemption in accordance with
the provisions of the Indian Toll (Army and Air
Force) Act, 1901 and Rules made thereunder,
(ii)   the Central and State armed forces in uniform
including para military forces and police;
(iv)   the fire-fighting Department or organisation;
(v)    the National Highways Authority of India or
any other Government organisation using
such      vehicle   for   inspection,    survey,
construction or operation of national highways
(d)     used as funeral van.
(e)     Specially designed and constructed for use of a
person suffering from some physical defect or
disability.”
13.   The Karnataka High Court in the case of Narasimha
Vasudeva Mahale (supra) has dealt with the issue involved in
respect of exemption of high dignitaries and in the
considered opinion of this Court, the exemption is granted to
high dignitaries as a policy matter keeping in view various
factors like security etc. Not only this, vehicles of even fire
fighting departments, ambulances, funeral vans have also
been exempted from payment of tax and therefore, the
ground canvassed by the learned counsel for the petitioners
regarding violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India
does not arise.
14.   The other important aspect of the case is that service
roads are available adjoining the various Highways and short
distance travellers can freely avail the facility of service
roads. The counter affidavit filed by the National Highway
Authority of India also reveals that toll fee is levied keeping
in view the distance and for short distances as well as for
daily users, reasonable fees is being charged. The counter
affidavit also reveals that fixation of fees does not depend
upon the sweet will of the contractor and it is fixed keeping
in view the statutory provisions as contained in the National
Highways Fee (Determination of Rates and Collection) Rules,
2008 and therefore, in the considered opinion of this Court,
the question of interference by this Court in the peculiar
facts and circumstances of the case does not arise. Not only
this, in the case of State Lorry Owners’ Federation, Tamilnadu
(supra), the Madras High Court has upheld the collection of
fees towards cost of construction of bridges and roads and
therefore, keeping in view the totality of the circumstances of
the case, this Court does not find any reason to grant the
reliefs as prayed for by the petitioners and no case is made
out for interference in the matter.
Resultantly, the Public Interest Litigation is dismissed.
Miscellaneous petitions, if any pending, shall stand closed.
There shall be no order as to costs.