Dated this the 28th day of October, 2022
1. This is a typical review portraying that Muslim
women  are  subordinate  to  the  will of  their male
counterparts. This review does not look innocuous at
the instance of the appellant, but rather appears to
have been fashioned and supported by clergies and the
hegemonic masculinity of the Muslim community who are
unable to digest the declaration of the right of
Muslim women to resort to the extra-judicial divorce
of khula, unilaterally.    The appeal from which this
review arises was filed challenging a divorce decree
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
granted to a Muslim wife under the Dissolution of
Muslim Marriages Act, 1939.            The appeal was filed by
the husband. In the appeal, we noticed the existence
of the right of Muslim women to resort to the extra-
judicial divorce of khula, allowing her to terminate
her marriage. Thereafter, the appeal was disposed of,
recording khula and also delineating the different
methods     of    extra-judicial       divorce    applicable  to
Muslim    spouses.        We   declared     that  the  right  to
terminate the marriage at the instance of a Muslim
wife is an absolute right, conferred on her by the
holy Quran and is not subject to the acceptance or
the will of her husband. In the review petition filed
by the husband, he does not dispute the authority
given to the Muslim wife to invoke khula, but rather
raises,     as    a   ground      of   review,    the  procedure
acknowledged by this Court to invoke the remedy of
khula by the Muslim wife.               We declared that khula
would    be    valid    if   the    following    conditions  are
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
i.    A     declaration        of     repudiation      or
termination of marriage by the wife.
ii. An     offer    to    return     dower    or   any   other
material     gain    received     by   her   during    marital
iii.An effective attempt for reconciliation was
preceded before the declaration of khula.
2.    The review petition, though, was filed by
the husband, the courtroom was filled with persons
who have shown an interest in the outcome and we
allowed    all    those    interested      to  make    submissions.
Accordingly, we had the advantage of hearing a muslim
scholar turned lawyer, Adv.Hussain C.S.
3.    According     to    the   learned     counsel   for   the
review    petitioner      and   Adv.    Hussain    C.S.,the    Court
erred    in    recognising      the    procedure     in   effecting
khula. According to them, if a Muslim wife wishes to
terminate her marriage with her husband, she has to
demand talaq from her husband and on his refusal, she
has to move the qazi or Court.                According to them,
though a Muslim woman has a right to demand divorce
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
of   her    own   will,    she    has   no    absolute   right   to
pronounce khula like the right of her counterpart to
pronounce      talaq.     It    was    submitted     that,   as   a
consequence of the declaration of law by this Court,
a large section of Muslim women are resorting to
khula in derogation of the Sunnah. It was also argued
that    the    Court    is    not    competent     to   decide   on
religious beliefs and practices and the Court ought
to have followed the opinion of Islamic Scholars.                It
was submitted that almost all across the globe, it is
recognised that on demand of the wife to terminate
the marriage, the husband has to pronounce talaq,
obliging her demand. In countries where qazis are
recognised,      on   refusal     of   the   husband,   the  qazis
would    terminate     the   marriage.      It  was   argued   that
nowhere in the world, a Muslim wife is allowed to
unilaterally terminate the marriage.               It was further
submitted that in the absence of qazis, the competent
civil court in India have to terminate the marriage.
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
4. In the holy Quran, Chapter II, verse 229, the
right of Muslim wife has been explicitly referred to,
which reads thus:
The divorce is twice, after that, either you retain
her on reasonable terms or release her with kindness.
And it is not lawful for you (men) to take back (from
your wives) any of your Mahr (bridal money given by
the husband to his wife at the time of marriage) which
you have given them, except when both parties fear
that they would be unable to keep the limits ordained
by Allah (e.g. to deal with each other on a fair
basis). Then if you fear that they would not be able
to keep the limits ordained by Allah, then there is no
sin on either of them if she gives back (the Mahr or a
part of it) for her Al-Khul’ (divorce). These are the
limits ordained by Allah, so do not transgress them.
And whoever transgresses the limits ordained by Allah,
then such are the Zalimun (wrong-doers, etc.).
5. The limit of moral authority postulated in
the above verse alongside the legal right providing a
remedy for a Muslim woman, may require delineation to
decide on the question involved. The moral injunction
that    one    has    to   be    contended     with is perhaps
reiterated with a warning of the life hereafter, by
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
pointing     out    that   they    shall    not  transgress   the
limits set by the Almighty.             The intersection of the
moral    injunction      and    the    legal   right   shows  the
accountability to the Almighty in the life hereafter
as per the faith, but it cannot be a determination of
the validity of the legal right in a court of law in
a    secular     country.         The     moral   injunction   so
stipulated in the above verse has to be read in the
context of the Prophet’s warning to the believers
that divorce is “the most hated of the permissible
things    to    Allah”    {See    Sunan    Ibn  Majah,   Book  on
6. The legal conundrum in this case, is not an
isolated one.        It has evolved over the years as the
scholars of Islamic studies, who have no training in
legal sciences started to elucidate on the point of
law in Islam, on a mixture of belief and practice.
Islam has a code of law, apart from laying down rules
relating to beliefs and practices. Legal norms are
the cornerstones of creating a social and cultural
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
order within the Muslim community. The dilemma that
persisted, in this case, is, perhaps, more related to
the    practice     that    has    been    followed   for  years,
overlooking the mandate of the legal norm conferring
on Muslim women the right to terminate the marriage
without the conjunction of the husband.                 The Court
in such circumstances is expected to look at the
legal     norm,     if    the    same     relies   upon   Quranic
legislations and the sayings and practices of the
Prophet (Sunnah).        The underlying distinction between
Fiqh and Shariah needs to be stressed here.              Fiqh has
been loosely translated to English as Islamic law and
literally      means     ‘the    understanding      of   what   is
intended’. Shariah means ‘a straight path’.                   Fiqh
refers to the science of deducing Islamic laws from
thr evidence found in the sources of Islamic law.
(See the distinction of Fiqh and Shariah in the book,
'The evolution of Fiqh'             by Dr. Abu Ameenah Bilal
Philips). Ordinary scholars and the Islamic clergy,
who have no formal legal training find it difficult
to deduce Islamic law from its sources.              Fiqh denotes
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
the true intentions and objects of Islamic law.                It
requires a legal mind to deduce Islamic law from the
sources. The dilemma faced by the Islamic clergy in
understanding triple talaq was based on the practice
followed in society for centuries, on the footing
that a single pronouncement of triple talaq would
constitute a valid talaq. This was related to the
decree    of    the   Caliph     Umar,    who   was  one  of  the
successors to the caliphate, after the demise of the
Prophet Mohammed. Noting the misuse of the authority
given to the husband, who invariably invoked talaq
and revoked talaq thereafter, causing miseries and
hardships to the women; on a complaint made by the
women and acting on their behalf, the Caliph decreed
that such pronouncement of talaq would be a valid
divorce. This decree, though, does not look in tune
with the Quranic legislation that refers to cyclic
pronouncement       of   talaq    at   different    intervals,was
devised to meet a particular situation in the society
at   that    point    in   time.     Caliph    Umar  resolved  to
exercise his executive power to meet a particular
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
exigency, to redress the grievances of women. This
power of the ruler is akin to the power exercised by
the executive in the modern State. That executive
power was so exercised, to tide over a particular
situation.     This    practice,     allowed    at  a  particular
time,    was    relied    upon    by   the    Islamic  clergy   to
justify      instantaneous       triple      talaq,   overlooking
Quranic    injunctions.       The   Islamic    clergy   failed  to
distinguish between the legislative authority of the
Quran and the executive power of the Islamic ruler to
meet particular contingencies. We have narrated the
above aspect only to bring home the point that the
Islamic     clergy     who     have    no    legal   training   or
knowledge in legal sciences, cannot be relied upon by
the   Court    to   decide    on   a   point   of  law   involved,
relating to the personal law applicable to the Muslim
community. The Courts are manned by trained legal
minds. The Court shall not surrender to the opinions
of the Islamic clergy, who have no legal training on
the point of law. No doubt, in matters related to
beliefs and practices, their opinion matters to the
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
Court and the Court should have deference for their
7. The Quranic verse relating to khula found in
Chapter 2, verse 229, in unequivocal terms, declares
that a Muslim wife has the right to terminate her
marriage.      The problem, presented before us today, is
based on a reported Hadith, illustrating an instance
of termination of marriage at the instance of a wife
during the lifetime of the Prophet Mohammed.                    In
almost all the authorities related to Islamic law,
this instance of divorce by a Muslim wife has been
reported.        We    have    also    referred     to  the  above
reported     Hadith    in   our   judgment      under  review.  We
again, in this review, refer to the Hadith.--                  One
Thabit    had   two    wives.      One   of    them  was  Jamilah.
Jamilah     did   not   like    the    looks    of  Thabit.    She
approached the Holy Prophet.            She said, “Messenger of
Allah! Nothing can keep the two of us together.               I do
not dislike him for any blemish in his faith or his
morals.     It is his appearance that I dislike.            I want
to separate from him.”            The Prophet replied, “Will
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
you give him back the garden he gave you”?                      She
replied, “I am prepared to give him the garden he
gave and even prepared to give more”.                  The Prophet
said, “You only need to give him the garden”.                  Then
the Prophet summoned Thabit and told him to accept
the garden and divorce Jamilah. (See for more reading
on this, 'The Rights and Duties of Spouses',                    7th
edition, by Maulana Sayyid Abul A’la Maududi, page
49). Relying on this, the counsel for the petitioner
and Adv. Hussain C.S. argued that the Prophet has
prescribed      a   procedure     for    divorce    in  the   above
manner     at   the    instance      of   a    Muslim   woman   and
therefore, it is not open for the Court to prescribe
the procedure in a different manner.                 According to
them, on the demand of the wife, the husband has to
pronounce talaq.         We are called upon to decide as to
the true procedure to be followed for divorce at the
instance of the wife (khula).
8.   Relying      upon    Article     25    of   the  Indian
Constitution read with the Shariat Act 1937, Adv.
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
Hussain C.S. argued that the Muslim Personal Law is
the    rule    of    decision     in    questions     relating  to
marriage, dissolution of marriage, maintenance, etc.
of the Muslim community.
9.   Citing      numerous      judgments,      the   counsel
vehemently submitted that the verses of the Quran
cannot be the subject matter of interpretation of
secular courts.
10. He submitted that the Shariah is based on
four    sources,      namely,     the    Quran,    Sunnah,   Qiyas
(analogy) and Ijma (consensus). When the Quran is
silent on any aspect, attention must be turned to the
Sunnah of the Prophet, thereby using it to supplement
the verses of the Quran. He quoted the verses of the
Quran and the Hadeeth to buttress this point.
Sura Al Hahr, verse 7 reads:
“Whatever   the   Messenger   gives   you,  accept  it; and
whatever he forbids you, abstain from it.”
The Prophet once said to his followers: “So long as
you hold fast to two things which I have left among
you,  you   will   not  go  astray;   God’s  Book,  and His
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
11. According to him, although the Quran grants
women the right to obtain khula (verse 2:229), it
does not prescribe a procedure for the same. In such
an instance, the learned counsel submitted that the
correct procedure for khula can be evidenced from the
Hadith of Thabit. Relying upon the verses of the
Quran and the Hadith, he contended that the following
mandate flows in respect of khula:
i.     Although undesirable but where there is a
fear of violation of the limits set by Allah,
khula can be obtained;
ii.    A woman must part with money if she wishes
iii.     khula is legally effective only when the
husband accepts the wife’s offer of payment and
divorces her.
12.    The   counsel     submitted      that  all  Muslim
scholars, irrespective of their schools of thought,
are    unanimous     in   their    opinion     that  khula  is  a
divorce     by  mutual     consent     or  agreement,   with  the
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
acceptance of the husband being an essential element
for a valid khula.
13. Submitting that although khula is an extra-
judicial form of divorce, when the husband refuses to
give consent, it takes the form of faskh (a judicial
divorce),     thereby     forcing     the    woman  to   seek  the
intervention of a qazi (judge). The learned counsel
then, however, went on to submit that the judge has
no discretion in the matter and has to give effect to
the khula, if the wife insists.
14. The learned counsel cited numerous judgments
to fortify his submissions on the nature of khula. We
are not referring to any of the judgments for the
reason that none of the judgments have decided upon
the    question     involved      in   this    review.    All  the
decisions of foreign courts and domestic courts refer
to the practice and form of khula exercised. In the
judgment cited of the Apex Court in Juveria Abdul
Majid    Patni     v.   Atif    Iqbal    Mansoori    and   another
[(2014) 10 SCC 736], the court had adverted to the
form of khula followed, to decide upon a question
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
arising under the Protection of Women from Domestic
15. In order to understand the true meaning of
khula and the procedure to be followed, we need to
trace back the evolution of the right of women to
obtain     a    divorce,      from    the    pre-Islamic    period
onwards.      This period was referred to, in the Holy
Quran, as the period of ignorance. Many of the laws
that were in existence in the pre-Islamic period were
modified,     adapted     or   abrogated     during   the  Islamic
period.        Marriage      in   pre-Islamic      Arabia   was   a
recognised institution for creating a family which
was the primary unit of society.               Without marriage,
there    would    be   no    family    and    no  ties   to  unite
different      members     of   a   community.       Marriage    in
pre-Islamic      society     was   one    way   to  increase    the
strength of the tribe, by begetting more children who
would be the next generation of the tribe. (Quoted
from ‘Changing the position of women in Arabia under
Islam during the early 70th Century’, Research Thesis
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
submitted       by    Farya      Abbas     Abdullah    Sulaimani,
University of Salford 1986). The author refers to the
existence of payment of dower by the bridegroom to
the bride in pre-Islamic Arabia.                 The author also
refers to the existence of the right to divorce in
pre-Islamic Arabia, for both men and women. The man
had the right to divorce whenever he liked without
restrictions and conditions.             The right of the wife
to dismiss the marriage also has been referred to by
the   author.       The   author    says    that   women  used  to
dismiss their marriage at their will.                 He narrates
the procedure as follows: “If they lived in a tent,
they would turn round, so that if the door had faced
east, it now faces west, and when the man saw this,
he knew that he was dismissed and he did not enter.”
A similar kind of divorce has also been referred to
in   the    book   titled     'Women    and    Gender  in   Islam'
written by Leila Ahmed [pg. 44].
Divorce and remarriage appear to have been common
for both men and women, either of whom could initiate
the dissolution. Kitab al-aghani reports: "The women
in the Jahilia, or some of them, divorced men, and
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
their [manner of] divorce was that if they lived in a
tent they turned it round, so that if the door had
faced east it now faced west ... and when the man saw
this he knew that she had divorced him and did not go
to her." Divorce was not generally followed by the
‘idda,    or    "waiting    period'     for    women   before
remarriage- an observance Islam was to insist on- and
although   a  wife  used   to   go   into  retirement  for  a
period following her husband's death,the custom, if
such it was, seems to have been laxly observed.
Abdur Rahim in his book, ‘The Principles of Islamic
Jurisprudence’ [pg. no.10], refers to another form of
termination of the marriage at the instance of wife.
The wife among the Arabs had no corresponding right to
release herself from the bond of marriage. But her
parents by a friendly arrangement with the husband
could obtain a separation by returning the dower if it
had been paid or by agreeing to forgo it if not paid.
Such an arrangement was called khula lit. stripping,
and   by  it   the   marriage    tie   would  be   absolutely
dissolved.
Thus,    it   is    clear    that    the    woman    exercised   the
authority     to   divorce     unilaterally      even    during  the
pre-Islamic period.
16.       In    the     post-Islamic         period,     Islam
emphasised on conciliation as the preferred mode of
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
resolution     of   all    disputes     between    the  believers.
The believers, at the first instance, will have to
resort     to   conciliation,       before     resorting    to  the
authority given to them to terminate any sort of
legal relationship. In Surah Al Hujurat Chapter 49,
verses 9 and 10 read thus:
9. And if two parties or groups among the believers
fall to fighting, then make peace between them both,
but if one of them rebels against the other, then
fight you (all) against the one that which rebels till
it complies with the Command of Allah; then if it
complies,    then   make    reconciliation    between   them
justly, and be equitable. Verily! Allah loves those
who are equitable.
10. The believers are nothing else than brothers (in
Islamic religion). So make reconciliation between your
brothers, and fear Allah, that you may receive mercy.
17. In Chapter 4, verses 35 and 128, the Quran
particularly refers to marital disputes and commands
the    believers      to    follow    proper     conciliation    to
resolve disputes.
35. If you fear a breach between them twain (the
man and his wife), appoint (two) arbitrators, one from
his family and the other from her’s; if they both wish
for  peace,   Allah   will   cause   their   reconciliation.
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
Indeed Allah is Ever All-Knower, Well-Acquainted with
all things.
128. And if a woman fears cruelty or desertion on
her husband’s part, there is no sin on them both if
they  make   terms   of   peace   between   themselves;  and
making peace is better. And human inner-selves are
swayed by greed. But if you do good and keep away from
evil, verily, Allah is Ever Well-Acquainted with what
you do.
The authority given to the women in Chapter 2, verse
229, must be read in the above background.
18.   Now,    we   will    come    back   to   the   procedure
illustrated       in    the    reported      Hadith     of   Jamila
demanding     divorce     from    Thabit.       The   Prophet   had
different     roles     during    his    lifetime.    He   was  the
messenger of God, he was a mediator and conciliator.
He   was    also    an   arbitrator/adjudicator.         In   'From
Middle    East    Stud.    25   (1993),    71-90.]    the   author,
Sherman A. Jackson has discussed the various roles of
According to al-Qarafi, the Prophet functioned in four
distinct   capacities:   (1)   messenger,   (2)  mufti,  (3)
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
judge,and (4)imam or head of state. His actions thus
constituted either(1)verbatim communications from God,
(2) fatwas, (3) judicial rulings (ahkam; sing. hukm),
or    (4)    discretionary      injunctions (tasarrufat;
sing.tasarruf) enjoined by the head of state.
M.H. Kamali, in his book, 'The Principles of Islamic
Jurisprudence'       [pg.    54],    discusses  the  different
capacities in which the Prophet acted.
The legal Sunnah (Sunnah tashri'iyya) consists of the
exemplary conduct of the Prophet, be it an act,saying,
or a tacit approval, which incorporates the rules and
principles of Shari'ah. This variety of Sunnah may be
divided into three types, namely the Sunnah which the
Prophet laid down in his capacities as Messenger of
God, as the Head of State or imam, or in his capacity
as a judge.
These roles cannot be overlooked while adverting to
the true meaning of the procedure followed by the
Prophet for terminating the marriage between Jamila
and Thabit, at the instance of Jamila.           The direction
given by the Prophet to Jamila to return the garden,
is on an equitable consideration. In a unilateral
divorce invoked by her, she has to return what she
had received from her husband. This part constitutes
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
the substantial law as far as khula is concerned.
Talaq is considered as a unilateral termination by
the husband. The Quran therefore casts an obligation
upon the husband         to provide fair provisions for the
wife’s future, subject to his means. (See the verses
236 & 241 of Chapter 2, Quran)
236. There is no sin on you, if you divorce women
while yet you have not touched (had sexual relation
with) them, nor appointed unto them their Mahr (bridal
money given by the husband to his wife at the time of
marriage). But bestow on them ( a suitable gift), the
rich according to his means, and the poor according to
his means, a gift of reasonable amount is a duty on
the doers of good.
241.   And   divorced   women    shall   be  provided   for,
equitably—a duty upon the righteous
The   verses     236   and   241    would    establish    that  the
husband is legally bound to ensure fair provisions
for    the    protection      of    the    wife   who    would   be
separated, on pronouncement of talaq by the husband.
It is particularly required to advert to, here, that
the right to invoke talaq or its validity is not
dependent on the acceptance or acknowledgment of the
provisions for her future.
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
19. The Prophet was approached by Jamila as she
had no knowledge of the procedure of divorce, at her
instance.        The   Prophet    responded      to   her  request,
asking    her    to   return    what    she    had  obtained    from
Thabit. She agreed and thereafter, Thabit was asked
to pronounce talaq.           In another instance of khula,
referred to in the book 'the Rights and Duties of
Spouses', 7th edition, by Maulana Sayyid Abul A’la
Maududi,     relating     to   the    second     wife   of  Thabit,
Habeeba; she was also granted divorce in a similar
manner. In another case, during the period of the
Caliph     Umar,     a   woman     pleaded      for   khula.    Umar
counseled her to patch up the differences.                  She was
adamant.     Then Umar ordered that she be kept alone in
a cell for three days, after which, she was produced
before him. She did not budge from her demand. On
production, she said that those were the three nights
of peace she had in years. Umar summoned her husband
and     delivered       the    judgment       and    granted     her
separation.       The   same    author,     Maududi,     refers   to
another instance of separation of Rubay’ah, daughter
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
of   Muawwiz.      She   sought     for    separation    from   her
husband, in return for all her property. The husband
did not accept the deal. The case was brought before
Caliph     Osman    who    accepted     the    woman's   plea   and
ordered the separation. In all these cases, there was
a third party intervention, of the Prophet or Caliph
(ruler      of    Arabia).      In     these     cases,    on   the
intervention of the Caliph, the husband pronounced
talaq, accepting the return of the property given to
the   wife.     This   procedure      is   being    cited   as  the
procedure to be followed for extra judicial divorce
by khula at the instance of the wife.
20.       We   have    to    differ     on  the   point   of
procedure      cited    by    the    counsel     for   the   review
petitioners      and   the   others.     We    cannot  ignore   the
situations       in    these     illustrated       cases.       The
obligation of the wife to return the property she
obtained      from    the     husband     forms     part   of   the
substantial law.        The mandate of conciliation and the
involvement of third-party, as referred to in the
various     instances      noted    above    by   us,   cannot   be
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
overlooked. It was more of a conciliatory situation
where    the   prophet     or   ruler,    as   the  case  may  be,
decided the termination of marriage at the instance
of   the   wife,    as   it    also    involved    the  return  of
property to the husband. In those circumstances, the
intervenor could demand that the husband pronounce
talaq and terminate the marriage. The pronouncement
of talaq by the husband partakes the acknowledgment
of the materials he is entitled to receive in return,
bringing an end to the marital tie. No doubt, this
procedure is most desirable for believers to follow
for termination of marriages at the instance of the
wife. However, the point is whether this procedure is
itself the law for effecting khula. To understand
this, one needs to distinguish between Hadith and
Sunnah. Hadith refers to the narration of the conduct
of the prophet in a situation. Whereas, Sunnah refers
to the law deduced from it. See 'The Principles of
Islamic Jurisprudence' by M.H. Kamali [pg. No 49].
Hadith   differs    from   Sunnah  in  the  sense that
Hadith is a narration of the conduct of the Prophet
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
whereas   Sunnah   is   the  example    or   the  law  that  is
deduced from it. Hadith in this sense is the vehicle
or the carrier of Sunnah, although Sunnah is a wider
concept    and  used    to  be   so   especially    before  its
literal meaning gave way to its juristic usage. Sunnah
thus preferred not only to the Hadith of the Prophet
but also to the established practice of the community.
But once the literal meanings of Hadith and Sunnah
gave   way   to  their   technical    usages    and  were  both
exclusively used in reference to the conduct of the
Prophet, the two became synonymous. This was largely a
result of al-Shafi'i's efforts, who insisted that the
Sunnah must always be derived from a genuine Hadith
and that there was no Sunnah outside the Hadith. In
the pre-Shafi'i period, 'Hadith' was also applied to
the statements of the Companions and their Successors,
the tabi'un. It thus appears that 'Hadith' began to be
used   exclusively    for   the   acts   and   sayings  of  the
Prophet only after the distinction between the Sunnah
and Hadith was set aside.
Further, the distinction between legal and non-legal
Sunnah is equally relevant. Shah Abdul Hannan in the
book ‘Usul Al Fiqh’ writes:
A very important classification is legal and non-legal
Sunnah.   Legal   Sunnah   (Sunnah    tashriyyah)consists    of
the   Prophetic    activities     and   instructions    of  the
Prophet (sm) as the Head of the State and as Judge.
Non-legal    Sunnah    (Sunnah    Ghayr   tashriyyah)    mainly
consist of the natural activities         of the Prophet (Al-
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
afal-al-jibilliyyah), such as the manner in which he
ate, slept, dressed and such other activities which do
not   form  a  part   of   Shariah.   This  is   called   adat
(habit) of the Prophet in the Nurul Anwar,a text-book
of Usul. Certain activities may fall in between the
two. Only competent scholars can distinguish the two
in   such  areas.   Sunnah    which   partake   of   technical
knowledge such as medicine, agriculture is not part of
Shariah according to most scholars. As for the acts
and sayings of the Prophet that related to particular
circumstances such as the strategy of war, including
such devices that misled the enemy forces, timing of
attack, siege or withdrawal, these too are considered
to be situational and not a part of the Shariah..
(Khallaf:.'ILM - Usul al Fiqh', Mahmud Shalutat: Al
Islam, Aqidah wa Shariah)
21. The    procedure      delineated      and    relied    upon
only refers to the settlement of a demand and the
husband obliging thereon, by accepting return of the
materials by pronouncing talaq, at the intervention
of    a   third-party.       That    procedure      adopted     in   a
particular situation cannot itself be made a general
law relating to khula while analyzing the right of
the wife to obtain divorce. The general law has to be
understood from the purport of the authority given
and     not    with     reference       to    the     situation     or
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
circumstances       under     which    it    was    exercised.    In
Islamic     law,    it   is   desirable      that   all   kinds   of
disputes     are   resolved      amicably     between    believers,
either    themselves      or   with    the    assistance    of   the
Ruler. If the matter is resolved by the Ruler or with
the intervention of a third party, that procedure
itself    cannot     be   cited    as   the    procedure   for   the
determination      and    validity     of   the   right   conferred
under the Quranic legislation. The right itself has
to be understood from the scheme of the law.                We   are
not   invalidating       the   procedure      of   arriving    at  a
settlement between spouses on demand of the wife, as
above.    We    reiterate     that    that    procedure    is   most
desirable for parties. We also clarify our judgment
to that extent. However, we cannot hold that that
procedure followed situationally, be treated as a law
when    parties     are   not    able    to   arrive   at   such   a
settlement. If the procedure itself is understood as
the    law,    that    would     derogate        from   the   right
conferred       on     a    Muslim      wife,      under    Quranic
legislation, to terminate the marriage at her will.
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
The     Quranic     verses      are     in    unqualified      terms
recognizing      that     right.    Deduction    of   law    from  a
particular conduct of the Prophet is not easy as the
Prophet     acted    in    different     and   varied   capacities
either     in   isolation,      or   in   combination     of   those
different capacities. This has resulted in different
understandings of the Sunnah among Islamic scholars.
This difference has extended to beliefs and practices
as    well.    The    existence      of   different    schools    of
thought among the Muslim community would vouch for
this.       We,    in   our    judgment     under   review,     also
adverted to the different ways of effecting khula
across the globe.
22. Many Islamic scholars, while distinguishing
the    features    of    legal    and   non-legal   Sunnah,     have
adverted to the following aspects ['The Principles of
Islamic Jurisprudence' by M.H. Kamali, pg. no 57]:
To distinguish the legal from non-legal Sunnah, it is
necessary for the mujtahid to ascertain the original
purpose and context in which a particular ruling of
the Sunnah has been issued and whether it was designed
to   establish   a   general    rule  of  law.  The   Hadith
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
literature does not always provide clear information
as to the different capacities in which the Prophet
might have acted in particular situations, although
the mujtahid may find indications that assist him to
some extent. The absence of adequate information and
criteria on which to determine the circumstantial and
non-legal Sunnah from that which constitutes general
law dates back to the time of the Companions. The
difficulty has persisted ever since, and it is due
mainly to the shortage of adequate information that
disagreement    has  arisen   among   the   ulema  over  the
understanding and interpretation of the Sunnah”.[45.
Ghazali, Mustasfa, II, 51; Badran, Bayan, pp. 41-42;
Mutawalli, Mabadi', p. 38.]
23. According to the learned Adv. Hussain C.S.,
if the husband refuses to pronounce talaq on the
request     of   the    wife,    a   qadi    has    the  power  to
pronounce talaq, and in the absence of a qadi, the
modern Courts can exercise the power of qadi. A qadi
can   act    as   a   conciliator,      mediator     and   also as
guardian. A qadi, in Islamic law, has the following
powers and functions         [See Engy Abdelkader, 'To Judge
or Not to Judge: A Comparative Analysis of Islamic
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
Jurisprudential Approaches to Female Judges in the
Muslim World (Indonesia, Egypt and Iran)', Fordham
“Notably, the pre-modern Muslim judge functioned in a
manner   wholly    distinct    from   his   modern    Western
counterpart.
As an initial matter, mediation figured prominently in
resolving disputes arising in pre-industrial Islamic
societies.    These   disputes    encompassed    quasi-legal
matters as well as those arising between siblings or
spouses.
In addition to resolving disputes, the judge’s typical
activities    included   supervising    charitable    trusts;
acting as a guardian over orphans; attending to public
works; and leading Friday prayers and funeral prayers
(an    exclusively     male     province),    among      other
responsibilities. Notably, the courts also functioned
as judicial registries.
Notably,   the   Quran   and   Hadith   literature    do   not
provide   explicit   provisions   setting   forth   necessary
qualifications    or  credentials   concerning    service   in
the  judiciary—although     Islamic   scholars   will    later
draw upon both of these textual sources to support
opinions on the subject.”
A qadi cannot be equated with a Court in the modern
State. Apparently, the reference to the qadi in this
context is to exercise his authority as a guardian
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
rather than an adjudicator. It is acknowledged by
Islamic law that the Muslim wife has the right to
demand termination of marriage. The argument that if
the husband refuses, she has to move the Court stares
at us. For what purpose she has to move the Court,
begs the question. The Court is neither called upon
to adjudicate nor called upon to declare the status,
but simply has to pronounce termination of marriage
on behalf of the wife.           The Court in our country is
not a guardian of an adult and able woman. If there
is   nothing     for   a   Court    to   adjudicate, the  Court
cannot assume the role of a guardian and pronounce
termination of marriage at the instance of a woman.
Conferring authority upon the court is an exercise in
futility, inasmuch as the court cannot entertain the
request as there is no dispute to be resolved between
the   parties.     The   relief     of   declaration of  status
based on divorce can be given only when divorce is
effected through an extra judicial method. If the
court treats such a request for termination in the
like manner of faskh, there would be no obligation on
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
the part of the wife to return the materials she
obtained from her husband. It is to be remembered
that in judicial divorce in the nature of faskh, the
courts    are    deciding     the   cause    on  the   premise  of
fault. If the arguments of the review petitioner is
accepted     that    the    court    will    have   to   pronounce
termination of marriage, then the claim for khula
would turn on fault. The very nature of khula has
always been recognised as a mode of divorce on a
no-fault basis. This is exactly the reason, in the
judgment     under     review,     we    interpreted     that  the
residuary ground as referred under Section 2(ix) of
the Dissolution of Muslim Marriages Act, 1939 cannot
be    equated      with    khula.      Dissolution     of   Muslim
Marriages       Act   only     contemplates      dissolution    of
marriage at the instance of Muslim women on fault
grounds. If the Qur'an, in unequivocal terms, permits
spouses     to   terminate     their    marriage   on   their  own
will,    it   cannot    be   said    that    the  Sunnah   further
qualifies      it,   subjecting      it   to   the  will   of  the
husband, in the case of khula.
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
24. Sunnah       cannot      override       or     abrogate    the
primary legislation.[See 'The Principles of Islamic
Jurisprudence' by M.H. Kamali, pg. no. 60]
As Sunnah is the second source of the Shari'ah next to
the Qur'an, the mujtahid is bound to observe an order
of priority between the Qur'an and Sunnah. Hence in
his search for a solution to a particular problem, the
jurist must resort to the Sunnah only when he fails to
find any guidance in the Qur'an. Should there be a
clear text in the Qur'an, it must be followed and be
given priority over any ruling of the Sunnah which may
happen to be in conflict with the Qur'an. The priority
of the Qur'an over the Sunnah is partly a result of
the fact that the Qur'an consists wholly of manifest
revelation    (wahy   zahir)    whereas    the    Sunnah   mainly
consists of internal revelation (wahy batin) and is
largely   transmitted    in   the    words   of   the  narrators
themselves.     The  other    reason     for    this   order   of
priority relates to the question of authenticity. The
authenticity of the Qur'an is not open to doubt, it
is, in other words, qati, or decisive, in respect of
authenticity and must therefore take priority over the
Sunnah,   or   at  least   that    part  of   Sunnah    which  is
speculative (zanni) in respect of authenticity. The
third   point   in  favor   of    establishing     an  order   of
priority between the Qur'an and the Sunnah is that the
latter is explanatory to the former. Explanation or
commentary should naturally occupy a secondary place
in  relationship     to   the    source,    55.    CE.   Shatibi,
Mawagfagar, IV, 3, Badran, Usad, p. 101.1 Furthermore,
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
the order of priority between the Qur'an and Sunnah is
clearly established in the Hadith of Mu'adh b. Jabal
which has already been quoted. The purport of this
Hadith was also adopted and communicated in writing by
'Umar b. al-Kattab to two judges, Shurayh b. Harith
and Abu Musa al-Ash'ari, who were ordered to resort to
the Qur'an first and to the Sunnah only when they
could find no guidance in the Qur'an. 156. Shatibi,
IV, 4; Siba'i, Sunnah, p. 377; Badran, Usal, p. 82.
Shatibi adds that two other prominent Companions, 'Abd
Allah  b.   Mas'ud,   and   'Abd   Allah  b.  'Abbas    are  on
record as having confirmed the priority of the Qur'an
There should in principle be no conflict between the
Qur'an   and   the  authentic    Sunnah.    If,  however,    at
conflict is seen to exist between them, they must be
reconciled   as   far   as  possible    and  both   should   be
retained.   If   this   is  not   possible,   the   Sunnah   in
question is likely to be of doubtful authenticity and
must  therefore    give   way  to   the  Qur'an.   No  genuine
conflict   is   known   to   exist   between   the   Mutawatir
Hadith   and   the  Qur'an.    All   instances   of   conflict
between the Sunnah and the Qur'an, in fact, originate
in the solitary, or Ahad, Hadith, which is in any case
of   doubtful    authenticity     and   subordinate    to   the
overriding authority of the Qur'an. 158. Cr. Badran,
Usaf, p. 102.]
Sunnah is the second source of legislation. The first
and primary source is the Quran itself. The Sunnah
cannot be interpreted in such a way as to either
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
abrogate or reduce the scope of the command of the
Lawgiver in the primary legislation. To understand
the scope of discussion in this, it is necessary to
understand the nature and varieties of law given in
the primary legislation.
25. The     nature     of   law   given    in    the  Quran   is
classified as defining law and declaratory law. There
are    varieties     of   sub-classes      of    law    under   these
headings. M.H. Kamali in his book, 'The Principles of
Islamic Jurisprudence' [pg. no 279-280] , refers to
defining law as follows:
Hukm shar'i is divided into the two main varieties of
al-hukm al-taklifi (defining law) and al-hukm al-wad'i
(declaratory law). The former consists of a demand or
an option, whereas the latter consists of an enactment
only. `Defining Law' is a fitting description of al-
hukm al-taklifi, as it mainly defines the extent of
man's liberty of action. Al-hukm al-wad'i is rendered
'declaratory law', as this type of hukm mainly declares
the legal relationship between the cause (sabab) and
its effect (musabbab) or between the condition (shart)
and   its    object    (mashrut)[5.     Cf.     Abdur   Rahim,
Jurisprudence,     p.   193,   for   the    use   of   English
terminology.].
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
Defining law may thus be described as a locution or
communication       from    the    Lawgiver    which   demands    the
mukallaf to do something or forbids him from doing
something, or gives him an option between the two. This
type of hukm occurs in the well-known five categories
of   wajib     (obligatory),       mandub   (recommended),     haram
(forbidden),          makruh        (abominable)       and     mubah
(permissible). Declaratory law is also subdivided into
the     five     categories        of    sabab    (cause),     shart
(condition), mani' (hindrance), `azimah              (strict     law)
as opposed to rukhsah (concessionary law), and sahih
(valid) as opposed to batil (null and void). [6.              Khallaf,
`Ilm, p. 101; Qasim, Usul, p. 213.]
As    stated      above,      defining       law,   is   a    locution    or
communication           from      the      law-giver       addressed      to
Mukallaf         (accountable/responsible                person)       which
consists of a demand or an option; it occurs in the
five      varieties          of     wajib      (obligatory),          mandub
(recommended), haram (forbidden), makruh (abominable)
and mubah (permissible). The learned author defines
declaratory law as a communication from the Lawgiver
which enacts something into a cause, a condition, or
a    hindrance        to     something        else.     The    nature     of
classification as above, indicates that the right to
exercise talaq or khula would form part of defining
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
law    and   the    sub-category       of   mubah     (permissible).
M.H. Kamali, in another book, 'Shariah Law Questions
and    Answers'     [pg.nos.66-67]        has   further      discussed
these categories:
Human actions are categorised according to a scale of
Five Values, namely those that are obligatory (wajib),
recommended     (mandub,    also    mustahab),     permissible
(mubah,    also   ja'iz),     reprehensible     (makruh)    and
forbidden (haram). The first and last of these, namely
the wajib and the haram, are legal categories in that
that they are binding and may also be justiciable.
These two categories mainly originate in the decisive
rulings of Qur'an and hadith and are fairly limited in
scope, whereas the remaining three categories occupy a
much wider space, as they are also largely developed
through   juristic    interpretation      and   ijtihad.    The
ijtihadi    conclusions      and    rules    concerning     the
evaluative    labeling   of    human    conduct    into   these
categories are, on the whole, instructive and often
rationally undisputable yet not binding - unless they
are  also   upheld   and  endorsed    by   general   consensus
(ijma'),   in  which   case   they   become   a  part   of  the
actionable ruling (hukm) of the Shariah and acquire a
binding force. These five values, known as al-ahkam
al-khamsah, constitute the main bulk of the practical
or positive law, the ahkam amaliiyyah, and the main
subject   matter   of  fiqh.    The  Scale   of   Five   Values
consists mainly of identifiers of the value attached
to practical conduct of competent persons. The wajib
and haram pertaining especially to human relations and
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
muamalat    are   also   enforceable      in   the    courts   of
Shariah,    but   those    which    pertain    to    the   purely
religious and devotional aspects of Islam, such as
performing the prayer or haj, normally do not give
rise to legal action. The other three categories are
not enforceable and basically fall outside the ambit
of   law   enforcement.     They    are   matters     mainly   of
personal     choice     and     may    consist      of    advice,
encouragement or discouragement, etc., that should be
followed,    in  the  case   of    recommendable/mandub,      and
should       be     avoided,        in      the       case     of
reprehensible/makruh, whereas the permissible/mubah is
totally neutral and may or may not be acted upon. The
advice contained in these three categories may have
cultural import and consequences and may also affect
aspects   of    personal    piety,     customary     and   social
relations, but it is not actionable in the way the
wajib and the haram are.
In ‘Imam Al-Shatibi's Theory of the Higher Objectives
and Intents of Islamic Law’, the author, Ahamd Al-
Raysun [pg nos. 148-149] has extensively discussed
the sub-category of mubah (permissible):
The   first   thing  which    al-Shatibi     concludes    in  his
discussions of the category of mubah is that "that
which is permissible, insofar as it is permissible, is
something    which  one   is   neither   required     to  do  nor
required    to  refrain   from."181     He   then   proceeds   to
express    the    same    thought     in    the   language     of
objectives,     saying,   "...As    far    as   the    Lawgiver's
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
intention is concerned, it makes no difference whether
one performs such an action or refrains from it." 182
What we are speaking of here is the essential meaning
of the category of mubah, or permissible.' Scholars
have described actions which fall into this category
as  neutral    in   the  sense    that   there   is  an  equal
preference,    if   you  will,     for  performing    them  or
refraining from them, and that one is free to choose
between these two options. This, then, is the meaning
of the term 'permissible' when considered is isolation
from   all   attendant     circumstances     and   influences.
Viewed   from   this  perspective,     the  Lawgiver   intends
neither that we perform such an action nor that we
refrain   from   it,   and   as   such,   neither   choice  is
required   of   us,  for   if  we   are  required   either  to
perform it or to refrain from it, then it will fall
into one of the other four categories of actions and
can no longer be classified as 'permissible.'
26. The nature of khula is in the form of a
‘permissible’ action, to the Muslim wife who seeks to
exercise the option of terminating her marriage. This
reflects     the    autonomy     of    choice    exercised    by  the
wife. The will of the wife so expressed cannot be
related     to   the    will    of   the    husband    who   has  not
expressed his choice to terminate the marriage. The
very idea of categorization under the law, of an
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
action    as    permissible,       is   to  retain   that    action
within the domain of the person who exercises the
option, by relating it with his or her autonomy.
Extending such actions to the will of another would
certainly keep the action out of the category of
‘permissible’.       The    law    being    categorized     so,   it
cannot be whittled down or constricted by the will of
her husband upon whom no authority is conferred to
enforce such permission. It is relevant to note that,
there is no qualifying obligation on the husband in
the form of the five categories of defining law,
either    in   the   Quran     or   the   Sunnah,   to   accept   or
repudiate the will expressed by the wife to make the
permissible activity contingent or dependant upon any
qualifying factors.
27. The      review      petitioner      would    admit    that
neither     the    Quran     nor    Sunnah     has  provided     any
guidance      in   the    event      the   husband     refuses    to
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
pronounce talaq. As already noted, the invocation of
khula     in   the    cases     referred      by    the   different
authorities all refers to the intervention of a third
party, like the ruler. Islam itself has provided the
guidance to overcome situations like this where a
legal vacuum is created.
28. Muslim women in India are confronted with
the situation where no solution would be available to
them to effectuate this right, conferred on her as
per Quranic legislation, if the arguments of review
petitioner are accepted. We note that these arguments
have been raised on the footing that the traditions
and practices that have been followed have become
part of faith. In the light of the above argument, we
are also looking at a different dimension of the
question from the perspective of those who conform to
the faith.
29.   Istihsan     is   an   Arabic     term   for  juristic
discretion. In ‘Principles of Islamic Jurisprudence’,
M.S Khamali [pg. nos. 218-220] refers to Istihsan a
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
“The jurist who resorts to istihsan may find the law
to    be   either     too    general,     or   too    specific     and
inflexible. In both cases, istihsan may offer a means
of avoiding hardship and generating a solution which
is   harmonious       with   the    higher    objectives      of   the
Shari'ah.”      It has been suggested that the ruling of
the second caliph, `Umar b. al-Khattab, not to enforce
the hadd penalty of the amputation of the hand for
theft during a widespread famine, and the ban which he
imposed     on   the   sale    of   slave-mothers     (ummahat     al-
awlad), and marriage with kitabiyahs in certain cases
were all instances of istihsan.[5.            Umm al-walad is a female
slave who has borne a child to her master, and who is consequently free
at his death. A kitabiyah is a woman who is a follower of a revealed
religion, namely Christianity and Judaism.]  For `Umar set aside
the    established      law   in   these   cases    on   grounds    of
public interest, equity and justice.[6.               Cf. Ahmad  Hasan,
Early Development, p.145.]
“The    Hanbali    definition      of  istihsan     also    seeks   to
relate istihsan closely to the Qur'an and the Sunnah.
Thus    according      to   Ibn   Taymiyyah,     istihsan     is   the
abandonment of one legal norm (hukm) for another which
is   considered      better    on   the   basis    of   the   Qur'an,
Sunnah, or consensus.”
“But the Maliks view istihsan as a broad doctrine,
somewhat       similar      to    istislah,      which     is     less
stringently confined to the Qur'an and Sunnah than the
Hanafis     and   Hanbalis      have.   Thus    according     to   Ibn
al-'Arabi, 'istihsan is to abandon exceptionally what
is required by the law because applying the existing
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
law would lead to a departure from some of its own
30.    In   ‘Istihsan      The   Doctrine     of  Juristic
Preference      in  Islamic      Law’    by  Saim    Kayadibi,  the
author says that during the early Islamic period, the
term Istihsan was neither known nor directly defined
and therefore, when it was applied in judgment it was
applied     without    giving     any   specific     definition  or
application.       Support      of   Istihsan      considered   the
fundamental      principle       of    ease    and    avoidance  of
hardship as the sole basis of Istihsan. The rights
and obligations conferred upon believers, in Islam,
cannot be denied for want of a system as envisaged in
31. In ‘Shari’ah Law An Introduction’, by M.H.
Kamali [pg. nos. 274- 275], the author discusses the
various instances when the principle of Istihsan was
put   into    practice      by   the    Caliphs     to  remedy  the
injustice      caused     by     the    strict     application   of
Some    instances     of    obvious     imbalance    in  the
distribution of inheritance can also be addressed, I
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
believe,    by   recourse    to   the  principle     of  istiḥsān
(juristic     preference),      especially     in   cases   where
strict enforcement of the existing law leads to unfair
results in the distribution of family wealth. In such
situations,     istiḥsān    authorizes     the   judge   and  the
jurist    to   find    an   alternative     and    a   preferable
solution to the case before them which would realize
considerations of equity and fairness. Notwithstanding
the existence of valid precedent on this as reviewed
below,   Muslim    jurists    and   judges   have   not  made  an
effective use of the resources of istiḥsan. Without
wishing    to   enter    into   details,    I   may   refer  here
briefly to the renowned case of al-mushtarakah (the
apportioned) which was decided by the caliph 'Umar b.
al-Khaṭṭāb. In this case, a woman was survived by her
husband, mother, two germane and two uterine brothers.
The   Qur'anic      rules   of    inheritance     were   strictly
applied but the result was such that the two maternal
brothers received one-third of the estate and the two
full brothers were totally excluded. This is because
the   former     are    Qur'anic     sharers     (dhawu'l-furüd)
whereas     the    latter    belong    to    the    category   of
residuaries     ('asabah).     The   former   must    take  their
shares   first    and   what   is  left   is   then   distributed
among the residuaries. The full brothers complained to
the caliph and forcefully pleaded with him about the
justice of their case. According to reports, the full
brothers addressed the caliph in the following terms:
suppose our father was a donkey (which is why the case
is also known as alhimariyyah), we still shared the
same mother with our maternal brothers. The caliph was
hesitant to act in the face of the clear Qur'anic
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
mandate, yet he decided on equitable grounds, after a
month  of   consultation    with   the    leading     Companions,
that all the brothers should share equally in the one-
third.
Unfair   results   of   a  similar    type    can    occasionally
arise, sometimes due to technical reasons, which could
be addressed by recourse to istihsan, and the judges
should not hesitate to do so when istihsan can be
invoked to serve the ideals of equitable distribution.
To give an example, suppose that a deceased person is
survived by a son and a daughter. During the lifetime
of his father the son had bad relations with him and
did not bother to seek his forgiveness even during the
months of his last illness, while the daughter took
the responsibility and spent much of her hard-earned
income on her father's medical bills before he died.
When  this   happened,    however,    the   son   was    quick   to
claim double the share of his sister in inheritance.
This would be the kind of case, in my view, where
istiḥsan can be invoked to remedy the unfair outcome
that is anticipated from a strict conformity to the
normal   rules    of   inheritance.     This     is    the   basic
rationale   of   the   doctrine    of   istiḥsān,      to   remedy
unfair    results    which    may   arise      from     a   strict
application of the existing rules of Shari'ah. Yet to
the best of my knowledge, Muslim countries have not
introduced enabling legislation that would authorize
the   judges    to    apply    istiḥsän      to     remedy     such
situations.    Istiḥsan    admittedly     does     not    seek   to
introduce new law. It is rather designed so as to
address    case    by    case    situations       where     strict
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
implementation of the existing law may lead to unfair
results. Istiḥsān in this way offers some potential to
vindicate the cause of equity and fairness when this
might present a compelling case for reconsideration
and  review.    For   this  to   become   reality,  we  need
lawmakers, judges and jurists of great professional
fortitude to make laws and adjudicate cases that break
away with the prevailing mindset of taqlid.
32. In this light, it is also important to give
due consideration to the maqasid (goals and purposes)
of Shariah. M.H. Kamali, in his book, “Shariah Law
Questions and Answers” [pg. no. 204-205] refers to
maqasid     and    its    importance     in    understanding    the
A) The maqasid (plural of maqsad - goals and purposes)
of  Shariah,   or   the  higher   purposes   of Islamic  law
(henceforth maqasid) refer to the meaning, purpose and
wisdom   that   the   Lawgiver   has  contemplated   in  the
enactment of Shariah laws. Maqasid thus refer to the
higher purposes of the law, which are meant to be
secured through the implementation of that law, and
they give the law a sense of direction and purpose. It
also means that the rules of Shariah, especially in
the spheres of human relations and muamalat, are not
meant for their own sake but to secure and realise
certain objectives. When the dry letter of the law is
applied in such a way that it does not secure its
intended purpose and fails, for instance, to secure
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
the justice and benefit it is meant to secure, or when
it leads, on the contrary, to harm and prejudice, the
law is most likely reduced to a purposeless exercise,
which   must   be  avoided.     The   laws    of   Shariah   are
generally meant to secure justice and the interests
and prosperity of the people both in this world and
the hereafter. But the detailed rules, commands and
prohibitions    of   Shariah    also    have   their   specific
purposes, which are often identified in the text of
the law, or by recourse to interpretation and ijtihad.
33. The maqasid of Shariah can be arrived at by
the     process       of     ta’lil        (ratiocination).         The
significance of the process of ta’lil in matters not
pertaining      to   worship     has    been    elaborated      by  the
author,     M.H.Kamali      in    the    book,     “Shariah     Law  An
Introduction”[pg. no. 55]:
3. Ta'lil is not valid with regard to 'ibādāt, but
outside     this     area     the      Shari'ah      encourages
investigation      and     enquiry       into     its     rules.
Ratiocination in the Qur'an means that the laws of
Shari'ah are not imposed for their own sake, nor for
want of mere conformity, but they aim at realization
of  certain   benefits/objectives.       This   also  tells   us
that  when   there   is  a   change   of   a   kind  whereby   a
particular    law   no   longer    secures     its   underlying
purpose and rationale, it must be substituted with a
suitable   alternative.     To   do   otherwise     would   mean
neglecting the objective of the Lawgiver. According to
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
al-Shāṭibi,   the   rules   of  Shari'ah   concerning    civil
transactions    and    customary    matters   (mu'amalat    wa
'ādāt)   follow    the   benefits    (maṣāliḥ)   which    they
contemplate. We note, for instance, that the Shari'ah
may forbid something because it is devoid of benefit,
but it permits the same when it secures a benefit. A
deferred   sale,   for   example,    of  dirham   for  dinar:
forbidden because of the fear of usury (riba) therein,
but a period loan is permitted because it secures a
benefit (deferment is harmful in one and beneficial in
the   other).    Similarly    fresh    dates   may   not,   in
principle,    be   sold   for    dry   dates   for   fear   of
uncertainty (gharar) and usury (ribā) but the Prophet
permitted this transaction, known as 'arāyā, because
of the people's need for it.
Moreover, instances of abrogation in the rulings of
Qur'an and Sunnah which took place during the lifetime
of the Prophet can properly be understood in these
terms. Instances are also found in the precedent of
Companions where some of the laws of Shari'ah were
suspended because they no longer secured the benefit
which   they   had   initially    contemplated.    Since   the
'illah and rationale on which they were premised were
no longer present they were suspended or replaced with
suitable alternatives. We note, for example, that the
caliph    'Umar   b.    al-Khaṭṭäb     suspended   the    hadd
punishment of theft during the year of the famine. The
caliph also stopped distribution of agricultural land
to Muslim warriors in Iraq despite a Qur'anic ruling
that entitled them to war booty; he also suspended the
share of the pagan friends of Islam (the 'allafat al-
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
qulub) in the revenues of zakah. These were persons of
influence   whose   co-operation     was   important   for  the
victory of Islam. The Qur'an had assigned a share for
them (9:60), which the caliph later discontinued on
the  ground,    as he   stated,   that    'Allah  has   exalted
Islam and it is no longer in need of their support'.
The caliph thus departed, on purely rational grounds,
from the letter of the Qur'an in favour of its general
purpose and 'his ruling is considered to be in harmony
with the spirit of the Qur'an'.
34. In the absence of any other method in the
manner     suggested     by    the    counsel      for   the    review
petitioner       and    others,to        effectuate       the    right
conferred on Muslim women being prevalent in this
country,     the    Court’s    authority       in   conferring     upon
Muslim women the right to invoke khula at her own
will,    will    have   to    be   respected.       The   Quran    lays
emphasis on the power of the authority and directs
the faithful to follow the authority in Chapter 4:59
of the Quran by commanding believers as follows:
59.  O   you   who  believe!    Obey   Allah    and  obey   the
Messenger (Muhammad), and those of you (Muslims) who
are  in  authority.    (And)   if  you    differ  in  anything
amongst   yourselves,     refer    it    to   Allah   and   His
Messenger, if you believe in Allah and in the Last
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
Day.   That   is    better   and   more    suitable    for   final
determination.
Al Haj A.D. Ajijola in the book ‘What is Shariah?’
[pg. no. 161] has discussed the power vested in the
authority to enact laws:
Strictly in theory in Islam, the authority to enact
laws primarily belongs to God, and He alone has the
supreme legislative power in the Islamic system. The
Caliph,    or     the    Executive     Head    of    the   Muslim
Commonwealth     has   no  sovereign     power   nor   any   royal
prerogative, he is theoretically simply the principal
magistrate to carry out the injunction of the Qur'an
and   the   ordinances      of    the   Prophet.     He   has   no
legislative functions as God alone is the Legislator
in Islam. Thus according to Muslim concept of law and
the    popular      belief,     there     is    technically     no
legislative power in the state. But in reality these
refer only to the basic law expressed or implied in
the  Qur'an    or    accepted   Hadith.    In   any   case,   this
actually means that any law made by Muslim community
must  not   be   repugnant     or  be   in   conflict   with   the
provision of the Qur'an and the accepted Prophet's
tradition. Otherwise, a Muslim state like a non-Muslim
states   has    unlimited     power    to   make   law   for   the
protection and the good of the community.
35. Istihsan         is   a   doctrine      for   the    Courts  to
adopt and apply, if there are no other methods to
R.P.No.936 of 2021 in MAT.Appeal No.89 OF 2020
streamline the rights conferred on believers to act
upon. So, assuming that the argument of the review
petitioner      holds     good,     in    the   absence   of  any
mechanism in the country to recognize the termination
of marriage at the instance of the wife when the
husband refuses to give consent, the court can simply
hold     that     khula     can    be    invoked    without   the
conjunction of the husband.
36. We, therefore, find no reason to review the
judgment.      We   record     our   deepest     appreciation  to
Advocate Hussain C.S who is not a practitioner before
this court, having argued the case with meticulous
preparation, despite the fact that we cannot accept
his views and opinions.