Order on compliance of the judgment and order dated 30.06.2021
Passed in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 539 of 2021
1.     Pursuant to a detailed judgment and order dated 30.06.2021, this Court
directed the National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA) and the
appropriate authority in paragraph 16 as under:
“16. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, we
dispose of the present writ petitions with the following directions:
1)       We direct the National Disaster Management Authority to
recommend guidelines for ex gratia assistance on account of loss of
life to the family members of the persons who died due to Covid-19,
as mandated under Section 12(iii) of DMA 2005 for the minimum
standards of relief to be provided to the persons affected by disaster
– Covid 19 Pandemic, over and above the guidelines already
recommended for the minimum standards of relief to be provided to
persons affected by Covid-19. However, what reasonable amount to
be offered towards ex gratia assistance is left to the wisdom of
National Authority which may consider determining the amount taking
into consideration the observations made hereinabove, such as,
requirement/availability of the fund under the NDRF/SDRF for other
reliefs and the priorities determined by the National Authority/Union
Government and the fund required for other minimum standards of
relief and fund required for prevention, preparedness, mitigation and
recovery and other reliefs to carry out the obligation under DMA
2005.     The aforesaid exercise and appropriate guidelines be
recommended, as directed hereinabove, within a period of six weeks
2)      The Appropriate Authority is directed to issue simplified
guidelines for issuance of Death Certificates/official document stating
the exact cause of death, i.e., “Death due to Covid-19”, to the family
members of the deceased who died due to Covid-19. While issuing
such guidelines, the observations made hereinabove in paragraph 13
be borne in mind. Such guidelines may also provide the remedy to
the family members of the deceased who died due to Covid-19 for
correction of the death certificate/official document issued by the
appropriate authority, if they are not satisfied with the cause of death
mentioned in the death certificate/official document issued by the
3)      The Union of India to take appropriate steps on the
recommendations made by the Finance Commission in this XVth
Finance Commission Report bearing paragraph 8.131 in consultation
with other stakeholders and experts.”
2.      Under the above directions in terms of para 16(1), the NDMA was
required to recommend guidelines for ex-gratia assistance on account of loss
of life to the family members of the persons who died due to Covid-19, as
mandatory under Section 12 (iii) of the Disaster Management Act, 2005 (for
short, ‘DMA 2005’) for the minimum standards of relief to be provided to the
persons affected by disaster – Covid-19 Pandemic, over and above the
guidelines already recommended for the minimum standards of relief to be
provided to persons affected by Covid-19, within a period of six weeks from
30.06.2021.      This Court also specifically observed that what reasonable
amount to be offered towards ex-gratia assistance is left to the wisdom of the
NDMA which may consider determining the amount taking into consideration
the observations made in the detailed judgment and order dated 30.06.2021,
such as, requirement/availability of the fund under the NDRF/SDRF for other
reliefs and the priorities determined by the National Authority/Union
Government and the fund required for other minimum standards of relief and
fund required for prevention, preparedness, mitigation and recovery and other
reliefs to carry out the obligation under DMA 2005.
3.     By order dated 16.08.2021, this Court extended the time for framing the
guidelines as per the directions contained in paragraph 16(1) of the judgment
dated 30.06.2021, by a further period of four weeks.
4.     An affidavit/additional affidavit has been filed on behalf of the Union of
India with respect to compliance of the directions contained in paragraph 16(1)
of the judgment dated 30.06.2021 and it is stated that now the NDMA has
prepared guidelines for ex-gratia assistance to the next of the kin of the
deceased due to Covid-19 under Section 12(iii) of the DMA 2005, vide
guidelines dated 11.09.2021 under which the NDMA has recommended an
amount of Rs.50,000/- as ex-gratia payment to the next of the kin of the
deceased due to Covid-19. It is stated that the ex-gratia assistance shall be
provided by the States from the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF) and
the ex-gratia assistance to the next of the kin of the deceased person shall be
disbursed      by    the   District   Disaster   Management      Authority/District
Administration and the disbursement shall be as per clause 8 of the said
guidelines. The relevant clauses of the guidelines read as under:
“5.     In view of the points mentioned in para 2, the Authority
recommends an ex-gratia payment to next of kin of the deceased due
to COVID-19, subject to cause of death being certified as COVID-19
as per the guidelines issued by MoHFW and ICMR.
6.      Amount of ex-gratia payment: The Authority recommends
an amount of Rs.50,000/- (Fifty Thousand only) per deceased person
including those involved in relief operations or associated in
preparedness activities, subject to cause of death being certified as
COVID-19. With regards to such certification, and redressal of any
grievances regarding the same, guidelines issued by MoHFW and
ICMR on 3rd September, 2021 and referred to in para 2 above, will be
applicable.
7.      Source of funds: The ex-gratia assistance shall be provided
by States from the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF).
(DDMA)/ district administration would disburse the ex-gratia
assistance to the next of kin of the deceased persons. The
concerned families will submit their claims through a form issued by
State Authority along with specified documents including the death
certificate that certifies the cause of death to be COVID-19. The
DDMA will ensure that the process of claim, verification, sanction,
and the final disbursement of ex-gratia payment will be through a
robust yet simple and people-friendly procedure. All claims must be
settled within 30 days of submission of required documents and
disbursed through Aadhaar linked Direct Benefit Transfer procedures.
9.      Grievance redressal: In case of any grievances with regards
to certification of the death, as prescribed in the MoHFW and ICMR
guidelines mentioned above a Committee at district level consisting
of Additional District Collector, Chief Medical Officer of Health
(CMOH), Additional CMOH/Principal or HOD Medicine of a Medical
College ( if one existing in the district) and a subject expert, will
propose necessary remedial measures, including issuance of
amended Official Document for COVID-19 death after verifying facts
in accordance with these guidelines. In case the decision of the
Committee is not in favour of the claimant, a clear reason for the
same shall be recorded.
10.     Continuous Scheme: The Ex-gratia assistance to families
affected by COVID-19 deaths will continue to be provided for deaths
that may occur in the future phases of the COVID-19 pandemic as
well, or until further notification.
5.     Now so far as the directions contained in para 16(2) of the judgment
dated 30.06.2021 are concerned, first affidavit has been filed on 08.09.2021 in
which it is stated that in compliance of the directions issued by this Court
contained in paragraph 16(2), the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare,
Government of India and the Indian Council of Medical Research have jointly
issued guidelines dated 3.9.2021 for issuance of an official document for
Covid-19 related deaths. It is further stated that office of the Registrar General
of India has also issued a circular dated 3.9.2021 to provide a medical
certificate of cause of death to the next of the kin of the deceased. Under the
guidelines dated 3.9.2021, it is provided as under:
“Government of India Ministry of Health & Family Welfare & Indian
Council of Medical Research Guidelines for Official Document for
COVID19 Death (lssued in compliance to the Hon'ble Supreme Court
order dated 30.06.2021 in WP(Civil) No. 539 and WP (Civil) 554 of
Since the beginning of the Covid-19 pandemic, Indian Council of
Medical Research (ICMR) and Ministry of Health & Family Welfare have
been issuing specific guidelines to States/UTs based on World Health
Organization's (WHO) guidelines & global best practices on reporting
Covid deaths. Relevant officers in States/UTs have also been trained on
correct recording of deaths related to Covid-19. Hon'ble Supreme Court
in Writ Petition (Civil) No. 539 and 554 of 2021 directed the Central
Government to issue simplified guidelines for issuance of Official
Document relating to COVID-19 deaths to the family members of the
deceased, who died due to COVID-19. Hon'ble Court had directed that
such guidelines may also provide the remedy to the family members of
the deceased who died due to COVID-19 for correction of the Medical
Certificate of Cause of Death/Official Document issued by the
appropriate authority.
i. COVID-19 cases, for the purpose of these Guidelines, are those
which are diagnosed through a positive RT-PCR/ Molecular Tests/ RAT
OR clinically determined through investigations in a hospital/ in-patient
facility by a treating physician, while admitted in the hospital/ in-patient
ii. Deaths occurring due to poisoning, suicide, homicide, deaths due to
accident etc. will not be considered as COvID-19 deaths even if
COVID19 is an accompanying condition.
3. Scenario based approach and interventions
i. COVID-19 cases which are not resolved and have died either in
hospital settings or at home, and where a Medical Certificate of Cause
of Death (MCCD) in Form 4 & 4 A has been issued to the registering
authority as required under Section 10 of the Registration of Birth and
Death (RBD) Act, 1969, will be treated as a COVID-19 death. Registrar
General of India (RGI) will issue necessary guidelines to Chief
Registrars of all States/UTs.
ii. As per the study by Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR), 95%
i. deaths take place within 25 days of being tested Covid positive. To
make the scope broader and more inclusive, deaths occurring within 30
days from the date of testing or from the date of being clinically
determined as a COVID-19 case, will be treated as 'deaths due to
COVID-19, even if the death takes place outside the hospital/ in-patient
iii. However, a COVID-19 case, while admitted in the hospital in-patient
ii. facility, and who continued as the same admission beyond 30 days,
and died subsequently, shall be treated as a COVID-19 death.
iv. In cases where the MCCD is not available or the next of kin of the
deceased is not satisfied with the cause of death given in MCCD (Form
4/4A), and which are not covered by the aforesaid scenarios, the
States/ UTs shall notify a Committee at district level consisting of
Additional District Collector, Chief Medical Officer of Health (CMOH),
Additional CMOH/ Principal or HOD Medicine of a Medical College (if
one exists in the district) and a subject expert, for issuance of the
Official Document for COVID-19 Death. The Committee will follow the
a. The next of kin of the deceased shall submit a petition to the District
Collector for issuance of the appropriate Official Document for COVID-
b. The Official Document for COVID-19 Death will be issued in the
format annexed to these Guidelines by the aforesaid district-level
Committee after due examination and verification of all facts.
c. The Official Document for COvID-19 Death shall also be
communicated to Chief Registrars of States/UTs and Registrar of Birth
and Death, who issued the death certificate.
d. The Committee shall also examine the grievances of the next of kin
of the deceased, and propose necessary remedial measures, including
issuance of amended Official Document for COVID-19 Death after
verifying facts in accordance with these guidelines. e.
e. The applications for issuance of Official Document for COVID-19
Death and for redressal of grievances shall be disposed off within 30
days of submission of the application/ grievance.”
6.     It provided that the deaths occurring due to poisoning, suicide, homicide,
deaths due to accident etc. will not be considered as Covid-19 deaths even if
Covid-19 is an accompanying condition.
7. On the last date of hearing, a concern was shown on some of the clauses
in the guidelines dated 3.9.2021 including the deaths occurring due to
poisoning, suicide, homicide, deaths due to accident etc. will not be
considered as Covid-19 deaths even if Covid-19 is an accompanying
7.1    A concern was also shown with respect to Grievance Redressal
Mechanism in case of any grievance with regard to certification of the death.
To that, under the guidelines dated 11.09.2021 in clause 9, a provision is
made with respect to constitution of a Grievance Redressal Committee at
District level consisting of the members mentioned in clause 9 of the
guidelines dated 11.09.2021, which is reproduced hereinabove.
8.     A further additional affidavit dated 22.09.2021 has been filed on behalf of
the Union of India on some of the issues/concerns expressed by this Court
during the course of hearing on 13.09.2021 and in response thereto, it is
1 Since       the      Guidelines    In      this        regard
. expressed           that      they  it        is respectfully
are      prospective          in submitted              that
was highlighted               by i.    COVID-19 cases,
this Hon'ble             Court   for        the purpose
the     certificates     which   those which             are
have already been issued         diagnosed through         a
hospitals/Government             Molecular      Tests/ RAT
Authority         prior       to  OR              clinically
coming into force the            determined
Guidelines               dated   in            a hospital/
3.09.2021.                       in-patient facility      by
A concern was raised as       hospital/         in-patient
to   whether      there was   facility.
3.09.2021 guidelines.
death.
of death.
of death.
2 It was further observed       It is further respectfully
. by this Hon’ble Court that    submitted that MoHFW
what     would    be    the   and ICMR has further
which have been received      COVID-19 deaths either
by the family members of      already issued prior to
the    deceased     patient   coming into force of
prior to coming into force    these Guidelines or as
of these Guidelines. This     rectified by the District
Hon’ble Court observed        Level Committee shall
documents               the   considering any death
Committee will consider       as     ‘death    due     to
for granting the financial    COVID-19’.
have died and have been       In this regard, it is
issued certificates prior to  respectfully submitted
coming into force of the      that it is clarified by
present Guidelines.
General of India.
3 A concern was raised          In this regard it is
. during the hearing of the     respectfully submitted
matter     regarding    the   that the timeline for
Committee as evinced in       States       may        be
the    guidelines     dated   prescribed as 30 days
03.09.2021      would    be   for     which     suitable
constituted by respective     instructions can be
State Governments and         issued by Ministry of
what    would     be    the   Health     and       Family
timeline      for       the   Welfare. Furthermore,
Committee to resolve the      in addition to the
disputes placed before it.
justice.
4 A further concern was         In this regard it is
. raised during the hearing     respectfully submitted
of the matter that these      that all the State
issued by the Ministry of     present petition and
Health,            Disaster   the guidelines have
Management             Cell;  been       framed         in
however,               their  pursuance        of     the
implementation          and   judgment        of      the
binding effect on the         Hon’ble          Supreme
Governments remains a         Governments              to
question.                     implement                it.
5 During the hearing dated      It    is      respectfully
. 13.09.2021, this Hon’ble      submitted that suitable
Court also observed that      directions      in     this
where people suffering        whereby, the family
from             COVID-19     members of people
committed suicide. This       committing          suicide
Hon’ble Court observed        within 30 days from
that the said class of         COVID-19 positive as
people do not form part        per         MoHFW/ICMR
of the Guidelines dated        guidelines will also be
was deliberated that case      granted under SDRF in
of such class of people        accordance with the
should also be suitably        Guidelines         dated
considered      and     they   11.09.2021 issued by
should also be included        NDMA under Section
within     the   ambit     of  12(iii) of DMA.
12(iii) of DMA.
9.     Having heard Shri Tushar Mehta, learned Solicitor General of India and
the writ petitioner Mr. Gaurav Kumar Bansal and Mr. Sumeer Sodhi, learned
Advocate for the intervenor and considering the Guidelines dated 11.09.2021
issued by the National Disaster Management Authority issued under Section
12 (iii) of DMA, 2005 on amount of ex-gratia assistance to the next of the kin
of the deceased due to Covid-19 and the affidavit/additional affidavit filed on
behalf of the Union of India, it appears that the NDMA has recommended an
amount of Rs.50,000/- as ex-gratia payment to the next of the kin of the
deceased due to Covid-19. The Guidelines also provide that ex-gratia
assistance shall be provided by the States from the State Disaster Response
Fund (SDRF) and the ex-gratia assistance to the next of the kin of the
deceased person shall be disbursed by the District Disaster Management
10.   In furtherance of our earlier order dated 30.06.2021, it is directed as
i)    that the next of the kin of the deceased died due to Covid-19 shall be
paid ex-gratia assistance of an amount of Rs.50,000/-, which shall be treated
as ex-gratia payment under Section 12(iii) of the DMA, 2005 and which shall
be minimum and which shall be over and above the compensation/amount to
be paid by the Union of India/State Governments/Union Territories to be
declared/provided under different benevolent schemes;
ii)   that the ex-gratia assistance of Rs. 50,000/- shall be provided by the
concerned States from the State Disaster Response Fund (SDRF);
iii)  that the ex-gratia assistance to the next of the kin of the deceased shall
be   disbursed     by   the   District Disaster    Management Authority/District
iv)   that the full particulars and address of the District Disaster Management
Authority/District Administration who is required to disburse the ex-gratia
assistance of Rs. 50,000/- shall be published in the Print Media and Electronic
Media and wide publicity shall be given;
that the same shall be published within a period of one week from today;
it is further directed that such information shall also be published in the
prominent offices of the village/taluk/district, such as, Gram Panchayat Office,
Taluk Panchayat Office, District Collector Office, Corporation Office etc.;
v)     that such ex-gratia assistance of Rs. 50,000/- shall be disbursed within a
period of 30 days from the date of submitting the application to the concerned
District Disaster Management Authority/District Administration along with the
proof of the death of the deceased due to Covid-19 and the cause of death
being certified as “Died due to Covid-19”;
vi)    that the amount to be disbursed as per the Guidelines dated 11.09.2021
and as observed hereinabove on the death being certified as Covid-19 death
for which the cause of death mentioned in the death certificate shall not be the
conclusive and if other documents are provided as discussed hereinbelow, the
next kin of the deceased died due to Covid-19 shall be entitled to the ex-gratia
vii)   that no States shall deny the ex-gratia assistance of Rs.50,000/- to the
next of the kin of the deceased died due to Covid-19 solely on the ground that
in the death certificate issued by the appropriate authority, the cause of death
is not mentioned as “Died due to Covid-19”;
viii)  that in case of any grievance with regard to certification of the death, the
aggrieved person may approach the Committee at District level consisting of
Additional District Collector, Chief Medical Officer of Health (CMOH),
Additional CMOH/Principal or HOD Medicine of a Medical College (if one
existing in the district) and a subject expert, who shall take remedial measures
including issuance of amended official document for Covid-19 death after
verifying the facts on production of the necessary documents showing that the
ix)    that the Authority/Committee shall carry out the directions as mentioned
hereinbelow while considering the case of the deceased as Covid-19. All the
States shall constitute such Committee within a period of one week from today
and the address location and full particulars of the said Committee at the
District level shall be published in Print Media and Electronic Media having
so far as the Corporation area is concerned, a similar Committee be
constituted consisting the Deputy Commissioner, Medical/Health, the Chief
Medical Officer of Health of the Civil Hospital in the area, if any, Additional
CMOH/Principal/HOD Medicine of a Medical College (if one existing in the
district) and a subject expert and their office shall be at the office of the
Municipal Corporation of the concerned municipality;
x)     it is further directed that in case the decision of the Committee is not in
favour of the claimant, a clear reason for the same shall be recorded by the
Committee which is called a Grievance Redressal Committee;
xi)    as agreed, and as per the Guidelines, the ex-gratia assistance to the
families affected by Covid-19 deaths shall continue to be provided for deaths
that may occur in future phases of Covid-19 as well.
11.    Now so far as the directions contained in para 16(2) of our earlier order
dated 30.06.2021 for issuance of the death certificates/official document
stating the exact cause of death, i.e., “died due to Covid-19” to the family
members of the deceased who died due to Covid-19 is concerned,
considering the additional affidavit filed on behalf of the Union of India dated
8.9.2021 and the subsequent clarification in the additional affidavit dated
22.09.2021 and the guidelines dated 3.9.2021, in furtherance of our earlier
order dated 30.06.2021, it is further directed as under:
i)    Covid-19 cases, for the purpose of considering the deaths of the
deceased due to Covid-19, are those which are diagnosed through a positive
RT-PCR/Molecular Tests/RAT or clinically determined through investigations in
a hospital/in-patient facility by a treating physician, while admitted in the
hospital/in-patient facility;
ii)   that the deaths occurring within 30 days from the date of testing or from
the date of being clinically determined as a Covid-19 case shall be treated as
“Deaths due to Covid-19”, even if the death takes place outside the
hospital/in-patient facility;
iii) also, the Covid-19 case while admitted in the hospital/in-patient facility
and who continued to be admitted beyond 30 days and died subsequently
shall also be treated as a Covid-19 death;
iv)   Covid-19 cases which are not resolved and have died either in the
hospital settings or at home, and where a Medical Certificate of Cause of
Death (MCCD) in Form 4 & 4A has been issued to the registering authority, as
required under Section 10 of the Registration of Birth & Death (RBD) Act,
1969, shall also be treated as Covid-19 death. However, it is observed and
made clear that irrespective of the cause of death mentioned in the death
certificate, if a family member satisfies the eligibility criteria mentioned in
paragraphs 11(i) to 11(iv) as above shall also be entitled to the ex-gratia
payment of Rs. 50,000/- on production of requisite documents as observed
hereinabove, and no State shall deny the ex-gratia payment of Rs. 50,000/- on
the ground that in the death certificate the cause of death is not mentioned as
v)     all concerned hospitals where the patient was admitted and given
treatment shall provide all the necessary documents of treatment etc. to the
family member of the deceased, as and when demanded, and if any hospital
and/or the place where the deceased had taken treatment refuses to furnish
such documents, it will be open for the Grievance Redressal Committee to call
for such information and the concerned hospital/institution where the
deceased was admitted shall have to furnish such particulars as required for
the purpose of establishing that the death was due to Covid-19;
vi)    a family member of the deceased who committed suicide within 30 days
from being diagnosed as Covid-19 positive shall also be entitled to avail the
financial help/ex-gratia assistance of Rs. 50,000/- as granted under the SDRF
in accordance with the guidelines dated 11.09.2021 issued by the NDMA
under Section 12(iii) of DMA, 2005, as directed hereinabove;
vii)   if any family member/kin of the deceased died due to Covid0-19 has any
grievance with respect to non-receipt of the ex-gratia payment of Rs. 50,000/-,
it will be open for the aggrieved claimant to approach the Grievance Redressal
Committee constituted as observed hereinabove, and the Grievance
Redressal Committee shall examine the contemporaneous medical record of
the deceased patient, and take a decision within a period of 30 days from
approaching the said Grievance Redressal Committee and as observed
hereinabove such Grievance Redressal Committee shall have powers to call
for the details/documents from the concerned hospital/hospitals from where
the deceased took the treatment;
viii)   all endeavours shall be made by the District Disaster Management
Authority/District Administration and even the Grievance Redressal Committee
to avoid any technicalities and all concerned authority shall act as a helping
hand, so as to wipe off the tears of those who have suffered due to loss of a
family member died due to Covid-19;
ix)     it is further directed that in cases of the death certifications already
issued and any family member of the deceased is aggrieved by the cause of
death mentioned in the death certificate already issued, it will be open for the
aggrieved person to move the appropriate authority who issued the death
certificate and/or registering authority and on production of the necessary
documents as observed hereinabove, including production of documents, such
as, positive RT-PCR/ Molecular Tests/ RAT OR clinically determined through
investigations in a hospital/ in-patient facility by a treating physician, while
admitted in the hospital/ in-patient facility, the concerned authority shall
modify/amend such death certificates. If the person is still aggrieved, it will be
open for the aggrieved person to approach the Grievance Redressal
Committee constituted as hereinabove and the concerned registering authority
shall ratify/amend the death certificate as directed by the Grievance Redressal
12.    The National Disaster Management Authority (NDMA), Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare, Union of India are directed to issue guidelines to the
concerned States/Union Territories incorporating the directions issued
hereinabove which shall be binding to all the States/Union Territories.
13.    Miscellaneous Application No. 1120/2021 stands disposed of with the
aforesaid directions.
Miscellaneous Application No. 1120/2021 in W.P.(C) No. 539/2021
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 30-06-2021
in W.P.(C) No. No. 539/2021 passed by the Supreme Court Of India)
(FOR ADMISSION and IA No.84308/2021-EXTENSION OF TIME)
Date : 04-10-2021 This matter was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Miscellaneous Application stands disposed of in terms of the
signed reportable Order.
Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
(Signed reportable Order is placed on the file)