Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 18667 of 2022
Counsel for Applicant :- Rajesh Kumar Sharma,Abhas Sharma
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Ashok Kumar Singh
Heard learned counsel for the applicant, learned A.G.A. for the
State and Sri Ashok Kumar Singh, learned counsel appearing
for the complainant.
This bail application has been filed to enlarge the applicant on
bail in Case Crime No. 94 of 2022, under Sections 147, 148,
As per the prosecution version, at about 8.00 pm, the
complainants were returning back to their house raising slogan
of 'Jai Sri Ram', near the house of Yasin, the applicant's side
started abusing them, when they protest the same, they were
beaten by the 'batt' of 'tamancha', 'balakati' and 'iron rod'.
Learned counsel for the applicant submitted that the applicant is
innocent and has been falsely implicated in the present crime. It
is submitted that the applicant's side also received injuries.
There is no specific role was assigned to any of the accused
person by the injured and the complainant. Only general role is
assigned to the accused person. The applicant was not present
on the spot at the time of the incident. He further submits that
the applicant has no previous criminal history. It is also
submitted that there is no apprehension that after being released
on bail, he may flee from the course of law or may, otherwise,
misuse the liberty of bail and the applicant is in jail since
11.03.2022 and the possibility of conclusion of trial in near
future is very bleak.
Learned counsel for the applicant has contended that this is a
case of parity inasmuch as the other co-accused have already
been granted bail by this Court. It is contended that the case of
the applicant is not other than the co-accused who have been
enlarged on bail.
Learned A.G.A. and learned counsel for the complainant have,
however, opposed the prayer for grant of bail, but they have not
disputed the above contention made by the learned counsel for
the accused-applicant.
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, I find it to
be a fit case for bail.
Let the applicant- Irfan son of Abdul Raseed @ Rashid
Shakeel be released on bail in the aforesaid case on his
furnishing a personal bond of Rs. 50,000/ with two sureties
each of the same amount to the satisfaction of the court below
with the following additional conditions which are being
imposed in the interest of justice :-
(1) The applicant shall attend in accordance with the conditions
of the bond executed under Chapter XXXIII of the Cr.P.C.;
(2) The applicant shall not commit an offence similar to the
offence of which he is accused, or suspected, of the commission
of which he is suspected;
(3) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly make any
inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the
facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such
facts to the Court or to any police officer or tamper with the
(4) The applicant shall cooperate with any investigation in the
case.
In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a
ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties
be verified by the court concerned before the bonds are
accepted.
It is clarified that the observations, if any, made in this order are
strictly confined to the disposal of this bail application and must
not be construed to have any reflection on the ultimate merits of
the case.
The bail application stands allowed.
Location: High Court of Judicature at