1.     The Court is constrained to pass the present order because of an
alarming situation which was witnessed, by the Court, during the Air
India flight from Kolkata to New Delhi on 5th March, 2021.
2.     It was noticed that, though all the passengers had worn masks,
many passengers had worn the masks below their chin and were
exhibiting a stubborn reluctance to wear their masks properly. This
behaviour was seen not only in the bus transporting the passengers
from the airport to the flight but also within the flight itself. It was
only on repeated entreaties made (by me) to the offending passengers
that they condescended to wear their masks properly. On the cabin
crew being questioned in this regard, they stated that they had directed
all the passengers to wear masks, but were helpless in case they did
not comply.
3.     To the perception of the Court, such a situation, in the present
scenario, when the country is seeing a resurgence of COVID-2019
cases, after they had shown signs of ebbing, is completely
unconscionable. Passengers in a flight are in a closed air-conditioned
environment, and, even if one of the passengers suffers from COVID,
the effect on other passengers could be cataclysmic. It is a matter of
common knowledge that being within arm’s length distance of a
COVID carrier, even if he is asymptomatic and is merely speaking, is
more than sufficient to transmit the virus.
4.     Attempts were made, by the Court, to trace, from the internet,
the latest guidelines of the Directorate General of Civil Aviation
(DGCA), regarding the protocols to be followed by passengers
undertaking domestic air travel. Unfortunately, the website of the
Directorate General of Civil Aviation does not contain the latest
guidelines, issued with regard to in-flight protocol to be maintained by
the passengers and the crew. The guidelines available on the website
of the DGCA – which, too can be accessed, only after an intrusive
navigation through the site, are of 21st May, 2020. The Court has
come across two news items, in different editions of the Times of
India in August, 2020, specifically stating that the instructions of May,
and making them more stringent in others. Relaxation was permitted
by allowing, inter alia, meals to be served in flight, middle seats to be
occupied, etc. At the same time, a news item in the e-edition of the
Times of India, dated 29th August, 2020, titled “India’s new flying
rules: No mask and SOP violation can land you in ‘no-fly’ list”,
“As per the latest development, the Directorate General of
Civil Aviation (DGCA) has now asked airlines to put those
passengers on the ‘no-fly list’ who violate the standard
operating procedures (SOPs) or do not wear masks during a
flight. This means, you will no longer be allowed to fly if you
don’t wear masks or comply with the COVID related
protocols.
Meanwhile, the government has also allowed airlines to
resume in-flight meal services on domestic flights, and serve
alcohol and hot meals on international flights, however, those
being subject to certain guidelines.
Therefore, from now on, passengers who intentionally don't
use a face mask, and poses a risk to other passengers, they
will be put on ‘no-fly list’ by flight commander or the cabin
crew after assessment. However, passengers will be allowed
to remove facemasks if absolutely necessary and that too for
legitimate reasons.”
5.     This Court does not intend to criticise, in any manner, the
efforts made by the Governmental authorities, including the DGCA, in
trying to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic situation, which has left
everyone befuddled regarding the best possible manner to deal with
the crisis. Sensitization of the citizenry has, however, to precede, not
succeed, galvanization of the governmental machinery. Having put in
place protocols to be followed by the public, in various exigencies, to
mitigate the possibility of a COVID resurgence, if such a resurgence -
which looms large as an ominous possibility as on date - is to be
avoided, these measures would have to be strengthened.
6.     This order merely seeks to achieve this objective, by lending
some teeth to the instructions already in place, in the larger public
interest.
7.     The following guidelines are, therefore, issued, for immediate
compliance by all airlines as well as by the DGCA:
(i)    The DGCA is directed to reflect, forthwith, on its
website, prominently, the instructions containing the guidelines
and protocols to be followed by passengers and in-flight crew in
domestic flights. This shall be reflected on the main website of
the DGCA, without requiring the person accessing the site to
navigate through various links to reach the instructions. The
DGCA will ensure that prominence, to the instructions, or to the
weblink through which they can, by a single click, be accessed,
is accorded, by displaying them in a distinct and different font,
blinking or otherwise, or by any other suitable means.
(ii)   All airlines are directed to ensure that, along with the
boarding pass, written instructions regarding the protocol to be
followed by passengers in flight, including the measures that
could be taken against them on failure to follow the protocols,
are provided to the passengers. The passengers should also be
duly sensitised regarding their responsibilities, to abide by said
protocol, both before as well as after boarding the flight. The in-
flight announcements which, presently, merely require the
passengers to wear masks at all times, should be modified to
include a cautionary word regarding the penal action that could
be taken against them in the event of default.
(iii)  In-flight crew shall carry out periodical checks of the
aircraft, in order to ensure that all passengers are complying
with the protocol to be followed by them in flight, especially
regarding wearing of masks. It is made clear that masks should
be worn as directed by governmental instructions, covering the
nose and mouth, and not worn merely covering the mouth or
below the chin.
(iv)   In the event of any passenger being unwilling to follow
this protocol prior to the flight taking off, the passenger should
be offloaded without delay. If a passenger, despite being
reminded more than once in flight, refuses to follow this
protocol, action should be taken against the passenger in
accordance with the guidelines issued by the DGCA or Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare, including placing the passenger
on a “no-fly” regimen, either permanently or for a stipulated,
sufficiently long, period.
(v)    It shall be the responsibility of the in-flight crew to
ensure strict compliance, by the passengers, with the aforesaid
protocol. In order to ensure compliance, the DGCA may
consider sending random observers on flights, without prior
information, who would check to ensure that the COVID
protocols are followed in flight.
(vi)   Strict enforcement of all penal provisions, which could
visit delinquent passengers who refuse to abide by the COVID
protocols to be maintained in flight, should be ensured. There
should be no relaxation whatsoever in that regard.
(vii) It is noticed that the guidelines of the DGCA do permit
relaxation from the requirement of wearing masks in
exceptional cases. Such relaxation, if necessary, should be
allowed only in cases which are truly exceptional, such as for
medical reasons, after a conscious assessment and evaluation of
(a) the necessity of the passenger to fly and (b) the justifiability
of the passenger’s refusal to wear the mask, weighed against the
risk to public interest involved if the passenger is allowed to
travel without a mask. In deserving cases - which should be the
exception, not the rule - the airline should take steps to isolate
the passenger so that he is kept at a safe distance from other
passengers in the flight.
8.    All concerned authorities are directed to accord adequate
publicity to these guidelines, so that there is strict compliance
therewith. The DGCA, the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of
Home Affairs, as well as all airlines operating in the domestic sector,
should take all steps in order to ensure that these guidelines are
complied with. They should also ensure that, in the case of airlines
which repeatedly fail to ensure compliance with the said guidelines,
penal action is initiated, in accordance with law.
9.      Let this order be also displayed on the official website of the
DGCA, the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Ministry of Home
Affairs, and a copy provided to learned counsel for the Union of India
and Air India, who have been gracious enough to appear at the request
of the Court.
10.     The DGCA would also ensure circulations of these guidelines to
all airlines, for strict compliance therewith. Periodical review of the
situation should be undertaken, to ensure that no laxity creeps into the
system.
11.     It is the duty of each of us to contribute towards this end.
Pointing fingers at the Central and State Governments, who have
formidable tasks to deal with, and are doing all they can, is of no use
whatsoever. Each of us, as members of a conscious and conscientious
citizenry, is required to be sensitive and sensitized in equal measure,
and to strain every sinew to keep the pandemic at bay. If the citizenry
becomes complacent, no Government, howsoever activated and alive
to the situation, can help.
12.     Let the matter be now registered as a Suo Motu Public Interest
Litigation and listed before the appropriate Bench dealing with Public
Interest Litigations as per roster, subject to orders of Hon’ble the Chief
Justice, on 17th March, 2021.
13.   The DGCA as well as Air India, who are represented today,
would file reports before the Bench, regarding compliance with the
above guidelines, before the next date of hearing.