This Court on 07.05.2021, taking into consideration the
circumstances prevailing in the State following the second wave of
Covid-19 pandemic, had taken suo motu cognizance of the
overcrowded jails in the State of Madhya Pradesh and passed certain
orders. On the same date, the Supreme Court also in continuation with
its earlier order in Re: Contagion of Covid-19 Virus in Prisons Suo
Moto Writ Petition (Civil) No.1/2020, passed a fresh order directing
inter alia that the High Powered Committees constituted by the State
Governments shall consider release of prisoners by adopting the
guidelines followed by them last year, at the earliest and further
directed that all those inmates, who were granted parole in pursuance
to the earlier order of the Supreme Court, should be again released on
parole for a period of 90 days in order to tide over the pandemic. This
Court on 10.05.2021, on the submissions made given by the learned
Amicus Curiae, learned Advocate General and the Director General of
Prisons, had passed the following order:-
“15. Having heard the learned Amicus Curiae and the learned
Additional Advocate General, this Court, in view of extraordinary
situation prevailing in the State, deems it appropriate to direct the
respondents to place before the High Powered Committee the
following suggestions given by both the Director General of
The jail authorities should consider granting emergent
parole, of atleast 90 days, on usual conditions to the
i.     All male prisoners, who are more than 60 years of
ii.    All female prisoners, who are more than 45 years of
iii.  All female prisoners, regardless of their age, who
are lodged in jail alongwith with their minor
iv.   All female prisoners who are carrying pregnancy of
v.    All prisoners on the basis of medical certification
found to be suffering from cancer, serious heart
ailments such as having: (i) undergone bypass
surgery, (ii) valve replacement surgery, (iii) HIV,
requiring Dialysis), (vi) Hepatitis B or C, (vii)
Asthma, (viii) Tuberculoses and (ix) disablement of
i.    The Superintendent of the concerned Jail, should, in
respect of those under-trial prisoners, who are
facing trial for the offence punishable up to
maximum of seven years, with or without fine,
obtain their applications for interim bail and
forward the same to the District and Session Judge
concerned, who shall have the same considered and
decided within four days for their release on
temporary bail for atleast a period of 90 days, on
execution of bail bond and surety, as may be
ii.   The Superintendent of Jail, should in respect of
those under-trial prisoners, who are covered by the
Authority    in   December,    2018,   obtain   their
applications for grant of interim bail and similarly
forward the same to the District and Session Judge
concerned, who shall have the same considered and
decided within four days for their release on
temporary bail for atleast a period of 90 days, on
execution of bail bond and surety, as may be
deemed appropriate. In this regard, the assistance of
the District Legal Services Authority may be taken
iii.   The following category of under-trial prisoners, may
a. those under trial prisoners, who are now in
during the period of interim bail earlier granted
b. those under trial prisoners, who were granted
interim bail on the basis of criteria adopted
earlier but failed to surrender in time in terms of
pursuant to execution of non-bailable warrant.
The meeting of the High Powered Committee for this
purpose be convened on 12.05.2021 at the time fixed by the
Executive Chairman of the M.P. State Legal Services Authority,
either by physical or virtual mode, as may be deemed possible.”
2.     Mr. Chander Uday Singh, learned Senior Counsel and Mr.
Sankalp Kochar, learned Amicus Curiae, have submitted that despite
recommendations of the High Powered Committee in its recent
meeting held on 12.05.2021, the number of prisoners lodged in
different jails of the State of Madhya Pradesh, which was 45,582 on
07.05.2021, as against their total capacity of 28,675, is not going to be
substantially reduced. Therefore, the desired object of decongesting
the jails may not be achieved. They both suggested that the High
Powered Committee ought to consider recommending release of all
such convicts on parole, who have either served out one-third of the
substantive sentence awarded to them or if sentenced to life
imprisonment, have completed incarceration of seven years or more.
Additionally, the learned Senior Counsel and learned Amicus Curiae
suggested that the High Powered Committee ought to also consider
recommending release of all such under-trial prisoners on interim bail,
who are facing trial for offences exclusively triable by the Court of
Magistrate regardless of the outer limit of the sentence. Third
suggestion given by them is that the High Powered Committee should
also consider recommending release of all women prisoners, both
convicts and under-trial, regardless of the offence for which they have
been convicted and the sentence awarded to them or the maximum
sentence that may be awarded to them upon conviction.
3.     Learned Additional Advocate General and the Director General
of Prisons have submitted that they will collate the data under all these
three categories and provide the same to the High Powered Committee
within a period of three days, for their consideration.
Jabalpur submitted that soon after the receipt of the data covering the
aforesaid three categories, request will be made to the Executive
Chairman of the M.P. State Legal Services Authority to hold the
meeting of the High Powered Committee, for their consideration.
5.     The High Powered Committee upon production of necessary
data before it, shall in its wisdom, consider the suggestions objectively
and    shall  make its       recommendation with or without any
modification/conditions, as it may deem fit.
6.     Mr. Chander Uday Singh, learned Senior Counsel and Mr.
Sankalp Kochar, learned Amicus Curiae, have submitted that despite
direction issued by the Supreme Court in Arnesh Kumar vs. State of
Bihar and another (2014) 8 SCC 273, the police in the State is not
following the guidelines given in paras 8.1 to 8.4 and paras 11.1 to
11.8 of the said judgment. This explains why there was an enormous
increase of approximately 8,000 under-trial prisoners in different jails
of the State during the period of lockdown even after release of about
7,500 prisoners-convicts on parole and UTPs on interim bail, pursuant
to earlier order passed by the Supreme Court on 23.03.2020.
7.     Mr. Pushpendra Yadav, learned Additional Advocate General
submitted that steps are being taken to release convicts on parole as
per the recent recommendation of the High Powered Committee. As
regards UTPs, applications have been moved before the concerned
Courts and orders for grant of interim bail to them are likely to be
passed shortly. On the question of compliance of directions of the
Supreme Court in Arnesh Kumar (supra), learned Additional
Advocate General submitted that he will have to seek instructions in
the matter to find out whether the Director General of Police has
issued general instructions to all the police stations to adhere to the
mandatory guidelines issued by the Supreme Court in paras 8.1 to 8.4
and paras 11.1 to 11.8 of its decision in Arnesh Kumar (supra).
8.     The Supreme Court in Arnesh Kumar (supra) categorically
observed that the law mandates that the police officer, before making
arrest of an accused, against whom a reasonable suspicion exists that
he has committed a cognizable offence punishable with imprisonment
for a term which may be less than seven years or which may extend to
seven years, should record his satisfaction as mandated by Section 41
of the Code of Criminal Procedure (for short the “Code”) that his
arrest is necessary (i) to prevent such person from committing any
further offence; (ii) for proper investigation of the offence; (iii) to
prevent such person from causing the evidence of the offence to
disappear or tampering with evidence; (iv) to prevent such person
from making any inducement, threat or promise to any witness from
disclosing facts to the court or to the police officer & (v) and that
unless such person is arrested, his presence in the court when required
cannot be secured. The Supreme Court therefore observed that before
a Magistrate authorizes detention under Section 167 of the Code, he
has to be first satisfied that the arrest made is legal and in accordance
with law and all the constitutional rights of the person arrested have
been safeguarded. If in his opinion, the arrest does not satisfy the
requirements of Section 41 of the Code, the Magistrate is duty-bound
not to authorize his further detention and release the accused after
recording his own satisfaction which shall never be based on the ipse
dixit of the police officer. The Supreme Court further highlighted the
importance of Section 41-A of the Code which was inserted by
Section 6 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2008
(No.5 of 2009) providing that in all cases where the arrest of a person
is not required as per Section 41(1) of the Code, the police officer is
required to issue notice directing the accused person to appear before
him at specific place and time. If such accused complies with the
terms of notice, the law further mandates that he shall not be arrested,
unless the reasons are recorded by the police officer that the arrest is
necessary. At this stage also the condition precedent for causing arrest,
as envisaged in Section 41 of the Code, has to be complied with,
which shall be subject to the same scrutiny by the Magistrate as
aforesaid. The Supreme Court deprecated the practice of mechanically
reproducing in the case diary all or most of the reasons contained in
Section 41 of the Code for effecting arrest. The Supreme Court
observed that it seems that police has not learnt its lesson; the lesson
implicit and embodied in the Code and is persisting with its colonial
approach despite six decades of independence, as the power of arrest
is being used as a tool of harassment and oppression of the citizen,
which is “one of the lucrative sources of police corruption”. All these
directions issued by the Supreme Court were intended to put a check
on the arbitrary power of police in mechanically arresting a citizen
accused of committing offences of rather lesser gravity, either without
adequate sensitivity or with oblique motive.
9.     In view of what has been noticed above, we direct the Director
General of Police to immediately issue fresh direction to all the Police
Stations in the State to adhere to the guidelines issued by the Supreme
Court in Arnesh Kumar (supra) in letter and spirit. We also direct
that all the Judicial Magistrates, upon the accused being produced
before them by the police for authorizing further detention, shall
mandatorily examine whether or not stipulations contained in both
Sections 41 and 41A of the Code, have been followed and if, for
reasons to be recorded in writing, the Judicial Magistrate concerned is
satisfied that mandate of both or any of those provisions, has not been
complied with by the police, he/she shall refuse to authorize further
detention of the accused and shall direct immediate release of the
accused. Even otherwise, if any arrest has been made without
adherence to the aforesaid guidelines, the accused concerned would be
entitled to directly apply to the court of competent jurisdiction for his
regular bail on this ground alone.
10.    We direct the Registrar General of the High Court to again
circulate the copy of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Arnesh
Kumar (supra) alongwith copy of this order to all the District Judges
of the State, for being served upon the Judicial Magistrates in their
respective judgeships. We also require the Director of the State
Judicial Academy to organize online/virtual programme, in a cluster
of districts or division-wise, in batches, for sensitizing, not only the
Judicial Magistrates but also the police officers, in tandem with the
M.P. Police Academy. The Director of the M.P. Police Academy shall
in this connection coordinate with the Director of State Judicial
Academy to work out the modalities for sensitizing the police officers
of the State. The Director General of Police shall also be responsible
for compliance of this direction.
11.    Learned Senior Counsel and learned Amicus Curiae also invited
attention of this Court to the order passed by the Supreme Court on
03.04.2020 in Suo Motu Writ Petition (Civil) No.4 of 2020 (In Re
Contagion of Covid 19 Virus in Children Protection Homes)
whereby all the Juvenile Justice Boards (JJB) and Children's Courts
were directed to proactively consider whether a child or children
should be kept in the Child Care Institutions considering the best
interest, health and safety concerns, which also included a direction
that for the children alleged to be in conflict with law, residing in
Observation Homes, the Juvenile Justice Boards shall consider taking
steps to release them on bail, unless there are clear and valid reasons
for the application of the proviso to Section 12 of the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (for short “the JJ Act”).
12.    We direct the Member Secretary of the M.P. State Legal
Services Authority, Jabalpur to require the Member Secretaries of the
respective District Legal Services Authorities to move an appropriate
application through their Legal Aid Counsels before the respective
Juvenile Justice Boards on behalf of the children in conflict with law,
for their release from Observation Homes across the State, who shall
consider the application and decide the same within a period of three
days from the date of its filing in the light of the observations made by
the Supreme Court in the aforesaid order dated 03.04.2020 passed in
Suo Motu Writ Petition (Civil) No.4 of 2020 (supra), especially,
taking into consideration the proviso to Section 12 of the JJ Act.
13.    Let a copy of this order be forwarded to the Director General of
Police, State of M.P., Bhopal; Director General of Prisons, Bhopal;
Academy, Bhopal and the Registrar General of M.P. High Court,
Jabalpur for necessary action.
Matters to come up on 31.05.2021.