1.     This is an application seeking release of applicant on regular bail till
final disposal of CBI EO-II EOU-V New Delhi registered by Central Bureau
of Investigation in connection with FIR No. RC 220/2016/E0022/CBI/EO-II
u/s 20 read with Sec 8 and 29 of NDPS Act, 1985 (hereinafter “Act”)
registered by CBI dated 17.12.2016, giving rise to filing of charge sheet no.
2/2017 dated 31.03.2017.
2.     It is submitted by Mr. Natrajan, learned counsel for the applicant that
the applicant has been in judicial custody since 18.12.2016 except for a
period of 20 days (16.06.2021 to 06.07.2021) and she is covered by
judgement of Hon’ble Supreme Court in Supreme Court Legal Aid
Committee (Representing undertrial prisoners) vs. Union of India, [(1994)
Digitally Signed byAMIT      BAIL APPLN. 1621/2022                         Page 1 of 18
3.     The Ld. Counsel for the Applicant submits that in terms of this
judgment where an undertrial prisoner is charged with an offence under the
Act with minimum imprisonment of 10 years and minimum fine of 1 lakh,
such an undertrial prisoner may be released on bail if he has been in jail for
not less than 5 years subject to conditions prescribed in the said judgment.
4.     Mr. Bhardwaj, learned counsel for the respondent states that the
observations of the Hon’ble Supreme Court were only a one time measure
passed in peculiar circumstances of that case, where the NDPS Courts were
not functioning within the State of Maharashtra at that point in time.
5.     Per contra, Mr. Natrajan has drawn my attention to a judgement dated
21.03.2022 passed in Bail Appl. 1724/2021 in Anil Kumar v. State by a
coordinate bench of this Court, wherein this Court has held:
“12. A bare perusal of paragraph 16 indicates to this Court
that the directions were not meant to be employed as one-time
directions in the said case, but were meant to apply as a one-
time measure in all cases in which the accused persons were in
jail and their trials had been delayed. The intention of
paragraph 16 was to convey that despite the absence or
presence of delay in trial in a case, the Special Court was still
free to exercise its power to grant bail under Section 37 of the
NDPS Act. Furthermore, if the Special Court also retained the
power to cancel bail if the accused was found to be misusing
the same. The directions were certainly not, as the learned
APP has submitted, meant to only apply in the case therein,
but were directions that were to be followed by Courts in all
cases pertaining to NDPS wherein the accused had been
subjected to prolonged delay in their trials.
13. It is unconscionable to state that the rights guaranteed
under Article 21 can be subjected to such arbitrary
categorisation and would not apply across the board to all
undertrials in NDPS cases who are at the receiving end of
inordinate delay in trial.”
Digitally Signed byAMIT      BAIL APPLN. 1621/2022                           Page 2 of 18
6.    In the present case, as already observed, the applicant was arrested in
2016. She has been in custody for 5 and a half years.
7.    It is stated that despite passage of 5 years 6 months, only the first
witness is under examination out of the list of 33 witnesses.
8.    A coordinate bench of this Court in another case titled Atul Aggarwal
v. Directorate of Revenue Intelligence [(2021) SCC OnLine Del 5489] has
“12. However, it is also pertinent to note that the Applicant
herein was arrested on 20.07.2012. It has been nine years since
he has been in custody. While remaining conscious of the fact
that the gambit of drug trafficking must be deterred with
stringent punishments, and that those who indulge in such
nefarious activities do not deserve any sympathy, Courts must
also not ignore the plight of the undertrials who remain
languishing in jails as their trials are delayed with no end in
sight. Deprivation of personal liberty without the assurance of
speedy trial contravenes the principles enshrined in our
Constitution under Article 21, and is, therefore,
unconstitutional to its very core. In such cases, in absence of
the pronouncement of conviction, the process itself becomes
the punishment. Nine years cannot be said to be a short
period of time.
13. The Supreme Court, while deciding a petition pertaining
to the delay in disposal of cases under the NDPS Act, had
issued certain directions, subject to general conditions, in
Prisoners) v. Union of India (supra) which have been
reproduced as follows:
“(i) Where the undertrial is accused of an offence(s) under the
Act prescribing a punishment of imprisonment of five years or
less and fine, such an undertrial shall be released on bail if he
has been in jail for a period which is not less than half the
punishment provided for the offence with which he is charged
and where he is charged with more than one offence, the
offence providing the highest punishment. If the offence with
Digitally Signed byAMIT     BAIL APPLN. 1621/2022                           Page 3 of 18
which he is charged prescribes the maximum fine, the bail
amount shall be 50% of the said amount with two sureties for
like amount. If the maximum fine is not prescribed bail shall be
to the satisfaction of the Special Judge concerned with two
sureties for like amount.
(ii) Where the undertrial accused is charged with an
offence(s) under the Act providing for punishment exceeding
five years and fine, such an undertrial shall be released on bail
on the term set out in (i)above provided that his bail amount
shall in no case be less than Rs. 50,000/- with two sureties for
like amount.
(iii) Where the undertrial accused is charged with an
offence(s) under the Act punishable with minimum
imprisonment of ten years and a minimum fine of Rupees one
lakh, such an undertrial shall be released on bail if he has been
in jail for not less than five years provided he furnishes bail in
the sum of Rupees one lakh with two sureties for like amount.
(iv) Where an undertrial accused is charged for the
commission of an offence punishable under Sections 3 1 and 31
A of the Act, such an undertrial shall not be entitled to be
released on bail by virtue of this order.”
14. As per Direction (iii) in the aforementioned judgment,
where an undertrial accused has been charged with offence(s)
under the NDPS Act which is punishable with minimum
imprisonment of ten years and a minimum fine of rupees one
lakh, then such an undertrial is to be released if he has been in
jail for not less than five years. In the instant case, the
Applicant has been charged with offences punishable under
Sections 9A,21,23,25A of the NDPS Act. With minimum
imprisonment of 10 years as stipulated under these offences, an
undertrial is to be released if he has been in jail for not less
than five years. Therefore the applicant is squarely covered by
the aforementioned judgment.”
9.    According to me, and also the interpretation of a coordinate bench of
this Court, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in para 16 of the Supreme Court
Digitally Signed byAMIT      BAIL APPLN. 1621/2022                          Page 4 of 18
Legal Aid Committee (supra) directed that in cases where accused persons
are in jail and their trials are delayed inordinately they may be released on
bail where the undertrial accused is charged with an offence(s) under the Act
punishable with minimum imprisonment of ten years and a minimum fine of
Rupees one lakh, and they have been in jail for not less than five years. It
was not a one-time measure in the facts of that case, but was meant to apply
as one-time measure in all cases where the undertrials are in jail and the
conclusion of their trial is nowhere in sight.
10.     In para 16 the Hon’ble Supreme Court further directed that the
observations made hereinabove are not intended to interfere with Special
Courts power to grant bail u/s 37 of the Act meaning thereby that the Special
Courts u/s 37 can grant bail notwithstanding the above conditions i.e. the
Special Courts are at liberty to grant bail even prior to having undergone
half of the minimum sentence. The Hon’ble Supreme Court further in para
16 has also indicated that the Special Courts are always free to cancel the
bail if the accused is found to be misusing the liberty of bail.
11.     The most important principal that the Hon’ble Supreme Court
enunciated in para 15 & 16 in Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee (supra)
is that no prisoner should be denied their life and liberty guaranteed under
Article 21 of the Constitution of India especially when speedy trial cannot
be guaranteed and there is no end in sight for the trial. The relevant portion
of the para 15 and 16 are:
“15. ….. He, therefore, rightly sought permission to amend the
cause-title and prayer clauses of the petition which was permitted. In
substance the applicant now prays that all undertrials who are in jail
for the commission of any offence or offences under the Act for a
period exceeding two years on account of the delay in the disposal of
Digitally Signed byAMIT      BAIL APPLN. 1621/2022                           Page 5 of 18
cases lodged against them should be forthwith released from jail
declaring their further detention to be illegal and void and pending
decision of this Court on the said larger issue, they should in any case
be released on bail. It is indeed true and that is obvious from the plain
language of Section 36(1) of the Act, that the legislature contemplated
the creation of Special Courts to speed up the trial of those
prosecuted for the commission of any offence under the Act. It is
equally true that similar is the objective of Section 309 of the Code. It
is also true that this Court has emphasised in a series of decisions
that Articles 14, 19 and 21 sustain and nourish each other and any
law depriving a person of “personal liberty” must prescribe a
procedure which is just, fair and reasonable, i.e., a procedure which
promotes speedy trial. See Hussainara Khatoon (IV) v. Home Secy.,
State of Bihar [(1980) 1 SCC 98 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 40] , Raghubir
Singh v. State of Bihar [(1986) 4 SCC 481 : 1986 SCC (Cri) 511]
and Kadra Pahadiya v. State of Bihar [(1983) 2 SCC 104 : 1983 SCC
(Cri) 361] to quote only a few. This is also the avowed objective of
Section 36(1) of the Act. However, this laudable objective got
frustrated when the State Government delayed the constitution of
sufficient number of Special Courts in Greater Bombay; the process
of constituting the first two Special Courts started with the issuance of
notifications under Section 36(1) on 4-1-1991 and under Section
36(2) on 6-4-1991 almost two years from 29-5-1989 when
Amendment Act 2 of 1989 became effective. Since the number of
courts constituted to try offences under the Act were not sufficient and
the appointments of Judges to man these courts were delayed, cases
piled up and the provision in regard to enlargement on bail being
strict the offenders have had to languish in jails for want of trials. As
stated earlier Section 37 of the Act makes every offence punishable
under the Act cognizable and non-bailable and provides that no
person accused of an offence punishable for a term of five years or
more shall be released on bail unless (i) the Public Prosecutor has
had an opportunity to oppose bail and (ii) if opposed, the court is
satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not
Digitally Signed byAMIT BAIL APPLN. 1621/2022                           Page 6 of 18
guilty of the offence and is not likely to indulge in similar activity. On
account of the strict language of the said provision very few persons
accused of certain offences under the Act could secure bail. Now to
refuse bail on the one hand and to delay trial of cases on the other is
clearly unfair and unreasonable and contrary to the spirit of Section
36(1) of the Act, Section 309 of the Code and Articles 14, 19 and 21
of the Constitution. We are conscious of the statutory provision
finding place in Section 37 of the Act prescribing the conditions which
have to be satisfied before a person accused of an offence under the
Act can be released. Indeed we have adverted to this section in the
earlier part of the judgment. We have also kept in mind the
interpretation placed on a similar provision in Section 20 of the
TADA Act by the Constitution Bench in Kartar Singh v. State of
Punjab [(1994) 3 SCC 569 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 899] . Despite this
provision, we have directed as above mainly at the call of Article 21
as the right to speedy trial may even require in some cases quashing
of a criminal proceeding altogether, as held by a Constitution Bench
of this Court in A.R. Antulay v. R.S. Nayak [(1992) 1 SCC 225 : 1992
SCC (Cri) 93] , release on bail, which can be taken to be embedded in
the right of speedy trial, may, in some cases be the demand of Article
21. As we have not felt inclined to accept the extreme submission of
quashing the proceedings and setting free the accused whose trials
have been delayed beyond reasonable time for reasons already
alluded to, we have felt that deprivation of the personal liberty
without ensuring speedy trial would also not be in consonance with
the right guaranteed by Article 21. Of course, some amount of
deprivation of personal liberty cannot be avoided in such cases; but
if the period of deprivation pending trial becomes unduly long, the
fairness assured by Article 21 would receive a jolt. It is because of
this that we have felt that after the accused persons have suffered
imprisonment which is half of the maximum punishment provided for
the offence, any further deprivation of personal liberty would be
violative of the fundamental right visualised by Article 21, which has
to be telescoped with the right guaranteed by Article 14 which also
Digitally Signed byAMIT BAIL APPLN. 1621/2022                           Page 7 of 18
promises justness, fairness and reasonableness in procedural matters.
What then is the remedy? The offences under the Act are grave and,
therefore, we are not inclined to agree with the submission of the
learned counsel for the applicant that we should quash the
prosecutions and set free the accused persons whose trials are
delayed beyond reasonable time. Alternatively he contended that such
accused persons whose trials have been delayed beyond reasonable
time and are likely to be further delayed should be released on bail on
such terms as this Court considers appropriate to impose. This
suggestion commends to us. We were told by the learned counsel for
the State of Maharashtra that additional Special Courts have since
been constituted but having regard to the large pendency of such
cases in the State we are afraid this is not likely to make a significant
dent in the huge pile of such cases. We, therefore, direct as under:
(i) Where the undertrial is accused of an offence(s) under the
Act prescribing a punishment of imprisonment of five years
or less and fine, such an undertrial shall be released on bail
if he has been in jail for a period which is not less than half
the punishment provided for the offence with which he is
charged and where he is charged with more than one
offence, the offence providing the highest punishment. If the
offence with which he is charged prescribes the maximum
fine, the bail amount shall be 50% of the said amount with
two sureties for like amount. If the maximum fine is not
prescribed bail shall be to the satisfaction of the Special
Judge concerned with two sureties for like amount.
(ii) Where the undertrial accused is charged with an offence(s)
under the Act providing for punishment exceeding five years
and fine, such an undertrial shall be released on bail on the
term set out in (i) above provided that his bail amount shall
in no case be less than Rs 50,000 with two sureties for like
amount.
(iii) Where the undertrial accused is charged with an
offence(s) under the Act punishable with minimum
Digitally Signed byAMIT BAIL APPLN. 1621/2022                           Page 8 of 18
imprisonment of ten years and a minimum fine of Rupees
one lakh, such an undertrial shall be released on bail if he
has been in jail for not less than five years provided he
furnishes bail in the sum of Rupees one lakh with two
sureties for like amount.
(iv) Where an undertrial accused is charged for the commission
of an offence punishable under Sections 31 and 31-A of the
Act, such an undertrial shall not be entitled to be released
on bail by virtue of this order.
The directives in clauses (i), (ii) and (iii) above shall be subject to the
following general conditions:
(i) The undertrial accused entitled to be released on bail shall
deposit his passport with the learned Judge of the Special
Court concerned and if he does not hold a passport he shall
file an affidavit to that effect in the form that may be
prescribed by the learned Special Judge. In the latter case
the learned Special Judge will, if he has reason to doubt the
accuracy of the statement, write to the Passport Officer
concerned to verify the statement and the Passport Officer
shall verify his record and send a reply within three weeks.
If he fails to reply within the said time, the learned Special
Judge will be entitled to act on the statement of the
undertrial accused;
(ii) the undertrial accused shall on being released on bail
present himself at the police station which has prosecuted
him at least once in a month in the case of those covered
under clause (i), once in a fortnight in the case of those
covered under clause (ii) and once in a week in the case of
those covered by clause (iii), unless leave of absence is
obtained in advance from the Special Judge concerned;
(iii) the benefit of the direction in clauses (ii) and (iii) shall not
be available to those accused persons who are, in the
opinion of the learned Special Judge, for reasons to be
Digitally Signed byAMIT BAIL APPLN. 1621/2022                            Page 9 of 18
stated in writing, likely to tamper with evidence or influence
the prosecution witnesses;
(iv) in the case of undertrial accused who are foreigners, the
Special Judge shall, besides impounding their passports,
insist on a certificate of assurance from the Embassy/High
Commission of the country to which the foreigner-accused
belongs, that the said accused shall not leave the country
and shall appear before the Special Court as and when
(v) the undertrial accused shall not leave the area in relation to
which the Special Court is constituted except with the
permission of the learned Special Judge;
(vi) the undertrial accused may furnish bail by depositing cash
equal to the bail amount;
(vii) the Special Judge will be at liberty to cancel bail if any of
the above conditions are violated or a case for cancellation
of bail is otherwise made out; and
(viii) after the release of the undertrial accused pursuant to this
order, the cases of those undertrials who have not been
released and are in jail will be accorded priority and the
Special Court will proceed with them as provided in Section
309 of the Code.
16. We may state that the above are intended to operate as one-
time directions for cases in which the accused persons are in jail and
their trials are delayed. They are not intended to interfere with the
Special Court's power to grant bail under Section 37 of the Act. The
Special Court will be free to exercise that power keeping in view the
complaint of inordinate delay in the disposal of the pending cases.
The Special Court will, notwithstanding the directions, be free to
cancel bail if the accused is found to be misusing it and grounds for
cancellation of bail exist. Lastly, we grant liberty to apply in case of
any difficulty in the implementation of this order.”
12.    I have also been taken through the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in Narcotics Control Bureau v. Mohit Aggarwal, [CRIMINAL
APPEAL NOS. 1001-1002 OF 2002 arising out of petitions for Special
Leave to Appeal (CRL.) NO. 6128-29/2021] dated 19.07.2022 wherein the
Hon’ble Supreme Court observed:
“…The length of the period of his custody or the fact that the charge-
sheet has been filed and the trial has commenced are by themselves
not considerations that can be treated as persuasive grounds for
granting relief to the respondent under Section 37 of the NDPS Act.”
13.    However, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in NCB v. Mohit Aggarwal
(supra) has not overruled the observations laid down in Supreme Court
Legal Aid Committee (Supra) wherein the Supreme Court has relied upon
the touchstones of Article 21 of the Constitution of India, the right intrinsic
to every being. NCB v. Mohit Aggarwal (supra) does not overrule the
judgment in Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee (Supra), the only way is
to read both the judgments harmoniously. In my opinion, it is the intention
of the Supreme Court in Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee (Supra) to
balance personal liberty of the undertrial prisoner which is sacrosanct with
the stringent rigours of the section 37 of the Act. Additionally, in NCB v.
Mohit Aggarwal (supra), the accused respondent was taken into custody on
11.01.2020, the Respondent was granted bail by the High Court by order
dated 16.03.2021. The accused had spent only one year and 2 months in jail.
In the present case, the accused has already spent 5 years and 6 months in
jail and only the first witness is under examination out of a list of 33
witnesses. NCB v. Mohit Aggarwal (supra) does not deal with a situation
where the undertrial prisoner has undergone more than half of the term of
the minimum 10 years prescribed as per the Act.
14.    Even in Saudan Singh v. The State of Uttar Pradesh, SLP (CRL)
No. 4633/2021 dated 05.10.2021 the Supreme Court observed that where
convicts (whose appeal are pending) have undergone more than 50% of their
sentence, may be entitled to bail. In the present matter the applicant is an
undertrial prisoner who has already undergone 50% of the minimum 10
years prescribed as per the Act, without even being convicted/sentenced
under the Act. Therefore, denial of bail without guarantee of speedy trial
would be an infringement of the applicant’s right guaranteed under Article
21 of the Constitution of India. This grant of liberty does not infringe upon
the powers of the trial court to cancel bail u/s 37 of the Act on non-
compliance of the bail conditions by the Applicant.
15.    As regards to the right to speedy trial, the same is provided under the
Act as Section 36 of the Act empowers the government to constitute Special
Courts for the purpose of providing speedy trial:
“36. Constitution of Special Courts
(1) The government may, for the purpose of providing speedy trial of
the offences under this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette,
constitute as many Special Courts as may e necessary for such
area or areas as may be specified in the notification.
16.    The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Abdul Rehman Antulay v. R.S.
Nayak [(1992) 1 SCC 225] laid down guidelines to ensure that speedy trial
is guaranteed to undertrial prisoners and their right under Article 21 of the
Constitution is not infringed. The Court promulgated the guidelines as
“86. In view of the above discussion, the following propositions
emerge, meant to serve as guidelines. We must forewarn that these
propositions are not exhaustive. It is difficult to foresee all situations.
Nor is it possible to lay down any hard and fast rules. These propositions
(1) Fair, just and reasonable procedure implicit in Article 21 of
the Constitution creates a right in the accused to be tried speedily.
Right to speedy trial is the right of the accused. The fact that a speedy
trial is also in public interest or that it serves the social interest also,
does not make it any the less the right of the accused. It is in the
interest of all concerned that the guilt or innocence of the accused is
determined as quickly as possible in the circumstances.
(2) Right to speedy trial flowing from Article 21 encompasses all
the stages, namely the stage of investigation, inquiry, trial, appeal,
revision and re-trial. That is how, this Court has understood this right
and there is no reason to take a restricted view.
(3) The concerns underlying the right to speedy trial from the point
of view of the accused are:
(a) the period of remand and pre-conviction detention should be as
short as possible. In other words, the accused should not be
subjected to unnecessary or unduly long incarceration prior to
(b) the worry, anxiety, expense and disturbance to his vocation and
peace, resulting from an unduly prolonged investigation,
inquiry or trial should be minimal; and
(c) undue delay may well result in impairment of the ability of the
accused to defend himself, whether on account of death,
disappearance or non-availability of witnesses or otherwise.
(4) At the same time, one cannot ignore the fact that it is usually
the accused who is interested in delaying the proceedings. As is often
pointed out, “delay is a known defence tactic”. Since the burden of
proving the guilt of the accused lies upon the prosecution, delay
ordinarily prejudices the prosecution. Non-availability of witnesses,
disappearance of evidence by lapse of time really work against the
interest of the prosecution. Of course, there may be cases where the
prosecution, for whatever reason, also delays the proceedings.
Therefore, in every case, where the right to speedy trial is alleged to
have been infringed, the first question to be put and answered is —
who is responsible for the delay? Proceedings taken by either party in
good faith, to vindicate their rights and interest, as perceived by them,
cannot be treated as delaying tactics nor can the time taken in
pursuing such proceedings be counted towards delay. It goes without
saying that frivolous proceedings or proceedings taken merely for
delaying the day of reckoning cannot be treated as proceedings taken
in good faith. The mere fact that an application/petition is admitted
and an order of stay granted by a superior court is by itself no proof
that the proceeding is not frivolous. Very often these stays are
obtained on ex parte representation.
(5) While determining whether undue delay has occurred
(resulting in violation of Right to Speedy Trial) one must have regard
to all the attendant circumstances, including nature of offence,
number of accused and witnesses, the workload of the court
concerned, prevailing local conditions and so on — what is called,
the systemic delays. It is true that it is the obligation of the State to
ensure a speedy trial and State includes judiciary as well, but a
realistic and practical approach should be adopted in such matters
instead of a pedantic one.
(6) Each and every delay does not necessarily prejudice the
accused. Some delays may indeed work to his advantage. As has been
observed by Powell, J. in Barker [33 L Ed 2d 101] “it cannot be said
how long a delay is too long in a system where justice is supposed to
be swift but deliberate”. The same idea has been stated by White, J.
in U.S. v. Ewell [15 L Ed 2d 627] in the following words:
„… the Sixth Amendment right to a speedy trial is necessarily
relative, is consistent with delays, and has orderly expedition, rather
than mere speed, as its essential ingredients; and whether delay in
completing a prosecution amounts to an unconstitutional deprivation
of rights depends upon all the circumstances.‟
However, inordinately long delay may be taken as presumptive
proof of prejudice. In this context, the fact of incarceration of accused
will also be a relevant fact. The prosecution should not be allowed to
become a persecution. But when does the prosecution become
persecution, again depends upon the facts of a given case.
(7) We cannot recognize or give effect to, what is called the
„demand‟ rule. An accused cannot try himself; he is tried by the court
at the behest of the prosecution. Hence, an accused's plea of denial of
speedy trial cannot be defeated by saying that the accused did at no
time demand a speedy trial. If in a given case, he did make such a
demand and yet he was not tried speedily, it would be a plus point in
his favour, but the mere non-asking for a speedy trial cannot be put
against the accused. Even in USA, the relevance of demand rule has
been substantially watered down in Barker [33 L Ed 2d 101] and
other succeeding cases.
(8) Ultimately, the court has to balance and weigh the several
relevant factors — „balancing test‟ or „balancing process‟ — and
determine in each case whether the right to speedy trial has been
denied in a given case.
(9) Ordinarily speaking, where the court comes to the conclusion
that right to speedy trial of an accused has been infringed the charges
or the conviction, as the case may be, shall be quashed. But this is not
the only course open. The nature of the offence and other
circumstances in a given case may be such that quashing of
proceedings may not be in the interest of justice. In such a case, it is
open to the court to make such other appropriate order — including
an order to conclude the trial within a fixed time where the trial is not
concluded or reducing the sentence where the trial has concluded —
as may be deemed just and equitable in the circumstances of the case.
(10) It is neither advisable nor practicable to fix any time-limit for
trial of offences. Any such rule is bound to be qualified one. Such rule
cannot also be evolved merely to shift the burden of proving
justification on to the shoulders of the prosecution. In every case of
complaint of denial of right to speedy trial, it is primarily for the
prosecution to justify and explain the delay. At the same time, it is the
duty of the court to weigh all the circumstances of a given case before
pronouncing upon the complaint. The Supreme Court of USA too has
repeatedly refused to fix any such outer time-limit in spite of the Sixth
Amendment. Nor do we think that not fixing any such outer limit
ineffectuates the guarantee of right to speedy trial.
(11) An objection based on denial of right to speedy trial and for
relief on that account, should first be addressed to the High Court.
Even if the High Court entertains such a plea, ordinarily it should not
stay the proceedings, except in a case of grave and exceptional
nature. Such proceedings in High Court must, however, be disposed
of on a priority basis.”
17.    It, therefore, is clear that speedy trial forms an intrinsic part of Article
21 of the Constitution and the denial of same may be a ground for bail in
certain circumstances/conditions.
18.    I have also heard the applicant on merits. The counsel for the
applicant states that:
a) The chargesheet indicates that the applicant neither had a mobile
phone nor any cash.
b) There is nothing against the Applicant except that she was
accompanying her husband in a Scorpio Car.
c) The Scorpio is also not owned by her and she did not rent it.
d) Even the driver of the car was not hired by her.
e) The drugs recovered were not on her person but were found from the
19.    Prima Facie, it appears that the accused is not guilty of the offence. If
she is part of a criminal conspiracy as per section 29 of the Act, the same
needs to be decided in the trial, where the intricacies of the alleged crime
can be delved into deeper by the trial court and the guilt or liability, if any,
can be decided, after the trial. However, at this stage, if bail is denied
without any possibility of the trial concluding anytime soon, would be
infringing upon her right guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution.
20.    I am also of the view that for the reasons stated above there are
reasonable grounds that the accused is not guilty of the offence as alleged.
Further, I am also of the view that the applicant is not likely to commit an
offence under the Act while on bail. Additionally, the APP has been given
an opportunity to oppose the application for bail. Hence, the rigours of
Section 37 also stand satisfied.
21.   In applying the aforesaid principles and the law laid down by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee (Supra), I
am of the view, that the applicant having undergone half of the minimum 10
years prescribed in the Act, needs to be enlarged on bail subject to the
following conditions:
a) The applicant shall furnish a personal bond in the sum of Rs.
1,00,000/- with two sureties of the like amount, one of them should
be the relative of the applicant, to the satisfaction of the Trial
b) The applicant is directed to deposit her passport with the Ld. Judge
of the Special Court concerned and if she does hold a passport than
she shall file an affidavit to that effect in the form that may be
prescribed by the learned Special Judge. The Ld. Judge may verify
the contents of the Affidavit incase there is a doubt of accuracy.
c) The applicant shall report to the concerned Police Station once in a
week, that is, on every Friday at 10:30 AM, and the Police is
directed to release her by 11:00 AM after recording her presence
and completion of all the necessary formalities.
d) The applicant is directed to reside in Delhi till further orders and
the address shall be verified by the learned Trial Court at the time
of acceptance of bail bonds.
e) The Applicant shall not leave Delhi without prior permission of the
f) The applicant is directed to give all her mobile numbers to the
Investigation Officer and keep them operational at all times.
g) The applicant shall not, directly or indirectly, tamper with
evidence or try to influence the witnesses in any manner.
h) In case it is established that the applicant has indulged in similar
kind of offences or tried to tamper with the evidence, the bail
granted to the applicant shall stand cancelled forthwith. The
Special Judge is also at liberty to cancel the bail if there is any
violation of the bail conditions.
22.   In the aforesaid terms, the application is disposed of.
23.   The Court has not gone into the merits of the matter and the
observations herein above are only for the purpose of granting bail to the
applicant.