Court on its own Motion Vs. State of Punjab & ors.
Present :            Mr. Rupinder S. Khosla, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Sarvesh Malik, Advocate as amicus curiae.
Ms. Shubra Singh, Advocate for the CBI.
Mr. Jaivir Chandail, Advocate for the U.T. Chd.
Mr. Satya Pal Jain, Addl. Solicitor General of India with
Mr. Dheeraj Jain, Sr. Counsel for respondent no. 3.
Mr. C.M. Munjal, Advocate for the applicant.
Principal Director of Income Tax (Investigation).
Case has been taken up on Video Conferencing in view of COVID-19
On the last date of hearing, this court was pleased to pass the following
order in CM-51, 53 & 54-CWPIL-2021 :-
“Case has been heard through Video Conferencing on account
of COVID-19 Pandemic.
Applicant seeks impleadment on the ground that complete list
of cases pending against sitting MLA from Atam Nagar Assembly
constituency, namely, Simarjeet Singh Bains has not been furnished
by the State. This apart, he submits that investigation has hardly
made any progress in any of the cases pending against him. Applicant
claims to be a victim of rape at the hands of the accused. His
grievance is that the police has not proceeded further with the
investigation. According to him, FIR was registered after application
under Section 156(3) of the Code of Criminal Procedure was filed
before the concerned Magistrate at Ludhiana and the order passed
therein. However, the said order was challenged before this Court but
petitioner remained unsuccessful. As per learned counsel, yet the
police is sitting tight over the matter and not conducting any
investigation because of influence of the MLA. According to him, the
matter falls within the ambit of the supervision of such cases as laid
down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ashwani Kumar Upadhyay v.
Union of India and another WP(Civil) No. 699 of 2016.
Main case is pending for 19.8.2021. A copy of the application
be furnished to the State of Punjab. The prayer for impleadment shall
be considered on the said date.
Meanwhile, the State of Punjab may also seek
instructions as regards the aforesaid contentions and assist in the
matter.
To come up on the date fixed.”
Mr. Tinna, learned Additional Advocate General, Punjab submits that still
he does not have complete instructions in the matter and needs more time to file an
affidavit.
No clear response is forthcoming as per the query raised by the Bench on
the last date of hearing. We are not inclined to grant further time. Purely in the interests
of justice, however, one opportunity is granted. He shall be at liberty to seek instructions
from Director General of Police, Punjab and apprise the court about the number of cases
pending against Simarjeet Singh Bains and stage of investigation after registration of case
against him by virtue of order passed by the concerned Magistrate at Ludhiana under
section 156(3) Cr.P.C.
At the outset, Mr Jain submits that in order to ensure compliance of orders
passed by Hon’ble Supreme Court in Ashwani Kumar Upadhyay v. Union of India
and another WP(Civil) No. 699 of 2016, the order shall be brought to the notice of
the concerned courts.
Pursuant to order dated 27.07.2021, report has been received from the
court of Jagjit Singh, Special Judge, CBI Court, Chandigarh. Copy thereof be
made available to Mr. Sumeet Goel, learned senior counsel representing the CBI to
enable him to assist on the next date of hearing.
At this stage, Mr. Khosla learned amicus curiae has pointed out that in
all those cases where stay is operating, respective investigating/prosecuting
agencies need to move an application for vacation of stay in view of Ashwani
Kumar Upadhyay’s case (supra).
Learned counsel representing various investigating agencies as well as
prosecution assure the court that this matter shall be looked into and all earnest
efforts shall be made before the next date of hearing. This court has no hesitation
in making it clear that in case needful is not done, it has no option but to seek
personal appearance of all the senior Officers who are entrusted with supervising
pending investigations/trials.
By the next date of hearing, registry may supply a list of cases
pending against MPs/MLAs in this court whether in the nature of civil or criminal
proceedings.
To come up on 03.09.2021.