This Civil Revision Petition has been preferred to set aside the fair and
decreetal order dated 11.04.2022 passed in I.A.No.1 of 2021 in O.P.No.4476
of 2019 pending on the file of the I Additional Family Court, Chennai.
2. Heard Ms.S.P.Arthi, learned counsel for the petitioner and
Mr.D.Suresh Kumar, learned counsel for the respondent and perused the
materials available on record.
The revision petitioner is the wife and the respondent is the husband.
The petitioner wife has filed an Original Petition in H.M.O.P.No.4476 of 2019
for dissolution of marriage against the respondent husband. During the
pendency of matrimonial proceedings, the wife filed a petition in I.A.No.1 of
2021 for granting the relief of mandatory injunction directing the respondent
to move out of the matrimonial home in the best interest and welfare of the
children till the disposal of the Original Petition in H.M.O.P.No.4476 of 2019.
The learned I Additional Principal Judge, Family Court, Chennai, has partly
allowed the petition by giving a direction that the respondent shall not disturb
the peaceful possession and enjoyment of the petitioner in the matrimonial
home in any manner whatsoever where the petitioner living along with her
children, till the disposal of the main petition. Aggrieved over that, the
revision petitioner has preferred this Civil Revision Petition.
4. Ms.S.P.Arthi, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that the
petitioner is an Advocate by profession and the respondent is doing business
in construction; the matrimonial life between the petitioner and the respondent
did not go well; the respondent started to harass the petitioner and insulted her
unsuiting to her profession and self worth; the respondent also tortured the
petitioner by manhandling her and abused her in filthy words; since the
petitioner is being abused and treated in a violent manner in front of the
children, the peace of mind of the children also affected; since the cruel
attitude of the respondent went beyond the limits, the petitioner was forced to
file a petition seeking mandatory injunction to remove the husband from the
matrimonial home till the disposal of the Original Petition.
4.1. Despite the learned Family Judge has accepted that the attitude of
the respondent is abusive and harsh, has not chosen to give a mandatory
injunction to remove the husband from the matrimonial home, but granting an
order directing the respondent not to disturb the petitioner; by taking
advantage of the absence of any order of his removal, the respondent
aggravated his abusive attitude and for which the petitioner and her children
were not able to put up with; since the children are young and at an
impressionable age, it is not ideal to put them under constant fear; the fact that
the respondent got alternate accommodation of his own has been brought to
the knowledge of the learned Family Judge but that was not considered.
5. Mr.D.Suresh Kumar, learned counsel for the respondent submitted
that despite getting a favourable order from the learned Family Judge of the
Family Court, the petitioner has chosen to file this Revision Petition just to
harass the respondent by adamantly seeking an order for removing him from
the matrimonial home; the order of the learned Family Judge is supportive to
the petitioner and there is no prejudice caused to the petitioner; even though
the respondent husband provides all good to the children and extend his
support, the petitioner is harassing the respondent and the children; so, the
order passed by the learned Family Judge does not require any revision.
6. The petitioner is said to be a practising Advocate. Since the marriage
between the petitioner and the respondent did not go well, the family became
a battlefield. While the petitioner states that the respondent is unruly and
harsh, the respondent claims that he is a very supportive father and the
petitioner being an advocate has dragged him to court. Though it is not
appropriate to deal with the merits of the allegations made by the respective
parties, some basic idea about the conduct of the parties is essential to decide
the prayer sought in the petition.
7. The anguish of the petitioner is despite the respondent married her
knowing her demanding profession, he is not able to reconcile with her
professional demands. Instead of giving a supportive hand to the petitioner by
being accommodative, the respondent has developed a complaining attitude
and found fault with the respondent for being engaged with her work.
8. Even in the counter filed in this Civil Revision Petition, the
respondent has stated that the petitioner did not prefer to stay at home, but
often went outside. According to the understanding of the respondent, an ideal
mother is a woman who always stays at home and does only the household
chores. If a woman chooses to be independent and do something more than
being a housewife and if it is not taken well by her husband, that makes her
life horrible by having its repercussion over her personal, familial and
professional spheres.     As couples if the parties do not tolerate each other's
career demand and balance both family and career and mingle with each
other’s society without any inhibition, constant conflict in an inevitable result.
Due to lack of understanding and respect for the professional commitments of
the petitioner, the respondent developed a hostile attitude towards her. His
intolerance seems to be creating squabbles and troubles in the life of the
parties.
9. An order of a single judge of this court dated 14.06.2022 in
connection with these parties, is placed before this court. The said order
would show that the respondent has even attributed bias against the learned
Judge by alleging that he was amenable to the influence of the petitioner.
This has invited the Court’s suo motu criminal contempt proceedings against
him. It is only an illustration of his doubtful mind and unreasonable attitude.
10. The couple of this case have got two children aged about 10 years
and 6 years. The respondent’s abusive attitudes will only disturb the children.
It is not unusual for couple live under a same proof despite their marriage lost
its charm. They may even turn east and west but still try to manage to live in
the same house. So long as their conduct does not hurt the family peace, but
only their personal relationship, there is no harm in allowing the parties to live
in a same house until a logical end is given to their marriage.
11. But it is a completely different scenario if one party unfurls unruly
and aggressive attitude. In such an unreasonably adverse situation, the
petitioner and her children can not be compelled to live under constant fear
and insecurity. In similar such circumstances, the courts have granted
direction to remove the husband from the matrimonial home. In this context, it
is worthwhile to refer the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court rendered in
the case of Samir Vidyasagar Bhardwaj Vs. Nandita Samir Bhardwaj
reported in (2017) 14 SCC 583. In the said case, it is held in paragraph No.10
“10. Section 19(1)(b) of the Protection of Women from
Domestic Violence Act provides that the Court may direct the
appellant husband to remove himself from the shared
household. The order passed under Section 19 of the Act seeks
to maintain continued and undisturbed residence of the
aggrieved party within the shared household and in pursuance
of the same it directs the respondent to execute a bond with or
without surety or secure an alternate accommodation for the
aggrieved party and pay the rent for the same and restrains the
respondent from or renouncing property rights or valuable
security of the aggrieved party.”
12. If the removal of the husband from home alone is the only way to
ensure domestic peace, the courts need to pass such orders irrespective of the
fact whether the respondent has or has not an other accommodation of his
own. If the husband has got an alternate accommodation, it is fine that he can
be asked to accommodate himself in that alternate premises. If he does not
have any other accommodation, it is upto him to secure an alternate
accommodation. In this case, the petitioner has filed a memo stating the
details about the possibility of accommodating the respondent in the alternate
accommodation possessed by him. But the same was not considered by the
court below.
13. However, the learned District Judge has arrived at a conclusion that
the wife should be given with the protection order. In that case, the order
given by the learned trial Judge should be a workable and practical one.
Allowing the respondent to be at the same home, but directing him that he
should not disturb the other inmates of the home is something impractical. A
relief for a person who fears about an impending atom bomb, would be just to
remove the bomb from his/her vicinity. The learned District Judge has made
an observation that there is no cohabitation between the couple for five years.
That means the marriage is nothing short of an utter failure. In such context
of the facts, it will be very difficult to maintain peace in the family, if the
respondent’s unruly and violent attitude is not contained by any workable
order.
14. The protection orders are normally given to ensure the peaceful
movement of a woman within her domestic sphere. When a woman fears the
presence of her husband and screams, the Courts cannot be indifferent by just
directing the husband that he should not harass the wife, but by allowing him
to reside in the same house.
15. When a couple lives under one roof, the conduct of one party to the
other is always vital in defining the respect and recognition the family would
get from others. If the domestic peace is disturbed due to unruly act of one
party, namely the husband, there need not be any hesitation in giving the
practical enforcement for the protection order by removing the husband from
the house. In such circumstances I feel the order of the court below needs
modification.
16. In the result, this Civil Revision Petition is allowed and the order of
the I Additional Family Court, Chennai made in I.A.No.1 of 2021 in
O.P.No.4476 of 2019 dated 11.04.2022 is modified and the respondent is
directed to leave the house where the petitioner and the children live and find
an alternate accommodation within a period of two weeks from the date of
receipt of a copy of this order, failing which, the respondent shall be removed
from the matrimonial home with the help of police protection. The petitioner
is at liberty to file a petition before the family court for getting appropriate
orders like police protection, in case, the respondent fails to leave the
matrimonial home by himself. In the event of such petition is filed, the
learned Judge of the I Additional Family Court, Chennai, shall consider and
pass necessary orders in accordance with law.          No costs. Consequently,
connected miscellaneous petition is closed.