1.     This petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India
assails order dated 14th September 2022 passed by the learned Civil
Judge in CS SCJ 307/17 (Premwati v. Sunita) to the extent it closed
the right of the petitioner, as the defendant in the suit, to cross-
examine PW-1. Mr. Rana submits that, on 14th September 2022, the
application of the respondent—plaintiff under Order VII Rule 14 of
the CPC was allowed, PW-1 was examined and cross-examination of
PW-1 was commenced by learned Counsel for the petitioner at 3 p.m.
He submits that learned Counsel for the petitioner cross-examined
PW-1 for three hours till 6.10 p.m. and then sought an adjournment
for further cross-examination which has been declined by the learned
Digitally Signed        CM(M) 1097/2022                                                   Page 1 of 3
Present :       Sh. Rajpal Gulia, ld. counsel for the plaintiff
alongwith plaintiff alongwith plaintiff.
Sh.Vinay Kumar Pathak, ld. counsel for the
defendant alongwith defendant.
It is 06:10 PM already and ld. counsel for the
defendant seeks adjournment on the ground that another
counsel who has to cross examine the witness has not
appeared today. It is pertinent to mention that the evidence
had started at 12 : 15 PM and the cross examination of PW1
was deferred at 1 PM. Thereafter, the evidence was resumed
at 3 PM, and the plaintiff witness has been examined at
length. The Court is not unmindful of the fact that the
plaintiff is an 80 yrs old citizen and despite the time
constrain, several irrelevant questions have already been
asked. Furthermore, perusal of the case file reveals that
Sh.Vinay Pathak, ld. counsel for the defendant has been
appearing in the present matter on all the dates and another
counsel Sh.V.P. Rana has appeared only twice in the span of
last 3 yrs. In view of the same, adjournment is not granted.
PW1 examined, cross examined and discharged.
Put up for evidence of PW2 on 23.09.2022 at 02 : 15
3.      Given the fact that cross-examination of PW-1 commenced
only at 12.15 p.m., the learned Civil Judge was, prima facie, not
justified in rejecting the petitioner’s request for permission to continue
cross-examination of PW-1 on the next date of hearing.
4.      That apart, the factors which have made with the learned Civil
Judge in refusing the petitioner’s request for further opportunity to
Digitally Signed        CM(M) 1097/2022                                                        Page 2 of 3
cross-examine PW-1, as reflected in the impugned order dated 14th
September 2022, cannot be treated as relevant. All that the learned
Civil Judge observes is that the plaintiff was 80 years of age and
several irrelevant questions had been put to her.
5.     While it is open to a Court to jettison irrelevant and immaterial
questions, if asked by Counsel, nonetheless, save and except in the
rarest of circumstances, the Court cannot compel a Counsel to
conclude cross-examination on the very day when it starts.
6.     In that view of the matter, I am of the opinion that, in the
interests of justice, the petitioner ought to be allowed permission to
continue cross-examination of PW-1 on the next date of hearing when
the matter is listed before the learned Civil Judge. The petitioner is
directed to endeavour and make all efforts to conclude the cross-
examination of PW-1 on the said date. No adjournment would be
granted to the petitioner in that regard.
7.     The petition stands allowed in the aforesaid terms with no
orders as to costs. Miscellaneous applications also stand disposed of.
Digitally Signed        CM(M) 1097/2022                                                 Page 3 of 3