for State-respondent No.1.
Instant petition has been filed under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 seeking quashing of FIR No.145 dated
23.07.2019, registered for offences under Sections 363 and 366-A of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (for short “IPC”), however, later on Section 376,
IPC and Section 4 of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act,
2012 (for short “POCSO Act”) were added, at Police Station Dehlon,
District Ludhiana, Annexure P-1, on the basis of the affidavits dated
FIR, Annexure P-1, has been registered on the basis of statement
of father of two school going minor girls, “J” (date of birth 13.09.2001) and
“M” (date of birth 20.06.2004), names withheld, on the allegation that in
the evening on 22.07.2019, they went to a market in connection with some
school work, but did not return and despite search, they could not be
located. Nardeep Singh Cheema @ Navdeep Singh Cheema, present
petitioner, wanted to get married to “J”, but she refused and he often used to
trouble her along with his friend, Gurpeet Singh, who was interested in
marrying “M”. Complainant's daughters had told him of these facts and he
suspects that they have been enticed by Nardeep Singh Cheema @ Navdeep
Singh Cheema and Gurpeet Singh.
While referring to the Marriage Certificate dated 19.09.2019,
Annexure P-3, counsel for the petitioner submits that petitioner has
performed marriage with “J” after she attained majority. He submits that “J”
as well as her father-complainant have executed affidavits, Annexure P-2
(colly), which reflect a compromise between the parties. He submits that the
married couple is living together and their statements have been recorded in
support of the compromise pursuant to order passed by this Court.
Status report by way of an affidavit of Assistant Commissioner of
Police (South), Ludhiana has been filed on behalf of State-respondent No.1,
which is taken on record. Upon instructions received from ASI, Balvir
Singh, State counsel has opposed the petition and has submitted that the
petitioner is accused of sexually exploiting a minor. However, counsel
representing the complainant-respondent No.2 and victim-respondent No.3
has supported the prayer made in the petition.
In the status report filed by the State, it has been submitted as
“5.        That on 24.07.2019 the present petitioner and his
co-accused Gurpreet Singh were arrested and both the
prosecutrix were recovered from the petitioner and his co-
accused. Statements u/s 161 Cr.P.C. of both the prosecutrix
were recorded in which they stated that on 22.07.2019 the
petitioner had taken respondent No.3 whereas co-accused
Gurpreet Singh had taken the other girl “M” in a
Gurudwara at Patiala where during the night the petitioner
committed sexual intercourse with respondent No.3 and his
co-accused committed sexual intercourse with the other
girl. Statements u/s 164 Cr.P.C. of both the prosecutrix
were got recorded before the Ld. Magistrate on
Examination of both the prosecutrix were got
conducted from Civil Hospital, Ludhiana on 26.07.2019
and vaginal swabs were taken and were sent to the
Chemical Examiner and in the reports of the Chemical
Examiner of both the girls, it was mentioned that
“spermatozoa were detected in the contents”. Accordingly,
offences u/s 376 IPC and 4 POCSO Act were added on
6.         That after completion of the investigation,
challan/Final Report u/s 173 Cr.P.C has been presented
against the present petitioner on 08.01.2020 and charges
were framed on 29.02.2020. There are total 12 prosecution
witnesses in this case, but no evidence has been led as yet
and now the trial is pending in the Court of Ms. Ravi Inder
Kaur Sandhu, Ld. Addl. Sessions Judge, Ludhiana and is
now fixed for 21.09.2022. However, now on 19.09.2019, the
petitioner and the prosecutrix/respondent No.3 have
performed marriage as mentioned above.”
Facts reveal that prosecutrix was admittedly a minor when she
was enticed and has been recovered from the custody of the accused-
petitioner. Material placed on the record by the State shows that she has
been subjected to sexual assault by the petitioner.
Subsequent marriage of the accused with the prosecutrix would
not dilute the offence under POCSO Act or under Section 376, IPC.
POCSO Act has been incorporated with the objective of protecting children
from offences of sexual assault, sexual harassment, pornography. If an
accused is absolved of committing sexual excesses with a minor on the
basis of settlement with victim on her attaining majority, this would
encourage an unhealthy trend and defeat the objective and spirit behind the
legislation of POCSO Act.
Consequently, offence under POCSO Act, which is a special
statue, cannot be quashed on the basis of any compromise or matrimony
between the accused and the prosecutrix.
Finding no merit in the prayer made, petition is dismissed.
It is clarified that nothing said hereinabove shall be construed to
be an expression of opinion on the merits of the case and the Trial Court
shall conclude the trial uninfluenced by any observation made hereinabove.