Dated this the 16th day of March, 2023
The appellants are accused Nos. 1 and 2 in Crime No.
574 of 2022, registered at the Infopark Police Station
for offences punishable under Sections 354A (1)(iii), 354A (iv)
of Indian Penal Code, Sections 66E and 67A of Information
Technology Act and Sections 3(1)(r), 3(1)(s), 3(1)(w)(ii) of the
Scheduled     Castes  and  Scheduled    Tribes  (Prevention   of
Atrocities) Act ('PoA' Act for short).   The FIR is registered
based on the 2nd respondent' complaint. The gist of 2nd
respondent's allegations are as under;
The 2nd respondent had filed a complaint against her
former employer T.P. Nandakumar, who was running an online
news      channel  by  name    'Crime  Online',  alleging   that
Nandakumar had compelled her to videograph her nudity for
creating a morphed video of a lady Minister of the State.
Based on the complaint, Crime No. 712 of 2022               was
registered at the Ernakulam Town Police Station and T.P.
Nandakumar was arrested.        Provoked by the arrest of T.P.
Nandakumar, the appellants, who are also media persons
working in     an   online channel    by name   'Bharath  Live',
published news items containing disparaging remarks against
the 2nd respondent and picturising her as a lady of loose
morals. In the news items, videos from the private moments
of the 2nd respondent's personal life was also included.    The
news items were published with the knowledge that the 2 nd
respondent belongs to a Scheduled Tribe community.
2. The appellants moved the Sessions Court, Ernakulam
for anticipatory bail and having failed in their attempt, this
Crl.Appeal is filed.
3.  Heard Adv. I.V. Pramod for the appellants, Adv. K.
Nandini for the 2nd respondent and Sr. Public Prosecutor
Renjith George for the State.
4.    Learned    counsel   for the appellants  assertively
submitted that none of the offences alleged against the
appellants are attracted. If the news item is viewed, it will be
evident that no abusive comments were made against the 2 nd
respondent and no obscene or inappropriate scenes from the
private life  of the 2 nd respondent was included.    The news
items published on 18.06.2022 and subsequent days are
more an expression of protest against the false implication of
T.P. Nandakumar and a revelation of the atrocities committed
against him by the 2nd respondent. According to the counsel,
protest by the press/media against the atrocious acts of the
2nd respondent will not attract offences under the PoA Act. At
any rate, custodial interrogation of the appellants is not
necessary and hence, pre-arrest bail ought to be granted.
Finally, it is submitted that the petitioners are prepared to
abide by condition imposed by this Court.
5. Learned counsel for the 2nd respondent submitted that
her client is being hounded by the appellants from the moment
she lodged the complaint against T.P. Nandakumar. The video
uploaded and published by the appellants on 18.06.2022
through their news channel contains private moments from the
2nd   respondent's    life, wherein   the  2 nd  respondent  is
inappropriately dressed. The idea behind the news stories was
to depict the 2nd respondent as an immoral lady, who is in the
habit of filing false complaints. The conversation between T.P.
Nandakumar and a Dy.S.P., which is included in the news item,
is sufficient proof that the appellants knew that the 2 nd
respondent belongs to a Scheduled Tribe.           It is therefore
beyond cavil that the abusive news and videos were published
with intent to denigrate the 2nd respondent and thus, the
appellants have committed the alleged offences.
6. Learned Public Prosecutor submitted that the plea for
anticipatory bail is liable to be rejected, since the available
materials are sufficient to attract the offences under the PoA
7. It is not in dispute that a news item containing video
footage of private moments from the 2 nd respondent's personal
life was published through the online news channel. Therefore,
the short question is whether publication of such video content
would attract offences under the        PoA Act.   In my opinion,
publication of another person's private moments for public
viewing is, by itself, an offensive act, even if there is no law
preventing such action. No person, whether it be the media or
Governmental agencies, have the right to            peep into the
private lives of the citizens of this country, without there being
a valid reason.     The    personnel vendetta of certain media
personalities or their so-called crusade for truth and justice,
are no excuse for         impinging the privacy of citizens.                 Every
individual is entitled to perform his actions in private. He or
she has the right to carry out his/her activities in life without
being spied upon.          As observed by the Apex Court in K.S.
Puttaswamy and Another v. Union of India and Others
[(2010) 10 SCC 1], the impact of the digital age results in
information on the internet being permanent. Humans forget,
but the internet does not forget and does not let humans
forget.      Therefore, any defamatory or abusive statement
uploaded online will remain as a permanent scar on the
affected person. Therefore, the online news channels have a
duty to ascertain the veracity of the news before making
disparaging remarks against individuals and publishing videos
of their personal lives. In this context, the following erudite
discussion in Sooraj V Kumar v. State of Kerala (2022 (4)
KLT 905) assumes relevance.
''27. The digital world has transformed the concept of viewership.
Unlike a speech made within an enclosed space in front of an
audience, the content, when uploaded, has its impact felt the world
over. The influence of the internet is in its universal accessibility. Prior
to the advent of the internet, a speech made within an enclosed area
could be heard or viewed only by those present inside the enclosed
space. However, after the emergence of the internet, the uploaded
content can be viewed or heard by any member of the public at any
time, as if they are present either viewing or hearing it, not only at the
time it was telecasted but even when the programme is accessed.
Each time a person accesses the content of the uploaded programme,
he or she becomes present, directly or constructively, in the broadcast
or telecast of the content.''
8.    It is disheartening to note that, atleast some online
news channels are in the habit of publishing sleaze more than
news. A section of the public also devours such sensational
and salacious news. In the absence of any mechanism to curb
the menace, it is for those channels to introspect and decide
whether, by the action of a few, faith in the fourth estate, a
powerful pillar of our democracy, is getting eroded. To quote
the Father of Our Nation;
“The press is called the Fourth Estate. It is definitely a
power, but, to misuse the power is criminal.”
9. As far as the case at hand is concerned, the specific
allegation is that the appellants had knowledge that the 2 nd
respondent belongs to Scheduled Tribe.                 If so, publication of
news and videos containing scenes intended to insult or abuse
the 2nd respondent is sufficient to attract the offences under
the PoA Act. Hence, the contention that there is no material
or circumstance to attract the offences under the PoA Act can
only be rejected. Consequently, the bar under Section 18 of
the Act, against grant of pre-arrest bail, will come into play.
Hence, the finding of the Special Court, in that regard, does
not warrant interference.
For the   aforementioned   reasons,   the   Crl.Appeal is
dismissed.
Annexure-R2(e)        True copy of the video dated 19/6/2022 in the
form of CD.
Annexure-R2(a)        True copy of the video dated 15/6/2022
uploaded by the Appellants in Bharath live in
the CD form.
Annexure-R2(b)        True copy of the transcription of R2(a), dtd.
Annexure-R2(c)        True copy of the video uploaded and published
by the Appellants dated 18/6/2022, in CD
form.
Annexure-R(d)         The copy of transcription of Annexure-R2(c),
dtd. 18/6/2022.
Annexure-R2(f)        True copy of the video in the CD form dated
25/6/2022 uploaded and published by the
Annexure-R2(g)        True copy of the video in the CD form dated
29/7/2022 uploaded and relayed by the
Annexure-R2(h)        The copy of the transcription of Annexure-
R2(g) dtd. 29/7/2022.
Annexure-R2(i)        True copy of video in the CD form dated
2/8/2022 uploaded and published in Crime
Annexure-R2(j)        True copy of the transcription of video
footage of Annexure - R2(i), dated August-2-
2022 published in Crime online.
Annexure-R2(k)        True copy of the screen shot from Bharath
live dated 15/6/2022.
Annexure-R2(k)(a)     True copy of the screen shot from Bharath
line dated 17/6/2022.
Annexure-R2(k)(b) True copy of the screen shot from Bharath
line dated 18/6/2022.
Annexure-R2(k)(c) True copy of the screen shot from Bharath
line dated 19/6/2022.
Annexure-R2(k)(d) True copy of the screen shot from Bharath
line dated 25/6/2022.
Annexure-R2(k)(e) True copy of the screen shots from Bharath
line dated 29/7/2022.