5/ 06.04.2022      There are some cases, which really shock the conscience of the
Court and this is one of such case. This case has not only shaken the
conscience of this Court, but also has shaken the faith on the investigating
agency, which has filed the chargesheet in this case against the petitioner.
2.           Petitioner has approached this Court by filing a bail application
under Section 439 read with Section 440 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973. He has prayed for bail from this Court, as his prayer for bail was rejected
by the Principal Sessions Judge, Jamtara in Miscellaneous Criminal
Application No.626 of 2021 on 08.10.2021. Petitioner is languishing in custody
from 01.07.2021, in fact, for committing no offence whatsoever under any
penal statute, far less under the Indian Penal Code. The reason I have
reached to such conclusion would be evident from the prosecution story and
the statements of several witnesses recorded during investigation.
3.           On the basis of a fardbeyan of one Mahadeo Mandal, Jamtara
(Karmatand) Police Station Case No.47 of 2021 was registered under Sections
302/34 of the Indian Penal Code. Informant is the father of the deceased, who
stated that on 30.06.2021, he received information that her daughter Asha
Devi, aged about 36 years, has been murdered in her matrimonial home by
the son-in-law of the informant. On receiving the said information, informant
along with his family members and other villagers reached the matrimonial
home of her daughter, where he saw her daughter lying dead on a cot. He
opined that the deceased was murdered as there was some ligature mark on
her neck. He stated that few days before the incident, there was some land
dispute for which there was quarrel between the husband of the deceased
Govind Mandal, his elder brother Naresh Mandal and the deceased. He also
stated that Govind Mandal, husband of the deceased, often used to assault
the deceased. He further narrated that his another daughter was also a
resident of that village and on receipt of the said information about the death of
Asha Devi, his another daughter, Tara Devi and other villagers were present
there and said Tara Devi stated that when she went to the house of the
deceased, she saw this petitioner, namely, Shanichara Kol sitting beside the
dead body of the deceased. On the basis of the aforesaid information, the
informant concluded that her daughter Asha Devi was done to death by her
husband Govind Mandal, her brother-in-law Naresh Mandal and this petitioner.
4.            As the bail application of the petitioner was rejected by the
Principal Sessions Judge, Jamtara, this bail application reached before this
Court. Entire Case Diary was received by this Court and the case was listed
on 31.03.2022, when this Court heard the learned A.P.P. and perused the
case diary. After perusing the case diary, this Court was shocked as to how
this petitioner, an innocent poor tribal villager, has been made an accused in
this case and chargesheet has been submitted against him and he has been
kept in custody. From the case diary I find that the chargesheet has been
submitted under Section 306/34 of the Indian Penal Code and not under
Section 302/34 of the Indian Penal Code as against this petitioner also. Since
the entire investigation is complete and the case diary is before me, I will
discuss as to what are the materials, which are there in the case diary and
whether there are any act committed by the petitioner, which even by taking
help of wild imagination, can attract any penal section or any provision of any
penal law or even under Section 306 of the Indian Penal Code.
5.            Paragraph 1 of the Case Diary is the reproduction of the First
Information Report and paragraph 3 is the inquest report of the dead body of
the deceased. The said inquest report in column 9 suggests that the death
may be by strangulation with the help of cloth. It is also apparent that the
petitioner was taken in custody on the same day, which is apparent from
paragraphs 4, 5 and 6 of the Case Diary. Paragraph 7 is the re-statement of
the informant, who narrates exactly the same what he had stated in the First
Information Report. From his statement, it is clear that the only material
against this petitioner is that he was seen sitting beside the dead body of the
deceased. Paragraph 10 is the statement of Tara Devi, who happens to be the
sister of the deceased. Her statement is very important. She stated that at
night about 10.30 p.m. she heard some hue and cry from the house, when she
accompanied by her husband went to the house of her sister where she found
that her sister was lying dead on a cot in the outer room and besides the dead
body this petitioner was sitting. She also stated that the husband and brother-
in-law of the deceased, on seeing this witness and others reaching their
house, fled from there. She also stated that son of the deceased was sleeping
inside the house, whom she woke up, whereafter the son disclosed that there
was some altercation between his father Govind Mandal, Uncle Naresh
Mandal and her mother (deceased). This witness stated that thereafter she
informed the fact to her father. This is the only fact, which the sister of the
deceased narrated. Paragraph 11 is the statement of Naresh Mandal, who
happens to be the husband of Tara Devi. Be it noted that this Naresh Mandal
is not the brother-in-law of the deceased. He also reached the place of
occurrence, immediately after the incident had occurred and stated in similar
line as Tara Devi had narrated. He also stated that he had seen this petitioner
sitting beside the deceased. From his statement, it is also clear that this
petitioner was a neighbour of the deceased. The statement of the son of the
deceased was recorded in paragraph 12. Son is aged about 18 years. He
stated that on the date of occurrence, he was sleeping in his house when Tara
Devi and others had woke him and informed him that his mother is dead and
this petitioner is sitting next to the dead body. He then saw the dead body and
found some mark of pressure on the neck. He stated that his father and uncle
had fled from the house. The statement of another witness Dhaneshwar
Mandal has been recorded in paragraph 13, who also stated in similar line that
this petitioner was found sitting beside the dead body. Paragraph 31 is the
excerpts of the Postmortem Report wherein it has been recorded that there
was no mark of any injury on the person of the deceased, save and except the
ligature mark on the neck and the doctor opined that cause of death is
“asphyxia due to hanging”. Paragraph 36 is the statement of Mukhia of the
village, who was not present on the date of occurrence. He stated that on
receipt of the information about the death, he rushed to the village and
inquired about the facts and he could come to know from the wife of this
petitioner that there was some altercation between the deceased and her
husband in the evening. Thereafter Govind Mandal left his house to take a
drink and when he returned, Govind Mandal (husband of the deceased) saw
Asha Devi had already committed suicide and was hanging with the help of
a Gamcha (Towel). She further narrated that on seeing this, Govind Mandal
rushed to the house of this petitioner and narrated the aforesaid fact and
called the petitioner. Govind Mandal, then, with the help of this petitioner,
brought the dead body down and laid it on the cot. When Govind Mandal could
realise that his wife has expired, out of fear he fled, requesting the petitioner to
sit beside the dead body. In the meantime, Tara Devi and others reached the
place of occurrence. In paragraph 37, statement of wife of this petitioner is
recorded, who narrated the same facts, which she narrated before the Mukhia.
Confessional statement of the petitioner and Govind Mandal was also
recorded, which is apparent from paragraphs 50 and 51 of the Case Diary.
This petitioner stated that he was along with his wife in his house when Govind
Mandal came running to his house at night between 10 p.m. and 10.30 p.m.
and informed him that his wife has committed suicide and request him to
accompany him. As a good neighbour, this petitioner accompanied him and
saw the dead body, which was hanging. He stated that Govind Mandal, with
his help brought the dead body down and laid the same on the cot, when other
villagers and sister of Asha Devi were seen going to the house. He further
stated that Govind Mandal got afraid and he fled request him to keep an eye
on the dead body, thus he was sitting there. He stated that the sister of the
deceased came and thereafter started making hue and cry that Govind Mandal
has murdered the deceased. Statement of Govind Mandal also suggests the
aforesaid fact.
6.            These are the facts, which have been gathered during
investigation in the entire case. All the witnesses consistently stated that this
petitioner was found sitting beside the dead body. Some of the witnesses also
stated that they had seen the husband of the deceased fleeing from the place
and this petitioner remained sitting there. In the supervision note dated
04.08.2021 recorded in paragraph 43 of the Case Diary, the Supervising
Officer had noted that there is no concrete evidence against this petitioner nor
any person produced any concrete evidence to implicate this petitioner. The
Supervising Officer also found that every one stated that when they reached
the place of occurrence, this petitioner was found sitting beside the dead body,
but no one could bring any evidence to the effect that the petitioner was
involved in the occurrence. Thus, a direction was given to investigate deeply
the role of this petitioner. Be it noted that the confessional statement of the
petitioner was recorded only thereafter. The statement of son of the deceased
was again recorded on 18.08.2021, who also did not whisper anything against
this petitioner, rather he stated that there was dispute between his father and
mother. He also stated that on the date of occurrence, after there was some
dispute between his father and mother, his father left the house and he had
gone to sleep. He only woke after the death of her mother, but, he could not
say as to how his mother died. After completion of investigation, the
Investigating Officer and the Supervising Authority, was satisfied that the death
was suicidal thus, submitted chargesheet under Section 306/34 of the Indian
Penal Code against this petitioner and the husband of the deceased.
7.            Thus, it is apparent from the narrations made in the entire case
diary I find that there is no overt act committed by this petitioner, which can
attract any ingredients of an offence, which is punishable under Section 306 of
the Indian Penal Code. Not only this, from the entire materials available, this
Court finds that the act of the petitioner will not attract any offence under any
penal law of this country. As noted, the act of the petitioner is that he was
sitting beside the dead body. This petitioner, admittedly, is a neighbour, who,
on the call of husband of the deceased, rushed to the place of occurrence and
found the dead body of the deceased hanging and it is this petitioner and the
husband of the deceased, who brought the dead body down from the hanging
state and laid it on the cot. This action of the petitioner cannot be said to be an
action which constitutes an offence, as he had fulfilled his obligation as a
neighbour. Even none of the witnesses including the son of the deceased
never alleged that there was any confrontation with the deceased and this
petitioner. That being so, this Court was really astonished as to how this
petitioner was chargesheeted for an offence punishable under Sections 306/34
of the Indian Penal Code and how he was taken in custody.
8.            For getting proper assistance, this Court requested the Additional
Advocate General to assist this Court after going through the case diary. When
the matter was taken up on 01.04.2022, the Additional Advocate General, after
going through the Case Diary, fairly admitted that save and except the fact that
this petitioner was found sitting next to the dead body, there is no material
whatsoever against this petitioner, even to remotely connect him with the
occurrence. This Court, thus, on 01.04.2022 requested the Director General of
Police to go through the Case Diary and assist this Court. Today, the Director
General of Police appeared and after going through the Case Diary, very fairly
admits that there is no material to implicate this petitioner in this case.
9.            From the aforesaid fact and the submissions of the Additional
Advocate General, the Director General of Police and also from the Case
Diary, it is quite evident that a simple innocent tribal person, who answered the
call of his neighbour, accompanied to his house, has been made an accused
and kept in custody for no fault on his part. He has been made to suffer for
answering a call of humanity. His liberty was not only threatened, but was
taken away by the State, whimsically, without there being any material against
him. In this case, the immediate remedy is to release the petitioner from
custody, which was provisionally done on 01.04.2022 when the petitioner was
directed to be released on furnishing personal bond of Rs.1. Petitioner was
released immediately till further orders of this Court. In view of what has been
held above and since there is no material against the petitioner, interim order
releasing the petitioner on bail on furnishing personal bond of Rs.1/- by order
dated 01.04.2022 is confirmed.
10.            A great injustice has been caused to the petitioner. As per
American Philosopher Michael J Sandel, where there is injustice, everyone, as
a human being, has a responsibility to contribute to remedying injustice.
Injustice has already been done to this poor petitioner, which now needs to be
11.            During course of arguments, learned Additional Advocate
General, Mr. Sachin Kumar very fairly submits that this Court can convert this
application into an application under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure and proceed to do justice. As held earlier, chargesheet in this case
has been submitted under Sections 306/34 of the Indian Penal Code. To bring
home a charge under Section 306 of the Indian Penal Code, there must be
proof of direct or indirect acts of incitement to the commission of suicide. There
should be a mental process of instigating a person or intentionally aiding a
person to commit suicide. In order to convict a person under Section 306 of
the Indian Penal Code, there has to be a clear mens-rea to commit the
offence. Further, there should be evidence capable of suggesting that the
accused intended by such act to instigate the deceased to commit suicide.
Further, in order to bring a case within the purview of Section 306 of the Indian
Penal Code, there must be a case of suicide and in the commission of the said
offence, the person who is said to have abetted the commission of suicide
must have played an active role by an act of instigation or by doing certain act
to facilitate the commission of suicide. Reference may be had to the judgment
of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Arnab Manoranjan Goswami
versus State of Maharashtra & Others reported in (2021) 2 SCC 427.
12.          As narrated earlier, from the Case Diary and the facts of this case,
none of the aforesaid are attracted so far as this petitioner is concerned. Thus,
filing chargesheet against the petitioner was a mechanical process adopted by
the investigating agency, without applying mind. This non-application of mind
has deprived this petitioner of his liberty, which is guaranteed by the
Constitution. In a whimsical manner, without applying mind by mechanically
taking refuge of law, which is not attracted on the facts of this case, this
petitioner has been kept in custody. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of
Arnab Manoranjan Goswami (supra) in paragraph 67 has held as under: -
J. Human liberty and the Role of courts
67. Human liberty is a precious constitutional value, which
is undoubtedly subject to regulation by validly enacted
legislation. As such, the citizen is subject to the edicts of
criminal law and procedure. Section 482 CrPC recognises
the inherent power of the High Court to make such orders
as are necessary to give effect to the provisions of CrPC
“or prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise
to secure the ends of justice”. Decisions of this Court
require the High Courts, in exercising the jurisdiction
entrusted to them under Section 482, to act with
circumspection. In emphasizing that the High Court must
exercise this power with a sense of restraint, the decisions
of this Court are founded on the basic principle that the
due enforcement of criminal law should not be obstructed
by the accused taking recourse to artifices and strategies.
The public interest in ensuring the due investigation of
crime is protected by ensuring that the inherent power of
the High Court is exercised with caution. That indeed is
one-and a significant-end of the spectrum. The other end
of the spectrum is equally important: the recognition by
Section 482 of the power inhering in the High Court to
justice is a valuable safeguard for protecting liberty. The
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1988 was enacted by a
legislature which was not subject to constitutional rights
and limitations; yet it recognized the inherent power in
Section 561-A. Post-Independence, the recognition by
Parliament of the inherent power of the High Court must be
construed as an aid to preserve the constitutional value of
liberty. The writ of liberty runs through the fabric of the
Constitution. The need to ensure the fair investigation of
crime is undoubtedly important in itself, because it
protects at one level the rights of the victim and, at a more
fundamental level, the societal interest in ensuring that
crime is investigated and dealt with in accordance with
law. On the other hand, the misuse of criminal law is a
matter of which the High Court and the lower courts in this
country must be alive…..”
13.          It is well settled principle of law that when there is no material
against a person, he cannot be forced to face the rigors of law. In this case,
learned Additional Advocate General, after going through the entire record,
admits that there is no material against this petitioner. I also, after going
through the Case Diary, find the same. This, thus, becomes a fit case where
the entire proceeding against the petitioner can be quashed by exercising
powers under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Learned
Additional Advocate General also prayed to invoke the said power to do
This Court, though is of the view that there is no material against
the petitioner to proceed, but, keeping in view the judicial propriety, as the
Chief Justice, who is the Master of Roster, has not assigned this Bench to
hear an application under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, it
will not be proper to exercise the aforesaid jurisdiction.
14.           The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Kishore Samrite
versus State of Uttar Pradesh & Others reported in (2013) 2 SCC 398 has
held that the Chief Justice is the Master of Roster and has the power to
constitute Benches and has the power to make the roster. It has also been
held that judicial discipline and propriety are the two significant facets of
administration of justice and every Court is obliged to adhere to these
principles to ensure hierarchical discipline on one hand and proper
dispensation of justice on the other. The Hon’ble Supreme Court further held
that there should be adherence to rule of law with due regard to the prescribed
procedure. Violation may not always result in invalidation of the judicial action,
but, may cause a shadow of improper exercise of judicial discretion. Thus, I
am not invoking the said jurisdiction, but am converting this application to one
under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Registry is directed to
convert the same.
15.           In this case, considering what has been found and held above, it
is a fit case where this petitioner needs to be compensated. Thus, this Court
holds that the petitioner is entitled to receive a compensation amount of
Rs.50,000/- to be paid by the State.
16.           Before parting with, I would just like to add that the suffering of the
petitioner could have easily been minimized if the Principal Sessions Judge,
Jamtara would not have dismissed the bail application in a mechanical manner
without appreciating the materials available in the case diary. Be it noted that
the decision to file chargesheet under Sections 306/34 of the Indian Penal
Code was taken before the Principal Sessions Judge, Jamtara dismissed the
bail application of the petitioner.
17.           Taking overall view of what has been observed above, the
following order is being passed in this case: -
(i)    Interim bail granted by this Court vide order dated
01.04.2022 in connection with Karmatanr Police Station
Case No.47 of 2021 is confirmed and the petitioner will be
allowed to remain on the same bail bond;
(ii)   This application is converted to one under Section
482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, to be listed
immediately before an appropriate Bench with the leave of
Hon’ble the Chief Justice;
(iii)  The Director General of Police will take suitable steps
to sensitize the investigating officers and the Supervising
Officers, who are incharge of investigation in different
criminal cases, so that innocent persons, against whom
there are no materials, are not harassed and their liberty is
not infringed or curtailed at the whims of the investigating
(iv)   Petitioner be paid a compensation of Rs.50,000/-
(Rupees Fifty Thousand) to be paid by the State, as without
any material against the petitioner, he was taken in custody,
thus his liberty was infringed. Said compensation should be
paid within four weeks to the petitioner through the
Superintendent of Police, Jamtara. Proof of payment of
such compensation should be communicated to the
Registrar General of this Court by the Superintendent of
(v)    Judicial Officers, while dealing with bail applications,
should be cautious and should not pass mechanical orders
rejecting bail applications when there are no materials
against the persons seeking bail;
(vi)   Copy of the entire brief alongwith the case diary and
the orders of this Court be transmitted to the Judicial
Academy, Jharkhand for giving appropriate training to the
Judicial Officers in dealing with these type of cases;