3.1           Second respondent published an advertisement
in the daily newspaper ‘Divya Bhaskar’ on 06.03.2021
inviting     tenders  to  decide      service   provider          agency
through outsourcing for the activities to be carried out in
‘Jan Seva Centers’ under the offices of the District
Collector, Surat. Petitioner applied for the same along
with seven other agencies and out of the seven bidders,
five are qualified and petitioner being lowest bidder,
second respondent assigned the contract in favour of
petitioner by order dated 23.04.2021 for the period
01.05.2021 to 30.04.2023, subject to further extension on
satisfaction of the work. Undisputedly, there are 14 Jan
Seva Centers falling within the jurisdiction of the District
Collector, Surat, all of which are said to be run by
petitioner since 03.06.2021. Petitioner has also appointed
various      operators   at these        Jan  Seva      Centers            in
consonance with the contract dated 23.04.2021.
3.2           During the subsistence of the said contract, a
show cause notice dated 27.10.2021 was issued to the
petitioner relating to a false income certificate generated
from Jan Seva Center, Kamrej, which was replied to by
petitioner, resulting in order dated 03.12.2021 being
passed whereunder the show cause notice came to be
disposed of by accepting the clarification offered by the
3.3           On 14.03.2022, an order came to be passed by
the respondents terminating the services of petitioner by
forfeiting the deposit and also blacklisting petitioner vide
Annexure-A. Being aggrieved by the same, present
application has been filed.
4.            It is the contention of Shri Chaudhary, learned
counsel appearing for petitioner that impugned order is
not preceded by any show cause notice nor personal
hearing was offered and the material used against
petitioner is on the basis of a complaint lodged on
08.03.2022, the copy of which is also not furnished to
petitioner and hence order dated 14.03.2022 being in
violation of principles of natural justice, it is liable to be
quashed. Hence, he prays for Special Civil Application
being allowed.
5.            Per contra, Shri K.M.Antani, learned Assistant
Government Pleader appearing for the State would
support the impugned order by contending that on
account of an FIR having been registered against
petitioner and the employee of petitioner having indulged
in  large       scale illegal  activities  in   issuing          income
certificates, the termination order has been passed as per
the contract and as such, he would support the impugned
order. He would alternatively contend that in the event of
this Court were to arrive at a conclusion that there is
violation of the principles of natural justice, liberty may
be granted to the petitioner to submit his reply by
treating the order dated 14.03.2022 as show cause notice
and after affording a personal hearing to the petitioner,
necessary orders would be passed by the respondent and
as such, he prays for suitable orders being passed in this
regard on this Special Civil Application.
6.            Having heard the learned advocates appearing
for the parties and on perusal of the records, we notice
that undisputedly the impugned order dated 14.03.2022
is not preceded either by a show cause notice or personal
hearing was offered to petitioner. The principles of
natural       justice protects     a      citizen    from        arbitrary
administrative actions whenever his/her right to person
or property is jeopardized. One of the objectives of giving
a hearing in application of principles of natural justice is
to see that any illegal action or decision does not take
place. Any wrong order may adversely affect a person and
it is essentially for this reason that a reasonable
opportunity requires to be granted before passing an
administrative order. The principles of audi alteram
partem is the basic concept of the principles of natural
justice. However, if the legislature specifically authorizes
an administrative action without hearing, then except in
cases of recognized exception, such action would be
violative of principles of fair hearing and it has to be read
into Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of India. The
Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of State of U.P. vs. Vijay
Kumar Tripathi, reported in 1995 Supp. (I) SCC 552
has held that though the rules permit award of censure
entry without notice and hearing, yet the principles of
natural justice should be read into such rules and no
censure entry can be awarded without any notice and
hearing. The principles of audi alteram partem is sine qua
non of every civilized society. Corollary deduced from this
rule is qui aliquid statuerit parte inaudita altera, aequum
licet dixerit, haud aequum facerit (he who shall decide
anything without the other side having been heard,
although he may have said what is right, will not have
done what is right).
7.             As has been frequently observed, the benefit of
audi alteram partem principle was even extended to
Adam and Eve, even by God before they were punished
for disobeying His command. This signifies that even if
the authority already knows everything and the person
has nothing more to tell, even then this rule of natural
justice is attracted, unless application of this rule would
be a mere empty formality. The exception to this rule is
the applicability of doctrine of useless formality theory
which has been reiterated by the Hon’ble Apex Court in
the case of Aligarh Muslim University and others vs.
Mansoor Ali Khan, reported in AIR 2000 SC 2783,
vide paragraphs 28, 32 and 34 as under :
“28.          On the above facts, the absence of a notice
to show cause does not make any difference for the
employee has already been told that if his further
overstay is for continuing in the job in Libya, it is
bound to be refused.
32.           Another important aspect of the matter is
that no new reason has been projected in the Writ
petition of Mr. Khan for his seeking further extension
earlier while in Libya. The only reason stated is that
he had obtained further extension in job. It is not a
case where there is a plea in the Court that there
were different grounds or reasons which he could
have put in his explanation, if called for, such as ill
health etc. Indeed, if the reasons could have been
somewhat different, - as may perhaps be disclosed or
proved in subsequent writ petition - such as his own
failing health, one can understand. But so far as leave
for purposes of job continuance in Libya, is
concerned, he has been fully put on advance notice
that no further extension will be given. It must be
held that no prejudice has been caused even though
no notice is given under Rule 5(8)(i).
34.           Thus, in our view, in the above peculiar
circumstances, the only conclusion that can be drawn
is that even if Mr. Mansoor Ali Khan had been given
notice and he had mentioned this fact of job
continuance in Libya as a reason, that would not have
made any difference and would not have been treated
as a satisfactory explanation under Rule 5(8)(i). Thus,
on the admitted or undisputed facts, only one view
was possible. The case would fall within the
exception noted in S.L.Kapoor's case. We, therefore,
hold that no prejudice has been caused to the officer
for want of notice under Rule 5(8)(i). We hold against
Mr. Mansoor Ali Khan under Point 5.”
8.           Keeping the aforesaid authoritative principles
enunciated by the Hon’ble Apex Court in mind, when we
turn our attention to the facts on hand in general and
particularly the impugned order dated 14.03.2022, it
leaves no manner of doubt in us that impugned order
smacks         of    arbitrariness       inasmuch    as      the         civil
consequences which has flowed from such order has not
only resulted in the valuable rights of the petitioner being
stifled or being taken away by virtue of petitioner having
been blacklisted and the money of petitioner being
forfeited under impugned order. Thus, impugned order
which is in violation of principles of natural justice cannot
be sustained.
9.             The Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Rajesh
Kumar vs. CIT, reported in 2007 (2) SCC 181, has held
that in any event when civil consequences ensue, there is
hardly any distinction between an administrative order
and a quasi-judicial order, and principles of natural
justice are attracted in both the situations.
10.            In the matter of M/s.Ashoka Smokeless Coal
Ind. P. Ltd. and others vs. Union of India and others,
reported in 2007 (2) SCC 640, the Hon’ble Apex Court
has held that some right which is likely to be affected by
any act of the administration, including a legitimate
expectation if attracted to the facts of a case would
necessarily be held as in violation of principles of natural
justice if such action was not preceded by personal
hearing or issuance of show cause notice.
11.            Thus, from the aforesaid analysis of case-laws,
two principles would emerge namely (i) Nemo in propria
causa judex, esse debet - no one should be made a judge
in his own cause or the rule against bias and (ii)                Audi
alteram partem - hear the other party or the rule of fair
hearing, or the rule no one should be contemned
unheard. In the instant case, the authority which has
passed the impugned order has relied upon the complaint
dated 08.03.2022 to blacklist the petitioner which notice
had been replied by petitioner and reply was also
accepted by the authority. Yet, for reasons best known,
respondent has reiterated the contents of the said notice
in the impugned order and same is used against
petitioner while passing the impugned order. In other
words, petitioner did not have the opportunity to explain
the circumstances or narrate the sequential facts, so as to
stave off the consequences flowing from the proposed
action of the respondent. In the absence of any material
being available on record and the fair submission made
by   Shri       K.M.Antani,    learned        Assistant     Government
Pleader that there was no show cause notice issued and
hearing afforded to petitioner before the impugned order
came to be passed, we have to necessarily hold that the
impugned order has been passed in violation of principles
of natural justice.
12.           For the reasons aforestated, we proceed to pass
(i)        Special Civil Application is allowed.
(ii)        Order dated 14.03.2022 (Annexure-A) is
quashed. Same is ordered to be treated as a show
cause notice and petitioner shall submit his reply
to the same within 10 days from today and the
respondent authority shall adjudicate the same
by affording a personal hearing to petitioner and
conclude the proceedings expeditiously at any
rate within an outer limit of 4 weeks from today.
(iii)         It is made clear that quashing of the
impugned order would not entitle petitioner to
commence           or continue        with  the     activities
entrusted to him under the office order dated
23.04.2021 and it would be subject to the
decision that would be taken by the respondent
authority.