1.     This writ petition has been preferred assailing a chargesheet dated 09
March 2015. In terms of the aforesaid chargesheet, the petitioner who was
an Executive Director under the respondents was proposed to be proceeded
against in disciplinary proceedings in accordance with the provisions made
in Rules 28 and 30 of the Power Finance Corporation Limited (Conduct
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                          Page 1 of 35
Discipline and Appeal) Rules1.        In the alternative, the petitioner has
prayed for quashing of the orders dated 22 and 31 July 2015. The petitioner
had questioned the authority of the Enquiry Officer to proceed further in the
matter in light of a perceived bias and an asserted failure to conduct the
enquiry in a fair and impartial manner. The Enquiry Officer who was
appointed at the relevant time was one Mr. Geeta Ram. The petitioner had
alleged that the manner in which the proceedings had been conducted by
Mr. Geeta Ram clearly gave rise to an apprehension of bias and accordingly
moved the respondents to change the Enquiry Officer. The aforesaid prayer
as addressed has been rejected and turned down by the orders of 22 and 31
July 2015. By the time this petition was taken up for hearing, undisputedly
Geeta Ram had ceased to be the Enquiry Officer and, on his passing away,
a new Enquiry Officer had come to be appointed. As a consequence to the
above, the alternative reliefs which are claimed have for all practical
purposes rendered infructuous. That leaves the Court to principally consider
the challenge which is raised to the chargesheet alone. For the purposes of
disposal of the present writ petition, the following essential facts would
merit being noticed.
2.      The petitioner was employed as an Executive Director in the Power
Finance Corporation Limited2. In 2008, PFCL is stated to have
incorporated a wholly owned subsidiary called              Power Finance
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                          Page 2 of 35
Corporation Consulting Limited3.                    Upon the incorporation of the
aforesaid subsidiary, the petitioner was transferred to the newly formed
company as its Chief Executive Officer. The relevant extract of the order
of 31 March 2008 is reproduced hereinbelow: -
Sub.:            Operationalisation of the subsidiary company
for Consultancy Services
Consequent upon the incorporation of a Wholly Owned
Subsidiary of the Corporation, namely PFC Consulting Limited to
promote, organize and carry on Consultancy Services in the related
activities of PFC, the services of Shri N.D. Tyagi, ED (CSG) stands
transferred to the newly formed company on the existing terms and
conditions till further orders with immediate effect. He is designated as
This issues with the approval of the Competent Authority.
3.      On 02 December 2013, the Assistant General Manager (HR) passed
an order transferring the petitioner back to PFCL and posting him as the
Executive Director (Facilitation Group). On 29 October 2014, a show
cause notice came to be issued calling upon the petitioner to explain why
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                                   Page 3 of 35
disciplinary action be not initiated against him in light of various infractions
which had come to be noticed connected with the administration of the
affairs of PFCCL during the period when the petitioner was posted as its
Chief Executive Officer. The allegation in the show cause notice was that
the petitioner had permitted casual staff to travel on outstation tours without
having gotten a transfer / local conveyance / daily allowance policy
approved by the competent authority. It was additionally alleged that the
petitioner had allowed expenditure and payment of travel related charges
claimed by casual staff without having approved or put in place a codified
policy with regard to their entitlement to such benefits. The show cause
notice alleged that the aforesaid infractions amounted to the petitioner
having acted in a manner prejudicial to the interest of the PFCCL. It was in
the aforesaid backdrop that it was proposed that disciplinary action would
be initiated.
4.     Upon consideration of the reply as submitted by the petitioner to the
aforesaid show cause notice, a chargesheet came to be subsequently issued.
On commencement of proceedings, the petitioner as noted above raised a
challenge to the authority of the Enquiry Officer and consequently sought a
change of that officer. On the record is a letter written by the petitioner on
20 July 2015 and in paragraph 4 whereof the petitioner stated thus: -
“4. A plain reading of the Daily Order Sheets (DOSs) issued by Mr.
Geeta Ram, from time to time (copies enclosed for ready reference),
clearly bring out the proven bias of Mr. Geeta Ram and, therefore, he
does not command my confidence, also because of his uncalled for
utterances during the hearings. In these circumstances, 1 request for
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                              Page 4 of 35
change of the Inquiry Officer, Mr. Geeta Ram, on grounds of bias, and
inept handling. I have no qualms to face the inquiry, provided the trial is
free and fair. I, therefore, request you Sir, that the Central Vigilance
Commission (CVC) may be approached for nominating a Commissioner
of Departmental Inquiries (CDl) to conduct the Inquiry.”
5.     Consequent to the respondents refusing the prayer for change of the
Enquiry Officer in terms of the impugned orders of 22 and 31 July 2015,
the instant writ petition came to be instituted before this Court. When the
matter was initially entertained, the Court on 29 September 2015 passed the
“The counter affidavit has been filed by the respondent nos. 1, 2 and 4.
Learned senior counsel for the petitioner seeks some time for filing
rejoinder. Rejoinder be filed within two (2) weeks with advance copy to
counsel for the respondents.
The respondent no.3 is served by speed post, however, ordinary
process has not been received back. None has appeared on behalf of the
respondent no.3. Since ordinary process has not been received back as
such dasti notice be taken by the petitioner for service of respondent no.3,
returnable on 10.12.2015.
Mr. Ravi Sikri, learned Senior Advocate for the petitioner states
that on the last date of hearing, Mr A.S. Chandhiok, Sr. Advocate has
appeared for respondent nos.l, 2 and 4 and stated that he will inform the
Enquiry Officer not to proceed with the enquiry proceedings till the next
date of hearing. Letter to this effect was sent to Enquiry Officer. Same be
continued till the next date of hearing.
Counsel for the respondent nos. 1,2 and 4 submits that the
petitioner is going to retire on 30.11.2015. It is fairly conceded by
Learned Sr. Adv. for the petitioner that even if that is so, since the inquiry
has already been started it has to reach its logical end.
As such, renotify on 10.12.2015.”
6.     It appears that the statement made on behalf of the respondents and
recorded by the Court in the order aforenoted, has continued till date and
thus the enquiry proceedings have not moved forward as a consequence
thereof. On notice being issued on the writ petition, respondents Nos. 1 and
4 have filed their counter affidavits. The writ petition was thereafter and
with the consent of parties taken up for final hearing.
7.     Mr. Gupta, learned Senior Counsel appearing in support of the writ
petition, conceded that insofar as the alternative prayers are concerned, they
would no longer survive in light of the subsequent events and the Enquiry
Officer having changed during the pendency of the present writ petition.
The chargesheet was assailed by Mr. Gupta principally on the following
grounds. Drawing the attention of the Court to the contents of the
chargesheet, it was argued that undisputedly the charges pertain to a period
when the petitioner was serving in PFCCL on deputation. Mr. Gupta
submits that bearing in mind the provisions made in Rules 36 and 37, no
authority or jurisdiction would vest in PFCL to try the petitioner or to
impose penalties for alleged acts of misconduct committed while the
petitioner was posted at PFCCL. Learned Senior Counsel submitted that
undisputedly no proceedings for the alleged infractions were ever initiated
or undertaken by PFCCL. Mr. Gupta has addressed the aforesaid
submissions based on the provisions contained in Rules 36.1, 37.1 and 37.2
which are extracted hereinbelow: -
“36.1 Where an order of suspension is made or disciplinary proceedings
are initiated against an employee, who is on deputation to the
Corporation from the Central or State Government or another Public
Undertaking or a local authority etc., the authority lending his services
(hereinafter referred to as the "Lending Authority") shall forthwith be
informed of the circumstances leading to the order of his/her suspension,
or the commencement of the disciplinary proceedings as the case may be.
37.1 Where the services of an employee are lent to the Government or
any authority subordinate thereto or to any other Public Undertaking etc.,
(hereinafter referred to as the “Borrowing Authority”) the Borrowing
Authority shall have the powers of the Appointing Authority for the
purpose of placing such an employee under suspension and of the
Disciplinary Authority for the purpose of conducting disciplinary
proceedings against him;
Provided that the Borrowing Authority shall forthwith inform Power
Finance Corporation Limited (hereinafter referred to as the “Lending
Authority”) of the circumstances leading to the order of suspension of an
employee or the commencement of the disciplinary proceedings, as the
case may be.
37.2 In the light of the findings of the Inquiring Authority against the
a) If the Borrowing Authority is of the opinion that any of the minor
penalties specified in Rule 28.1 should be imposed on the employee, if
any, after consultation with the Corporation, it make such orders in the
case as it deems necessary:
Provided that in the event of a difference of opinion between the
Borrowing Authority and the Lending Authority, the services of the
employee shall be replaced at the disposal of the Corporation.
b) If the Borrowing Authority is of the opinion that any of the major
penalties specified in Rule 28.2 should be imposed on the employee, it
shall replace his/her services at the disposal of the Corporation and
transmit to it the proceedings of the inquiry for such action as deemed
necessary.
The Disciplinary Authority may make an order under this clause on the
record of inquiry transmitted to it by the Borrowing Authority of by
holding such further inquiry as it may deem necessary, as far as may be,
in accordance with Rules 30, 31 or 32.”
8.      In light of the provisions made in the Rules aforenoted, Mr. Gupta
submits that PFCCL which was the “Borrowing Authority” alone would
have had the authority and jurisdiction to commence disciplinary
proceedings in respect of the alleged misdemeanors. It was submitted that a
bare perusal of Rule 37.1 would establish that the Borrowing Authority is
conferred all powers of the appointing authority for the purposes of placing
an employee under suspension in contemplation of disciplinary proceedings
as also to initiate such proceedings if circumstances so warrant. According
to Mr. Gupta, any action that could have possibly been taken or initiated in
respect of the alleged acts of misconduct pertaining to the period when the
petitioner had remained on deputation in PFCCL, could have thus been
initiated by that entity alone.
9.      Mr. Gupta then submits that the entire material on the basis of which
disciplinary action has been initiated would be in the possession of PFCCL.
Learned Senior Counsel submitted that the decision to initiate disciplinary
action would necessarily stem from the competent authority in PFCCL
being satisfied on a consideration of the material and evidence gathered that
such action is warranted. According to Mr. Gupta, in the absence of any
such decision having been arrived at by the competent authority in PFCCL,
the impugned chargesheet and all proceedings initiated pursuant thereto
must be held to be wholly without jurisdiction, arbitrary and illegal. Mr.
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                                  Page 8 of 35
Gupta, in this connection has also referred to Rule 30.2 to submit that the
formation of opinion of an imperative to enquire into an imputation of
misconduct is a pre-condition for initiation of disciplinary proceedings
under the Rules. According to Mr. Gupta, since no opinion was ever
formed in this respect by the competent authority in PFCCL, the action as
initiated against the petitioner is liable to be quashed. For the purposes of
evaluating the merits of the aforenoted contention, Rule 30.2 is extracted
“30.2 Whenever the disciplinary authority is of the opinion that there are
grounds for inquiring into the truth of any imputation of misconduct or
misbehaviour against an employee, it may itself inquire into, or appoint
any officer of the Corporation or any other public servant or retired
public servant (hereinafter called the Inquiring Authority) to inquire into
the truth thereof.”
10.     Mr. Gupta submits that the issues raised in the present writ have been
conclusively decided by the Madhya Pradesh High Court in B.L. Satyarthi
Vs. State of M.P.4 Taking the Court in some detail through the decision
rendered by the Division Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court, Mr.
Gupta submitted that Rule 20 of the Madhya Pradesh Civil Services (CCA)
Rules, 1966 is pari materia with the provisions of Rule 37.1. He drew the
attention of the Court to the following principles as were laid down in B.L.
“10. The moot question is as to whether the procedure contemplated
under Rule 20 as reproduced hereinabove is applicable only when the
employee continues on deputation or can be invoked even after the period
of deputation is over or the employee is repatriated back to his parent
department.
11. In the case of Shiv Prasad Pandey (supra) the employee was working
in the Police Department and while so serving he was deployed to work
on deputation with the Border Security Force. While working in the
Border Security Force because of certain offence committed by him, he
was put to trial in accordance to the Border Security Force's Act much
after he was repatriated back to the Police Department. It was held by the
Supreme Court that on his repatriation to the Police services, he ceases to
be an officer of the Border Security Force from the date of his
repatriation and therefore, he cannot be subjected to taking any action
under the Border Security Force's Act. However, in the present case the
Rules are different, and the action was taken after the repatriation from
the Corporation.
12. Rule 20 of Madhya Pradesh Civil Services (CCA) Rules, 1966 as
applicable to the State of Madhya Pradesh and reproduced hereinabove
gives power to the borrowing department to take disciplinary action
against a Government servant who is on deputation and the powers to the
appointing authority and the Disciplinary Authority are conferred on the
borrowing department. The Rule contemplates that the borrowing
department shall have the powers of the Appointing Authority for the
purpose of placing the government servant under suspension and for
taking disciplinary action against him but the proviso contemplates that
the action taken has to be forthwith communicated to the parent
Department. When power is given to any authority to suspend a
Government servant or initiate disciplinary action against him an
assumption has to be drawn that the power can be exercised so long as
the relationship of master and servant, employer and employee subsists or
the contract of employment is in existence. Once the relationship of
master and servant or employer and employee or the contract of service
itself comes to an end, the question would be as to how disciplinary
action or power to suspend can be exercised by an authority with whom
the contract of employment of the employee concerned is no more in
existence. Rule 20 therefore, has to be interpreted by holding that the
power conferred under Rule 20 to the borrowing department or authority
to suspend a Government servant or to take a disciplinary action against
him can be exercised only if the relationship of master and servant or the
contract of employment between the borrowing department and the
deputationist employee subsists. When an employee who is a government
servant and holds a lien in a Government department is sent on
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                                   Page 10 of 35
deputation to Foreign Department or a Corporation, then during the
period of deputation a temporary contract of service is brought into force
between the borrowing department and the employee concerned and so
long as its contract of employment subsists the borrowing department can
invoke the provision of Rule 20 but once the employee is repatriated back
to the foreign department then the contract of employment temporarily
created during the period of deputation ceases and if that be the position,
then the borrowing department does not have any authority to take action
against the employee concerned. Apart from the above a perusal of Rule
20(2) and the proviso to Rule 20(2)(i) and (iii) also clarifies the position.
After the departmental proceeding initiated by the Borrowing Department
is completed and the finding of enquiry is recorded, in the light of the
finding if the Borrowing Department wants to impose any of the penalties
specified in clause (i) to (iv) of Rule 10, then after consultation with the
lending department the punishment can be imposed. However, the
proviso to Rule 20(2)(i) indicates that if there is any difference of opinion
between the Borrowing Department and lending department that the
service of the employee has to be replaced at the disposal of the lending
department. This clearly shows that action under these Rules can be taken
only when the employee is on deputation not otherwise as the stipulation
in proviso to Rule 20(2)(i) speaks about replacement of the employee to
the lending department. Similarly in Rule 20(2)(i) and proviso thereto
also it is clearly provided that if the punishment to be imposed is a major
punishment as provided in Rule 10(v) to (ix), then the employee has to be
replaced to the lending department and it is only the lending department
which can take action. The stipulation in this part of the rule for
replacement of the employee to the parent department clearly indicates
the intention of the rule maker. In case Rule 20 was applicable to a
employee who is already repatriated to the parent (lending) department
then the provision for replacement of the employee to the lending
department as contained in both the provisos to Rule 20(2)(i)(iii) would
not provide for replace the service of the government employee to the
lending department. This in our considered view would be the
interpretation which can be given to the powers that may be exercised by
the borrowing department under Rule 20.
13. We are fortified in our aforesaid reasoning and the aforesaid finding
if we take note of a decision and Circular of the Government of India in
the Ministry of Human Affairs in the matter of taking disciplinary action
under the provisions of Rule 20 of the Central Services (Classification,
Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965. Rule 20 of the Central Services
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                                      Page 11 of 35
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 is pari materia and
identical to the provisions of Rule 20 of M.P. Civil Services
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1966 and while clarifying the
powers available to the borrowing department for taking action against an
employee lent to the service of Central Government by any other State
Government or local authority, the Central Government has clarified the
position in the Circular being File No. : 7/9/62: Ests. (A) and it is
stipulated in the said Circular that Rule 20 is not applicable for the
purpose of instituting departmental proceedings on a State Government
servant whose services were borrowed by the Central Government has
since been replaced or been repatriated back to the State Government.
The Circular contemplates that in such cases, the concerned Ministry or
department of the Central Government, where the employee was on
deputation may complete the preliminary enquiry as may be considered
necessary and thereafter forward the relevant records to the State
Government for instituting departmental proceedings and for taking
further action. That is the procedure contemplated by the Central
Government for taking action under Rule 20 of the Central Services
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 and if the aforesaid
procedure contemplated by the Central Government is evaluated in the
light of principles discussed by us herein above, we find that this is the
only interpretation that can be given to the provisions of Rule 20 of M.P.
14. Somewhat similar situation was considered by the Madras High Court
also in the case of K. Kanagasabapathy v. City Supply Officer,
Civil, (1978) 1 MLJ 184. In that case also the disciplinary proceedings
were initiated by the borrowing department after the employee was
repatriated to the parent department and it was held by the Madras High
Court in the aforesaid case that after the employee had left the borrowing
department and had gone back to the parent department, officers of the
borrowing department had no jurisdiction to take any disciplinary
proceeding against him. It is held that the power is made available to the
borrowing department only so long as the concerned officer is serving in
the said department but not after he had gone back to the parent
department.
15. Keeping in view the aforesaid principle also, we find that the action
taken by the Madhya Pradesh Rajya Van Vikas Nigam for initiating
departmental enquiry in the matter is unsustainable once the employee
namely the appellant herein was repatriated back to the parent
department.”
11.    Mr. Chandhiok, learned Senior Counsel who appeared on behalf of
PFCCL, while controverting the aforenoted submissions argued that the
writ petition is clearly premature since all that is challenged at this stage is a
chargesheet. Mr. Chandhiok submits that in the absence of any
jurisdictional challenge to the authority of the respondents to proceed
against the petitioner departmentally, the writ petition itself would not be
maintainable and is liable to be dismissed. According to learned Senior
counsel, the posting of the petitioner in PFCCL was merely a transfer. Mr.
Chandhiok submits that although PFCCL was incorporated as a wholly
owned subsidiary, disciplinary and administrative control over officers and
employees of PFCL whose services had been lent continued to remain with
the respondent No.1. He refers to the fact that a perusal of the Annual
Reports and Accounts of PFCL would show that the income and turnover of
PFCCL was published in a compendious form establishing and indicating
that the respondent No.4 was merely a constituent of respondent No.1. Mr.
Chandhiok invited the attention of the Court to the original order of transfer
of the petitioner to submit that it clearly evidences that the services of the
petitioner had merely been lent on transfer to PFCCL. It is further pointed
out that the documents which have been placed on the record by the
respondents would establish that no independent control, administrative or
otherwise, was exercised by PFCCL over employees of PFCL.                   This,
according to him, is evident from the fact that the PFCL maintained a
common seniority list in respect of all employees working in PFCL and
PFCCL. Mr. Chandhiok further pointed out that common promotion orders
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                            Page 13 of 35
used to be issued for employees of PFCL and PFCCL and that too by the
competent authority of the first respondent.        It was submitted that the
petitioner himself in his letter of 20 July 2015 admitted that the Chairman
and Managing Director of PFCL was the competent Disciplinary Authority.
According to Mr. Chandhiok, once the jurisdiction of the Chairman and
Managing Director of PFCL to act as the Disciplinary Authority was
conceded, it was clearly not open to the petitioner to question the
chargesheet or the disciplinary proceedings initiated.          Mr. Chandhiok
referring to the aforesaid letter further submitted that a reading of paragraph
4 of the said communication itself indicates that all that the petitioner had
questioned was the alleged inept handling of disciplinary proceedings by
Mr. Geeta Ram and the failure of the said Enquiry Officer to conduct
proceedings in a fair and unbiased manner. Mr. Chandhiok lays stress on
the own admission of the petitioner who had asserted in that
communication itself that subject to the Enquiry Officer being changed, he
would otherwise have no objection to face the enquiry provided it was
conducted in a free and fair manner.
12.    The learned ASG, while reiterating the submissions noted above, has
contended that once the petitioner had in unequivocal terms recognised the
authority of the Managing Director of PFCL to initiate proceedings, the
challenge to the chargesheet is liable to be negatived on that score alone.
The learned ASG submitted that as is evident from the own letters
submitted by the petitioner before the respondents, the solitary objection
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                            Page 14 of 35
which was taken was with respect to the lack of impartiality as exhibited by
Mr. Geeta Ram, the then Enquiry Officer. Learned ASG laid emphasis on
the letter of the petitioner dated 20 July 2015 to submit that he himself had
in clear and unequivocal terms stated that he would have no “qualms to
face the enquiry” provided it was conducted in a free and fair manner. It
was submitted that the petitioner had prior to the filing of the present writ
petition not raised any objection with respect to the authority of PFCL to
initiate enquiry proceedings. In the aforesaid background, learned ASG
would submit that the instant writ petition is clearly a misconceived foray
and is liable to be dismissed.
13.     Proceeding further, learned ASG would submit that a challenge to a
chargesheet can only be countenanced if it be based on a jurisdictional
question raised and relating to the competence of the Disciplinary Authority
to initiate proceedings or on grounds that no enquiry could be initiated
under the Rules that may apply. Taking the Court through the material
placed on the record, learned ASG submits that the petitioner had not raised
any objection either with respect to the jurisdiction of the Disciplinary
Authority or to the initiation of proceedings under the relevant Rules. It was
submitted that the enquiry proceedings which had been validly initiated
have come to be stalled in light of the interim order which operates on this
writ petition and which position has continued for over seven years even
though the solitary grievance which was raised by the petitioner, namely the
conduct of proceedings by Mr. Geeta Ram, had itself ceased to exist long
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                           Page 15 of 35
back. Learned ASG further reiterated the submission that in terms of the
administrative arrangement which stood put in place, the employees of
PFCL were merely lent and transferred to PFCCL.
14.     Learned ASG then submitted that the aforesaid transfer of employees
could not be termed or viewed as a deputation. He also referred to the
undisputed fact that a common seniority list used to be maintained for all
employees working in PFCL and PFCCL. The lack of any dichotomy
between the two entities was also sought to be underlined on the basis of a
common Employees Provident Fund which was maintained by PFCL itself.
Learned ASG further urged that the concept of deputation involves three-
way consent, namely, of the authority lending the services of their
employees, the borrowing authority as well as the consent of the employee
concerned. To buttress his submission, he pressed into aid the following
principles as enunciated by the Supreme Court in Umapati Choudhry Vs.
“8. Deputation can be aptly described as an assignment of an employee
(commonly referred to as the deputationist) of one department or cadre
or even an organisation (commonly referred to as the parent department
or lending authority) to another department or cadre or organisation
(commonly referred to as the borrowing authority). The necessity for
sending on deputation arises in public interest to meet the exigencies of
public service. The concept of deputation is consensual and involves a
voluntary decision of the employer to lend the services of his employee
and a corresponding acceptance of such services by the borrowing
employer. It also involves the consent of the employee to go on
deputation or not. In the case at hand all the three conditions were
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                                    Page 16 of 35
fulfilled. The University, the parent department or lending authority, the
Board, the borrowing authority and the appellant, the deputationist, had
all given their consent for deputation of the appellant and for his
permanent absorption in the establishment of the borrowing authority.
There is no material to show that the deputation of the appellant was
not in public interest or it was vitiated by favouritism or mala fide. The
learned Single Judge in the previous writ petition had neither quashed
the deputation order nor issued any direction for its termination. Indeed
the learned Single Judge had dismissed the writ petition. No material
has been placed before us to show that between November 1987 when
the judgment of the Single Judge was rendered and December 1991
when the Division Bench disposed of the writ petition filed by the
appellant the petitioners of the previous case had raised any grievance
or made any complaint regarding non-compliance with the directions
made in the judgment of the learned Single Judge. In these
circumstances the Division Bench was clearly in error in declining to
grant relief to the appellant. Further, the appellant has, in the meantime,
retired from service, and therefore, the decision in the case is relevant
only for the purpose of calculating his retiral benefits.”
15.     Proceeding along these lines he also placed reliance on the following
pertinent observations as made by the Supreme Court in State of Punjab
18. The concept of “deputation” is well understood in service law and
has a recognised meaning. “Deputation” has a different connotation in
service law and the dictionary meaning of the word “deputation” is of
no help. In simple words “deputation” means service outside the cadre
or outside the parent department. Deputation is deputing or transferring
an employee to a post outside his cadre, that is to say, to another
department on a temporary basis. After the expiry period of deputation
the employee has to come back to his parent department to occupy the
same position unless in the meanwhile he has earned promotion in his
parent department as per the Recruitment Rules. Whether the transfer is
outside the normal field of deployment or not is decided by the
authority who controls the service or post from which the employee is
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                                       Page 17 of 35
transferred. There can be no deputation without the consent of the
person so deputed and he would, therefore, know his rights and
privileges in the deputation post. The law on deputation and repatriation
is quite settled as we have also seen in various judgments which we
have referred to above. There is no escape for the respondents now to
go back to their parent departments and working there as Constables or
Head Constables as the case may be.
16.    Turning then to the relevant Rules which had been pressed into aid, it
was submitted that a reading of Rule 37.1 would clearly establish that it
would only operate as long as an officer or employee of PFCL was posted
and working in PFCCL. Learned ASG submits that the moment the
petitioner came to be repatriated and stood transferred back to PFCL, it was
the Disciplinary Authority of PFCL who alone could be recognised as
having the power to proceed against the petitioner departmentally. Mr.
Sharma submits that Rule 37.1 cannot possibly be read as empowering the
Borrowing Authority to institute disciplinary proceedings against an officer
or employee even after his repatriation to the Lending Authority.
17.    The learned ASG submitted that the decision in B.L. Satyarthi far
from lending credence to the submissions advanced on behalf of the
petitioner, is an authority which is liable to be read in favour of the stand
taken by the respondents here. The learned ASG submitted that B.L.
Satyarthi had in fact held against the Corporation, there which had taken
disciplinary measures even after the deputation of the appellant before that
Court had come to an end, would have no jurisdiction to initiate
disciplinary action. In view of the above, it was contended that the said
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                                   Page 18 of 35
decision in fact reinforces the submissions addressed on behalf of the
respondents in the present petition.
18.    Having heard learned counsels for parties, the Court at the outset
notes that undisputedly Mr. Geeta Ram against whom allegations of bias
and unfair conduct was laid, is no longer the Enquiry Officer. Viewed in
that background it is evident that the alternative reliefs which are sought
need no longer be considered or evaluated. That only leaves the Court to
consider the submissions addressed on the anvil of Rule 37.1 and to
examine whether the petitioner is correct when he contends that
proceedings in respect of alleged acts of misdemeanour committed while he
was posted in PFCCL cannot be validly tried by the competent authority in
PFCL. However before proceeding to do so, it would be apposite to deal
with some of the additional submissions which have been raised by the
respondents.
19.    In the considered view of this Court, the respondents have rightly
contended that ordinarily a writ petition challenging a chargesheet would
not be liable to be entertained unless there be a jurisdictional challenge to
the initiation or continuance of disciplinary proceedings. Both Mr.
Chandiok as well as the learned ASG have vehemently urged that the only
objection which was raised when the writ petition was preferred was with
respect to the competence of the then Enquiry Officer. It was submitted that
the petitioner had himself submitted that he would have no “qualms” to
participate in the enquiry so long as the Enquiry Officer was replaced.
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                          Page 19 of 35
However and notwithstanding the above, since Mr. Gupta has raised two
fundamental questions pertaining to the validity of the enquiry proceedings
and respective counsels have been heard at great length on the same, it
would appear to be expedient to answer the questions raised on merits
rather than relegating the petitioner to raise those issues either before the
respondents or the Enquiry Officer. The Court also bears in mind the long
pendency of the writ petition on the board of this Court and therefore the
imperative to finally lend a quietus to the controversy which is raised. The
issue is thus answered accordingly.
20.     The Court then notes that both Mr. Chandiok as well as the learned
ASG had raised the issue of a compendious Annual Report of PFCL and
PFCCL as being liable to be read as evidence of the two corporations in a
sense not being separate entities. The Court finds itself unable to sustain the
submission as advanced along the aforesaid lines for the following reasons.
A subsidiary, even if it be a wholly owned subsidiary, upon incorporation
under statute is and has always been recognised to be a separate legal entity.
The act of incorporation gives birth to a distinct legal entity and is so
recognised in law. While there cannot possibly be a doubt with respect to
this well settled legal proposition, the Court deems it appropriate to advert
to the following pertinent observations as made by the Supreme Court in
Vodafone International Holdings BV Vs. Union of India7:-
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                           Page 20 of 35
71. In the thirteenth century, Pope Innocent IV espoused the theory of the legal
fiction by saying that corporate bodies could not be excommunicated because
they only exist in abstract. This enunciation is the foundation of the separate
entity principle.
75. The common law jurisdictions do invariably impose taxation against a
corporation based on the legal principle that the corporation is “a person” that
is separate from its members. It is the decision of the House of Lords in
Salomon v. Salomon and Co. Ltd. [1897 AC 22: (1895-99) All ER Rep 33
(HL)] that opened the door to the formation of a corporate group. If a “one
man” corporation could be incorporated, then it would follow that one
corporation could be a subsidiary of another. This legal principle is the basis of
holding structures.
101. A company is a separate legal persona and the fact that all its shares are
owned by one person or by the parent company has nothing to do with its
separate legal existence. If the owned company is wound up, the liquidator, and
not its parent company, would get hold of the assets of the subsidiary. In none
of the authorities have the assets of the subsidiary been held to be those of the
parent unless it is acting as an agent. Thus, even though a subsidiary may
normally comply with the request of a parent company it is not just a puppet of
the parent company. The difference is between having power or having a
persuasive position. Though it may be advantageous for parent and subsidiary
companies to work as a group, each subsidiary will look to see whether there
are separate commercial interests which should be guarded.
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                                   Page 21 of 35
257. The legal relationship between a holding company and WOS is that they
are two distinct legal persons and the holding company does not own the assets
of the subsidiary and, in law, the management of the business of the subsidiary
also vests in its Board of Directors. In Bacha F. Guzdar v. CIT [AIR 1955 SC
74] , this Court held that shareholders' only right is to get dividend if and when
the company declares it, to participate in the liquidation proceeds and to vote at
the shareholders' meeting. Refer also to Carew and Co. Ltd. v. Union of India
[(1975) 2 SCC 791] and Carrasco Investments Ltd. v. Directorate of
258. Holding company, of course, if the subsidiary is a WOS, may appoint or
remove any Director if it so desires by a resolution in the general body meeting
of the subsidiary. Holding companies and subsidiaries can be considered as
single economic entity and consolidated balance sheet is the accounting
relationship between the holding company and subsidiary company, which
shows the status of the entire business enterprises. Shares of stock in the
subsidiary company are held as assets on the books of the parent company and
can be issued as collateral for additional debt financing. Holding company and
subsidiary company are, however, considered as separate legal entities, and
subsidiary is allowed decentralised management. Each subsidiary can reform
its own management personnel and holding company may also provide expert,
efficient and competent services for the benefit of the subsidiaries.
259. The US Supreme Court in United States v. Bestfoods [141 L Ed 2d 43 :
524 US 51 (1998)] explained that it is a general principle of corporate law and
legal systems that a parent corporation is not liable for the acts of its
subsidiary, but the Court went on to explain that corporate veil can be pierced
and the parent company can be held liable for the conduct of its subsidiary, if
the corporal form is misused to accomplish certain wrongful purposes, when
the parent company is directly a participant in the wrong complained of. Mere
ownership, parental control, management, etc. of a subsidiary is not sufficient
to pierce the status of their relationship and, to hold parent company liable. In
Adams v. Cape Industries Plc. [1990 Ch 433 : (1990) 2 WLR 657 : (1991) 1
All ER 929 (CA)] , the Court of Appeal emphasised that it is appropriate to
pierce the corporate veil where special circumstances exist indicating that it is
mere facade concealing true facts.
21.    Insofar as the impact of the accounts of both the companies
appearing in a common Annual Account statement is concerned, it becomes
pertinent to note that the same was in accordance with the statutory
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                                     Page 22 of 35
mandate of the provisions contained in the erstwhile Companies Act, 1956.
Nothing worthwhile can be read or deduced from the aforesaid fact except
to hold that the disclosures with respect to the accounts and turnover of
PFCCL was inserted in the Annual Report of PFCL in compliance with
statutory provisions. Additionally, regard must also be had to the well
recognised exceptions when the corporate veil of a corporate entity is liable
to be pierced or lifted. This position was recognised and explained by our
Court in Freewheels (P) Ltd. Vs. Dr. Veda Mittra8 as follows: -
“Mr. P.N. Lekhi and Mr. K.K. Jain, the learned counsels for the
respondents, contended that if I tear as under the corporate veil of the
subsidiary-company it will lead me to an inescapable conclusion that the
subsidiary company is, in fact, not a separate entity but merely an agent
or trustee of the holding company, so that the assets of the subsidiary
company are really the assets of the holding company. The learned
counsel contended that the development and growth of corporations and
the necessity of striking a balance between the theory of indoor
management by the corporations and the public gaze and control in the
corporate sector had led the courts to tear the veil woven by Salomon v.
Salomon and Co., (1897) A.C. 22 and the present day tendency of the
courts is to peep deeper into the matter to find out whether or not the
subsidiary company is, in fact a separate legal entity. It is true that
Salomon's case has, in certain spheres of commercial enterprise suffered
a demise at the hands of Legislature and the Companies Act has made
various provisions qualifing the rule that each company constitutes a
separate legal entity. The most striking examples of such qualifications
lie in the provisions relating to accounts, which provisions have been
designed primarily to give better information of the accounts and
financial position of the group as a whole to the creditors, shareholders
and the public. The learned Single Judge has dealt with those provisions,
and it is not necessary to very much elaborate on the same. Section 212
inter alia requires each holding company attach to its balance sheet a
copy of the balance-sheet and profit and loss accounts of the subsidiary
company, copies of the reports of the subsidiary company Board of
Directors and Auditors, and a statement of the holding company's interest
in the subsidiary company. The said provision enjoins the holding
company to disclose diverse other informations with its balance sheet.
Sub-Section (5) of the section 212 deals with a situation where the
financial year of a subsidiary company does not coincide with the
financial year of the holding company and requires the disclosure of
information regarding changes in holding company's interest in the
subsidiary company between the end of the financial year of the
subsidiary and the end of the holding company's financial year, and
details of any material changes which may have occurred between the
end of the financial year of the subsidiary and the end of the holding
company's financial year in respect of the subsidiary's fixed assets, its
investments, the moneys lent by it, and the moneys borrowed by it.
Towards the same end are directed the provisions of section 214. Section
31 deprives a director of the holding company of his rights to
compensation for loss of office if he has been guilty of fraud etc. in the
conduct of the affairs of the subsidiary company. Similarly, company
may by a special resolution remove its managing agent from office for
gross negligence in or for gross mismanagement of the affairs of the
subsidiary company (Section 338). These provisions inter alia indicate
the leaning of the Legislature to treat all companies within a group as part
of the same entity as against the arbitrary unit-wise distinction of each
company. To that extent, it will not be incorrect to say, as suggested by
the learned counsel for the respondents, that the Legislature has itself rent
the veil of protection thrown round corporations by the house of Lords in
Salomon's case. There are, however, limitations to rending the veil, and
the Court will not do so except for specific purposes and when compelled
by the clear words of the statute. The Law Reports abound with decisions
showing the tendency of the different Courts to tear the veil in varying
circumstances. For instance, in Apthorpe v. Peter Schoenhofen Brewing
Co., (1889) 4 T.C. 41 the finding of fact arrived at by the Commissioners
that the property ostensibly in the name of the New York Company was,
in fact, that of the English Company liable to English income-tax on the
ground that the business was being carried on partly in London was
upheld. Again, in some cases the Courts have come to the conclusion that
the subsidiary company was merely an agent of the holding company. It
may not be possible to put in a strait jacket of judicial definition as to
when the subsidiary Company can really be treated as a branch, or an
agent, or a trustee of the holding company. Each case must necessarily
turn on its own facts. Circumstances, such as, the profits of the subsidiary
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                                     Page 24 of 35
company being treated as those of the parent company, the control and
conduct of business of the subsidiary company resting completely in the
nominees of the holding company, and the brain behind the trade of the
subsidiary company being really the holding company, may indicate that
in fact the subsidiary company is only a branch of the holding company.
Basically, however, the fundamental concept must always to kept in view
that each company is a distinct legal entity. Again the purpose for which
the veil has to be rent must be kept in view, and the doctrine of the
tearing of the veil cannot be blindly extended to each and every purpose.
It is unnecessary to elaborate on this aspect any more, as here the parent
company holds only a nominal majority in the share capital of the
subsidiary, which holding is 52 per cent. With that meagre majority alone
I am not prepared to hold, even if it were possible to do so for such a
purpose, that the subsidiary company has lost its indentity as a separate
legal entity. Mr. Lekhi went to the extent of saying that not only for this
purpose but in all cases a subsidiary company must be treated as an asset
of the holding company. This contention is beyond the reach of sustained
argument. I am, in the circumstances, of the opinion that the subsidiary
company has neither lost its identity nor merged itself into a group
consisting of the parent company and the subsidiary company. If Mr.
Lekhi's argument were to be accepted then each subsidiary company will,
crack not only under the pressure of its own uncongenial shareholders,
which may invariably exist in every company, but also of the pressure of
the shareholders and creditors of the holding company.”
22.    In any case, this Court finds no justification to hold against the
petitioner on the aforesaid score since the validity of the disciplinary
proceedings must firstly be answered in the backdrop of the Rules which
apply. The submission of PFCCL being a mere agent of PFCL based on
common published accounts, a joint seniority list, a common Provident
Fund structure would be factors which may have been of relevance if the
Court were to find that the disciplinary proceedings cannot be sustained on
the anvil of Rule 37.1. However, the Court finds that the challenge to the
disciplinary proceedings as urged on the basis of the Rules which apply, is
liable to be negatived for reasons which stand recorded hereinafter.
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                                   Page 25 of 35
23.    Rule 37.1 deals with a situation where an employee lent by PFCL to
PFCCL may be found to have committed acts of misconduct and thus
warranting disciplinary proceedings being initiated. The aforesaid Rule on
its plain reading would apply to the trial of allegations of misconduct
committed by an officer or employee of PFCL while he is still serving
under PFCCL, the Borrowing Authority. In order to meet such an exigency
Rule 37.1 prescribes that the Borrowing Authority shall have the powers of
the Appointing Authority for the purposes of placing such an employee
under suspension and for conducting disciplinary proceedings. Rule 37.2(a)
then proceeds to mandate that if the Borrowing Authority comes to the
conclusion that a minor penalty is liable to be imposed, it may after
consultation with the Lending Authority make such orders as circumstances
may warrant. Significantly Rule 37.2(b), on the other hand, prescribes that
if the Borrowing Authority were to form the opinion that the misconduct
would warrant the imposition of a major penalty, it would transmit the
relevant proceedings of the enquiry to the Lending Authority leaving it
open to it to take such action as may be deemed necessary. The Explanation
to Rule 37.2(b) provides that upon receipt of the records of enquiry which
may have been undertaken, the Disciplinary Authority may proceed to pass
such further orders as may be justified in the facts and circumstances of the
case. It further leaves it open to the Disciplinary Authority of the lending
entity to independently conduct an enquiry as contemplated under Rules 30,
31 and 32. A holistic reading of Rules 37.1 and 37.2 would establish that
the Borrowing Authority has been conferred the jurisdiction to proceed
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                           Page 26 of 35
departmentally against an officer or employee whose services are lent to it
and exercise the very same powers which may otherwise be available to the
Disciplinary Authority      subject only to the caveat that if in those
proceedings it comes to conclude that a major penalty is liable to be
imposed, it would be obliged to transmit the entire proceedings of enquiry
to the Disciplinary Authority of the lending institution for taking further
action in terms of the Explanation noticed above. If on a culmination of the
proceedings as drawn, the competent authority finds that a minor penalty is
liable to be imposed, it stands sufficiently empowered in terms of Rule
37.2(a) to proceed to do so subject to the caveat that the same would have
to be made with due consultation with the Lending Authority.
24.    As this Court construes Rule 37.1, it is evident that the competent
authority in PFCCL would have been entitled to exercise all powers as
otherwise inhering in the Disciplinary Authority of the petitioner during the
period while he was still serving in the said organisation. Those rules
introduce a legal fiction in terms of which the competent authority of the
borrowing entity stands conferred with all powers that are otherwise vested
in the appointing authority of the lending entity. However Rules 37.1 and
37.2 cannot possibly be read as conferring a power or authority on PFCCL
to proceed against the petitioner even after his services stood repatriated to
PFCL. The Court also finds itself unable to sustain the submission of Mr.
Gupta who had contended that no proceedings at all could have been drawn
by PFCL in the absence of any proceedings having been initiated while he
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                           Page 27 of 35
was still serving in PFCCL. This Court is of the firm opinion that an act of
misconduct is always open to be tried by the Disciplinary Authority in
accordance with the Rules which would apply. The Court finds itself
unable to either countenance or accept the submission that since PFCCL
had failed to try the petitioner for the alleged acts of misconduct, that power
would cease to exist once the petitioner reverted to PFCL. An act of
misconduct would be open to be tried by a Disciplinary Authority
notwithstanding the reversion of the petitioner to PFCL. Regard must be
had to the fact that the reversion of the petitioner to PFCL cannot possibly
be construed as either effacing the allegation of the commission of
misconduct nor can it possibly be interpreted as denuding the Disciplinary
Authority to try the allegations of misconduct in accordance with the Rules.
25.    Regard must also be had to the fact that the services of the petitioner
were only temporarily lent to PFCCL. He continued to hold a lien in the
cadre of officers of PFCL. A deputation of an officer or his temporary
placement in a related entity does not sever all relations of master and
servant that exists between the principal employer and that officer or
employee. The services of the petitioner were temporarily assigned to
PFCCL. The order in terms of which the petitioner was posted in PFCCL
cannot possibly be construed or interpreted to embody a termination of his
lien on the permanent post that he held in PFCL. In fact, it was not even the
case of the petitioner that he had acquired a permanent lien on the post of
Chief Executive Officer in PFCCL. The petitioner also did not question his
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                            Page 28 of 35
repatriation to PFCL. The concept of lien and the impact of deputation was
succinctly explained by the Supreme Court in State of Rajasthan Vs. S.N.
Tiwari9 in the following terms:-
“16. It is not the case of the State that the respondent employee was made
permanent as a homoeopathic doctor in ESI Corporation. The respondent
employee did not acquire any lien in ESI Corporation. The question of
termination of lien does not arise since the respondent employee did not
acquire a lien on a permanent post outside the cadre on which he is borne.
17. It is very well settled that when a person with a lien against the post is
appointed substantively to another post, only then he acquires a lien
against the latter post. Then and then alone the lien against the previous
post disappears. Lien connotes the right of a civil servant to hold the post
substantively to which he is appointed. The lien of a government employee
over the previous post ends if he is appointed to another permanent post on
permanent basis. In such a case the lien of the employee shifts to the new
permanent post. It may not require a formal termination of lien over the
previous permanent post.
18. This Court in Ramlal Khurana v. State of Punjab [(1989) 4 SCC 99 :
1989 SCC (L&S) 644 : (1984) 11 ATC 841] observed that: (SCC p. 102,
“8. … Lien is not a word of art. It just connotes the right of a civil servant
to hold the post substantively to which he is appointed.”
19. The term “lien” comes from the Latin term “ligament” meaning
“binding”. The meaning of lien in service law is different from other
meanings in the context of contract, common law, equity, etc. The lien of a
government employee in service law is the right of the government
employee to hold a permanent post substantively to which he has been
permanently appointed. (See Triveni Shankar Saxena v. State of
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                                     Page 29 of 35
20. The High Court upon appreciation of the material available on record
found that lien of the respondent employee always continued in the
Department of Economics and Statistics. His urgent temporary
appointment as homoeopathic doctor vide order dated 3-12-1980 was not a
substantive appointment for any definite period. The mere fact that the
respondent employee continued to work for a long period itself would not
result in loss of lien in the parent Department of Economics and Statistics.
That even after the respondent employee joined as homoeopathic doctor in
ESI Corporation in 1980 the parent department treated the respondent
employee as belonging to its own cadre. We find no infirmity in the order
passed by the High Court.”
26.    The submission of Mr. Gupta with respect to the competence and
jurisdiction to hold a disciplinary enquiry essentially rested on the decision
of the Madhya Pradesh High Court in B.L. Satyarthi. However, in the
considered view of the Court quite far from supporting the case of the
petitioner, that decision in fact would buttress and lend support to the
conclusions recorded hereinabove. It becomes pertinent to note that in B.L.
Satyarthi, the petitioner who was an employee of the Forest Department
had been sent on deputation to the Madhya Pradesh Rajya Van Vikas
Nigam, an autonomous corporation. He continued on deputation in the
Nigam upto 6 November 1989 whereafter he was repatriated to the Forest
Department. The Nigam issued a charge sheet against the petitioner there
after he had been reverted to the Forest Department. It was the validity of
the aforesaid action of the Corporation that led to the litigation.                 The
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                                  Page 30 of 35
Madhya Pradesh High Court while examining the challenge had taken into
consideration the provisions made in Rule 20 of the Madhya Pradesh Civil
Services (CCA) Rules, 1966 which are in pari materia with Rule 37.1.
Upon a consideration of the submissions which were addressed, the High
Court concluded that when an employee who holds a lien in a Government
Department is sent on deputation to either another Department or an
autonomous corporation, a temporary contract of service comes into being
between the borrowing department and the employee concerned. The Court
noted that as long as the said contract of employment subsists, the
borrowing department could invoke the provisions of Rule 20 and initiate
disciplinary proceedings. However, and significantly the Court in B.L.
Satyarthi further observed that once the employee is repatriated back to the
lending department, the contract of employment temporarily created during
the period of deputation ceases and in that situation the borrowing
department would have no authority to take action against the employee
concerned. It also took note of the decision of the Madras High Court in K.
Kanagasabapathy v. City Supply Officer, Civil10 which had also clearly
held that a borrowing department would have no authority to initiate
disciplinary proceedings once the employee stood repatriated. It
accordingly allowed the appeal and while quashing the punishment order
which had been imposed by the Nigam, accorded liberty to transmit the
proceedings of enquiry to the Forest Department for taking further action if
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                         Page 31 of 35
warranted. B.L. Satyarthi thus cannot possibly be read as an authority
which may have laid down a principle supporting the contentions advanced
by Mr. Gupta. In fact, it holds to the contrary and is in consonance with the
conclusions reached by this Court. The Court is thus of the firm opinion
that once the petitioner stood repatriated to PFCL, no action could have
possibly been initiated by PFCCL for alleged acts of misconduct committed
while the petitioner was serving in that organization. In fact once the
petitioner stood repatriated to his original cadre, it was the Disciplinary
Authority of PFCL alone which could have initiated departmental
proceedings against him.
27.    Mr. Gupta had further submitted that in the absence of any requisite
satisfaction having been recorded or reached by the competent authority of
PFCCL, no proceedings could have been initiated by the respondents. It
was also argued that the entire chargesheet rests on material and evidence
which would be with PFCCL. In view of the above, it was contended that
the initiation of disciplinary proceedings suffers from a jurisdictional error.
28.    The Court finds itself unable to either countenance or accept this
contention for the following reasons. As has been found in the preceding
paragraphs of this judgment, the competent authority in PFCCL could have
exercised jurisdiction in this regard only while the petitioner was serving in
that organization. Rules 37.1 and 37.2 put in place and introduce an
impermanent legal fiction which would be deemed to operate only during
the tenure of service rendered by the officer in the borrowing entity.
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                            Page 32 of 35
However, and as has been held hereinabove, once that temporary period of
service comes to an end and the officer reverts to his parent cadre, the
authority in the borrowing department ceases to have jurisdiction or
authority to proceed against the concerned employee. Upon repatriation, it
is the competent authority in the parent body who alone would have the
requisite jurisdiction to form an opinion whether the officer or employee is
liable to be proceeded against departmentally. That discretion and authority
of the competent authority cannot possibly be held to be dependent upon
the formation of opinion by an authority of the borrowing department,
corporation or company. As was noticed hereinbefore, the petitioner did not
lose or surrender his lien in PFCL. His placement in PFCCL was merely a
temporary transfer and placement. Once he came back to the parent
organization, the authority which had been temporarily conferred upon the
borrowing entity in terms of the legal fiction contained in Rule 37.1 ceased
to operate. It was thus the Disciplinary Authority of PFCL alone who could
have taken a decision whether the petitioner was liable to be proceeded with
departmentally for trial of charges of misconduct.
29.    Regard must also be had to the fact that an act of misconduct stands
attached to the officer or employee personally. The fact that the alleged
misdemeanor was committed while the petitioner was serving on deputation
does not detract from the commission of misconduct. An act of alleged
misconduct is a fact which would remain and survive to be tried
notwithstanding the deputation having come to an end. Merely because the
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                          Page 33 of 35
period of deputation may have come to an end, it would not divest the
Disciplinary Authority of PFCL from initiating an enquiry. If the
submission of Mr. Gupta were to be accepted, it would amount to laying
down a principle that misconduct when committed during deputation
cannot be enquired into once the same comes to an end. The Court finds
itself unable to accord a legal imprimatur to the aforenoted submission
bearing in mind the serious repercussions that would ensue if the same were
accepted. This since it would essentially mean that the right of an employer
to enquire into an act of alleged misconduct would stand lost forever merely
because the authority in the borrowing department had failed to initiate
action. The Court finds itself unable to interpret Rules 37.1 and 37.2 as
providing for or envisaging such a consequence. The Court fails to discern
a legal principle which may support this contention. In any case and in light
of the interpretation accorded to the relevant Rules, the Court finds that
PFCL did retain the right to proceed against the petitioner.
30.    The submission that the enquiry proceedings are liable to be
interdicted since the relevant records are available with PFCCL is also
wholly without merit and untenable. The enquiry proceedings would
continue based on the material which has been gathered and is in the
possession of the respondents. The evidence on which the charges are
sought to be established have been duly set out in the chargesheet.
Ultimately, the onus to prove the charges levelled lies upon the
respondents. If there be absence of evidence, they would be unable to prove
W.P. (C) 7741/2015                                           Page 34 of 35
the charge. However, whether sufficient material or evidence exists to
support the charges levelled, is a question which must be left for the
Enquiry Officer to consider. There exists no justification for the Court to go
into this question at this stage especially when that aspect is yet to be
considered by the Enquiry Officer.
31.    Accordingly, and for all the aforesaid reasons, the writ petition fails
and shall stand dismissed.