The petitioner is before this Court calling in
question     entertaining   of   the    proceedings     in
Crl.Misc.361/2020, registered by the respondent-wife
seeking maintenance from the hands of the husband
2.  Heard Sri. Shivanna, learned counsel for the
petitioner and Sri. Umesh B.N., learned       counsel for
3. Brief facts leading to the filing of the present
petition as borne out from the pleadings are as follows:
The petitioner and the respondent get married on
01-11-2016. On the relationship between the petitioner
and the respondent getting strained, respondent- wife
registers a complaint on 7-12-2020 alleging offences
punishable under Sections 498A, 504 read with 34 of
IPC and later on,     prefers Crl.Misc.361/2020 seeking
maintenance from the hands of the husband invoking
Section 125 of the Cr.P.C.
4. The petitioner contends that the petition was
not even maintainable and the Court has declined to
consider these submissions holding the submissions
would be taken note of after hearing the respondent-
wife and while considering the matter for grant of
maintenance or otherwise. At that juncture, petitioner
files  the subject petition seeking quashment of the
entire proceedings instituted under 125 Cr.P.C.
5.  Learned counsel appearing for the        petitioner
would place reliance upon Sub Section 4 of Section 125
Cr.P.C in support of his submission on maintainability.
Sub Section 4 of Section 125 Cr.P.C. reads as follows:
“125. Order for maintenance of wives, children
(1) xxx  xxx xxx
(4) No wife shall be entitled to receive an
allowance for the maintenance or the interim
maintenance and expenses of proceeding, as
the case may be, from her husband under
this section if she is living in adultery, or if,
without any sufficient reason, she refuses to
live with her husband, or if they are living
separately by mutual consent”.
6.   The     submission     of   the   learned    counsel
appearing for petitioner         is that, wife on her own
consent or with the consent of the husband moved out
of matrimonial house and therefore, husband -petitioner
is not liable to pay any maintenance. The said
submission runs counter to the very averments in the
7.    The respondent-wife at paragraph- 5 of the
petition filed under Section 125 Cr.P,C. avers as follows:
“5. It is respectfully submitted that the
father of the petitioner have spent huge amount for
the purpose of engagement, clothes and Marriage
and Reception         of the petitioner with the
respondent and the petitioner parents have given
gold Jewelers to the respondent and petitioner.
The said gold Jewelers within the hand of
respondent. Herewith produced Gold receipts are
marked as Documents No.3 to 6. The Respondent
at the instance has started ill treating he
petitioner; however the petitioner being a Hindu
married wife has tolerated all the harassment
mated out to her by the respondent and his
mother.       That for the last one year the
harassment has so aggravated that the petitioner
could not tolerate the same, and the respondent
at the instance of her mother has drove away the
petitioner to her parental/rent house and refused
to maintain her. It is submitted that the petitioner
knew only household work, and she has no source
of income. Now the petitioner is living at he mercy
of her father house.”
The respondent-wife        narrates about unbearable
harassment and ill-treatment from both by the husband
and mother- in- law has resulted in her going away from
matrimonial house. This can by no stretch                mean
moving away of the wife         by mutual consent for the
petitioner    to   contend    that   proceedings     were  not
8. These submissions were taken note of by the
trial Court in the proceedings on 3-8-2021, the Court
observes as follows:
“Sri. JK Learned counsel for petitioner
present. Respondent present. Respondent has
filed petition U/s 125, 126 of CrPC along with
affidavit contending that he is intending to examine
the petitioner before passing any orders on Interim
The Learned counsel for petitioner has
vehemently argued that the examination of
petitioner for the sake of interim maintenance is not
It is the contention of the Learned counsel for
respondent that his client should not be punished
without examining the petitioner.
Perused the entire record. For the main
petition the respondent has filed detail counter.
Now we are at the stage of hearing on Interim
The proviso to Sec. 125 of CrPC provides
discretion to court          to order for interim
maintenance during the pendency of proceedings
and at this pre matured stage court feels it is not
just to post the matter for examination. So far as
contention of Learned counsel for respondent is
concerned, the granting or non granting interim
maintenance is not at all decided yet. It will be
decided only after giving opportunity of hearing to
both side. Further granting or non granting of
interim maintenance is not punishing any
litigant.     Prima-facie at this juncture petition
shows that petitioner and respondent are not
living together since two year and petitioner is
living      in her maternal house. Hence, the
application filed by the respondent U/s 125 and
126 of CrPC is concerned it will be considered at
the time of hearing on main petition. Hence, the
application filed by the respondent U/s 125 and
126 of CrPC is kept in abeyance as examination of
the parties is not at all necessary for deciding
interim application is maintenance.
Hence posted for hearing.
Heard on application for interim application
by learned counsel for petitioner.
Learned counsel for respondent prays time
for hearing on interim maintenance. Granted.
Call on for hearing as final chance by
9.   Therefore, finding no grounds to interfere at
this juncture, the petition stands dismissed.
In view of the dismissal of the main petition,
prayer ought in I.A.No.1/2022 does not survive for
consideration. Hence, it is disposed of.