The Delhi Police has informed the High Court that it is carrying out periodic checks throughout the national capital to ensure that no barricade remains unmanned and that it will make all possible endeavours to keep all the barricades manned.
Taking noting of the submission, a division bench of Chief Justice Satish Chandra Sharma and Justice Subramonium Prasad disposed of a suo moto public interest litigation registered by the court last year in respect of the unmanned barricades 
A status report was filed by the Delhi Police on January 6 stating that disciplinary action was initiated in 51 cases against concerned staff or SHOs for violating standing order issued in March 2022. 
It added that barricades are being put up at 773 locations, out of which 714 are manned by the police staff and barricades in remaining 59 locations or colonies are being manned by the RWA staff. 
“The Night Checking Officers also check all the barricades placed in the area and if any unmanned barricade is found, information is required to be immediately forwarded to the District Control Room and also to the concerned SHO. The night patrolling staff has also been directed to inform the SHOs about it so that the unmanned barricades are immediately removed,” the report states. 
An assurance was given by DCP South East District regarding strict compliance of the Standing Order issued by the Delhi Police Headquarters and a circular dated September 15, 2022 issued by the Commissioner of Police. 
“In light of the aforesaid, no further orders are required to be passed in the matter. The petition is disposed of, along with pending application(s), if any,” the court said.
A previous status report filed in the matter under the signatures of DCP Legal stated that a detailed standing order was revised, wherein it was instructed that under no circumstances the barricades should be left unmanned.
The order stated that barricades should be removed from the carriageway and footpath when not in use so that they don't cause any traffic hindrance or become a cause of potential hazard for motorists and pedestrians.
Delhi Police had previously also taken the court through to a letter dated March 4, 2022 stating that the staff has been sensitized for ensuring meticulous compliance of directions contained in the standing order.
The Police in September last year informed the court that the complaints relating to unattended barricades can be immediately reported on 112 helpline or Twitter by tagging social media handles of the traffic police.
The matter was registered last year as a PIL on the basis of a letter addressed by one On Prakash Goel. In the letter, which was also addressed to the Prime Minister, grievances were raised with respect to setting up of unmanned barricades in the areas in question.
Om Prakash had argued that such unmanned barricades serve no purpose and are in fact causing blockades of free flow of traffic, resulting in misery and harassment to vehicle owners and general public.
Case Title: COURT ON ITS OWN MOTION V. THE COMMISSIONER OF POLICE AND ORS



