The appellant, being the sole accused in Spl.S.C.No.23 of 2015 on
the file of the Mahalir Neethimandram, Salem, has filed an appeal
aggrieved by the judgment dated 29.06.2018, in and by which, he is found
to be guilty for the offence under Section 6 r/w 5(k) and 5(j)(ii) of the
POCSO Act and under Section 506(i) of the Indian Penal Code.
2. On 19.12.2013, P.W.1, the victim, appeared before P.W.12, the
Sub-Inspector of Police, All Women Police Station, Kondalampatti and
lodged a complaint to the effect that, she is aged about nineteen years and
the appellant who is her neighbor, is aged about thirty years and she got
acquainted with the appellant since she used to go to his house for
watching television and about three months prior to the complaint, at about
10.00 PM in the night, the appellant called the victim for a physical
relationship, when she refused, he forcibly pushed her down on the mud
and since she attempted to shout, stuffed her mouth with a piece of cloth
and had intercourse and since her periods stopped for the passed three
months, when she was going to the medical shop to get some medicines to
Crl.A.No.146 of 2022
abort the foetus, the appellant's sister confronted her and upon which, she
confessed the entire issue to her father and thereafter, the complaint is
being lodged.
3. On the strength of the said complaint, P.W.12 registered a case in
Cr.No.12 of 2013 for the offence under Section 376 and 506 (i) of the
Indian Penal Code. Thereafter, P.W.13 and P.W.14 took up the case for
investigation and during the investigation, since P.W.8, the school
Headmaster, has given a certificate in Exhibit P.6, stating the date of birth
of the child as 19.12.1996 and as per the same, since the girl was less than
eighteen years of age at the time of occurence, the offence was altered into
one under POCSO Act and laid the final report, proposing the appellant
guilty for the offences.
4. Based on the materials on record, the Special Court framed
charges under Sections 363, 366 and 506 (i) of the Indian Penal Code and
under Section 6 r/w 5(k) and 5(j) (ii) of the POCSO Act. Upon being
questioned, the accused denied the charges and stood trial. In order to
bring home the charges, the prosecution examined P.W.1 to P.W.14 and
Crl.A.No.146 of 2022
marked Exhibit P.1 to Exhibit P.25 and also produced M.O.1.
5. By way of cross examination on behalf of the defense, Exhibit
D.1 to Exhibit D.3 were marked. Upon questioning about the material
evidence and the incriminating circumstances on record under Section 313
of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the appellant again denied the same as
false. Thereafter, no evidence was let in on behalf of the defence. The Trial
Court thereafter, proceeded to hear learned Special Public Prosecutor on
behalf of the prosecution and learned counsel for the accused. By the
judgment dated 29.06.2018, while acquitting the accused in respect of
other offences, found the accused guilty for offence under Section 506(i)
of the Indian Penal Code and imposed punishment of rigorous
imprisonment for a period of two years and fine of Rs.2,000/- and in
failing of payment of fine, to undergo three months simple imprisonment
and found the appellant guilty for the offence punishable under Section 6
of the POCSO Act and imposed rigorous imprisonment for a period of ten
years and a fine of Rs.50,000/- and in default of payment of fine, simple
imprisonment for a period of six months. Aggrieved by the same, the
present appeal is laid before this Court.
6. Heard Mr.S.Jevakumar, learned counsel for the appellant and
Mr.S.Vinoth Kumar, learned Government Advocate (Crl. Side) appearing
on behalf of the prosecution.
7. Learned counsel for the appellant, taking this Court through the
evidence on record, firstly would submit that, in this case, even as per the
evidence of P.W.1, the victim girl, she was born on 27.07.1995. In her
chief evidence, she has categorically deposed that she was born only on
27.07.1995. When she was further cross examined by learned counsel for
the accused, she has mentioned the said date of birth and has also
specifically stated that the said date only finds place in all her credentials
namely, the school records, the identity certificate on behalf of the
Disabilities Department and in her horoscope. As a matter of fact, the
identity certificate, issued by the Disabilities Department was marked as
Exhibit D.1 and her disability certificate is marked as Exhibit D.3. Even
the book given to her for granting various benefits under the Disability
Schemes, is also marked as Exhibit D.2. She has categorically stated that
she has obtained the birth certificate and she had even given her transfer
Crl.A.No.146 of 2022
certificate to the police. Therefore, he would submit that, when P.W.1
herself has clearly given her date of birth, which is reflected in some of the
documents and when the prosecution has not treated her hostile to that
effect and cross examined her, the evidence of P.W.1 should be treated as
proof for her own date of birth.
8. Learned counsel would further submit that, on the other hand, the
prosecution even though had examined the Headmaster of the school as
P.W.8, marked only the certificate given by P.W.8, which is neither the
transfer certificate nor any actual school record. Therefore, in the absence
of the same, when the transfer certificate is very much available in the
school, when the prosecution has not categorically established that the date
of birth is 19.02.1996 only, the version of the victim should be taken as
correct and if the same is taken as correct, even for the offence alleged, the
punishment would only be under Section pre-amended 376 of the Indian
Penal code, as it stood before the amendment. He would further submit
that it may be seen that in this case, the case of the prosecution, as if the
offence was committed forcibly cannot be countenanced by wholesome
reading of the complaint, the First Information Report, the earliest
Crl.A.No.146 of 2022
statement given under Section 164 of the Cr.P.C and the evidence of the
victim before the Court. Therefore, would submit that the victim did not
disclose about the offence to anyone and revealed only when she was
unable to hide the pregnancy and as a matter of fact, she has given birth to
the child. He would further submit that the answer of the appellant /
accused for the purpose of questioning about the sentence, he has clearly
stated that the act of intercourse had taken place but, with consent and he
had prayed for lesser amount of punishment. Therefore, relying upon all
the above factors, learned counsel would submit that in this case, the said
mitigating facts have to be taken into consideration while punishing the
accused and prays for minimum punishment.
9. Per contra, learned Government Advocate (Crl. Side) would
submit that this is a case, where the victim was not only a minor child but
also a physically handicapped child. The appellant is a married man,
having two children at the time of occurrence itself. He was thirty years of
age at the time of occurrence. Therefore, the victim has categorically
deposed that she was forced down on the mud and the intercourse had
happened and even the appellant had stuffed her mouth with cloth so as to
Crl.A.No.146 of 2022
prevent her from shouting and therefore, this is a case of grave offence of
rape and therefore, he would submit that maximum punishment should be
imposed on the appellant. He would submit that, the prosecution has to
prove the age of the victim as per Rule 12 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Rules. As per the Rule 12, the prosecution has to
firstly see whether there is SSLC or 12th Std certificate. In the absence of
it, it was for the prosecution to take the certificate from the school
regarding the date of birth of the girl. The prosecution has taken Exhibit
P.6 certificate and therefore, the date of birth of the girl is duly proved as
per the Rule and in this regard, even contra evidence of the victim would
not come to the aid of the appellant. Therefore, he would submit that since
the child was less than eighteen years of age and since the prosecution has
proved that the occurrence happened after the coming into force of the
POCSO Act, that is, on 23.10.2013, and the parentage of the child born to
the victim has also been proved by marking the DNA report, in this regard,
the prosecution has proved the offence to the hilt and there is nothing for
this Court to interfere in this appeal.
10. I have considered the rival submissions made on behalf of both
Crl.A.No.146 of 2022
side and perused the material records of this case.
11. The foremost question arising in this case is as to what is the
date of birth of the victim child. In this regard, the procedure has already
been laid out by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in Jarnail Singh vs
State of Haryana1 and it is useful to extract paragraphs 22 and 23, which
“22. On the issue of determination of age of a minor,
one only needs to make a reference to Rule 12 of the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Rules, 2007 (hereinafter referred to as “the 2007
Rule”). The aforestated 2007 Rules have been framed
under Section 68(1) of the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2000. Rule 12 referred to
hereinabove reads as under:
“12. Procedure to be followed in determination
of age. (1) In every case concerning a child or a
juvenile in conflict with law, the court or the Board or
Crl.A.No.146 of 2022
as the case may be, the Committee referred to in Rule
19 of these Rules shall determine the age of such
juvenile or child or a juvenile in conflict with law
within a period of thirty days from the date of making
of the application for that purpose.
(2) The court or the Board or as the case may be
Committee shall decide the juvenility or otherwise of
the juvenile or the child or as the case may be the
juvenile in conflict with law, prima facie on the basis of
physical appearance or documents, if available, and
send him to the observation home or in jail.
(3) In every case concerning a child or juvenile
in conflict with law, the age determination inquiry shall
be conducted by the court or the Board or, as the case
may be, the Committee by seeking evidence by
(a)(i)     The    matriculation    or    equivalent
certificates, if available; and in the absence whereof;
(ii) The date of birth certificate from the school
Crl.A.No.146 of 2022
(other than a play school) first attended; and in the
(iii) The birth certificate given by a corporation
or a municipal authority or a panchayat;
(b) And only in the absence of either (i), (ii) or
(iii) of clause (a) above, the medical opinion will be
sought from a duly constituted Medical Board, which
will declare the age of the juvenile or child. In case
exact assessment of the age cannot be done, the Court
or the Board or, as the case may be, the Committee, for
the reasons to be recorded by them, may, if considered
necessary, give benefit to the child or juvenile by
considering his/her age on lower side within the
margin of one year.
and, while passing orders in such case shall, after
taking into consideration such evidence as may be
available, or the medical opinion, as the case may be,
record a finding in respect of his age and either of the
evidence specified in any of the clauses (a)(i), (ii), (iii)
Crl.A.No.146 of 2022
or in the absence whereof, clause (b) shall be the
conclusive proof of the age as regards such child or the
juvenile in conflict with law.
(4) If the age of a juvenile or child or the juvenile
in conflict with law is found to be below 18 years on
the date of offence, on the basis if any of the conclusive
proof specified in sub-rule (3), the Court or the Board
or as the case may be the Committee shall in writing
pass an order stating the age and declaring the status
of juvenility or otherwise, for the purpose of the Act
and these Rules and a copy of the order shall be given
to such juvenile or the person concerned.
(5) Save and except where, further inquiry or
otherwise is required, inter alia, in terms of Section 7-
A, Section 64 of the Act and these Rules, no further
inquiry shall be conducted by the Court or the Board
after examining and obtaining the certificate or any
other documentary proof referred to in sub-rule (3) of
this rule.
(6) The provisions contained in this Rule shall
also apply to those disposed of cases, where the status
of juvenility has not been determined in accordance
with the provisions contained in sub-rule (3) and the
Act requiring dispensation of the sentence under the
Act for passing appropriate order in the interest of the
juvenile in conflict with law.”
23. Even though Rule 12 is strictly applicable only to
determine the age of a child in conflict with law, we are
of the view that the aforesaid statutory provision
should be the basis for determining age, even of a child
who is a victim of crime. .......”
12. Therefore, in this case, the first option namely, the matriculation
or equivalent certificate is not available, since the child was a school drop
out at 8th Std, the second option is the date of birth certificate from the
school. It is in this context, the controversy in this case is at large.
According to learned counsel for the accused, the prosecution ought to
have produced the date of birth certificate from the school, which was very
Crl.A.No.146 of 2022
much available in the form of the transfer certificate. A perusal of the cross
examination of P.W.8 also reveals that the transfer certificate given by the
school when she joined the high-school from another middle-school after
completion of 7th Std, is also available with the school. Since she was a
drop out and did not continue her education, even as per P.W.8, the
transfer certificate of the girl is also available with the school. Therefore,
the primary evidence is available and when the same is not marked. The
extract given in the form of Exhibit P.6 is disputed by the defence by
providing D.1 to D.3 in which the date of birth is mentioned as
27.07.1995. The victim girl has categorically deposed that her date of birth
is only 27.07.1995. The prosecution has not cross examined the victim, in
that material aspect treating her hostile and that piece of evidence have
been left as final. All through the investigation, right from the First
Information Report and the complaint, the age of the victim is mentioned
only as nineteen years, therefore, I am of the view that the prosecution has
failed to categorically prove the age of the victim as less than eighteen
years as on date of the occurrence, that is, on 23.10.2013. I am of the
opinion that the evidence of the victim that the date of birth is 27.07.1995,
can be accepted as her correct age and as on date of the occurrence, her
Crl.A.No.146 of 2022
age is more than eighteen years and therefore, the alleged intercourse
would be an offence under Section 376 of the Indian Penal code and
cannot be one under Section 6 of the POCSO Act.
13. The victim has categorically deposed that she was forced into
the act. Considering the fact that she was a physically handicapped girl and
the time of occurrence and the manner of occurrence, I am unable to
accept the contention of learned counsel for the accused that the act
happened with the freewill and consent of the victim. Merely because the
victim did not immediately complain to her parents or others and was
keeping quiet and the fact that there was even chance of repeated assaults
by itself will not absolve the appellant from the act and for the victim is
not under the Trial in this case, but the appellant is the person who is. The
victim behaves differently considering the circumstances in which she is.
The victim girl is a physically handicapped girl and she can at least be
said, to be forced into this act against her will if not by physical or brutal
force and therefore, offence under Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code is
made out. Therefore, I find the appellant guilty for the offence under
Section 376 of the Indian Penal Code.
14. Now, considering the question of sentence, considering the
overall facts and circumstances of the case and the age of the appellant, I
am of the view that punishment of rigorous imprisonment for a period of
seven years will be appropriate punishment.
15. I find that the Trial Court has directed the State Government to
pay Rs.1,00,000/- as compensation to the victim child. Irrespective of the
fact that whether the said amount of Rs.1,00,000/- is paid to the victim or
not, in this case, the copy of this judgment shall be forwarded to the Tamil
Nadu State Legal Services Authority and the Tamil Nadu State Legal
Services Authority shall serve a notice to the victim. Upon such notice, the
victim shall apply, as per law, for compensation under the relevant Victim
Compensation Fund and the said Legal Services Authority shall fix the
quantum and pay the maximum permissible compensation to the victim,
since, she is now with a child and she is also a physically challenged girl.
The Legal Services Authority is also entitled to take into account the sum
of Rs.1,00,000/-, if already paid and accordingly adjust the sum with the
total sum payable.
16. Apart from the above, over and out of the fine amount paid by
the accused, as ordered by the Trial court, a sum of Rs.50,000/- is also
directed to be paid as compensation to the victim child.
17. In view of my above findings, this criminal appeal is partly
allowed on the following terms:
(i) The judgment of the learned Magalir Neethimandram,
Salem dated 29.06.2018 in S.C.No.23 of 2015 is set aside,
inasmuch as the accused is found guilty for the offence
under Section 6 r/w Sections 5(k) and 5(j)(ii) of the POCSO
Act and the conviction is modified as one under Section 376
of the Indian Penal Code;
(ii) For the offence under Section 376 of the Indian Penal
Code, the appellant is imposed with punishment of rigorous
imprisonment for a period of seven years and a fine of
Rs.50,000/- and in default of payment of fine, to undergo
simple imprisonment for a further period of six months;
Crl.A.No.146 of 2022
(iii) The other finding of guilty in respect of Section 506(1)
of the Indian Penal Code and the sentence thereof, are
upheld.
(iv) The accused is entitled to adjust the fine already paid
and out of the fine amount already paid, immediately a sum
of Rs.50,000/- shall be paid out as compensation to the
victim without any formal application on her part, but by
identification by the respondent police in this regard.
(v) The accused is also entitled to count the period of
imprisonment already undergone by him.
(vi) The Government of Tamil Nadu shall also pay the
compensation amount of Rs.1,00,000/- as ordered by the
18. The Tamil Nadu Legal Services Authority shall issue notice to
Crl.A.No.146 of 2022
P.W.1 and P.W.1, upon such notice, is entitled to make such application
for compensation under all or any of the available Victim compensation
Schemes and the Legal Services Authority shall determine the quantum of
compensation payable to the victim in accordance with law and if already
a sum of Rs.1,00,000/-, as directed by the Trial Court, is paid to the victim,
then the said sum alone can be taken into account.
19. The sentence of the appellant shall run concurrently.
Index: yes/no                                             27.07.2022
3. The Public Prosecutor, High Court of Madras.
Crl.A.No.146 of 2022