1.           Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned Chief
2.           This writ petition has been filed praying for the following
a) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of certiorari to
quash the order dated 16.06.2021 (letter dated 17.06.2021
passed by respondent no.2/District Magistrate/District Level
b) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus
commanding and directing to the respondent no.2 to take
appropriate action and provide the security to petitioner.
3.           Briefly stated facts of the present case are that according to the
petitioner he is a witness in Case Crime No.0057 of 2018, dated
10.06.2018, under Sections 147, 148, 149, 504, 302 IPC P.S. Holagarh,
District – Prayagraj. Earlier by Order dated 21.08.2020, iqfyl mik/kh{kd
^izKku^ iz;kxjkt, intimated the petitioner that there is no need for protection.
Consequently, the petitioner filed the Writ C No.27614 of 2020 which
was allowed and a direction was issued to the District Level
Committee/Superintendent of Police, Prayagraj, to pass an order afresh in
accordance with law in the light of the directions of Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of Mahender Chawla and Others Vs. Union of
India and Others (2019) 14 SCC 615 . Again the respondents
passed almost identical order on 17.06.2021 refusing to grant protection
to the petitioner. Consequently, the petitioner has filed the present writ
for the petitioner states that after this Court
passed the order dated 05.10.2021, the respondents are giving protection
on dates fixed in the trial which shall continue till the conclusion of the
5.           Learned Chief Standing Counsel submits that protection has
been provided to the petitioner by order dated 13.10.2021. He further
submits that the State Government has taken a decision to implement the
Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 and has taken several steps and it
is being fully implemented.
6.           To support his submissions, the learned Chief Standing Counsel
has referred several paragraphs of the personal affidavit of the Secretary
(Home) State of U.P. dated 08.11.2021.
7.           We have carefully considered the submissions of learned
counsels for the parties.
8.           We find that Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Mahender
Chawla (Supra) approved the Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 which
The ability of a witness to give testimony in a judicial setting or to
cooperate with law enforcement and investigations without fear of intimidation or
reprisal is essential in maintaining the Rule of law. The objective of this Scheme is to
ensure that the investigation, prosecution and trial of criminal offences is not
prejudiced because witnesses are intimidated or frightened to give evidence without
protection from violent or other criminal recrimination. It aims to promote law
enforcement by facilitating the protection of persons who are involved directly or
indirectly in providing assistance to criminal law enforcement agencies and overall
administration of Justice. Witnesses need to be given the confidence to come forward
to assist law enforcement and Judicial Authorities with full assurance of safety. It is
aimed to identify series of measures that may be adopted to safeguard witnesses and
their family members from intimidation and threats against their lives, reputation and
Jeremy Bentham has said that "Witnesses are the eyes and ears of justice."
In cases involving influential people, witnesses turn hostile because of threat to life
and property. Witnesses find that there is no legal obligation by the state for extending
any security.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India also held in State of Gujarat v.
Anirudh Singh MANU/SC/0749/1997 : (1997) 6 SCC 514 that: "It is the salutary duty
of every witness who has the knowledge of the commission of the crime, to assist the
State in giving evidence." Malimath Committee on Reforms of Criminal Justice
System, 2003 said in its report that "By giving evidence relating to the commission of
an offence, he performs a sacred duty of assisting the court to discover the truth".
Zahira Habibulla H. Sheikh and Anr. v. State of Gujarat MANU/SC/0322/2004 : 2004
(4) SCC 158 SC while defining Fair Trial said "If the witnesses get threatened or are
forced to give false evidence that also would not result in a fair trial".
First ever reference to Witness Protection in India came in 14th Report of
the Law Commission of India in 1958. Further reference on the subject are found in
154th and 178th report of the Law Commission in India. 198th Report of the Law
Commission of India titled as "Witness Identity Protection and Witness Protection
Programmes, 2006" is dedicated to the subject.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court observed in Zahira case supra, "country can
afford to expose its morally correct citizens to the peril of being harassed by anti-
social elements like rapists and murderers". The 4th National Police Commission
Report, 1980 noted 'prosecution witnesses are turning hostile because of pressure of
Accused and there is need of Regulation to check manipulation of witnesses."
The Legislature has introduced Section 195A Indian Penal Code in 2006
making Criminal Intimidation of Witnesses a criminal offence punishable with seven
years of imprisonment. Likewise, in statues namely Juvenile Justice (care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2015, Whistle Blowers Protection Act, 2011, Protection
of Children from Sexual Castes and Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 also
provides for safeguarding witnesses again the threats. However no formal structured
programme has been introduced as on date for addressing the issue of witness
protection in a holistic manner.
In recent year's extremism, terrorism and organized crimes have grown
and are becoming stronger and more diverse. In the investigation becoming and
prosecution of such crimes, it is essential that witnesses, have trust in criminal justice
system. Witnesses need to have the confidence to come forward to assist law
enforcement and prosecuting agencies. They need to be assured that they will receive
support and protection from intimidation and the harm that criminal groups might
seek to inflict upon them in order to discourage them from co-operating with the law
enforcement agencies and deposing before the court of law. Hence, it is high time that
a scheme is put in place for addressing the issues of witness protection uniformly in
the country.
Witness Protection may be as simple as providing a police escort to the
witness up to the Courtroom or using modern communication technology (such as
audio video means) for recording of testimony. In other more complex cases,
involving organised criminal group, extraordinary measures are required to ensure the
witness's safety viz. anonymity, offering temporary residence in a safe house, giving a
new identity, and relocation of the witness at an undisclosed place. However, Witness
protection needs of a witness may have to be viewed on case to case basis depending
upon their vulnerability and threat perception.
(a) The Scheme shall be called "Witness Protection Scheme, 2018
(b) It shall come into force from the date of Notification.
(a) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);
( b ) "Concealment of Identity of Witness" means and includes any condition
prohibiting publication or revealing, in any manner, directly or indirectly, of the name,
address and other particulars which may lead to the identification of the witness
during investigation, trial and post-trial stage;
(c) "Competent Authority" means a Standing Committee in each District chaired
by District and Sessions Judge with Head of the Police in the District as Member and
Head of the Prosecution in the District as its Member Secretary.
(d) "Family Member" includes parents/guardian, spouse, live-in partner, siblings,
(e) "Form" means "Witness Protection Application Form" appended to this Scheme;..
(f ) "In Camera Proceedings" means proceedings wherein the Competent
Authority/Court allows only those persons who are necessary to be present while
hearing and deciding the witness protection application or deposing in the court;
( g ) "Live Link" means and include a live video link or other such arrangement
whereby a witness, while not being physically present in the courtroom for deposing
in the matter or interacting with the Competent Authority;
(h) "Witness Protection Measures" means measures spelt out in Clause 7, Part-
III, Part-IV and Part V of the Scheme.
(i) "Offence" means those offences which are punishable with death or life
imprisonment or an imprisonment up to seven years and above and also offences
punishable Under Section 354, 354A, 354B, 354C, 354D and 509 of Indian Penal
( j ) "Threat Analysis Report" means a detailed report prepared and submitted by
the Head of the Police in the District Investigating the case with regard to the
seriousness and credibility of the threat perception to the witness or his family
members. It shall contain specific details about the
nature of threats by the witness or his family to their life, reputation or property apart
from analyzing the extent, the or persons making the threat, have the intent, motive
and resources to implement the threats. It shall also categorize the threat perception
apart from suggesting the specific witness protection measures which deserves to be
(k) "Witness" means any person, who posses information or document about any
(l) "Witness Protection Application" means an application moved by the
witness in the prescribed form before a Competent Authority for seeking Witness
Protection Order. It can be moved by the witness, his family member, his duly
engaged counsel or IO/SHO/SDPO/Prison SP concerned and the same shall preferably
be got forwarded through the Prosecutor concerned;
(m) "Witness Protection Fund" means the fund created for bearing the expenses
incurred during the implementation of Witness Protection Order passed by the
(n) "Witness Protection Order" means an order passed by the Competent
Authority detailing the witness protection measures to be taken;
(o) "Witness Protection Cell" means a dedicated Cell of State/UT Police or
Central Police Agencies assigned the duty to implement the witness protection order.
threat extends to life of witness or his family members,
during investigation/trial or thereafter.
Category 'B': Where the threat extends to safety, reputation or property of the
witness or his family members, during the investigation/trial or thereafter.
Category 'C': Where the threat is moderate and extends to harassment or
intimidation of the witness or his family member's, reputation or property, during the
investigation/trial or thereafter.
(a) There shall be a Fund, namely, the Witness Protection Fund from which the
expenses incurred during the implementation of Witness Protection Order passed by
the Competent Authority and other related expenditure, shall be met.
(b) The Witness Protection Fund shall comprise the following:
i. Budgetary allocation made in the Annual Budget by the State Government;
ii. Receipt of amount of costs imposed/ordered to be deposited by the courts/tribunals
iii. Donations/contributions from Charitable
Institutions/Organizations and individuals permitted by Central/State Governments.
iv. Funds contributed under Corporate Social Responsibility.
(c) The said Fund shall be operated by the Department/Ministry of Home under
The application for seeking protection order under this scheme can be filed in the
prescribed form before the Competent Authority of the concerned District where the
offence is committed, through its Member Secretary along with supporting
documents, if any.
(a) As and when an application is received by the Member Secretary of the Competent
Authority, in the prescribed form, it shall forthwith pass an order for calling for the
Threat Analysis Report from the ACP/DSP in charge of the concerned Police Sub-
(b) Depending upon the urgency in the matter owing to imminent threat, the
Competent Authority can pass orders for interim protection of the witness or his
family members during the pendency of the application.
(c) The Threat Analysis Report shall be prepared expeditiously while maintaining full
confidentiality and it shall reach the Competent Authority
within five working days of receipt of the order.
(d) The Threat Analysis Report shall categorize the threat perception and also include
suggestive protection measures for providing adequate protection to the witness or his
(e) While processing the application for witness protection, the Competent Authority
shall also interact preferably in person and if not possible through electronic means
with the witness and/or his family members/employers or any other person deemed fit
so as to ascertain the witness protection needs of the witness.
(f) All the hearings on Witness Protection Application shall be held in-camera by the
Competent Authority while maintaining full confidentiality.
(g) An application shall be disposed of within five working days of receipt of Threat
Analysis Report from the Police authorities.
(h) The Witness Protection Order passed by the Competent Authority shall be
implemented by the Witness Protection Cell of the State/UT or the Trial Court, as the
case may be. Overall responsibility of implementation of all witness protection orders
passed by the Competent Authority shall lie on the Head of the Police in the State/UT.
However the Witness Protection Order passed by the Competent Authority for change
of identity and/or relocation shall be implemented by the Department of Home of the
(i) Upon passing of a Witness Protection Order, the Witness Protection Cell shall file a
monthly follow-up report before the Competent Authority.
(j) In case, the Competent Authority finds that there is a need to revise the Witness
Protection Order or an application is moved in this regard, and upon completion of
trial, a fresh Threat Analysis Report shall be called from the ACP/DSP in charge of the
police sub-division concerned.
The witness protection measures ordered shall be proportionate to the threat and shall
be for a specific duration not exceeding three months at a time.
(a) Ensuring that witness and Accused do not come face to face
(c) Arrangement with the telephone company to change the witness's telephone
number or assign him or her an unlisted telephone number;
(d) Installation of security devices in the witness's home such as security doors,
(e) Concealment of identity of the witness by referring to him/her with the changed
(f) Emergency contact persons for the witness;
(g) Close protection, regular patrolling around the witness's house;
(h) Temporary change of residence to a relative's house or a nearby town;
(i) Escort to and from the court and provision of Government vehicle or a State funded
(k) Allowing a support person to remain present during recording of statement and
(l) Usage of specially designed vulnerable witness court rooms which have special
arrangements like live video links, one way mirrors and screens apart from separate
passages for witnesses and Accused, with option to modify the image of face of the
witness and to modify the audio feed of the witness' voice, so that he/she is not
(m) Ensuring expeditious recording of deposition during trial on day to day basis
(n) Awarding time to time periodical financial aids/grants to the witness from Witness
Protection Fund for the purpose of re-location, sustenance or starting a new
(o) Any other form of protection measures considered necessary.
8. Monitoring and review:- Once the protection order is passed, the Competent
Authority would monitor its implementation and can review the same in terms of
follow-up reports received in the matter. However, the Competent Authority shall
review the Witness Protection Order on a quarterly basis based on the monthly follow-
up report submitted by the Witness Protection Cell.
During the course of investigation or trial of any offence, an application
for seeking identity protection can be filed in the prescribed form before the
Competent Authority through its Member Secretary.
Upon receipt of the application, the Member Secretary of the Competent
Authority shall call for the Threat Analysis Report. The Competent Authority shall
examine the witness or his family members or any other person it deem fit to ascertain
whether there is necessity to pass an identity protection order.
During the course of hearing of the application, the identity of the witness
shall not be revealed to any other person, which is likely to lead to the witness
identification. The Competent Authority can thereafter, dispose of the application as
per material available on record.
Once, an order for protection of identity of witness is passed by the
Competent Authority, it shall be the responsibility of Witness Protection Cell to ensure
that identity of such witness/his or her family members including
name/parentage/occupation/address/digital footprints are fully protected.
As long as identity of any witness is protected under an order of the
Competent Authority, the Witness Protection Cell shall provide details of persons who
can be contacted by the witness in case of emergency.
10. Change Of Identity:- In appropriate cases, where there is a request from the
identity and based on the Threat Analysis Report, a decision can be taken for
conferring a new identity to the witness by the Competent Authority.
Conferring new identities includes new name/profession/parentage and providing
supporting documents acceptable by the Government Agencies. The new identities
should not deprive the witness from existing educational/professional/property rights.
11. Relocation Of Witness:- In appropriate cases, where there is a request from
the witness for relocation and based on the Threat Analysis Report, a decision can be
taken for relocation of the witness by the Competent Authority.
The Competent Authority may pass an order for witness relocation to a
safer place within the State/UT or territory of the Indian Union keeping in view the
safety, welfare and wellbeing of the witness. The expenses shall be borne by the
12. Witnesses To Be Apprised Of The Scheme:- Every state shall give wide
publicity to this Scheme. The IO and the Court shall inform witnesses about the
existence of "Witness Protection Scheme" and its salient features.
13. Confidentiality And Preservation Of Records:- All stakeholders
including the Police, the Prosecution Department, Court Staff, Lawyers from both
sides shall maintain full confidentiality and shall ensure that under no circumstance,
any record, document or information in relation to the proceedings under this scheme
shall be shared with any person in any manner except with the Trial Court/Appellate
Court and that too, on a written order.
All the records pertaining to proceedings under this scheme shall be
preserved till such time the related trial or appeal thereof is pending before a Court of
Law. After one year of disposal of the last Court proceedings, the hard copy of the
records can be weeded out by the Competent Authority after preserving the scanned
soft copies of the same.
In case the witness has lodged a false complaint, the Home Department of
the concerned Government can initiate proceedings for recovery of the expenditure
incurred from the Witness Protection Fund.
In case the witness or the police authorities are aggrieved by the decisions
of the Competent Authority, a review application may be filed within 15 days of
passing of the orders by the Competent Authority.
1.   Particulars of the Witness (Fill in Capital):
(6) Name and other details of family members of
the witness who are receiving or perceiving threats
(6) Cr. Case No. (in case of private complaint)
• Applicant/witness can use extra sheets for giving additional information.
1 . I undertake that I shall fully cooperate with the competent authority and the
Department of Home of the State and Witness Protection Cell.
2. I certify that the information provided by me in this application is true and correct
to my best knowledge and belief.
3 . I understand that in case, information given by me in this application is found to be
false, competent authority under the scheme reserves the right to recover the expenses
incurred on me from out of the Witness Protection Fund.
9.             After reproducing the aforequoted Witness Protection Scheme,
2018, Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of                           Mahender Chawla
(Supra) further observed/directed as under :
“27. As is clear from its reading, the essential features of the
Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 include identifying categories of
threat perceptions, preparation of a “Threat Analysis Report” by
the Head of the Police, types of protection measures like ensuring
that the witness and accused do not come face to face during
investigation, etc. protection of identity, change of identity,
relocation of witness, witnesses to be apprised of the scheme,
confidentiality and preservation of records, recovery of expenses,
28. Since it is beneficial and benevolent scheme which is aimed at
strengthening the criminal justice system in this country, which
shall in turn ensure not only access to justice but also advance the
cause of justice itself, all the States and Union Territories also
accepted that suitable directions can be passed by the Court to
enforce the said scheme as a mandate of the Court till the
enactment of a statute by the legislatures.
29. It is clear from the aforesaid events that the Scheme is the
outcome of the efforts put in by the Central Government with due
assistance not only from the State Governments as well as Union
Territories but other stakeholders including police personnel,
NALSA and State Legal Services Authorities, High Courts and
even civil society. There is no reason not to accede to the aforesaid
submission of the learned Attorney General and other respondents.
35. One thing which emerges from the aforesaid discussion is that
there is a paramount need to have witness protection regime, in a
statutory form, which all the stakeholders and all the players in the
criminal justice system concede. At the same time no such
legislation has been brought about. These are the considerations
which had influenced this Court to have a holistic regime of
witness protection which should be considered as law under
Article 141 of the Constitution till a suitable law is framed
36.1. This Court has given its imprimatur to the Scheme prepared
by Respondent 1 which is approved hereby. It comes into effect
forthwith.
36.2 The Union of India as well as the States and the Union
Territories shall enforce the Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 in
letter and spirit.
36.3 It shall be the “law” under Articles 141/142 if the
Constitution, till the enactment of suitable parliamentary and/or
State legislations on the subject.
36.4 In line with the aforesaid provisions contained in the
Scheme, in all the district courts in India, Vulnerable Witness
Deposition Complexes shall be set up by the States and Union
Territories. This should be achieved within a period of one year
i.e. by the end of the year 2019. The Central Government should
also support this endeavour of the States/Union Territories by
helping them financially and otherwise.”
10.         In paragraph 8 of his personal affidavit the Secretary (Home)
has stated that Standing Committee consisting of District and Sessions
Judge (Chairman), District Magistrate (Member Secretary) and Senior
Superintendent of Police/Superintendent of Police (Member) has been
constituted in each District of Uttar Pradesh. A Chart containing the
description of Constitution of standing committee in each district has been
filed as Annexure 5 to the personal affidavit.
11.         However, from perusal of the personal affidavit, it appears that
merely letters have been issued by the State Government and its top
officials to the District Level Officers and the Standing Committees have
been constituted but the Witness Protection Scheme, 2018 is not being
implemented in letter and spirit which fact is further evident from the
facts of the present case itself that the petitioner (witness) to get protection
under the aforesaid scheme has to approach this court twice and
concerned authorities have passed the orders without any sense of
responsibility. Despite the orders of this Court dated 10.06.2020 and
19.03.2021, passed in Writ C No.8925 of 2020 and Writ C No.27614 of
2020 respectively the State respondents repeatedly passed the same order.
It is only after the present writ petition was filed and an order dated
05.10.2021 was passed, only then the State respondents have given
protection to the petitioner by passing the order dated 30.10.2021. This
instance itself is sufficient to discern the truth that various circulars or
letters being issued by the State Government are merely an eye wash and
in truth the Witness Protection Scheme, 2018         is not being properly
implemented by the State respondents.
12.        In view of the aforesaid, we dispose of this writ petition with
the directions to the State Government and all its concerned
authorities/committees to implement the Witness Protection Scheme,
2018 forthwith as well as the directions issued by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of Mahender Chawla (Supra) forthwith.