Writ Appeal Nos. 489 of 2023, 491 of 2023,
494 of 2023, 495 of 2023, 497 of 2023 &
498 of 2023, WP(C) Nos. 6678 of 2023, 6774 of 2023,
6777 of 2023, 6816 of 2023, 6878 of 2023 & 6917 of 2023
Dated this 02nd March, 2023
The writ appeals arise from the refusal of the learned Single
Judge to stay the separate impugned orders passed by two District
Collectors prohibiting sale of liquor by FL3 licensees and licensed toddy
shops existing within an area surrounding three different locations where
religious festivals are being held. The orders passed were identical and
one of such orders followed the earlier orders. We called for the writ
petitions also on consent of the parties, since the disposal of the appeals
either way would dispose of the writ petitions also.
2. We have to notice the facts insofar as the location, the
genesis and the area of prohibition as coming out from the separate
impugned orders in the writ petitions. In W.A No.489/23 the District
Collector, Kollam issued Ext.P2 order dt. 16.02.2023 prohibiting sale of
liquor within the Police Station limits of Kadakkal, Chithara and
Chadayamangalam             on     02.03.2023,        in     connection      with the
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases
‘Kumbhathiruvathira’ festival in Kadakkal Devi Temple. The very same
order is challenged in W.A No.494/2023 by another FL 3 licensee within
the same area, the order produced as Ext.P2. In W.A No.491/2023 the
impugned order Ext.P2 is dt. 17.02.2023 issued by the District Collector,
Palakkad in connection with Manappullikkavu Vela proposed to be
conducted on 02.03.2023, again specifically prohibiting sale of liquor by
Bars including Toddy Shops located within Palakkad Municipality,
Kannadi and Marutha Road Panchayaths on the said day. W.A
No.498/2023 also challenges the order dt 16.02.2023 and W.A
No.497/2023 challenges the order dt.17.02.2023 issued respectively by
the District Collectors of Kollam and Palakkad; the challenge being raised
by an FL3 licensee and licensees of Toddy Shops respectively. W.A
495/2023 is an order issued by the District Collector, Palakkad of a
similar prohibition in connection with Pattambi Nercha within the
Pattambi Municipal limits by the shops and outlets and the Karimban
Kadavu outlet of the Kerala Beverages Corporation on two days,
04.03.2023 and 05.03.2023.
3. The learned Single Judge looked at S.54 of the Act and from
the order, found the District Magistrate having adverted to adverse
reports regarding the apprehension of disruption of law and order
including that of the District Police Chief. The decision of a Division Bench
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases
in State of Kerala v. Mary Kurian and others in W.A No.391/2018 and
connected cases dated 12.02.2018 was distinguished and reliance was
placed on Aneesh V. District Collector [2012(2) KLT 91] to uphold the
impugned orders.
4. Learned Counsel appearing for the appellants, Sri Thomas
Abraham specifically relied on Mary Kurian (supra) to contend that the
Division Bench had followed an earlier Division Bench decision, both with
reference to Maramon Convention held yearly at Kozhanchery,
Pathanamthitta; which earlier decision is produced as Ext.P3 in W.A
No.495/2023 and the recent one as Ext.P5. It was argued that unlike
Toddy Shops the FL3 licensees are spending huge amounts for taking
such license and prohibition imposed even for a single day would cause
immense prejudice to the licensees and eat into their profits, especially
since there is no remission of licence fee granted by reason of the
prohibition. In Mary Kurian (supra) this Court had specifically
deprecated the conduct of the District Collector in having acted upon the
complaint raised by the General Secretary of the Convention which is
almost similar in the instant cases also; the request having been
generated by the Committee conducting such festival. S.54 is pointed out
to show that the first limb requires a notice, which also brings within it an
opportunity of hearing; which was not afforded to the appellants who
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases
were the licensees. It is also argued that the second limb empowers any
Magistrate or even a Police Officer present in a location to require a
licensed shop to be closed, on a real apprehension of a riot or unlawful
assembly within the vicinity of the said shop. As noticed in Mary Kurian
(supra) the District authorities have to ensure law and order, even in
areas where festivals are conducted and they cannot abdicate their
powers by issuing blanket orders imposing prohibition in such areas. For
the purpose of obtaining FL3 licenses the appellants are classified hotels,
who have expended considerable money in developing infrastructure also
in promotion of tourism. The blanket ban issued would also affect the
customers housed in the premises who would be prohibited from taking
liquor on the particular day. There is absolutely no real apprehension as
can be discerned from the various orders and the offences referred in one
of such orders are all minor offences under S.151 of the Cr.P.C. There is
total violation of the guidelines issued by the Government, produced as
Ext. P5 in W.A 495/2023. Sri.Nireesh Mathew, learned Counsel appearing
in two appeals adopts the arguments already addressed and specifically
emphasise the virtues of toddy and the attraction it offers for tourists to
visit the State. It is pointed out that despite the prohibition having been
extended to large areas it does not prevent a person from having liquor
from outside the prohibited area and coming to the festival. The
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases
prohibition does not offer any mitigation to violence or unruly behaviour
by reason of intoxication.
5. Sri. T K Vipindas, Senior Government Pleader, meticulously
took us through the individual orders to show the real apprehension
entertained by the District Collector on the basis of the crimes reported in
the area previously, also during the festival times and the reports of the
District Police Chief which sought for such prohibition. It is on a real
apprehension that the orders have been issued and there would be
convergence of people of different hues and faith in the festival grounds
and there would be many coming to the festival for mere merry making
and not necessarily with a religious bend of mind. Specific reference is
made to Manappullikavu Vela where there is convergence of persons from
three different desoms at one spot. In fact, these occasions often lead to
settling of scores between goonda gangs and the common man always
bear the brunt when such violent incidents erupt, oftener than ever
triggered by intoxication. The learned Senior Government Pleader seeks
for dismissal of the writ appeals.
6. The bulwark of the contention of the appellants is the
decision in Mary Kurian (supra) of another Division Bench, penned by
one of us (KVC, J). Therein an identical ban was imposed for a period of
nine days and within one kilo-metre radius of the Convention venue;
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases
which in effect prohibited the sale of liquor only from the sole licenced
premises of the respondents 1 and 2. The decisions placed before the
Court upholding and interfering with such similar prohibitions were dealt
with. It was found that in the cases where prohibitions were upheld, there
was minimal impact of one or at the worst, three days. The Division Bench
in W.A 673/2014 dt 9.5.2014 upholding the order of prohibition, did so
on specific grounds raised of the report of the police as to one person
having died on account of intoxication, a specific instance of attack
unleashed against one religious denomination and a hartal called by
another religious denomination. The orders upholding prohibition on
account of elections were distinguished since there is a specific provision,
enabling it in the Abkari Act. The Division Bench found that as in the
earlier case dealt with in WP(C) No.5187/2005 there was no cogent
material available of reasonable apprehension of breach of peace and the
orders were passed mechanically as were issued in consecutive years; all
of which were also verbatim reproductions of the earlier orders. It was in
these circumstances that the impugned order therein was interfered with.
7. We are quite satisfied that the distinction on facts, drawn
by the learned Single Judge, in the instant cases, from that of the decision
in Mary Kurian (supra) is perfectly in order. In the present cases the
prohibition is for a single day and in one case for two days. The area is
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases
also quite vast covering police station limits, Panchayat and Municipal
areas and so on and so forth. The contention raised by the appellants that
any person could still come intoxicated to the festival, does not permit us
to digress from the immediate effects of consumption of liquor, especially
when it is readily available at the spot and the deleterious consequences
on the unsuspecting public, if the intoxicated person or persons turn
violent and engage in criminal activities.
8.   We also notice from S.54 that the notice does not
necessarily speak of an opportunity for hearing. The notice in writing is
only insofar as notice to the licensee to close down a shop, in which
intoxicating liquor or drug is sold, for the purpose of preservation of
public peace, which notice is only to enable the licensee to arrange his
affairs accordingly. In fact, the licensee of a liquor shop has absolutely no
say in the preservation of public peace and a hearing conducted would be
futile since they cannot instruct the District Administration as to how the
law-and-order situation within their jurisdictional limits is to be
maintained peacefully. We cannot also countenance the argument of the
appellants that the second limb would be sufficient to allay any outbreak
of violence since prevention is always better than cure.
9. We also looked at the Circular alleged to have been not
complied with, in letter and spirit; which in any event is in the nature of a
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases
guideline, the strict compliance of which should get subsumed in the
objective of the statutory provision being satisfied and the discretion of
the authorities who are responsible to maintain law and order. The
notice, as spoken of in the guidelines is only to ensure that legal remedies
are not stifled by issuance of orders at the last moment. Despite the seven
days prescribed it cannot be taken as a mandate since emergent
situations may have to be dealt with. We also notice the learned Senior
Government Pleader's submission that such notice may result in illegal
stocking and even illicit brewing. Here admittedly all the orders were
issued on 16.02.2023 & 17.02.2023 and served respectively on
17.02.2023 and 20.02.2023. All the orders were challenged by Writ
Petitions before the date on which such prohibition is contemplated.
10. The learned Counsel also had a contention that there was
no cogent material to apprehend breach of peace or disruption of law and
order situation, on account of opening of liquor shops and here also the
prohibition is only on a subjective satisfaction of the District Collector
which is based on a perpetual apprehension that, when there is
convergence of large number of people in a particular locality during
festival times there could be drunken behaviour, which is not justified.
11. We have also looked at the individual orders. The order dt
16.02.2023 issued by the District Collector, Kollam noticed that in the
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases
previous years there were untoward incidents in the premises of a Bar
Hotel which in one case even led to a murder. There were frequent
reports of unruly incidents leading to disruption of law and order as also
clashes between members of political parties who take the opportunity of
a crowd during the festivals to settle scores and escape unidentified. It
was specifically noticed that in most of these cases the accused acted
under intoxication. The District Collector Palakkad in the order dt
17.02.2023, imposing prohibition on the day of Manappullikavu Vela
noticed a number of crimes which are specifically adverted to in the
order; which the appellants assert to be of no import since they are all
under S.151 of the Cr.P.C. S.151 of Cr.P.C specifically deals with arrest to
prevent the commission of cognizable offences, which puts the police
personnel under pressure especially when they are also enjoined upon to
control a crowd converging in a particular spot in which the festival is
held. In fact, the registration of such crimes and detention of persons,
would also result in depletion of manpower deployed to control the
crowd. It is common knowledge that often unruly behaviour leading to
crimes arise with intoxication and escalates into violence. The order dt
17.02.2023 imposing prohibition of two days in connection with Pattambi
Nercha also refers to the crimes registered in connection with the very
same festival in 2022 and the group clashes which took place in Bars kept
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases
open on that particular day. The crimes that arose solely due to the
consumption of liquor are also detailed, where serious offences under IPC
are seen charged.
12. We are convinced that the separate orders passed are not
mechanical in nature or verbatim reproduction of earlier orders. True, in
one of the orders, ie, the order issued by District Collector, Kollam, there
was a request made by the Temple Advisory Committee and a report
called for from the Rural District Police Chief; both of which were referred
to by District Collector. In the other two orders the references are only to
the communication received from the District Police Chief and the
Inspector of Police. The decision in Mary Kurian (supra) was not to the
effect that a request made by an Advisory Committee or the Convenor of a
festival cannot be acted upon by the District Collector. What was found
fault with in Mary Kurian (supra) was the lackadaisical report obtained
from the police authority and the vague apprehensions expressed as also
the verbatim reproduction of the orders passed in earlier years. None of
these grounds arise in the impugned orders and we find no reason to
interfere with the order of the learned Single Judge.
13. We quite understand that the licensees have made
substantial investments to carry on liquor vending, both foreign liquor
and toddy. The disruption of sales for one or two days especially with the
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases
object of maintaining peace, for public good and preservation of public
order, relegates commercial considerations to the back seat. We also
notice a judgment by one of us, (KVC, J) sitting single and extract
paragraph 5 from E.S Manoj v. District Collector (WP(C) No.12886/2015
and con.case)[MANU/KE/0490/2015].
“5. More than the statistics of registered crimes, in such a
huge gathering of devotees and non-devotees; all of whom
come to watch the visual and rhythmic delight offered,
respectively by the fire-works and the percussionists;
particularly that associated with the Pooram, it is common
knowledge that many untoward incidents happen, which are
not reported. The victims are often reduced to mutely
suffering such menacing overtures, often motivated and
accentuated by the intoxicating effect of liquor. The
psychedelic effect of the colours and the adrenalin rush of the
“mela” are sufficient intoxication for the crowd and they could
do without the inebriation provided by the traditional
“watering-holes”, called “BAR”'s.”
We, sitting in Division, endorse the above view. As is the case
with Thrissur Pooram, the festivities in all the three sites have a profusion
of pyrotechnics, musical ensemble, colourful displays on caparisoned
elephants,      exhibitions,     fares and  the  like, providing    sufficient
entertainment without being further enthused and infused with the
toxicity of liquor. True, there could still be drunkenness and brawls
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases
resulting from that; but there would be sufficient mitigation and reduced
instances, if proximate access to liquor is prohibited. We dismiss the
appeals and the writ petitions and leave the parties to suffer their
respective costs.
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases
Writ Appeal No.489/2023 & con. cases