1.      Rule returnable forthwith. Respective learned Assistant
Government Pleaders waives service of notice of Rule for
and on behalf of the respondent – State in all these
petitions.
2.      With the consent of the learned advocates for the
respective parties, all these petitions are taken up
for final hearing today.
3.      In all these petitions, under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India, the prayer of the petitioners is to direct the
respondents to grant the benefit of one increment and
further to direct the respondents to revise the pension and
other retirement benefits of the petitioners.
4.      For the benefit of this common oral judgment, the facts of
SCA No.20181 of 2021 is considered.
4.1.         The grievance of the petitioner is that he has
been denied yearly increment for one full year of service
rendered by the petitioner for the period from 1.7.2015 to
5.     The issue of granting increment as prayed for by the
present      petitioners    was        a  subject-matter                 of
challenge before this Court. A Division Bench of this
Court on 27.4.2022 in Letters Patent Appeal No.868
of 2021 in the case of State of Gujarat v.
Takhatsinh Udesinh Sonagara noticing the facts
of the respondent therein, who too prayed for
increment for one full year of service and revision of
pension accordingly, considering the decision of the
Madrash       High    Court         in   the    case          of        P.
Ayyamperumal v. The Registrar and others
being Writ Petition No.15732 of 2017 decided on
15.9.2017 as well as the decisions of the Himachal
Pradesh High Court as well as Rajasthan High Court
in the cases of Hari Prakash and others v. State
of Himachal Pradesh and others being Civil Writ
Petition No.2503 of 2016 decided on 6.11.2020 and
Safi Mohammad             and         others   v.     State            of
Rajasthan and others decided on 1.12.2021 and
also of Rajasthan High Court in Ramji Lal Kulhari
and others v. State of Rajasthan and others
being Civil Writ Petition No.85 of 2020 and group of
petitions decided on 10.1.2022 respectively held as
“5. The Delhi High Court in Gopal Singh
(supra) taking same view as that of Madras
High Court in P.Ayyamperumal (supra)
explained that the entitlement of government
servant to receive the increment, though may
not be a matter of course, but is dependent
upon good conduct of the central government
servant and that he earns increment on the
basis of his good conduct for specified period.
“Payment of salary and increment to a
central government servant is regulated
by the provisions of F.R., CSR and Central
Civil Services (Pension) Rules. Pay defined
in F.R. 9(21) means the amount drawn
monthly by a central government servant
and includes the increment. A plain
composite reading of applicable provisions
leaves no ambiguity that annual increment
is given to a government servant to enable
him to discharge duties of the post and
that pay and allowances are also attached
to the post. Article 43 of the CSR defines
progressive appointment to mean an
appointment          wherein      the        pay            is
progressive, subject to good behaviour of
an officer. It connotes that pay rises, by
periodical increments from a minimum to
a maximum. The increment in case of
progressive appointment is specified in
Article 151 of the CSR to mean that
increment accrues from the date following
that on which it is earned. The scheme,
taken cumulatively, clearly suggests that
appointment of a central government
servant is a progressive appointment and
periodical increment in pay from a
minimum to maximum is part of the pay
structure.      Article    151         of           CSR
contemplates that increment accrues from
the day following which it is earned. This
increment is not a matter of course but is
dependent upon good conduct of the
central    government       servant.          It        is,
therefore,       apparent      that           central
government employee earns increment on
the basis of his good conduct for specified
period i.e. a year in case of annual
increment. Increment in pay is thus an
integral part of progressive appointment
and accrues from the day following which
it is earned. ”
5.1 It was stated that where a government
servant observes good conduct for entire year
before increment accrues, it is logical and
normal that he earns the increment. Dealing
with the situation where the government
servant has retired on 30th June and the
increment is payable on 1st July, the High
Court stated thus, (Para 23)
“Annual increment though is attached to
the post & becomes payable on a day
following which it is earned but the day on
which increment accrues or becomes
payable is not conclusive or determinative.
In the statutory scheme governing
progressive         appointment         increment
becomes due for the services rendered
over a year by the government servant
subject to his good behaviour. The pay of a
central government servant rises, by
periodical increments, from a minimum to
the maximum in the prescribed scale. The
entitlement to receive increment therefore
crystallises when the government servant
completes requisite length of service with
good conduct and becomes payable on the
succeeding day.”
5.1.1 It was further observed by the Delhi High
Court that denial of the entitlement to receive
benefit when is crystallized in law could be
arbitrary if it is denied unless there is valid
reason. Though the increment was earned for
past period it is denied on the ground that on
the date when the increment becoming payable
the government servant was not holding the
post as he had retired, such has to be viewed to
be not the valid ground to deny the increment.
The High Court observed that ‘the concept of
day following which the increment is earned
has otherwise no purpose to achieve’. It was
stated, (Para 24)
“In isolation of the purpose it serves the
fixation of day succeeding the date of
entitlement has no intelligible differentia
nor any object is to be achieved by it. The
central government servant retiring on
30th June has already completed a year of
service and the increment has been
earned provided his conduct was good. It
would thus be wholly arbitrary if the
increment       earned     by     the          central
government employee on the basis of his
good conduct for a year is denied only on
the ground that he was not in employment
on the succeeding day when increment
5.1.2 The retirement of the government servant
on the day prior to the increment becoming
payable is only fortuitous circumstance, it was
rightly expressed, (Para 24)
“In the case of a government servant
retiring on 30th of June the next day on
which     increment      falls     due/becomes
payable looses significance and must give
way to the right of the government
servant to receive increment due to
satisfactory services of a year so that the
scheme is not construed in a manner that
if offends the spirit of reasonableness
enshrined in Article 14 of the Constitution
of India. The scheme for payment of
increment would have to be read as whole
and one part of Article 151 of CSR cannot
be read in isolation so as to frustrate the
other part particularly when the other
part creates right in the central
government servant to receive increment.
This would ensure that scheme of
progressive appointment remains intact
and the rights earned by a government
servant remains protected and are not
denied due to a fortuitous circumstance.”
5.2 The view taken by the Madras High Court
in P.Ayyamperumal (supra) and by Delhi High
Court in Gopal Singh (supra) and other High
Courts as above, holding that the government
servant is entitled to increment becoming
payable on 1st July, even though he has retired
on 30th June, is required to be accepted. This
court is in concurrence with the view taken in
the aforesaid decisions by the Madras High
Court and the Delhi High Court and the
reasons supplied therein. This court is unable
to subscribe to the converse view taken by
High Courts        of      Himachal       Pradesh              and
5.3 Furthermore the Supreme Court has
dismissed the Special Leave Petition (Civil)
Dairy No.22283 of 2018 against the decision of
the Madras High Court in P.Ayyamperumal
(supra) as per the order dated 23.7.2018.
5.4 Besides above, the Division Bench of this
court in Union of India Vs. Laxmanbhai
Kalabhai      Chavda          being      Special             Civil
Application No.10751 of 2020 decided on
27.1.2021, dealing with the same issue
accepted the interpretation of the Rule 10
made by the High Court of Madras High Court
in P.Ayyamperumal (supra). The Division Bench
of this court dealt with the legality of the order
of the Central Administrative Tribunal which
had granted the benefit. In that learned
standing counsel could not dispute the
judgment of the Madras High Court in
P.Ayyamperumal (supra) confirmed by the Apex
Court in the Special Leave Petition as above.
5.4.1 In Laxmanbhai Chavda (supra), the
Division Bench of this court observed that
reading of Rule 10 of the Rules would make it
clear that the government servant is entitled to
the increment becoming payable on 1st July.
“...Rule 10 of the Rules, which speaks of
uniform date of annual increment, which
is 1st July of every year. It says that the
employees completing six months and
above in the revised pay structure as on
1st July, will be eligible to be granted the
increment. The first increment, after
fixation of pay as per the said Rules is on
1.1.2006 in the revised pay structure
which shall need to be granted on
1.7.2006 for those employees for whom
the date of next increment was between
1.7.2006 to 1.1.2007.”
5.4.2 It was further stated, (Para 6)
“...the interpretation of Rule 10 of the
Rules made by High Court of Madras
in W.P. No.15372/2017, where the
Court held from the factual details
that the employee before it since had
completed one full year service as on
30.6.2013, i.e. the date of which he
was       superannuated,         but             the
increment fell due on 1.7.2013, on
which date he was not in services
and therefore, it interpreted that he
shall have to be treated as having
completed one full year of service,
though the date of increment fell on
the next day of his retirement.
Accordingly, the court had allowed
the petition and directed that the
petitioner before the High Court of
Madras be given one notional
increment for the period from
1.7.2012 to 30.6.2013, on his having
completed one full year of service.”
5.5 As a Co-ordinate Bench, we are bound
by the aforesaid view taken in Laxmanbhai
Chavda (supra), and stand in agreement
with the same.
6. For the aforesaid reasons and the
discussion, the present challenge to the
order of the learned Single Judge in this
Letters Patent Appeal stands meritless.
7. The present Letters Patent Appeal is
dismissed. Notice is discharged. Interim
orders stand vacated. The directions
issued in paragraph No.12 of the order of
learned Single Judge regarding grant of
benefits to the petitioner- respondent
herein, the same shall be granted within
six weeks from today and the direction
shall be complied with.
In view of disposal of the main appeal, the
Civil   Application       will    not        survive.
Accordingly, it is disposed of.”
6.      Accordingly, all these petitions are allowed. Thereby,
the respondents are directed to grant the benefit of
one increment to the petitioners and accordingly,
revise their pension. Appropriate order shall be
passed within a period of twelve weeks from the
date of receipt of the judgment of this Court.
7.      Rule is made absolute. Direct Service is permitted. No
order as to costs.