[1]        Appellant-husband has come up in appeal against the judgment
and decree dated 07.04.2004 of the Additional District Judge, Faridkot,
whereby petition filed by him under Section 13 of the Hindu Marriage Act
(for short 'the HMA') for dissolution of marriage has been dismissed.
[2]        The marriage between the parties was solemnised on 23.11.1990
at Narnaul, Tehsil and District Mohindergarh (Haryana) according to
Hindu rites. Two sons, namely, Rahul and Rohit were born out of the said
wedlock. As per appellant-husband, respondent-wife is suffering from
incurable mental illness and becomes violent and beats the children
mercilessly and even goes to the extent of attacking the appellant. The
best efforts made by the appellant to get the respondent treated medically
did not bear fruits.      Respondent even refuses to cook meals for the
FAO-M-118-M of 2004
appellant, therefore, he had to go to sleep without food. Respondent
deserted the appellant without any reason more than 3½ years ago
immediately preceding the petition. The efforts made by the appellant to
rehabilitate the respondent in matrimonial home also failed leading him to
file the petition for dissolution of marriage.
[3]        On notice of the petition, respondent-wife appeared and filed
detailed written statement admitting the factum of marriage between the
parties and children from the said wedlock. She denied that she was
suffering from mental illness and ever physically assaulted the children or
husband or ever denied them food. Rather appellant had levelled false
allegations against the respondent to get divorce and it was the appellant
who forced her to leave the matrimonial home. She made efforts to get
herself rehabilitated in her matrimonial home. Respondent denied all the
averments made in the petition and sought dismissal of the same.
[4]        Appellant filed rejoinder to the petition and reiterated his earlier
stand taken in the petition and denied the averments made in the written
[5]        Vide order dated 12.09.2002 following issues were framed: -
“1.         Whether respondent is suffering from incurable
2.          Whether the respondent caused cruelty to the
3.          Whether the respondent has deserted the petitioner
without any reason? If so, its effect? OPA
[6]        In order to prove his case, appellant-husband examined Hoshiar
FAO-M-118-M of 2004
Singh as PW1, Sushil Kumar as PW2 and he himself stepped into witness
box as PW3. He also tendered documentary evidence and closed his
[7]        On the other hand, respondent-wife examined Bhani Sahai as
RW1, her mother Saroj Devi as RW2 and she herself stepped into witness
box as RW3. She also tendered documentary evidence and closed her
[8]        Vide impugned judgment, the Family Court dismissed the
petition filed by the appellant on the ground that he has failed to prove the
allegations levelleved by him against the respondent-wife.
[9]        Heard learned counsel for the parties at length.
[10]       Perusal of record shows that the matter was referred to Lok
Adalat for settlement between the parties. However, on 19.08.2011 case
was returned to this Court as the efforts made for reconciliation between
the parties failed. Again an attempt was made to resolve the dispute and
vide order dated 22.12.2015 the parties were directed to appear before the
Lok Adalat on 29.01.2016.           On 08.04.2016 vide second attempt no
compromise could be arrived at between the parties and on their request
case was sent back to this Court for adjudication.
[11]       The issue for consideration in the present appeal would be
whether the relationship of the husband and wife has come to an end and
if the respondent-wife is not ready to give mutual divorce to the appellant-
husband, whether this act of her, would amount to cruelty towards
husband, keeping in view the fact that she is not staying with her husband
for the last about 23 years and there is no scope that they can cohabit as
FAO-M-118-M of 2004
husband and wife again. Reference at this stage can be made to a
judgment of Hon'ble the Supreme Court of India in a case of Chandra
Kala Trivedi vs. Dr. S.P.Trivedi, 1993 (4) SCC 232 wherein Hon'ble the
Supreme Court was considering a case where marriage was irretrievably
broken down and held that in these case, the decree of divorce can be
granted where both the parties have levelled such allegations against each
other that the marriage appears to be practically dead and the parties
cannot live together.
[12]       Reference at this stage can be made to a judgment of three
Judge Bench of Hon'ble the Supreme Court of India in case of A
Jayachandra vs. Aneel Kaur, 2005 (2) SCC 22 wherein Hon'ble the
Supreme Court was having an occasion to consider the case of divorce on
the basis of cruelty including mental cruelty. While examining the
pleadings and evidence brought on record, the Court emphasized that the
allegation of cruelty is of such nature in which resumption of marriage is
not possible, however, referring various decisions, the Court observed that
irretrievable breaking down of marriage is not one of statutory grounds on
which Court can direct dissolution of marriage, this Court has with a view
to do complete justice and shorten the agony of the parties engaged in
longdrawn legal battle, directed in those cases dissolution of marriage. In
para 17, it has been observed as under:-
“17. Several decisions, as noted above, were cited by
learned counsel for the respondent to contend that
even if marriage has broken down irretrievably decree
of divorce cannot be passed. In all these cases it has
been categorically held that in extreme cases the court
FAO-M-118-M of 2004
can direct dissolution of marriage on the ground that
the marriage had broken down irretrievably as is clear
from para 9 of Shyam Sunder case. The factual
position in each of the other cases is also
distinguishable. It was held that long absence of
physical company cannot be a ground for divorce if
the same was on account of the husband's conduct. In
Shyam Sunder case it was noted that the husband was
leading adulterous life and he cannot take advantage
of his wife shunning his company. Though the High
Court held by the impugned judgment that the said
case was similar, it unfortunately failed to notice the
relevant factual difference in the two cases. It is true
that irretrievable breaking of marriage is not one of
the statutory grounds on which court can direct
dissolution of marriage, this Court has with a view to
do complete justice and shorten the agony of the
parties engaged in long- drawn legal battle, directed
in those cases dissolution of marriage. But as noted in
the said cases themselves, those were exceptional
cases.”
[13]      Hon'ble the Supreme Court in a case of Naveen Kohli vs. Neetu
Kohli, 2006 (4) SCC 558 was considering a case of irretrievable break
down of marriage. In this case, wife living separately for long but did not
want divorce by mutual consent only to make life of her husband
miserable. Thus, the decree of divorce was granted and held it is a cruel
treatment and showed that the marriage had broken irretrievably. In para
62, 67, 68 and 69, it has been observed as under:-
“62. Even at this stage, the respondent does not want
divorce by mutual consent. From the analysis and
FAO-M-118-M of 2004
evaluation of the entire evidence, it is clear that the
respondent has resolved to live in agony only to make
life a miserable hell for the appellant as well. This type
of adamant and callous attitude, in the context of the
facts of this case, leaves no manner of doubt in our
mind that the respondent is bent upon treating the
appellant with mental cruelty. It is abundantly clear
that the marriage between the parties had broken
down irretrievably and there is no chance of their
coming together, or living together again. The High
Court ought to have visualized that preservation of
such a marriage is totally unworkable which has
ceased to be effective and would be greater source of
misery for the parties.
67. The High Court ought to have considered that a
human problem can be properly resolved by adopting
a human approach. In the instant case, not to grant a
decree of divorce would be disastrous for the parties.
Otherwise, there may be a ray of hope for the parties
that after a passage of time (after obtaining a decree
of divorce) the parties may psychologically and
emotionally settle down and start a new chapter in life.
68. In our considered view, looking to the peculiar
facts of the case, the High Court was not justified in
setting aside the order of the Trial Court. In our
opinion, wisdom lies in accepting the pragmatic
reality of life and take a decision which would
ultimately be conducive in the interest of both the
parties.
69. Consequently, we set aside the impugned judgment
of the High Court and direct that the marriage
FAO-M-118-M of 2004
between the parties should be dissolved according to
the provisions of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955. In the
extra-ordinary facts and circumstances of the case, to
resolve the problem in the interest of all concerned,
while dissolving the marriage between the parties, we
direct the appellant to pay Rs.25,00,000/- (Rupees
Twenty five lacs) to the respondent towards permanent
maintenance to be paid within eight weeks. This
amount would include Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees five lacs
with interest) deposited by the appellant on the
direction of the Trial Court. The respondent would be
at liberty to withdraw this amount with interest.
Therefore, now the appellant would pay only
Rs.20,00,000/- (Rupees Twenty lacs) to the respondent
within the stipulated period. In case the appellant fails
to pay the amount as indicated above within the
stipulated period, the direction given by us would be of
no avail and the appeal shall stand dismissed. In
awarding permanent maintenance we have taken into
consideration the financial standing of the appellant.”
[14]      In the present case, the marriage between the parties had broken
down irretrievably since long and there is no chance of their coming
together, or living together again. Further, not to grant decree of divorce
would be disastrous for the parties.
[15]      The three Judges' Bench of Hon'ble the Supreme Court in a case
of Samar Ghosh vs. Jaya Ghosh, 2007 (4) SCC 511 passed the decree on
the ground of mental cruelty but the concept of irretrievable breakdown of
marriage has been discussed in detail referring the 71st report of the Law
Commission of India.
[16]       Hon'ble the Supreme Court in a case of K. Srinivas Rao vs.
D.A. Deepa, 2013 (5) SCC 266 has observed that though irretrievable
breakdown of marriage is not a ground for divorce under the Hindu
Marriage Act, however, marriage which is dead for all purposes, cannot
be revived by Court's verdict, if parties are not willing since marriage
involves human sentiments and emotions and if they have dried up, there
is hardly any chance of their springing back to life on account of artificial
reunion created by court decree.
[17]       It is well settled that once the parties have separated and
separation has continued for a sufficient length of time and anyone of
them presented a petition for divorce, it can well be presumed that the
marriage has broken down. The Court, no doubt, should seriously make an
endeavour to reconcile the parties; yet, if it is found that the breakdown is
irreparable, then divorce should not be withheld. The consequences of
preservation in law of the unworkable marriage which has long ceased to
be effective are bound to be a source of greater misery for the parties.
[18]       In the present case, the appellant and the respondent are living
separately for the last more than 23 years. Firstly efforts were made to
resolve the matrimonial dispute through the process of mediation, which
is one of the effective mode of alternative mechanism in resolving the
personal dispute but the mediation failed between the parties.
[19]       Applying the ratio of the above-mentioned judgments to the
facts of the present case and keeping in view the extra-ordinary facts and
circumstances of the case, the appeal is allowed, judgment dated
07.04.2004 passed by the Additional District Judge, Faridkot, is set aside
FAO-M-118-M of 2004
and decree of divorce is granted in favour of the appellant-husband.
Decree-sheet be prepared accordingly. However, we direct the appellant-
husband to make an F.D. of `10 lakhs as permanent alimony in the name
of the respondent-wife.