appearances, Court's orders or directions Court's or Judge's orders
and Registrar's order
Shri D.P. Thakre, Additional Government Pleader for Respondent
Nos.1, 2, 6 and 7.
Shri S.M. Puranik and Shri J.B. Kasat, Advocates for NagpurMunicipal
Shri Sundeep R. Badana, Advocate for Intervenor- Ankita Shah.
Shri S.S. Sanyal, Advocate for Intervenor.
Shri A.S. Manohar, Advocate for Intervenor.
Shri Vikram M. Vishwarupe, Advocate for Intervenor.
Shri Ashwin Deshpande, Advocate for Intervenor.
2.       Civil Application No.916 of 2022 has been filed by the N.G.O.-
Save Speechless Organization, which is a Public Trust, which is
founded with the object of providing the dog shelter homes for taking
proper care of stray dogs. The N.G.O. has prayed for it’s addition as a
party-respondent in this petition. The cause being espoused by the
N.G.O. is noteworthy and laudable.        We are of the view that the
presence of the N.G.O. as a party-respondent in this petition would be
of a great help to the cause being espoused in this petition. Of course,
Shri Mirza, learned counsel for the petitioners, submits that in
appropriate cases, the intervenors, who wish to be added as the
respondents, must be called upon to deposit an amount of not less
than Rs.10,00,000/- in this Court to show their bona fides. It is his
contention that providing of food, shelter and care to stray dogs
happens at the cost of tax-payers’ money and, therefore, if any N.G.O.
or any individual is interested in the welfare of stray dogs, it or he
must come forward and show it’s or his bona fides so that the issue
can be resolved properly by balancing the interest of members of
public at large and the interest of dog lovers.         We would have
ordinarily accepted the argument of Shri Mirza, learned counsel for
the petitioners, but, so far as the present N.G.O. is concerned, we find
that the N.G.O. has already proved it’s bona fides, as the N.G.O. is
already running a dog shelter where it is taking care of about 150 to
200 stray dogs. Therefore, for allowing this application, there would
be no need for imposing any condition of deposit of any amount by the
N.G.O. Civil Application No.916 of 2022 is, therefore, allowed. The
N.G.O. be added as another party-respondent in this petition.
3.       Shri Mirza, learned counsel for the petitioners, submits that
the Apex Court has only stayed the particular observation of this Court
made in the order dated 20-10-2022, which reads as follows :
“8.      ...If these so called friends of stray dogs are really
interested in protection and welfare of the stray dogs, they
must adopt the stray dogs, take home the stray dogs or at
least put them up in some good dog shelter homes and bear
all the expenses for their registration with Municipal
Authorities and towards their maintenance, health and
vaccination...”
Shri Mirza submits that except for this observation, the Apex
Court has not stayed the order passed by this Court on the earlier
occasion on 20-10-2022.        He further submits that it is, therefore,
necessary that the rest of the directions issued by this Court are
required to be followed by the parties, in particular by the Nagpur
Municipal Corporation and the Commissioner of Police, Nagpur, and
accordingly, the Nagpur Municipal Corporation and the Commissioner
of Police be directed to comply with those directives.
4.       Shri Thakre, learned Additional Government Pleader for the
respondent-State, submits that he is yet to receive any instructions
about exercise of the powers under Section 44 of the Maharashtra
Police Act, 1951 by the Commissioner of Police, as directed by this
Court, and, therefore, he seeks time to file a reply in that regard. In
the meanwhile, we would request the learned Additional Government
Pleader to take up the issue with the Commissioner of Police and see
that no nuisance is created by the stray dogs and if it is found that
there is nuisance created, it should be brought in control by the
Commissioner of Police in exercise of the powers under Section 44 of
the Maharashtra Police Act, 1951, conferred upon him, subject to
directions of this Court dated 22-10-2022. In fact, the Apex Court has
already directed the Nagpur Municipal Corporation to take steps to
deal with ferocious and aggressive dogs in accordance with law in it’s
latest order dated 16-11-2022.       About the directions, which are
required to be followed by the Nagpur Municipal Corporation and
which have not been stayed by the Apex Court, we are of the view that
the Nagpur Municipal Corporation must now show enthusiasm and
must take the requisite initiative for complying with those directions;
and doing so by it, would only lead to substantial reduction or
elimination of the nuisance caused by ferocious and aggressive dogs.
Of course, that has to be done in accordance with law in terms of the
directions issued by the Apex Court and also by this Court on
20-10-2022, to the extent they are not stayed by the Apex Court.
5.        Today, Shri Puranik, learned counsel for the Nagpur
Municipal Corporation, is not available owing to some personal
difficulty, and a request is made on his behalf to grant further time to
file a detailed compliance report. We grant time till 7-12-2022.
6.        Shri Ashwin Deshpande, learned counsel for one of the
intervenoers-respondents, draws our attention to the direction made
in Para 19 of the order dated 20-10-2022 passed in Civil Application
No.2364 of 2022, whereby this Court had directed the Commissioner
of Municipal Corporation, Nagpur, to look into the complaint
dated 18-10-2022 filed by Dhantoli Nagrik Mandal complaining about
the nuisance created by stray dogs in that area. A further direction
was issued to take steps and ensure that the nuisance is removed and
eliminated on or before the next date. This Court had also directed
the Commissioner of Municipal Corporation, Nagpur, to submit a
compliance report on the next date.
7.        There was a response, orally submitted by the Nagpur
Municipal Corporation on the last date stating that about 24 stray dogs
were detained by the Nagpur Municipal Corporation, which were later
on released.      However, the compliance report stating about the
reduction or removal of the nuisance created by stray dogs is
necessary and it is not as yet filed.    We grant further time to the
Corporation to file the same on record.
8.        Shri Sanyal, the learned counsel for one of the intervenors-
respondents, invites our attention to some documents filed on record
of the case by him, which contain the research papers and the revised
module for stray dogs management, rabies eradication, reducing
man-dog conflict, devised by the Animal Welfare Board of India. He
submits that the revised module formulated by the Animal Welfare
Board of India draws on experiences of several other countries,
including European countries, and our own country, which were
successful in reducing the dog population.       He submits that this
module takes care of not only the vaccination programmes and
sterilization of stray dogs, but also the manner in which it has to be
done and the nature of food that must be provided to stray dogs. He
further submits that if this module is adopted and followed by the
Nagpur Municipal Corporation, it would help in reducing or removing
the man-dog conflict, putting an end to the nuisance of stray dogs.
The Animal Welfare Board of India is not a party here. We direct the
Nagpur Municipal Corporation to consider the guidelines prescribed in
the revised module issued by the Animal Welfare Board of India for
the purpose of elimination of stray dogs’ nuisance and taking care of
welfare of these stray dogs. The Nagpur Municipal Corporation may
also consult the Animal Welfare Board of india, if it thinks fit.
9.        As regards the submission of Shri Mirza, learned counsel for
the petitioners, that the intervenors, who wish to be joined as the
party-respondents, must be asked to deposit an amount of
Rs.10,00,000/- in this Court to show their bona fides, we may say that
the submission would be taken care of and would be considered in
future, if any new applications are made by more intervenors. As
regards the present intervenors, who have been permitted to be joined
as the party-respondents, we must say that each of the intervenors
must give his or it’s suggestions regarding the manner in which the
nuisance of stray dogs must be controlled. We would also call upon
them to contribute their individual bits for the cause which has been
espoused in this petition.
10.       Shri Ashwin Deshpande, learned counsel for one of the
intervenors-respondents, and Shri Mirza, learned counsel for the
petitioners, have pointed out to us that as an aftermath of the order of
this Court dated 20-10-2022, some of the persons have embarked
upon the exercise of unauthorizedly collaring the stray dogs without
obtaining their registration, just to create a confusion in the mind of
the officials of the Corporation, who are tasked with taking of action
for controlling the nuisance of stray dogs. We direct the Nagpur
Municipal     Corporation    to   check    whether    any    stray   dogs
unauthorizedly collared and if so, take steps for removing their collars
forthwith and later on deal with them in accordance with law.
A compliance report in this regard be submitted on the next date.
11.      Stand over to 7-12-2022.