The instant revision petition has been filed for setting aside the
order dated 26.10.2018 passed by Additional Sessions Judge, Narnaul,
whereby the application submitted by the petitioner for declaring him as a
juvenile on the date of occurrence had been dismissed in the case arising out
of FIR No.658 dated 30.12.2014 under Sections 148, 149, 323, 302, 307,
216 IPC and Section 25/54/59 of the Arms Act, registered at Police Station
The facts of the case in brief are that a criminal case was
registered on the statement of complainant-Ajit son of Hanuman wherein he
had alleged that he along with Kukku son of Nihal Singh and one Vikas son
of Suman Kumar were standing at Kurahvata turn at around 04.00 pm on a
motorcycle when the accused persons along with the petitioner came along
with guliya and dandas in their hands. The accused caused injuries on the
head and body of the complainant with their respective weapons and also
fired a shot on the eye of Kukku which was stated to have been stained with
blood. The assailants thereafter ran away from the spot along with their
motorcycles and scooty upon people being attracted to the spot. On the
basis of statement of the complainant, the aforesaid FIR for the commission
of offences including Section 307 IPC was registered against the assailants
including the petitioner. During investigation, Kukku succumbed to the
injuries sustained by him in the incident and the offence under Section 302
IPC was added later on. The investigation was completed and a final report
was filed on conclusion of the investigation against the petitioner even
though material pertaining to juvenility of co-accused Naval and Hemant
was collected by the investigating agency during the investigation.          A
separate juvenile challan was to be submitted against the accused Naval and
Hemant Kumar who were claimed to be juvenile as on the date of
commission of offence.
After the submission of the final report, the case was committed
and charge framed. The petitioner did not raise any plea of juvenility.
Evidence commenced and it was thereafter that the petitioner submitted an
application dated 31.08.2017(Annexure P-10) before the Court of Additional
Sessions Judge, Narnaul for determining the claim of his juvenility at the
time of commission of offence. It was claimed by the petitioner that the
incident in question had taken place on 30.12.2014 and that he was born on
03.09.1998 at Sri Ganganagar, Rajasthan. Hence, he was minor at the time
of the incident in question.          The said application has, however, been
dismissed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Narnaul vide order dated
26.10.2018. The present revision petition has been preferred against the said
order after a further delay of more than 2½ years of the passing of the said
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has
vehemently argued that the documents issued by the authorities at Sri
Ganganagar clearly established that date of birth of the petitioner is
03.09.1998 and that he was thus a minor as on the date of commission of
offence on 30.12.2014. He has further relied upon the affidavit sworn by his
mother in support of his date of birth. It is also claimed that father of the
petitioner has appeared in the witness box and has reiterated the date of birth
of the petitioner in his deposition i.e. 03.09.1998.       He has also placed
reliance on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the matter of
Manoj @ Monu @ Vishal Chaudhary Versus State of Haryana and
another, 2022 AIR (Supreme Court) 1060, to contend that the birth
certificate issued by a Municipal Authority or Panchayat is a relevant
document to prove juvenility of an accused in preference to the school
leaving record. He has argued that reliance of the prosecution on the school
certificate showing his date of birth as 03.09.1994 is thus liable to be
disregarded on appraisal/consideration thereof against the birth certificate
issued by the authorities in Sri Ganganagar, Rajasthan.           He has thus
vehemently argued that the application of the petitioner for declaring him
juvenile has been dismissed wrongly and in disregard to the law laid down
by the Court and the said order thus deserves to be set aside.
I have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and have gone
through the impugned order as well as the documents appended along with
the instant petition.
It is evident from a perusal of the said order that the reliance of
the petitioner is on the documents i.e. certificate(Ex.D1) issued by Registrar,
Deaths & Births, Sri Ganganagar, Rajasthan; application for obtaining the
said certificate as Ex.D2; the application form for registering the date of
birth of the applicant-accused as Ex.D3 and the affidavit of Smt. Manju Devi
i.e. mother of the petitioner furnished to Tehsildar/Executive Magistrate, Sri
Ganganagar, Rajasthan as Ex. D4. In addition thereto, reliance was also
placed on the deposition of Radhe Shyam/father of the petitioner.
Perusal of the deposition of Radhey Shyam, while appearing as
a witness in support of the application clearly establishes that the said
witness claims to be running a barber shop in Sri Ganganagar, Rajasthan and
claims to have worked there from 1992 to 2003. He submits that even
though his son was born in March 1998, but he does not know his date of
birth. It is also acknowledged by him that an application for declaring the
petitioner as a juvenile had been filed earlier in the Court in the year 2015
and that he was not aware whether the same was dismissed or withdrawn. It
is claimed by him that he has three daughters and thereafter his son Rahul
was born. The petitioner-Ravi @ Rabbu was born after Rahul. He has
acknowledged that his daughters had studied upto 3rd/4th grade and that
petitioner-Ravi @ Rabbu also studied in class 3rd at LRK Middle School,
Mahendergarh but thereafter also denied that the petitioner-Ravi @ Rabbu
ever studied in Mahendergarh. It is found undisputed that father of the
petitioner had gone to Sri Ganganagar in the year 1992 and that his family
and children were residing at Mahendergarh and that he used to visit
Mahendergarh once in 2-3 months. The relevant extract of the deposition of
Radhey Shyam is reproduced as under:-
“I went to Ganga Nagar in year 1992. I cannot tell the house
number. Ward number of the house where I stayed during that
year.    My shop was situated in the Housing Board.           My
children were residing at Mahendergarh and I used to visit to
them in once of 2-3 months. My parents were residing besides
my children for their look after at Mahendergarh. I do not
know that when present case was registered against my son. I
did not inform with regard to date of birth my son Ravi @
Rabbu either in the Office of Death of Birth at Mahendergarh
or in the Police Station or to the Chowkidar or in the Municipal
Committee. I did not get registered the date of birth of my other
children. I returned from Ganga Nagar to Mahendergarh in
year 2003 and thereafter I did not go back there. I did not visit
at Ganga Nagar for any cause except once I visited to
Dharurera for the sake of marriage of my brother-in-law
namely Babu Lal. It is incorrect to suggest that date of birth of
my son Ravi @ Rabbu is 03.09.1994 and he had studied at LRK
Middle School, Mahendergarh in the Class 3 and in order to
save him from legal punishment and I am deliberately
denying/concealing his date of birth.”
It is also evident from the birth certificate appended along with
the petition as Annexure P-4 that the application for registration of the birth
certificate was submitted on 04.05.2015 i.e. merely five months after the
commission of offence and registration of the FIR.            Further, even the
information for registration of date of birth at Sri Ganganagar was submitted
in the month of May 2015 along with an affidavit of Manju Devi, mother of
the petitioner.
The case of the petitioner does not seem probable and fails to
inspire confidence. It is noticed that it is the case of the father of the
petitioner himself that he was staying at Sri Ganganagar during the period
from 1992 to 2003 and used to visit Mahendergarh once in 2-3 months. He
has also admitted that the children were residing at Mahendergarh and they
did not stay at Sri Ganganagar. Further, no explanation has been tendered as
to why father of the petitioner preferred to remain silent to get the date of
birth registered for a period of nearby 17 years since birth of the petitioner,
as per claim of father of the petitioner himself. The application in question
was itself submitted in the year 2015. Further, the witness namely Mukesh
Chalana, UDC in Municipal Council, Sri Ganga Nagar, Rajasthan has
appeared as PW2 and submitted that the original record had not been
brought by him and the entry in question had been made only on the basis of
an affidavit(Ex.D4) purportedly furnished by the mother of the petitioner. It
is also submitted that neither the affidavit(Ex.D4) nor the application(Ex.D2)
were prepared in his presence and that the affidavit(Ex.D4) does not bear
any identification report.      It is also noticed that the space meant for
informant in the application form was also vacant. It also stands established
that the date of birth of the petitioner/applicant was registered on 04.05.2015
and birth certificate was issued on 05.05.2015. It is thus evident that as per
own case of the petitioner entry as regards registration of the date of birth
was incorporated after a lapse of 17 years and even the affidavit(Ex.D4)
(which is foundation of the certificate) lacks identification. The witness who
appeared on behalf of the Municipal Council, Sri Ganga Nagar, Rajasthan
was also not the person who made an entry in the register and further
accepted that the affidavit(Ex.D4) is only the material on the basis whereof
the entry has been made. Even the said affidavit is suspicious because of
lack of identification by any competent person. Besides, Manju Devi who
was author of the said affidavit has also not stepped into the witness box to
support the same. The original register was not produced to verify the
condition of the same or to ascertain the genuineness of the entry.
Even though there would be no dispute with respect to the
proposition of law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court and relied upon by
learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner that a birth certificate
issued by the Corporation or Municipal Authority has to be given eminence.
However, it would be inherent in such an order that such certificate should
not be shrouded by suspicious circumstances and is duly proved. However,
facts of the instant case render issuance of the certificate by the authorities
suspicious and unreliable in the light of circumstances noticed above. The
delay in registration and issuance of birth certificate and that too after the
petitioner was already nominated as an accused in the FIR leaves enough
room for doubting the credibility of the witness and the documents
submitted by them. The supporting evidence and the witnesses who were
required to prove due issuance of the documents pertaining to the
registration certificate have not been examined. The original record of the
register of Births has also not been produced before the Court. Hence, the
entry in the record of Municipal Council cannot be accepted as genuine,
valid, legal and a primary and proved document.
Per contra, the entry in the school certificate which reflects the
date of birth of the petitioner as 03.09.1994 is a more contemporaneous
evidence and is corroborated by the circumstances including the admission
of the father of the petitioner himself that the children used to stay at
In addition thereto, it is also evident from perusal of the
evidence of father of the petitioner that even earlier an application seeking
declaration of the petitioner as juvenile was also filed, but the same was
either dismissed or was withdrawn.         There is also no reference by the
petitioner to the said order and no valid reason has been given as to why the
petitioner did not prefer to raise a challenge to the said order. The challenge
to the impugned order has also been raised after a delay of more than 2½
All the facts have been duly taken into consideration by the
Additional Sessions Judge, Narnaul. There is no undisputed, reliable and
uncontroverted evidence that would prove and establish the date of birth of
the petitioner as 03.09.1998. In the absence of any such convincing and
undisputed evidence and the evidence led by the petitioner being suspicious,
unreliable and having not been proved by cogent, convincing and reliable
evidence, I find no illegality or infirmity in the impugned order dated
26.10.2018 passed by Additional Sessions Judge, Narnaul.
The instant revision petition is accordingly dismissed, being
devoid of merit.