Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 24591 of 2021
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Aditya Narayan Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
1.     The present bail application under Section 439 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure purports to have been filed on behalf of the applicants
Kamlesh Yadav and Rajesh Chauhan in Case Crime No. 104 of 2020, under
Sections 328, 302 IPC, Police Station Bahariyabad, District Ghazipur who
are stated to be in jail since 09.04.2021.
has appeared in the matter.
3.     No one appears on behalf of the applicants to press this bail
application even when the matter has been taken up in the revised list.
4.     Sri B.B. Upadhyay, learned Additional Government Advocate for the
State is present.
5.     Sri Amit Srivastava, Advocate appears on behalf of Saurabh Singh
Chauhan the purported deponent of the present bail application.
6.     The present bail application is an example of a mischievous filing of a
case before a Court of law by fictitious person(s).
7.     This matter was initially taken up on 26.07.2021 and the following
in the revised list.
No one appears on behalf of the applicants to press this bail
application. Sri Sanjay Singh, learned A.G.A. is present for the
Sri Abhishek Kumar, Advocate has appeared in this matter and
informed the court that although he is not a counsel in the
present matter but the present bail application has been shown
to be filed by Sri Aditya Narayan Singh Advocate having Roll
No. A/A-0132/12 and Sri Rajesh Chandra Tiwari having
Advocate Roll No. A/R-1202/12 and states that same is a
mischief by some one as Sri Aditya Narayan Singh has expired
around two years back and as per the Advocate Roll No. A/R-
1202/12 the same is some one else and not of Sri Rajesh
Stamp Reporter has reported that the certified copy of first
information report and free copy of bail rejection order is
required.
From perusal of bail application it is apparent that the mobile
number of Sri Aditya Narayan Singh Advocate as mentioned
has 11 digits which is not possible even the memo of
appearance/parcha has filed with the bail application is hand
written parcha which has the same details as have been
mentioned in the bail application.
Registrar General of this Court is directed to give a report
regarding the details of both the counsels as printed in the bail
application within three days from today.
Let the matter be listed on 30.07.2021 as fresh.”
8.   The Registrar General of this Court gave a report dated 29.07.2021
In compliance to the above directions, the details regarding
above mentioned Advocates-on-Roll nos. A/A0132/12 and
A/R1202/12 have been sought from the AOR Sectioin and in
response, AOR Section has submitted three pages in which
1. Roll no. A/A0132/2012 (Flag- ‘B’) is assigned on the
name of Aditya Narayan Singh, S/o Udai Narayan Singh,
Chamber No. 118 and Mobile No. 9450611089. The office peon
went to the above Chamber No. 118 where Sri Anil Kumar
Aditya (A/A0745/2012 s/o Sri Aditya Narayan Singh, Advocate
found. Sri Anil Kumar Aditya came in may chamber and
informed me that his father Sri Aditya Narayan Singh had died
on 16.05.2014 and submitted his father’s death certificate
2. Roll No. A/R1202/2012 (Flag- ‘D’) is assigned on the
name of Ravi Tiwari S/o Madhu Sudan Tiwari, Chamber No. 17
and Mobile No. 9335113219. I personally called on the Mobile
No. 9335113219 and asked him about this Bail Application. Sri
Ravi Tiwari came in my chamber and informed me that he has
not submitted any Bail Application in this matter.
On page no. 75 of this Bail Application, the name of two
Advocates are mentioned. The Name, AOR No., Chamber no.
and Mobile no. of the one advocate is mentioned as Sri Aditya
Narayan Singh, A/A0132/2012, 111 and 94450611089,
respectively and the Name, AOR No and Chamber no. of
another advocate is mentioned as Rajesh Chandra Tiwari,
A/R1202/2012 and 111.
Page No. 04 of this Bail Application is having same name
of Sri Rajesh Chandra Tiwari with same AOR but Chamber no.
is different which is mentioned as Chamber No. 127, Old
The office peon went to the above mentioned Chamber
Nos. 111 and 127, Old Building, High Court, Allahabad but none
of advocate having name Rajesh Chandra Tiwari is found in
both the Chambers.
In this regard, an information about the purchasing
authority of the Welfare Stamp having serial number S.R. No.
HCBA 0167796 affixed on the back of page no. 75 from the
Secretary, High Court Bar Association, Allahabad and in
response, the Hony. Secretary, High Court Association,
Allahabad has submitted that the Welfare stamp has been
taken by Sri Aditya Narayan Singh, Advocate having Advocate
Roll No. A/A0132/2012 on 22.06.2021 (Flag- ‘E’).
On the perusal of the above facts, it is clear that
advocate Aditya Narayan Singh has passed away long back
and AOR no. A/R1202/2012 is assigned to Sri Ravi Tiwari
instead of Sri Rajesh Chandra Tiwari. On being search on the
official website of Allahabad High Court, no record found on the
name of Rajesh Chandra Tiwari (Flag- ‘F’).”
9.   The matter was then taken up on 30.07.2021 and the following order
“Sri Abhishek Kumar, Advocate has appeared in the matter. No
one appears on behalf of the applicants to press this bail
application even when the matter has been taken up in the
revised list.
Sri B.B. Upadhyay, learned A.G.A. is present for the State.
This Court on 26.7.2021 has passed the following order:-
"Matter taken up in the revised list.
No one appears on behalf of the applicants to press this bail
application. Sri Sanjay Singh, learned A.G.A. is present for the
Sri Abhishek Kumar, Advocate has appeared in this matter and
informed the court that although he is not a counsel in the
present matter but the present bail application has been shown
to be filed by Sri Aditya Narayan Singh Advocate having Roll
No. A/A-0132/12 and Sri Rajesh Chandra Tiwari having
Advocate Roll No. A/R-1202/12 and states that same is a
mischief by some one as Sri Aditya Narayan Singh has expired
around two years back and as per the Advocate Roll No. A/R-
1202/12 the same is some one else and not of Sri Rajesh
Stamp Reporter has reported that the certified copy of first
information report and free copy of bail rejection order is
From perusal of bail application it is apparent that the mobile
number of Sri Aditya Narayan Singh Advocate as mentioned
has 11 digits which is not possible even the memo of
appearance/parcha has filed with the bail application is hand
written parcha which has the same details as have been
mentioned in the bail application.
Registrar General of this Court is directed to give a report
regarding the details of both the counsels as printed in the bail
application within three days from today.
Let the matter be listed on 30.07.2021 as fresh."
A report of the Registrar General of this Court has been
submitted. The said report is on record. A perusal of the said
report goes to show that Sri Aditya Narayan Singh, Advocate,
who is shown as one of the counsels in the bail application, has
died on 16.5.2014. His death certificate has been provided by
his son which is on record. It is further reported that the
Advocate Roll No. A/R1202/2012 is assigned on the name of
Sri Ravi Tiwari, Advocate, having his chamber in Chamber No.
17 and not to Sri Rajesh Chandra Tiwari who is also shown as
another counsel in the bail application. Even a report from
Hony. Secretary, High Court Bar Association, Allahabad was
called for verification about the details of purchasing authority of
Welfare Stamp having Serial No. HCBA 0167796 which is
affixed on the back of page-75 being the memo of appearance/
purcha filed on behalf of the applicant and a report has been
submitted stating that the said Welfare Stamp has been taken
by Sri Aditya Narayan Singh, Advocate, having Advocate Roll
No. A/A0132/2012. It is again reiterated that Sri Aditya Narayan
Singh has been reported to have died on 16.5.2014 but the said
Welfare Stamp has even then been purchased in his name.
Even the free copy of bail rejection order has not been filed in
this bail application.
The deponent in the present bail application is Saurabh Singh
Chauhan whose details are mentioned as under:-
"Affidavit of Saurabh Singh Chauhan, Aged about 22 years,
Son of Amrendra Singh Chauhan, Resident of Semaria,
He in para No. 1 of the affidavit claims himself to be the son of
the applicant which is also incorrect as he states himself to be
the son of Amrendra Singh Chauhan, but the present bail
application has been filed on behalf of Kamlesh Yadav the
applicant no. 1 and Rajesh Chauhan the applicant no. 2. The
photocopy of Aadhar Card of the said deponent is annexed at
page-15 of the paper book.
Issue notice to Saurabh Singh Chauhan, son of Sri Amrendra
Singh Chauhan for his appearance before this Court at 10.00
A.M. on 10.8.2021 through C.J.M., Ghazipur, to be served on
him through concerned police station for which office shall
taken appropriate steps within four days from today.
The said action be taken by the office through Fax.
The matter being urgent in nature as the two applicants are in
jail be put up before this Court on 10.8.2021 at 10.00 A.M. as
fresh.
C.J.M., Ghazipur shall send his compliance report by fastest
mode to this Court before the next date fixed.”
10.   Subsequently, on the matter being taken up on 10.08.2021 the
following order was passed by this Court:-
“Sri Abhishek Kumar, Advocate appears in the matter.
No one appears on behalf of the applicant to press this bail
application evenwhen the matter is taken in the revised list.
Sri B.B. Upadhyay, learned A.G.A. for the State is present.
Sri Prabha Shanker Mishra, Honorary Secretary of the High
Court Bar Association, Allahabad is present on behalf of the Bar
The deponent of the present bail application, Saurabh Singh
Chauhan is present before the Court in compliance of the order
dated 30.07.2021.
Sri Amit Kumar Srivastava, Advocate appears in the matter and
states that the deponent who has been summoned vide order
dated 30.07.2021 is present and as he is the deponent in the
bail application of co-accused Amrendra Singh Chauhan, as
such, he is appearing on his behalf.
Sri Amit Kumar Srivastava prays for and is granted 04 days
time to file an affidavit in the matter of the summoned person.
Sri Prabha Shanker Mishra, Honorary Secretary of the High
Court Bar Association states that he may be granted 05 days
time to ascertain certain facts regarding Sri Rajesh Chandra
Tiwari who is shown as a counsel appearing in the present bail
application and also the other counsel who has been allotted
Advocate Roll No. A/R1202/2012 which is assigned in the name
of Sri Ravi Tiwari, Advocate.
Time as prayed is allowed to take necessary steps at his end.
In the meantime, the Registrar General of this Court is directed
to accept the bail application of the applicants which as per the
statement of Sri Abhishek Kumar, Advocate has been
presented for reporting in the office on behalf of Kamlesh Yadav
and Rajesh Chauhan and present the same before the Court
having roster.
List this case on 16.08.2021 as fresh for further arguments.
In the meantime, Sri Amit Kumar Srivastava shall file the said
affidavit and Sri Prabha Shanker Mishra may produce the
relevant report which he proposes to prepare and provide it to
the Court on the next date.
The deponent of the present bail application, Saurabh Singh
Chauhan shall remain present, when the matter is listed next.”
11.    An affidavit dated 13.08.2021 has been filed by Saurabh Singh
Chauhan the so called deponent of the present bail application. Paras 2 to
12 of the said affidavit are quoted hereinbelow:-
“2.     That the deponent in the present affidavit has been
shown to be the deponent of present Criminal Misc. Bail
Application, although he is not the deponent in the said bail
application nor he ever instructed any counsel including Sri
Aditya Narayan Singh and Sri Rajesh Chandra Tiwari,
Advocates to file the present bail application on behalf of
Kamlesh Yadav and Rajesh Chauhan. It is also relevant to
mention here that the deponent has never been authorized by
the accused/applicants to file the present bail application before
this Hon’ble Court on their behalf.
3.      That it is relevant to mention here that the deponent does
not know Sri Aditya Narayan Singh and Sri Rajesh Chandra
Tiwari, Advocates nor he ever met with them despite that the
present bail application has been filed mentioning his
particulars and annexing his Adhar Card, as the deponent in the
present bail application, although the deponent has never
instructed them to file the present bail application.
4.      That the deponent has come to Allahabad and to engage
Sri Amit Kumar Srivastava, Advocate for filing the bail
application of his father Amrendra Chauhan which was filed by
Sri Amit Kumar Srivastava, Advocate as Criminal Misc. 1 st Bail
Application No. 28431 of 2021 which was allowed by the order
dated 12.08.2020 passed by this Hon’ble Court.
5.      That it appears that the present bail application has been
filed on behalf of Kamlesh Yadav and Rajesh Chauhan
mischievously to keep them behind the bars indefinitely and it
also appears that for filing the present bail application no
instruction has been given by the accused applicants as neither
certified copy of the First Information Report nor the
free/certified copy of rejection order passed by court below has
been annexed along with present bail application. It transpires
that the copy of Criminal Misc. 1st Bail Application No. 28431 of
2021 (Amrendra Chauhan Vs. State of U.P.) has been obtained
by someone and photocopy of the documents / annexures have
been annexed in the said bail application which can be verified
by this Hon’ble Court after perusing the annexures of present
bail application and of Criminal Misc. 1 st Bail Application No.
28431 of 2021.
6.      That the averments in paragraph Nos. 1 to 22 and 24 of
the affidavit filed in support of present bail application are
exactly same as averred in paragraph Nos. 1 to 22 and 24 of
affidavit filed in support of Criminal Misc. 1 st Bail Application No.
28431 of 2021. For kind perusal of this Hon’ble Court a photo
copy of the Criminal Misc. 1st Bail Application No. 28431 of
2021, Amrendra Chauhan Vs. State of U.P. is being filed
herewith and marked as ANNEXURE NO. 1 to this affidavit.
7.      That the Aadhaar Card of the deponent has been
annexed alongwith Criminal Misc. 1st Bail Application No. 28431
of 2021 and therefore the same was obtained and
mischievously been used annexing alongwith present bail
application, although the deponent never provided his Aadhaar
Card to the counsel or any other persons for filing the present
bail application, rather same was misused after obtaining the
copy of Criminal Misc. 1st Bail Application No. 28431 of 2021,
Amrendra Chauhan Vs. State of U.P.
8.      This mischief while filing the present bail application
would also apparent from the perusal of the bail application
which would reveal that eleven digit mobile number of Sri Aditya
Narayan Singh Advocate has been mentioned, who has already
died on 16.05.2014, but mobile number of Sri Rajesh Chandra
Tiwari, Advocate, who has mentioned his wrong advocate roll
number, has not been mentioned in the bail application. In
these circumstances, it is apparent that at the behest of
persons inimical to the applicants the present bail application
has been filed while showing the deponent as the deponent in
the present bail application.
9.      That the deponent has no concern with the applicant
no.1 Kamlesh Yadav but it has been mentioned in paragraph-1
of the present bail application that the deponent is the son of
applicant, although the deponent is the son of Amrendra Singh
Chauhan. The aforesaid averments also show that the
never instructed any person to file the present
bail application on behalf of Kamlesh Yadav and Rajesh
10.    That the deponent is a young boy, aged about 22 years
and he is a student of B.Sc. He is having absolutely clean
antecedent, despite that he has been falsely and mischievously
shown as deponent in the present bail application although he
has no concern at all with the applicants in the present bail
application. In support of aforementioned averments the photo
copies of educational certificates of deponent are being filed
herewith and marked as ANNEXURE NO.2 to this affidavit.
11.    That there was no occasion for the deponent to file the
present bail application. He came to Allahabad only for the
pairvi of his father. He was never authorized to do pairvi on
behalf of Kamlesh Yadav and Rajesh Chauhan nor he ever did
any pairvi on their behalf. His Aadhaar Card which has been
annexed alongwith Criminal Misc. 1st Bail Application No. 28431
of 2021 has surreptitiously been obtained and filed along with
the present bail application. The deponent has not made his
signature in the bail application nor is signatures are available
in the present bail application. Under these circumstances it is
apparent that he has not been involved in filing the present bail
application in any manner, despite that he is being harassed
unnecessarily.
12.    That is is most respectfully stated here that the deponent
has not been involved in filing of present bail application in any
manner. The present bail application has been filed by some
person mischievously in order to keep the applicants behind
bars for indefinite period as no counsel ever appeared before
this Hon’ble Court and whenever bail application was taken up.
The deponent is wholly innocent and he was not aware about
the present bail application. His Aadhaar Card has been
misused for oblique purposes regarding which he had no
knowledge.”
12.    Sri Abhishek Kumar, Advocate has produced before the Court an
order dated 23.11.2020 passed in Criminal Misc. Anticipatory Bail
Application (U/s 438 Cr.P.C.) No. 7610 of 2020 (Gram Pradhan Rajesh
Chauhan and two others Vs. State of U.P. and two others), a perusal of
which goes to show that the said anticipatory bail application was filed on
behalf of Rajesh Chauhan, Amarendra Chauhan and Kamlesh Yadav in
which an order has been passed on 23.11.2020 granting them anticipatory
bail till submission of police report, if any, under Section 173(2) Cr.P.C.
before the competent Court. The said application also purports to have
been filed by Sri Aditya Narayan Singh Advocate.
Further, an order dated 19.01.2021 has been produced before the
Court which has been passed in Criminal Misc. Application (U/s 482
Cr.P.C.) No. 135 of 2021 (Gram Pradhanpati Rajesh Chauhan and two
others Vs. State of U.P.), a perusal of which goes to show that none
appeared in the matter when it was taken up and as such the case was
directed to be listed in the ordinary course vide order dated 19.01.2021.
The said petition also purports to have been filed by Sri Aditya Narayan
Further, another order dated 28.09.2020 has been produced before
the Court which has been passed in Criminal Misc. Writ Petition No. 7968
of 2020 (Rajesh Chauhan and two others Vs. State of U.P. and 3 others), a
perusal of which goes to show that even in the said writ petition no one
had appeared on behalf of the petitioners when the matter was called up in
the revised list. The said writ petition was dismissed for want of
prosecution vide order dated 28.09.2020. The same was purported to have
been filed by Sri Aditya Narayan Singh and Sri Rajesh Shukla, Advocates
in which Sri Ram Yash Chauhan, Advocate had appeared on behalf of the
private respondent apart from the learned Additional Government
Advocate for the State.
The said three orders have been taken on record.
13.    The common feature in all the three above petitions is that Sri
Aditya Narayan Singh, Advocate (who is reported to have died on
16.05.2014) has been the sole counsel in two matters and one of the
counsels in the writ petition.
14.    From perusal of the entire records, the report of the Registrar
General of this Court and the affidavit filed by Saurabh Singh Chauhan, it
is apparent that the present bail application has been filed in a clandestine
manner for the reasons best known to the person(s) who have played
mischief by filing the same and then not appearing before the Court to
press the same. The present bail application is a bogus bail application and
this Court thus cannot shut its eye to the said issue and let the same go by
after prima facie coming to the opinion that the filing of the present bail
application on behalf of the two applicants Kamlesh Yadav and Rajesh
Chauhan is in a clandestine manner. The present case is a sham litigation.
This Court is resourceful enough to take appropriate action in the matter
and as such deems it appropriate to take action in the present matter
pertaining to the bogus filing of the present bail application of which
notice was given in the office of the learned Government Advocate, High
Court, Allahabad on 22.06.2021 which was allotted Notice No. 22575 of
2021 and the bail application was presented for reporting in the office of
the Stamp Reporter (Criminal) of this Court on 28.06.2021 and then the
same was presented in the concerned office for being placed before the
Court on 02.07.2021 and is thus before this Court.
15.    The Registrar General of this Court is thus directed to register a First
Information Report in the present matter for which an investigation is
needed to be done seriously so as to cull out the truth and appropriate
action be taken against person(s) involved in the bogus and clandestine
filing of the bail application before this Court. The needful be done within
one month from today.
16.    The Senior Superintendent of Police, Prayagraj is directed to ensure
that the investigation is done by a responsible and a competent police
officer efficiently.
17.    A copy of this order be forwarded by the office to the learned
Additional Government Advocate for its compliance.
18.    Let the matter be listed on 25.10.2021 before this Court along with a
compliance report of the Registrar General and the learned Additional
Government Advocate for further orders.