This petition is filed praying to issue a direction to the 3rd and 4th
respondents not to harass the petitioner nor his staffs in relation to the
running of his restaurant "Kafe Latte" along with Hookah service, except in
accordance with law.
2.    Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that petitioner is
carrying on a restaurant business in the name and style of "KAFE LATTE"
(previously known as "LATTE"). Necessary statutory licenses and permits
for the running of restaurant business vide License Code.09- 111-
004236/2022-23 dated 04.03.2022 was given by the Greater Chennai
Corporation, Chennai. Hookah is served in a designated smoking area to
customers above the age of 21 years in accordance with all the guidelines
laid down under the Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of
Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, supply
and Distribution) Act, 2003. Hookah is served in a separate area which is a
designated smoking zone. The indentity card of every guest and customer is
checked and only those persons above the age of 21 are allowed to enter the
premises. The restaurant is also not situated within 100 yards of any
educational institution. Warning boards and signs regarding the health
hazard of smoking is placed in conspicuous places of the restaurant.
3. The petitioner, earlier, has filed a Writ Petition in W.P.No.
15285 of 2018 seeking injunction restraining the respondents from
interfering with the peaceful conduct of the petitioner's restaurant and an
order of injunction was granted. Even after the order, respondents entered
the premises and arrested the employees and therefore, Contempt Petition
No.1575 of 2018 was filed. Statutory notice was issued to the authorities.
However Contempt Petition No.1575 of 2018 was dismissed on 08.07.2019
for no appearance of the petitioner. Again, a Contempt Petition No.1205 of
2020 was filed. It was disposed with a direction that in name of surprise
inspection, respondent police cannot violate the law. On 08.11.2022, 3 rd
and the 4th respondent had entered the premises and searched the entire
premises and then, registered an FIR in Crime No.246 of 2022 stating that
materials for making "hookah" were available in the premises. Hookah is not
a banned substance. The Hon'ble Supreme Court and this Hon'ble Court in
plethora of cases stated that Hookah is not a banned substance. In the said
circumstances, this petition is filed for the aforesaid relief. In support of the
above submission, learned counsel for the petitioner produced the judgment
reported in (2014) 15 SCC 689 (Narinder S.Chadha and others ..vs..
Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai and others) for the proposition
that smoking with hookah would be permissible under Rule 4(3) of
Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and
Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, supply and Distribution)
Act, 2003.       He also produced the copies of similar orders passed in
W.P.No.18608 of 2021, W.P.No.6567 of 2022, W.P.No. 20180 of 2022 and
W.P.No.24880 of 2022.
4. In response, learned Government Advocate (Crl.Side) strongly
opposed this petition on the ground that already First Information Report in
Crime No.246/2022 for the offences under Section 24(1) of Cigarettes and
Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of
Trade and Commerce, Production, supply and Distribution) Act, 2003 was
registered against the petitioner in Thousand lights police station for
violating the provisions and for possessing banned hookah substance. He
also submitted that there is no specific zone provided as mandated under the
Act. First accused was supplying banned Hutka products, which is injurious
to human health. Restaurant is surrounded by schools and women's colleges.
There is a possibility that children would also be spoiled. He relied on the
order passed in W.P.No.10223 of 2017, wherein hookah smoking was not
permitted in the restaurant. Learned Government Advocate also brought to
the notice of this Court that the Government of Tamil Nadu has introduced a
Bill to amend the Act prohibiting hookah bars. Thus, he prayed for dismissal
of this petition.
5. Considered the rival submissions and perused the records.
6. With regard to the submission of the learned Government
Advocate that the Government has introduced the Bill to amend the
“Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and
Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, supply and Distribution)
Act” to prohibit the hookah bars, until the Bill is passed in the Tamil Nadu
Legislative Assembly and made an Act, L.A. Bill No.57 of 2022 cannot be
given effect to. It is seen from the order produced by the learned counsel for
the petitioner in W.P.No.15285 of 2018, there was an injunction granted
against the respondents from interfering with the petitioner's running the
restaurant in the name and style of 'LATTE' and providing hookah in a
separate smoking zone. The copies of the orders passed in Cont.P.Nos.1575
of 2018 and 1205 of 2020 were also filed.
7.  It is observed in para 18 of the judgment reported in (2014) 15
SCC 689 (cited supra) that,
“18. This takes us to the definition of
"smoking" contained in Section 3(n) of the Act
which has been set out hereinabove. A perusal of
this definition shows that it includes smoking of
tobacco in any form with the aid of a pipe,
wrapper, or any other instrument, which would
obviously include a Hookah. That being the case,
"smoking" with a Hookah would be permissible
under Rule 4(3) and the expression "no other
service shall be allowed" obviously refers to
services other than the providing of a Hookah. It
is, thus, evident that the added words in clause (C)
of Condition No.35 are clearly ultra vires the Act
and the Rules.”
8.  As per this judgment of the Honorable Supreme Court, the term
'smoking' includes smoking with hookah and it is permissible under Rule
4(3) of the Act. Thus, it is made clear that there is no prohibition for
providing hookah service in a restaurant, but it is subject, of course, to the
conditions laid down in Section 4 and Rule 4 of the Act.
9.    Section 4 of the Act reads as follows:-
“4. Prohibition of smoking in a public place.–No person
shall smoke in any public place: Provided that in a hotel
having thirty rooms or a restaurant having seating
capacity of thirty persons or more and in the airports, a
separate provision for smoking area or space may be
made.”
10.   As per this Section if a hotel has 30 rooms and restaurant has
seating capacity of 30 persons or more, a separate provision for smoking
area or space may be made.
11.   Rule 4 of “The Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places Rules,
2008” reads as follows:-
4. Hotels, Restaurants and Airports: -
(1) the owner, proprietor, manager, supervisor or in
charge of the affairs of a hotel having thirty or more
rooms or restaurant having seating capacity of thirty
persons or more and the manager of the airport may
provide for a smoking area or space as defined in
rule 2(e) .
(2) Smoking area or space shall not be established at
the entrance or exit of the hotel, restaurant and the
airport and shall be distinctively marked as
“Smoking Area” in English and one Indian language,
as applicable.
(3) No service shall be allowed in any smoking area
or space provided for smoking.
(3A) The owner, proprietor, manager, supervisor or
in charge of the affairs of the hotel, restaurant or
airport, shall display a board at the entrance of the
smoking area or space of minimum size of 60x30 cm
with a white background and having the message in
English and one Indian language as applicable in
(i)    tobacco smoking is harmful to your
health and the health of non- smokers;
(ii)    entry of person below the age of eighteen
years is prohibited.
(4) The owner, proprietor, manager, supervisor or in
charge of the affairs of a hotel having thirty or more
rooms may designate separate smoking rooms in the
manner prescribed as under:
a) all the rooms so designated shall form a
separate section in the same floor or wing, as the
case may be. In case of more than one floors/wings,
the room shall be in one floor/wing as the case may
b) all such rooms shall be distinctively marked
as “Smoking rooms” in English or one Indian
language, as applicable.
c) the smoke from such room shall be ventilated
outside and does not infiltrate/permeate into the non-
smoking areas of the hotel including lobbies and the
corridors.
As per this Rule, smoking area or space mentioned in proviso to Section 4 of
the Act shall mean a separately ventilated smoking area with the board
“Smoking Area” in English or one Indian language.
12. The definition of 'smoking area or space' as defined under Rule
2(e) of the 'Prohibition of smoking in public places Rules, 2008' is as
(e) "smoking area or space" mentioned in the proviso to
section 4 of the Act shall mean a separately
ventilated smoking room that-
(i) is physically separated and surrounded by full
height walls on all four sides;
(ii) has an entrance with an automatically closing
door normally kept in close position;
(iii) has an air flow system, as specified in Schedule
(iv) has negative air pressure in comparison with the
remainder of the building.
13.    The combined reading of Rule 4 and the definition for the term
'smoking area or space' show that it should conform to the aforesaid
specifications. That apart, they shall display a board at the entrance of the
smoking field or area with minimum size of 60x30cm with white
background with a message in English and in one Indian language in black
colour that 'the tobacco smoking is harmful to your health and health of non
smokers and the entry of the person below the age of 18 years is prohibited'.
If the smoking area or space does not conform to the specifications aforesaid
and Rule 4 of The Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places Rules, 2008, it is
no doubt that the respondent police can prosecute the offender for violation
of the provisions of the Act.
14. In the case before hand, it is the case of the petitioner that the
petitioner has a separate smoking area or space conforming to the standard
specifications as per Rule 4 of The Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places
Rules, 2008. However respondent police disputed this claim in the counter
affidavit. The petitioner has produced, for the perusal of the Court, the
photographs of the exclusive smoking zone. In the light of the contradictory
position taken with regard to the availability of exclusive smoking area or
space as specified under Rule 4 of The Prohibition of Smoking in Public
Places Rules, 2008 and in the light of the judgment of the Honorable
Supreme Court reported in (2014) 15 SCC 689 (cited supra), this Court is
of the view that a direction may be issued to the respondent police not to
interfere with the petitioner's running the restaurant in "Kafe Latte" along
with Hookah service, if hookah service is provided in a smoking area or
space conforming to Rule 4 of the The Prohibition of Smoking in Public
15. With regard to the registration of First Information Report in
Crime No.246 of 2022, it is seen that hookah pots, Tubes, Alufo-Aluminium
foils, premium coconut charcoal were alone found. We have seen that
smoking through hookah is not prohibited as per the judgment of the
Honorable Supreme Court reported in (2014) 15 SCC 689 (cited supra).
Therefore the registration of this First Information Report appears to be on
the wrong understanding of the provisions of the Act and Rules.
16. In view of the reasons stated above, this Court disposed this
writ petition with a direction to the respondent police not to harass the
petitioner or his staff and also not to interfere with the petitioner's running of
restaurant “Kafe Latte” along with Hookah service, if the Hookah service is
being run conforming to the provisions of “Cigarettes and Other Tobacco
Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and
Commerce, Production, supply and Distribution) Act, 2003” and also “The
Prohibition of Smoking in Public Places Rules, 2008”. If there is violation
of any provisions under this Act, it is open to the respondents to take
appropriate legal action.
1.          The Commissioner of Police – Chennai City
2.          The Deputy Commissioner of Police (Triplicane Range)
3.          The Assistant Commissioner of Police (Nungambakkam Range)