[In C.R.A. 626 of 2014]               Mr. Suman Sankar Chattopadhyay, Adv.
[In C.R.A. 604 of 2014]               Mr. Anindya Sundar Chatterjee, Adv.
For the State             :           Mr. Sudip Ghosh, Sr. Adv.
Appeals are directed against judgment and order of conviction and
sentence dated 25.08.2014 and 26.08.2014 passed by the learned Additional
District & Sessions Judge, 2nd Court, Tamluk convicting the appellants for
commission of offence punishable under section 302/34 of the Indian Penal
Code and sentencing Monirul Molla to suffer imprisonment for life till his
death and to pay a fine of Rs. 10,000/-, in default, to suffer simple
imprisonment for another three years and Jiarul Molla @ Jiarul Ali Molla to
suffer imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs. 5,000/-, in default, to
suffer simple imprisonment for two years and six months and further
convicting Jiarul Molla for commission of offence punishable under section
25(1-A) and 25(1-B) of the Arms Act and sentencing him to suffer
imprisonment for five years and pay a fine of Rs. 3,000/-, in default, to suffer
simple imprisonment for three hundred days for the offence punishable
under section 25(1-A) of the Arms Act and further to suffer imprisonment for
three years and pay a fine of Rs.2,000/-, in default, to suffer simple
imprisonment for two hundred days for the offence punishable under section
25(1-B) of the     Arms Act. Sentences imposed on Jiarul Molla to run
Prosecution case as alleged against the appellants are as follows: On
10.11.2011 at 7 a.m. Monirul Molla had contacted a driver, namely, Sanjay
Mondal (P.W. 1) who belonged to an adjacent village, for the purpose of
visiting Digha in his car along with his mother and wife. Sanjay Mondal
agreed to such proposal. Around 7 p.m. he went to village Kataliya and
Monirul and another companion boarded the vehicle. The other person got
out of the vehicle and they proceeded. Thereafter, Monirul stated his mother
would not go for the trip but a lady who was introduced as the wife of
Monirul boarded the vehicle. Monirul and the lady sat in the rear of the
vehicle whereas the other person who was referred to as Jiarul sat beside
Sanjay. Around 9:15 p.m. they reached Kolaghat and had a dinner in a hotel
which was situated opposite to hotel Ser-e-Punjab. Thereafter, they again
proceeded on their journey. After 15-20 minutes, there was a sudden feud
inside the car. Sanjay felt irritation in his eyes and some liquid drops fell on
his left hand which caused burning sensation. When he raised alarm, Jiarul
who was sitting beside him, put a gun to his head and threatened him to
proceed. He proceeded for sometime and upon reaching an island he
somehow turned around and proceeded towards Mecheda. At that time
Monirul again abused the lady and started assaulting her. When they
reached near Ser-e-Punjab Sanjay saw few vehicles and to save his life he
tried to stop the car but the car fell into a drain. Sanjay ran out of the car
shouting “dakat dakat”. Hearing commotion Tarlok Singh, cashier of Ser-e-
Punjab Hotel rushed to the spot and saw two persons running away from the
vehicle. He sent intimation to Kolaghat Police Station which was diarised by
duty officer Dipak Chakraborty (P.W. 24). Pursuant to intimation, the then
Officer-in-Charge, Basukinath Banerjee (P.W. 23) came to the spot along with
his force. He found a dead body of a lady with severe acid burn injuries
inside a Scorpio vehicle. He found a firearm on the seat of the vehicle. He
recorded the statement of Sanjay which was dispatched to the police station
through Constable Asit De (P.W. 22) and Kolaghat Police Case No. 313 dated
11.11.2011 under section 326/302/34 and 25/27 Arms Act was registered
against Monirul Molla and another. In the meantime, inquest was made over
the dead body and the vehicle along with a firearm and other articles were
seized. Investigation of the case was entrusted to Kashinath Chowdhury,
P.W. 25. On the next day he went to Kashipur Police Station, under South
24-Parganas, to investigate the first information report. On interrogation he
found the identity of the deceased. He examined her family members
including her brother (P.W. 9). Body of the deceased was identified by the
said witness on 13.11.2011. Statement of Sanjay Mondal was recorded under
section 164 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. He arrested Monirul Molla
and filed charge-sheet showing Jiarul Molla as absconder. Subsequently,
Jiarul was arrested and put on trial. Charges were framed under section
326/302/34 and 25(1A) (1B) of the Arms Act against the appellants. They
pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. In the course of trial, prosecution
examined 25 witnesses and exhibited a number of documents. Defence of the
appellants is one of innocence and false implication. In conclusion of trial,
trial Judge by the impugned judgment and order dated 25.08.2014 and
26.08.2014 convicted and sentenced the appellants, as aforesaid.
Mr. Rahman appearing for Monirul Molla argued that the evidence of
P.W. 1, Sanjay Mondal, is unreliable. His deposition in Court suffers from
both embellishments and contradictions. His behavior in the course of the
incident is most unnatural. It is not explained how he could turn the vehicle
when Jiarul has put up a gun in his head. P.W. 7, mother of the owner of the
vehicle stated Sanjay telephoned her around 10:30-10:45 p.m. and informed
he was in danger. It is unclear how Sanjay could have contacted her in the
course of the incident. P.W. 1 also admitted he was in the police station for
three days till he was sent to the Magistrate for recording statement under
section 164 of the Cr.P.C. Hence, the witness was under the influence of the
police and his evidence ought not to be believed. It is further argued there is
a three day delay in sending first information report to Magistrate which
raises doubt with regard to the truthfulness of the prosecution case. No
customer of Ser-e-Punjab hotel was interrogated. P.W. 3, the manager of the
hotel did not corroborate P.W. 2, the cashier, that two persons were seen
running away from the car. Name of the accused persons had not been
disclosed by P.W. 1 to the medical officer, P.W. 16. Motive for commission of
the crime is stated for the first time in Court. Manner of the incident as
disclosed by P.W. 1 is at variance to the F.I.R. or earlier statement of the
case. No fingerprints were collected from the vehicle nor was F.S.L. report
with regard to articles seized from the vehicle placed on record. Identification
of Monirul by P.W. 8 for the first time in Court does not inspire confidence.
Hence, prosecution case is riddled with improbabilities and inconsistencies
and ought not to have been believed.
Mr. Chattopadhyay while adopting the arguments of Mr. Rahman
submits Jiarul was belatedly implicated in the instant case. P.W. 1 did not
state his name in the first information report. Upon tutoring, the witness
disclosed its name in his statement before Magistrate which was recorded
after two days on 13.11.2011. His client was arrested from his residence and
there was no question of abscondence. Hence, he prayed for acquittal.
Mr.  Swapan     Banerjee   with  Mr.   Sudip   Ghosh,   learned    Senior
Government Advocates submit P.W. 1 is the most natural witness to the
instance case. He was the driver of the vehicle which was hired by Monirul
and his associate Jiarul to go to Digha. Victim lady boarded the vehicle and
was introduced as the wife of Monirul. In the course of the journey, acid was
thrown on her body. P.W. 1 also suffered acid burn injuries. Hence, he is an
injured eye-witness. He has narrated the entire incident with vivid details.
Minor variation in his deposition from his earlier statement does not affect
the intrinsic truth and credibility of the witness. P.W. 1 resided in an
adjacent village and was known to Monirul. He did not have enmity with the
appellants. His evidence receives corroboration from medical evidence as well
as other witnesses. P.W. 25 immediately commenced investigation and went
to Ghatakpukur to interrogate the family members of the deceased and other
witnesses. Hence, delay in dispatch of the first information report does not
affect the credibility of the prosecution case. P.W. 1 voluntarily remained at
the police station. It cannot be said he had been prevailed by the police
officers to make out a false case against the appellants. P.W. 1 came to know
of the name of Jiarul Molla in the course of the transaction. P.W. 9 stated the
deceased Bijali had left her residence with Monirul and his associate Jiarul.
These circumstances clearly establish the presence of Jiarul in the vehicle
and his actual participation with Monirul to commit the crime. Hence, the
prosecution case is proved beyond doubt.
P.W. 1 is the star witness of the prosecution case. He was the driver of
the vehicle which had been hired by Monirul to go to Digha. Monirul boarded
the vehicle with his associate Jiarul. The victim lady boarded the vehicle and
was introduced to P.W. 1 as wife of Monirul. Monirul and victim sat in the
rear seat while Jiarul sat beside P.W. 1. On the way, they stopped at hotel
opposite to Ser-e-Punjab hotel. They had lunch and proceeded towards
Digha. After sometime, there was a smoke inside the car and few drops of
liquid also fell on the hand of P.W. 1 which caused burning sensation. When
he raised alarm, Jiarul put a gun at his head and asked him to continue on
the journey. Upon reaching a crossing, P.W. 1 suddenly turned the vehicle
and proceeded towards Mecheda. In the meantime, Monirul again abused
and assaulted the victim. Reaching Ser-e-Punjab, P.W. 1 found a number of
vehicles standing there. To save his life, he tried to stop the car and the car
fell into a ditch. He ran out crying “dakat dakat” and the miscreants also ran
away. He informed the incident to the employees of Ser-e-Punjab, P.W. 2 and
3. Police came to the spot. He narrated the incident to the police. He also
informed his owner about the incident. He made statement to the police
which was reduced into writing and treated as first information report. He
was medically treated. Police seized the vehicle and other papers. He made
statement before Magistrate on 13.11.2011.
P.W. 2 and 3 are the cashier and manager of Ser-e-Punjab respectively.
Hearing hue and cries, P.W. 2 came out and saw dead body of a lady inside a
vehicle. A gun was lying beside the seat of the driver. He also saw two
persons running away from the vehicle. Police came to the spot and seized
various articles including vehicle. He signed on the seizure list. P.W. 3
corroborated the version of P.W.2.
P.W. 5 is the owner of the hotel opposite to Ser-e-Punjab where P.W. 1
claimed they had lunched. He stated Pravash Barik was a waiter who was in-
charge of service on that day. He had been interrogated by police but had left
his job one month after the incident.
P.W. 6 is the owner of the black coloured Scorpio vehicle bearing No.
WB-02Z/7208 which was found at the place of occurrence. He deposed P.W.
1 was his driver and had informed his mother an accident had occurred on
the fateful day.
P.W. 7, mother of P.W. 6, stated on 10.11.2011 P.W. 1 had taken
permission from her to use the vehicle on hire to take a family belonging to
his village to Digha. At 10:30/10:45 hours she received a phone call from
P.W. 1 who stated he was in danger. Soon thereafter, he disconnected the
call. On 11.11.2011, she went to Kolaghat Police Station and came to know
of the incident.
P.W. 8 was employed at the petrol pump known as Bhangar Service
Station which was owned by the family member of P.W. 6. He deposed on
10.11.2011 P.W. 1 had come to the service station to fill petrol in the Scorpio
vehicle. He had seen Monirul give money to P.W. 1 to buy petrol.
P.Ws. 9 to 14 are the family members of the deceased.
P.W. 9 is brother of the deceased Bijali. He deposed she was married to
one Kanta Malik and had two issues. Four or five years ago, there was a
quarrel and she started residing with them. She had developed close
relationship with Monirul who was dealer in timber. Jiarul was also involved
in wood business and is an associate of Monirul. On the fateful day, his
sister told him she was going to the residence of Monirul as his mother is
unwell. She had been taken by Monirul and Jiarul. On 12.11.2011 police
came to their residence and showed him a photograph. He identified his
sister by her dress. Thereafter, he went to the morgue and identified her. He
identified the appellants in Court. P.W. 10, father of Bijali, P.Ws. 11 and 13,
cousins of Bijali have corroborated P.W. 9. P.Ws. 12 and 14 are son and
daughter of Bijali respectively. P.W. 12 said Monirul used to regularly visit
his mother and a relationship cropped up between them. He had given a
mobile phone to her mother. After the incident Monirul had threatened him
to withdraw the case using the same mobile number. P.W. 14 is the married
daughter of the deceased. She corroborated her brother, P.W. 12.
P.Ws. 16 and 20 are medical witnesses.
P.W. 16 treated P.W. 1 at Paikpara B.P.H.C., Kolaghat. He found
multiple burn marks on the left forearm of P.W. 1. He proved the injury
report. P.W. 20 held post mortem over the body of the victim. He found 17
injuries lacerated in nature of different depth and dimension. Except injury
Nos. 15, 16 and 17 other injuries related to compression of neck by ligature.
Injury No. 16 is the acid burn injury. He opined death was due to combined
effects of shock and haemorrhage resulting from the acid burn injury and
compression of neck which were ante-mortem and homicidal in nature.
P.Ws. 21 to 25 are police officials.
P.W. 23, Basukinath Banerjee was the Officer-in-Charge of Kolaghat
Police Station. Around 11:05 hours one Dipak Chakraboty (P.W. 24) received
telephonic information from one Tarlok Singh, manager of Ser-e-Punjab hotel
that one car had capsized just beside the hotel and dead body of an
unknown female was found inside the car. The information was diarised and
P.W. 23 along with force came to the spot. On reaching the spot, he found a
Scorpio car capsized in the drain beside Ser-e-Punjab hotel. Tarlok Singh
introduced him to the driver of the car. P.W. 23 found a female with burn
injuries lying in the vehicle. A gamcha was tied down her neck. He found a
pipe gun in the rear seat along with some bottles containing drinks. He called
a photographer to take video photographs of the spot. P.W. 23 recorded the
statement of Sanjay Mondal. The statement was sent before him through
Constable Asit Dey to the police station to register specific case. Duty Officer
Dipak Chakraborty received the complaint and drew up F.I.R. and the
present case was registered. In the meantime, night patrolling car with
Officer Satyajit Chanak came at the spot. Inquest was held and inquest
report was prepared by Satyajit Chanak, Exhibit-6. Body was sent for post
mortem examination through Constable Goutam Kumar Ghosh, P.W. 21.
Investigation of the instant case was handed over to Kashinath
Chowdhury, P.W. 25. P.W. 25 proceeded to the place of occurrence. He drew
up rough sketch map. He interrogated the witnesses. He arranged for
medical treatment of P.W. 1. He received seizure articles from Goutam Ghosh
in presence of P.Ws. 18 and 19. On 12.11.2011, he proceeded to Kashipur
Police Station with the complainant to investigate the case. He identified the
residences of Monirul and Jiarul but could not trace them out. He
interrogated the family members of deceased, that is, Uday Mondal and
Shyam Mondal. They identified the deceased as their sister and daughter of
Pravat Mondal. Pravat Mondal also identified the deceased. On 13.11.2011,
he prayed to record the statement before the Magistrate. He interrogated the
owner of the vehicle and his mother. In the course of investigation he found a
blood stained blouse, one sari, seat cover of vehicle, gamcha, one bottle
containing of 30 ml. of liquid like acid and a bottle of 7up and 10 ml. of
liquid suspected as acid. He sent the articles for examination by the forensic
department. He received the report of arms expert, Exhibit-14. He obtained
sanction from District Magistrate, Exhibit-15. He submitted charge-sheet
against Monirul and Jiarul. In the course of investigation, he obtained
warrant of arrest, proclamation and attachment against Jiarul who was
absconding. He was finally arrested on 07.08.2013, that is two years after
the incident.
Whether the sole eye-witness (P.W. 1) is reliable?
P.W. 1 is an injured eye-witness. His deposition has been assailed on
behalf of the defence on various grounds. It is contended he embellished his
deposition in Court which is at variance to the F.I.R. and his earlier
statement to Magisrate. He was detained at the police station and under
dictation of police the FIR and his statement under section 164 of the Cr.P.C.
was recorded on 13.11.2011, that is, two days after the incident. He had not
named Jiarul in the first information report but on tutoring disclosed the
name of the said accused in his statement under section 164 of the Cr.P.C.
His behavior in the course of the incident is most strange. It is unclear how
he turned the vehicle when Jiarul had put a gun on his head.
I have given anxious considerations to the aforesaid submissions. P.W.
1 stated Monirul had hired his vehicle on 10.11.2011 to go to Digha. Monirul
resided in an adjacent village and was known to P.W. 1. He further stated
Monirul and his associate who was referred to as Jiarul had boarded the
vehicle. Thereafter, another lady boarded the vehicle from Ghatakpukur who
was introduced to him as the wife of Monirul. P.W. 7, mother the owner of
the vehicle corroborated P.W. 1. She stated P.W. 1 had taken permission
from her to use the vehicle to take a family of his village to Digha. P.W. 6,
owner of the vehicle admitted although the vehicle was a private one, he used
to let it out on hire on occasions.
Evidence of P.W. 1 is also corroborated by P.W. 9. P.W. 9 is the
younger brother of the deceased. He deposed there was close relationship
between Monirul and his sister who was living separately from her husband.
Monirul used to regularly visit his sister. Monirul was a dealer in timber.
Jiarul was also in timber business and a friend of Monirul. On the fateful
day, that is, 10.11.2011 his sister stated that she was going to the residence
of Monirul to meet his ailing mother. He further stated Monirul and Jiarul
accompanied his sister from their residence.
These witnesses corroborate P.W. 1 that Monirul, Jiarul and the victim
lady had boarded his vehicle on the fateful day to go to Digha.
In the course of the incident, P.W. 1 suffered acid burn injuries. This is
corroborated by P.W. 16 who treated him at Paikpara B.P.H.C., Kolaghat. The
medical officer found acid burn injures on the left hand of P.W. 1. Aforesaid
evidence establishes beyond doubt that P.W. 1 was the driver of the vehicle
wherein acid was thrown on the victim and he was also injured in the course
of the incident. Hence, I am of the opinion that the prosecution has been able
to prove P.W. 1 was an injured eye-witness to the incident.
It has been argued that P.W. 1 has not truthfully stated the manner in
which the incident occurred. He was kept in the police station for three days
and was tutored by the police to implicate the appellants. I am unable to
accept the aforesaid contentions. Incident of over-turning of the Scorpio
vehicle wherein the deceased lady with burn injuries and ligature marks
around her neck was found was reported to the police station around 11:05
hours on 10.11.2011. Officer-in-Charge of Kolaghat Police Station (P.W. 23)
immediately proceeded to the spot and recorded the statement of P.W. 1 by
00:45 hours on 11.11.2011. Written complaint was dispatched to the police
station and formal F.I.R. was registered at 2:15 hours on 11.11.2011. Hence,
within a couple of hours of the incident, F.I.R. came to be registered which
rules out any possibility of concoction. It is argued the F.I.R. has been ante
dated as it was dispatched to the Magistrate after two days, that is,
13.11.2011 when P.W. 1 was forwarded for recording his statement under
section 164 of the Cr.P.C. Delay in sending the first information report to the
nearest Magistrate by itself does not affect the truthfulness of the
prosecution case. Impact of such delay has to be assessed in the background
of attending facts and circumstances of the case. Learned Counsels for the
appellants submit that the investigating officer, P.W. 25, admitted in Court
that there is no note in the C.D. when F.I.R. was sent to the Magistrate on
13.11.2011. However, analysis of the prosecution evidence on record show
P.W. 25 had already commenced investigation on the first information report
from the day of its registration and on 12.11.2011 had proceeded to
Kashipur Police Station in South 24-Parganas to examine the family
members of the deceased as well as hold raids at the residence of the
appellants        for their apprehension.  Thus,  investigation  on  the   first
information report had commenced in full swing immediately upon its
registration and in all probability due to pre-occupation of the investigating
officer to immediately collect evidence it had slipped out of his mind to
forward the first information report to the Magistrate. In Pala Singh And
Another Vs. State of Punjab1 the Apex Court held as follows:
“8. …FIR was actually recorded without delay and the
investigation started on the basis of that FIR and there is no other
infirmity brought to our notice, then, however improper or
objectionable the delayed receipt of the report by the Magistrate
concerned it cannot by itself justify the conclusion that the
investigation was tainted and the prosecution insupportable.”
In Shiv Ram And Another Vs. State of U.P.2 the Apex Court held if the
prosecution evidence is otherwise credible and trustworthy, mere delay in
sending F.I.R. to Magistrate which is attributable to remissness in
investigation, would not demolish the prosecution case. (See also State of
U.P. Vs. Gokaran And Others3, State of J & K Vs. S. Mohan Singh And
Another4, Anil Rai Vs. State of Bihar5 and Mahmood And Another Vs. State
In the present case, ample evidence is forthcoming that F.I.R. was
promptly registered within couple of hours of the incident. Investigation
commenced on the F.I.R. and the investigating officer proceeded to various
places including the village of the accused persons and raided their
residence. In this backdrop, delay in sending the F.I.R. to the Magistrate in
all probability was due to preoccupation of the investigating officer to collect
evidence and apprehend the offenders and cannot be said to be a ground to
throw out the prosecution case.
It is contended that P.W. 1 improved his version in Court when
compared with his earlier statement in F.I.R. or before the Magistrate. While
in the F.I.R. and before the Magistrate, P.W. 1 only spoke of acid attack on
the victim, in Court he stated the victim was also assaulted repeatedly by
Monirul after the acid attack. Whether such variation in P.W. 1’s deposition
would discredit him must be assessed in the backdrop of the circumstances
of the case. P.W. 1 is an injured eye-witness. He was driving the vehicle.
Monirul and the victim were sitting in the rear seat when the incident
occurred. P.W. 1’s deposition in Court finds corroboration from the autopsy
doctor P.W. 20 who found acid burn injuries as well as compression on the
neck of the deceased. P.W. 2, the cashier of Ser-e-Punjab as well as Officer-
in-Charge, P.W. 23, police officer who arrived at the spot immediately after
the incident also noted acid burn injuries and a ligature around the neck of
the deceased. Thus, the version of P.W. 1, with regard to the manner of
assault is fully corroborated and ought not to be discarded due to minor
contradictions in his statement in F.I.R. or before the Magistrate.
After the incident, hearing the hue and cry of P.W. 1, P.W. 2, cashier of
Ser-e-Punjab rushed to the spot and noted two persons running away from
the vehicle. P.W. 2’s evidence lends credence to P.W. 1 and ought not to be
discarded as he is an independent witness. P.W. 3, manager of the hotel
came to the spot later which explains the reason why he did not notice the
persons running away from the spot. This circumstance also supports the
prosecution case with regard to presence of two other persons in the vehicle
wherein the victim was murdered.
Non-examination of the customers of the hotel has been explained
away by the investigating officer. He stated they were flying customers and in
being apprehensive they may not be traceable during trial, they were not
Learned Counsels for the appellants also expressed doubt with regard
to the unnatural conduct of P.W. 1. It is contended how the witness could
have turned his car when Jiarul had put a gun on his head. Mr. Ghosh,
learned Senior Government Advocate contended P.W. 1 had taken advantage
of the topography of the area to turn around the vehicle. I find much
substance in his submission. After throwing acid on the victim, Jiarul had
threatened P.W. 1 and had put a gun on his head. P.W. 1 proceeded for some
time and on reaching a crossing with multiple arms, took advantage of the
topography and he turned round the vehicle towards Mecheda. This conduct
of P.W. 1, when seen in the light of the attending circumstances, cannot be
said to be unnatural. He did this in a desperate attempt to reach a populated
area and seek help. When he reached Ser-e-Punjab hotel and saw a number
of vehicles standing, he tried to stop the car suddenly and lost control. The
car fell into a ditch. He rushed for help crying “dakat dakat” and P.W. 2 and
others came to the spot. Police also arrived at the spot and he narrated the
incident to the police. He also informed P.W. 7, mother of the owner of the
vehicle with regard to the incident. On the next day, P.W. 7 came to the
police station and acknowledged the identity of P.W. 1 to the police.
Thereafter, police proceeded to work out the information given by P.W. 1 and
contacted the family members of the deceased. Police also raided the
residences of the accused persons but they were not found. Upon primary
verification of the statement of P.W. 1 on 13.11.2011 police made a prayer for
recording his statement under section 164 of the Cr.P.C. During this period
P.W. 1 remained at the police station. From the conduct of P.W. 1 as well as
the investigating officer (P.W. 25), it appears the said witness had voluntarily
remained in the police station and co-operated with the investigation relating
to the verification of his statement which had been recorded immediately
after the incident. In the course of investigation, independent evidence was
collected corroborating the F.I.R. lodged by P.W. 1. These circumstances
show P.W. 1 willingly corroborated with the investigating agency to verify the
contents of his F.I.R. and remained at the police station. There was no
coercion or undue influence upon him to concoct the first information report.
Reliance on Bolum Bhaskara Rao and AnotherVs. State of A.P.7 is wholly
misplaced. In the said report the witness belonged to a different political
party and was inimical to the appellant. He had been forcibly detained in the
police station and his wife had lodged complaints with regard to his wrongful
detention. Hence, his evidence was not believed. The instant case is factually
distinguishable from the authority relied upon by the appellant.
Identification of Jiarul:-
With regard to the involvement of Jiarul, learned Counsel strenuously
argued P.W. 1 did not disclose his name in the first information report. On
the other hand, the witness had described the associate of Monirul through
his physical features. However, in his subsequent statement under section
164 Cr.P.C. as well as in Court the witness stated that he came to know the
name of Jiarul in the course of his conversation with Monirul. This is clearly
an afterthought and identification of Jiarul by P.W. 1 for the first time in
Court, is not worthy of credence. Jiarul was arrested from his residence
which rules out any possibility of his abscondence. It is true P.W. 1 did not
name Jiarul in his first information report. Reading the contents of the F.I.R.,
it would give an impression that he had described the associate of Monirul
not by name but by his physical features. However, in his statement under
section 164 Cr.P.C. before Magistrate which was recorded two days later, he
stated he came to know the name of the accused in the course of their
conversation. No doubt this fact is absent in the first information report and
gives rise to some doubt whether P.W. 1 had known Jiarul by name.
Nonetheless, the witness had described the physical features of Jiarul in first
information report. He had ample opportunity to see Jiarul when they were
travelling together in the same vehicle. The said accused had sat beside him
and put a gun to his head. This left a lasting impression about the physical
features of the accused in his mind. Accordingly, he identified the appellant
in Court also. It is contended no test identification parade was held.
Identification by a witness in Court is substantive evidence. T.I. Parade
conducted in the course of investigation gives assurance and lends
corroboration to the substantive identification in Court. If the identification of
the accused in Court appears to be convincing and failure to hold test
identification parade is explained by prosecution, it would not affect the
credibility of such identification. In the present case, Jiarul had absconded
and could not be arrested. Warrant, proclamation and attachment had been
issued against him. Charge-sheet was filed showing him an absconder. He
was finally apprehended after two years. Due to his abscondence, the
investigating agency was unable to put him up for test identification parade.
On the other hand, it appears from the evidence on record P.W. 1 had ample
opportunity to see the accused while they were travelling in the same car and
had described his physical features in the F.I.R. Hence, identification of
Jiarul in Court by P.W. 1, in the aforesaid facts and circumstances, cannot
be doubted in the absence of T.I. parade. The fact that Jiarul accompanied
Monirul and the victim lady in the vehicle on the fateful day, is also
corroborated by P.W. 9, brother of the victim. P.W. 9 deposed on the fateful
day his sister left their residence stating she is going to the house of Monirul
to meet his ailing mother. She was accompanied by Monirul and his
associate Jiarul. P.W. 9’s evidence lends support to P.W. 1 and establishes
beyond doubt that the other person accompanying Monirul was none other
than Jiarul. After the incident, both the appellants were not found at their
residence and the investigating agency filed charge-sheet showing Jiarul as
an absconder. Inspite of issuance of warrant of arrest, proclamation and
attachment, Jiarul could not be apprehended. He was finally apprehended on
07.08.2013 (two years after the incident) and put on trial. I am aware
abscondence per se cannot establish guilt of an accused. However, in the
present case abscondence of Jiarul after the incident is an additional
circumstance which adds credibility to the prosecution case against him.
It is also argued that the motive of crime has not been proved.
Evidence have come on record particularly from the relations of the deceased,
namely, P.Ws. 9 to 14 there was an illicit relationship between Monirul and
the deceased. From the conversation overheard by P.W. 1, it appears Monirul
suspected the deceased was involved with others too. Hence, he committed
the murder with the assistance of Jiarul. It is contended that such fact was
stated by P.W. 1 for the first time in Court. Even if such contention is
accepted the presence of P.W. 1 who is an injured eye-witness at the place of
occurrence cannot be doubted. His version with regard to the incident finds
corroboration from other evidence on record. When prosecution case is
proved through reliable and convincing evidence particularly that of an
injured eye-witness, absence of motive would not affect the credibility of the
prosecution case.8
It is also contended F.S.L. report of articles seized from the vehicle
have not been produced. No fingerprints were collected from the spot. There
are defects in investigation. Evidence of P.W. 1 alongwith other corroborative
evidence unequivocally establish the presence of the appellants in the
vehicle. Medical evidence proves beyond doubt acid burn injuries suffered by
P.W. 1 and the deceased. In this backdrop, the aforesaid defects in
investigation do not create an inherent wedge in the prosecution case.
Authorities distinguished:-
Authorities relied on behalf of the appellants are apposite. In Kuna
Alias Sanjay Behera Vs. State of Odisha9 the Apex Court discarded the
evidence of solitary eye-witness on the ground he was untrustworthy. It was
noted there was no source of light at the place of occurrence and the witness
inspite of being a near relation did not raise alarm or seek assistance from
In the present case, the presence of P.W. 1 as an injured eye-witness at
the place of occurrence is beyond doubt. He suffered injuries in the course of
the incident which is corroborated by medical evidence. Thus, the ratio of the
aforesaid report is clearly distinguishable. In Jaikam Khan Vs. State of
U.P.10 the Apex Court reiterated the principles laid down in appreciating
evidence of a sole eye-witness. It stated as follows:
“46. …11.….Hence, in our opinion, it is a sound and well-
established rule of law that the court is concerned with the
quality and not with the quantity of the evidence necessary for
proving or disproving a fact. Generally speaking, oral testimony in
this context may be classified into three categories, namely:
(1) Wholly reliable.
(3) Neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable.
In the first category of proof, the court should have no
difficulty in coming to its conclusion either way — it may convict
or may acquit on the testimony of a single witness, if it is found
to be above reproach or suspicion of interestedness, incompetence
or subornation. In the second category, the court equally has no
difficulty in coming to its conclusion. It is in the third category of
cases, that the court has to be circumspect and has to look for
corroboration in material particulars by reliable testimony, direct
or circumstantial…….”
Applying the aforesaid principle laid down by the Apex Court to the
facts of the present case, I find P.W. 1 is a reliable injured eye-witness. His
evidence is supported by other witnesses as well as medical evidence. Thus,
he may be safely relied upon to prove the prosecution case. Other unreported
authorities11 relied on by the prosecution relate to appreciation of evidence in
the facts of those cases. Whether a witness is a truthful and reliable one
would depend on the facts of each case. No precedential value may be
Sk. Shanawaz Vs. State of West Bengal, 2018 SCC OnLine Cal 16830
Dulara Mondal Vs. State of West Bengal in CRA 501 of 2010 dated 31.07.2019
attached to decisions in cases in the matter of appreciation of evidence. In
this regard one may refer to the sagacious observation of the Apex Court with
regard to the role of precedents in the appreciation of evidence in criminal
“The fate of every criminal case depends upon its own facts
and the intrinsic worth of the evidence adduced in the case rather
than what was said about the evidence of witnesses in other
decided cases in the context of facts of those cases. The question
of credibility of a witness has primarily to be decided by referring
to his evidence and finding out as to how the witness has fared in
cross-examination and what impression is created by his evidence
taken in the context of the other facts of the case. Criminal cases
cannot be put in a strait jacket. Though there may be similarity
between the facts of some cases, there would always be shades of
difference and quite often that difference may prove to be crucial.
The same can also be said about the evidence adduced in one case
and that produced in another. Decided cases can be of help if
there be a question of law like the admissibility of evidence.
Likewise, decided cases can be of help if the question be about the
applicability of some general rule of evidence, e.g., the weight to
be attached to the evidence of an accomplice. This apart,
reference to decided cases hardly seems apposite when the
question before the court is whether the evidence of a particular
witness should or should not be accepted.”
Prosecution case has unfolded through the eyes of P.W.1 who is a
reliable and truthful witness. His version is corroborated by other witnesses.
Medical evidence on record, that is, P.W. 16 (who treated P.W. 1) and post
mortem doctor, P.W. 20, unequivocally show that both P.W. 1 and victim had
suffered acid burn injuries in the vehicle. Manner of assault on the deceased
as narrated by P.W. 1 is also supported by the medical evidence.
Evidence of P.W. 1 also shows Jiarul threatened him with a gun which
was recovered from the vehicle itself. In the course of investigation report of
arms expert was collected by I.O. P.W. 25 (Exhibit 14). From the aforesaid
evidence charges under section 25(1-A)/ 25(1-B) are also proved. Thus, the
prosecution case against the appellants is proved beyond doubt.
In the light of the aforesaid discussion, I uphold the conviction of the
Sentence of Jiarul is upheld and the appeal being C.R.A. 626 of 2014
is dismissed.
I note that the trial Court has imposed a sentence of life imprisonment
till death upon Monirul for the offence 302/34 I.P.C. Life imprisonment
under section 53 read with section 45 of the I.P.C. means imprisonment till
end of life (see Gopal Vinayak Godse Vs. State of Maharashtra13). However,
the trial Court has emphasized it proposes to impose a heavier sentence on
Monirul than Jiarul by imposing life imprisonment till death, that is to mean
sentence of life imprisonment shall not be remitted or commuted till the
death of the appellant. Imposition of such a sentence, that is, life
imprisonment without remission under section 433A of the Cr.P.C. cannot be
imposed by the trial Court for the offence punishable under section 302/34
of the I.P.C. In Union of India Vs. V. Sriharan Alias Murugan And Others14
a Constitution Bench clarified such a sentence can be imposed only by the
Supreme Court or by the High Court while converting a death sentence to
one of life imprisonment. Even then, the Court’s discretion does not encroach
on the constitutional powers of the President of India or the Governor under
Article 72/161 of the Constitution of India respectively. In Gauri Shankar15
the Apex Court held such powers cannot be exercised by the trial Courts.
Trial Court, therefore, fell in error in directing that Monirul shall suffer life
imprisonment till his death, that is, life imprisonment without remission.
Hence, this Court modifies the sentence imposed upon Monirul and directs
he shall suffer life imprisonment as prescribed under section 53 read with
section 45 of the Indian Penal Code and interpreted by the Apex Court in
With the aforesaid modification as to sentence imposed on Monirul the
appeal being C.R.A. 604 of 2014 is disposed of.
The period of detention suffered by appellants during investigation,
enquiry or trial shall be set off under Section 428 of the Code of Criminal
This Court has, in a number of cases,16 noted a propensity amongst
the trial Court judges to impose a sentence of life imprisonment with
qualifications like the present one. This Court, therefore, feels it necessary to
issue a practice direction to all the judicial officers in the State so that in
similar cases they do not fall in error and impose sentence of life
imprisonment without remission.
“Except in cases where the law provides for a sentence of imprisonment
for life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of the person’s
natural life (e.g., sections 376A, 376AB, 376D, 376DA, 376DB and 376E of
I.P.C.), trial Courts while imposing a sentence of life imprisonment as provided
under section 53 of I.P.C. shall not qualify the said sentence by directing that
the sentence shall continue till the death of the convict or without remission as
prescribed in law.”
Motiyar Rahaman & Anr. Vs. The State of West Bengal in CRA 531 of 2015 dated 02.03.2022
Sk. Azaharuddin vs. State of West Bengal in CRA 45 of 2021 dated 24.03.2022
Registrar General shall circulate this practice direction to all the
judicial officers in the State for intimation and due adherence in future.
I agree.