Psychotropic Substance Act (“NDPS Act” for short).
2.     The        case  of  the  prosecution        case      is    that         the
complainant          PSI   S.M.Parmar         DCB,    Baroda        filed        the
complaint on 15.04.2003 and with other police staff got the
information regarding the accused as stated in complaint
and after that as per the information received informing to
the Dy. Police Commissioner and then after the police staff
and the panch went on the place together in police Jeep.
That during that when they were at the place watch was
arranged and during that they obstructed and stopped the
person and asked his name and after that the search was
taken and during that they seized the powder of Brown
sugar in one plastic bag and accordingly the panchnama
was drawn sample was taken and hence after completing
the whole of the formalities under the provisions of law
during panchnama the complaint was filed as Stated in the
complaint. Thereafter, the further investigation was made
and the statements of witnesses were recorded and after
completion of investigation the charge sheet was filed
against the accused. It is submitted that after that the
matter was came on evidence and on behalf of the
prosecution in all 20 witnesses were examined inclusive of
complainant,          panchas,   FSL       officers    and     Investigating
Officer. Out of that some of the witnesses were examined by
predecessor. During the examination of the witnesses to
some extent the panchas were declared hostile and the
complainant and the other witnesses has supported the
case of prosecution and deposed that according to the facts
stated by them. After hearing of the arguments of both the
sides the Additional Sessions Judge has delivered the
Judgment on 30.12.2005 and has acquitted the accused.
2.1. Being aggrieved by the judgment and order of acquittal
passed by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Vadodara
in Sessions Case No. 4 of 2003 dated 30.12.2005, the
appellant has preferred this criminal appeal.
3.     Mr.R.C. Kodekar, Learned APP for the appellant –
original complainant has vehemently argued that                 all the
mandatory procedure has been followed by the investigating
officer under the provisions of the NDPS Act. The trial court
has not believed the evidence of the prosecution witnesses.
The learned Judge has committed a grave error in not
believing the deposition of the prosecution witnesses and
documentary evidence on record. He has further submitted
that the learned Judge has erred in acquitting the
respondents – accused from the charges levelled against
them. He has further submitted that the prosecution has
proved that the respondents have committed offence under
sections 8(C), 20(B), 22 and 29 of the NDPS Act. He has
further submitted that      the learned Special Judge has
acquitted the respondents accused merely on some minor
contradictions and omissions in the evidence of the
witnesses. He has further submitted that              the learned
Special Judge has erred in not believing the evidence of the
investigating officer who had no reason to implicate the
accused falsely in the case. He has further submitted that
the offence punishable under section 8(C), 20(B), 22 and 29
of the NDPS Act, is made out, however, the same is not
believed by the learned Judge. He has further submitted
that though the prosecution witnesses have supported the
case of the prosecution, the trial court erroneously not
believed their evidence and acquitted the accused.
Making above submissions, he has requested to allow
the present appeal.
4.     Mr.Nasir Saiyed, learned advocate appearing for the
respondent accused has vehemently submitted that there is
hardly any substance in the submissions of learned APP.
There is no admissible evidence on record connecting the
accused with the commission of the offence. There are
material contradictions and omissions in the evidence of the
prosecution       witnesses. There        are  breach        of      various
mandatory provisions, as observed by the learned Judge in
the impugned order. The witnesses and panchas have
turned hostile. The prosecution has not proved the case
beyond reasonable doubt. No illegality has been committed
by the learned Judge while acquitting the respondent
5.     Heard the learned advocates for the respective parties
and gone through the impugned judgemenet and order of
the trial court as well as the entire material on record.
6.     Before adverting to the facts of the case, it would be
worthwhile to refer to the scope in Acquittal Appeals. It is
well settled by is catena of decisions that an appellate Court
has full Power to review, re-appreciate and consider the
Evidence upon which the Order of Acquittal is founded.
However, the Appellate Court must bear in mind that in
case of Acquittal, there is prejudice in favour of the
Accused, firstly, the presumption of innocence is available
to him under the Fundamental Principle of Criminal
Jurisprudence that every person shall be presumed to be
innocent unless he is proved guilty by a competent Court of
Law. Secondly, the Accused having secured his Acquittal,
the presumption of his innocence is further reaffirmed and
strengthened by the trial Court.
7.     On perusal of the record and from the deposition of the
investigating officer, it is clear that the Police Inspector has
not made investigation as to whether the secrete letter was
forwarded after registering in the register or not. On the
other hand, there is no investigation as to whether the
higher officer has received the said secrete letter or not.
Likewise he has admitted that it has not come out from his
letter that any letter was written to the Commissioner. This
witness admitted that there is mention of zip-lock plastic
bag. From the Panchnama              and evidence of the raiding
party and search officer, it is clear that the bag was sealed
by candle and on the other-hand, it is not the say of any of
the witness that the zip-lock plastic bag, as stated by the
FSL Officer, was used. Thus, there is suspicion regarding
the bag in which the muddamal was packed. Thus, the
investigation of the investigating officer is faulty.
8.     Though it is the case of the prosecution that the
accused was searched by the police inspector in presence of
the witnesses and not only that it is further case of the
prosecution that the muddamal found from the bag which
was hanging on the shoulder of the accused and even
though secrete information to that effect was also received,
there is no strict compliance of section 42(2) of the NDPS
Act. There is nothing on record to show that any option for
search was given to the accused or there is no writing that
the accused refused to exercise the option of search. Thus,
there is violation of mandatory provision of section 50 of the
NDPS Act. As per section 52 the officer who arrests the
accused has to disclose the reasons for arrest at the
earliest. In the present case, nobody including search officer
disclose the reasons for arrest of the accused. There is
violation of mandatory provision of section 52 of the NDPS
Act. After recovering the muddamal, seal is required to be
affixed on the muddamal but in the present case no such
seal was affixed and hence there is violation of mandatory
provisions of section 55. There is no evidence on record as
to the report to be made regarding reasons for arrest of the
accused and complete details of the muddamal seized.
Thus, there is violation of mandatory provisions of section
57 of the NDPS Act.
9.     The prosecution has failed to prove that both the
accused known to each other or they hatched conspiracy
for transportation of muddamal goods. The prosecution has
failed to prove that from where the accused No.2 brought
the muddamal. There is no evidence that accused No.1
brought the muddamal from the accused No.2. There is no
evidence that the accused            have helped each other in
commission of the offence.
10.    As held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of
Prabhashankar Dube Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh,
reported in AIR 2004 (MP) procedure under section 50
should be done in just and proper manner. In the present
case, there is no just and proper compliance of section 50.
Hence, as         per the aforesaid decision of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court, the accused is entitled to acquittal.
11.    As held by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of
Ali Mustufa Vs. State of Kerala, reported in AIR 1995 SC
244, when prior information is received, it is mandatory for
the department to explain to the accused about his right,
otherwise the entire procedure and penal order are vitiated.
In the present case, there is no compliance of section 50 of
the NDPS Act and hence also the accused is entitled to
12.    As      held in the case       of Vinod     Vs.      State          of
Maharashtra reported in 2004(1) EFR 333, it is not only
required to give option to the accused but it is required to
explain to the accused regarding his rights conferred under
section 50 of the NDPS Act and if such procedure is not
adopted, the issue of punishment is vitiated. In the present
case, section 50 of the NDPS Act is not complied with and
hence the accused cannot be convicted.
13.    As held in the case of Bodokan Abdul Raheman
reported in 2002(2) EFR 87, under the NDPS Act, the
provision for punishment is rigorous           and therefore, the
complainant side has to comply with the mandatory
provisions strictly and if there is breach of mandatory
provision of section 42 and 50, it can be said that the case
is not proved and the accused is entitled to acquittal. In the
present case also mandatory provisions of section 42 and 50
are not complied with and hence, the accused is entitled to
14.    It may be noted that as per the settled legal position,
when two views are possible, the judgment and order of
acquittal passed by the trial Court should not be interfered
with by the Appellate Court unless for the special reasons. A
beneficial reference of the decision of the Supreme Court in
the case of State of Rajasthan versus Ram Niwas reported
in (2010) 15 SCC 463 be made in this regard. In the said
case, it has been observed as under:-
“6. This Court has held in Kalyan v. State of U.P.,
“8. The settled position of law on the powers to be
exercised by the High Court in an appeal against
an order of acquittal is that though the High Court
has full powers to review the evidence upon which
an order of acquittal is passed, it is equally well
settled that the presumption of innocence of the
accused persons, as envisaged under the criminal
jurisprudence prevalent in our country is further
reinforced by his acquittal by the trial court.
Normally the views of the trial court, as to the
credibility of the witnesses, must be given proper
weight and consideration because the trial court is
supposed to have watched the demeanour and
conduct of the witness and is in a better position
to appreciate their testimony. The High Court
should be slow in disturbing a finding of fact
arrived at by the trial court. In Kali Ram V. State of
Himachal Pradesh, (1973) 2 SCC 808, this Court
observed that the golden thread which runs
through the web of administration of justice in
criminal case is that if two views are possible on
the evidence adduced in the case, one pointing to
the guilt of the accused and the other to his
innocence, the view which is favourable to the
accused should be adopted.             The Court further
"27. It is no doubt true that wrongful acquittals are
undesirable and shake the confidence of the
people in the judicial system, much worse,
however, is the wrongful conviction of an innocent
person. The consequences of the conviction of an
innocent person are far more serious and its
reverberations cannot but be felt in a civilised
society. Suppose an innocent person is convicted
of the offence of murder and is hanged, nothing
further can undo the mischief for the wrong
resulting    from    the       unmerited    conviction             is
irretrievable. To take another instance, if an
innocent person is sent to jail and undergoes the
sentence, the scars left by the miscarriage of
justice cannot be erased by any subsequent act of
expiration. Not many persons undergoing the
pangs of wrongful conviction are fortunate like
Dreyfus to have an Emile Zola to champion their
cause and succeed in getting the verdict of guilt
annulled. All this highlights the importance of
ensuring, as far as possible, that there should be
no wrongful conviction of an innocent person.
Some risk of the conviction of the innocent, of
course, is always there in any system of the
administration of criminal justice Such a risk can
be minimised but not ruled out altogether It may in
this connection be apposite to refer to the following
observations of Sir Carleton Alien quoted on page
157 of "The Proof of Guilt" by Glanville Williams,
"I dare say some sentimentalists would assent to
the proposition that it is better that a thousand, or
even a million, guilty persons should escape than
that one innocent person should suffer; but no
responsible and practical person would accept
such a view. For it is obvious that if our ratio is
extended indefinitely, there comes a point when
the whole system of justice has broken down and
society is in a state of chaos."
28. The fact that there has to be clear evidence of
the guilt of the accused and that in the absence of
that it is not possible to record a finding of his guilt
was stressed by this Court in the case of Shivaji
Sahebrao, (1973) 2 SCC 793, as is clear from the
following observations:
"Certainly it is a primary principle that the accused
must be and not merely, may be guilty before a
court, can be convicted and the mental distinction
between 'may be' and 'must be' is long and divides
vague conjectures from sure considerations."
“9. The High Court while dealing with the appeals
against the order of acquittal must keep in mind
the following propositions laid down by this Court,
namely, (i) the slowness of the appellate court to
disturb a finding of fact; (ii) the noninterference
with the order of acquittal where it is indeed only
a case of taking a view different from the one
taken by the High Court."
8.     In  Arulvelu     and     another     versus           State
reported in (2009) 10 Supreme Court Cases 206,
the Supreme Court after discussing the earlier
judgments, observed in para No. 36 as under:
“36. Careful scrutiny of all these judgments lead to
the definite conclusion that the appellate court
should be very slow in setting aside a judgment of
acquittal particularly in a case where two views
are possible. The trial court judgment can not be
set aside because the appellate court's view is
more probable. The appellate court would not be
justified in setting aside the trial court judgment
unless it arrives at a clear finding on marshaling
the entire evidence on record that the judgment of
the trial court is either perverse or wholly
unsustainable in law.”
15.     In view of the above, this court is of the opinion that
the prosecution has failed to prove the charges levelled
against the appellant accused beyond reasonable doubt and
the trial court has rightly acquitted the accused.
16.     In the result, present appeal is dismissed.