1             These two writ petitions involve identical issues, and are,
therefore, disposed of by this common judgment.
2             The petitioners are aggrieved of and have challenged the order
of Area Manager, Food Corporation of India issued vide order
No.Estt/Casual/DOS/2016 dated 24.11.2016 [„the impugned order‟]
whereby and whereunder the petitioners along with proforma respondents
herein, who were working as casual labourers in FSDs Leh and Kargil have
been accorded temporary status subject to certain terms and conditions laid
down in the impugned order. The petitioners claim that they are entitled to
be brought on permanent establishment in the same manner in which the
petitioners of SWP Nos. 1549/1998 have been regularized and brought on
the permanent establishment of Food Corporation of India [„FCI‟].
3             With a view to appreciate the claim of the petitioners and the
challenge thrown to the impugned order on various grounds, it is necessary
to set out the material facts.
The FSDs Leh and Kargil were made operational by the FCI
in the year 1992-93. Due to cold climatic conditions and the difficult
terrain of Ladakh region, no officers/officials from Jammu or Srinagar
region were willing to work and, accordingly, the petitioners along with
proforma respondents herein were voluntarily engaged as casual workers to
perform the duties of watch and ward and some other ancillary work of the
Depots. It is submitted that the casual workers similarly situated with the
petitioners herein, who were also engaged in the year 1992-93 in the
Srinagar region, filed SWP No. 1549/1998 before this Court which was
disposed of vide judgment dated 28.12.2002 directing the Food
Corporation of India to accord wholesome and due consideration to the
petitioners‟ case for regularization under law after keeping in view the
observations made in the said judgment. In compliance to the said
judgment passed by this Court, the writ petitioners of SWP No. 1549/1998,
who were working as casual workers like the petitioners and proforma
respondents herein, were regularized and brought on permanent
establishment of FCI. Relying strongly on the aforesaid judgment passed in
the case of counterparts of the petitioners working in Srinagar region, the
petitioners along with proforma respondents filed a representation before
the officers of FCI.
Hearing no response from the respondents and feeling aggrieved,
the petitioners along with proforma respondents (respondent Nos 6 to 11)
filed SWP Nos. 1276.2004, 1545/2004 and 1605/2004 before this Court
seeking, inter alia, a direction to the respondents to regularize their
services in the same manner in which other similarly situated casual
labourers working in Kashmir region had been regularized. The said writ
petitions came to be disposed of by this Court vide judgment dated
24.05.2007 with a direction to the official respondents to accord
consideration to the case of the petitioners and proforma respondents for
their regularization in accordance with rules, norms and policy governing
the field. The Court also directed that while according consideration to the
claim of the petitioners and proforma respondents herein, the judgment
passed by the Court in SWP No. 1549/1998 should also be taken into
4             It is submitted by the petitioners that when the judgment
dated 24.05.2007 was not complied with by the official respondents, they
along with proforma respondents filed SWP Nos. 333/2010 and 09/2011.
The said writ petitions were clubbed together and disposed of by a Single
Bench of this Court vide its judgment dated 11.03.2015. The learned Single
Judge in its judgment noted that though the formal consideration order in
terms of the judgment dated 24.05.2007 was yet to be passed by the official
respondents, yet their reply filed in the writ petitions divulged that the
respondents had taken a decision on 05.01.2009 in 314th meeting of Board
of Directors and the case of the petitioners and proforma respondents had
been rejected. The Single Bench also found that though the official
respondents had not given specific reasons for rejecting the proposal
including the proposal to regularize the services of the petitioners and
proforma respondents, yet it was discernible that the Board‟s decision was
influenced by the judgment of Hon‟ble Supreme Court rendered in the case
of State of Karnataka vs. Uma Devi and ors. The Court after considering
the rival contentions came to the conclusion that the Board of Directors had
misdirected in applying the ratio of judgment of Uma Devi’s case (supra)
which, in the given facts and circumstances, was not applicable to the case
of the petitioners and the proforma respondents. Accordingly, the Single
Bench allowed the petition vide its judgment dated 11.03.2015, but without
specifically issuing any directions to the respondents.
5            Be that as it may, the aforesaid judgment was not accepted
by the official respondents, who assailed it before the Division Bench by
filing LPASW Nos. 164/2015 and 192/2015. The Division Bench of this
Court vide its judgment dated 14.09.2015 disposed of both the appeals
directing the Board of Directors of FCI to reconsider its earlier decision
and pass a fresh order bearing in mind the scheme framed in 176 th Board
meeting    held   on   24.02.1987    providing    regularization           of casual
labourers/daily wagers working for more than 3 years. The observations of
the Division Bench, which are to some extent relevant for determining the
controversy on hand, are contained in para (9) of the judgment and are
“9.In the light of the said judgments, we are of the view that
though regularization cannot be claimed as a matter of right,
the private respondents having been engaged in the year 1998
in a most difficult area, namely Kargil Depot of FCI and they
having been allowed to work for 17 years and posts being
available for regularization and services of similarly placed
persons having been regularized as admitted by the appellants
may be on special reasons, the Board is bound to reconsider
its decision already taken and pass a fresh order bearing in
mind the scheme framed in 176th Board meeting held on
24.02.1987 providing regularization of casual labourers/daily
wagers working for more than three years, within a period of
three months from the date of receipt of copy of this order. The
Board while making the decision shall also keep in mind that
the Food Corporation of India is an Industry and workers
employed have a right to get fair treatment. The watchmen
posts are also required permanently for FCI godowns. The
FCI is an industry and it is bound to follow the provisions of
Industrial Disputes Act in terms of the decision of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court reported in 1985 (2) SCC 136 (Workmen of
the Food Corporation of India vs. M/S Food Corporation of
India). In the said judgment no following Section 9-A of the
Industrial Disputes Act 1947, while changing the conditions of
service was held illegal and the same was held ineffective. The
FCI Board while considering all aspects shall also consider
the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court reported in AIR
2015 SC 2210 (ONGC Ltd vs. Petroleum Coal Labour Union
and ors) wherein while dealing with a similar claim of a
workman appointed by the ONGC it is held that keeping an
employee appointed on a temporary basis and continuing in
such status for number of years is unfair labour practice.”
6.           It appears that when the judgment of the Division bench dated
14.09.2015 too was not complied with even after the review petition moved
by the FCI stood dismissed by the Division Bench vide its order dated
10.05.2016, the petitioner and proforma respondents filed a contempt
petition No.79/2016 alleging non-compliance of the judgment dated
14.09.2015 (supra). Before the Division Bench hearing the contempt
petition, the respondents made a statement that in compliance to the
judgment of the Division Bench, the FCI had taken a decision in terms of
its order dated 24.10.2016 to grant temporary status to the petitioners and
the proforma respondents, who were writ petitioners in SWP No. 09/2011
and SWP No. 333/2010 w.e.f 03.06.2016 and that the consequential order
would be given to the petitioners within a period of two weeks. On the
basis of this statement made before the Division Bench, the contempt
petition was closed vide order dated 25.10.2016. As deposed before the
Division Bench in the contempt proceedings, the respondents passed the
consequential order on 24.11.2016 i.e the order impugned conferring upon
the petitioners and the proforma respondents working as casual labourers in
FSDs Leh and Kargil the status of temporary employees subject to terms
and conditions given in the impugned order itself. With a view to better
appreciate the controversy, the terms and conditions of the impugned order
are reproduced hereunder:
(i) the casual workers who has completed 10 years of
services as on 01.07.2012 are eligible for the benefits of the
(ii). The services of the casual workers who do not fulfil
the criteria fixed for the benefit of the scheme may only be
allowed to continue in the services in case there is any
pending Court case/award/orders of the Court(s) otherwise
the services of the casual workers be dispensed by giving
them the notice as per rules;
(iii). A written undertaking is to be submitted by the worker
before grant of the benefit of the scheme that no claim for
regularization and arrears for the work done prior to
03.06.2016 be filed in any legal forum/FCI. Any court case
which is pending in the any court is to be withdrawn before
extending the benefit of the schem to the casual labour;
(iv). Casual workers extended the benefit of the scheme
shall continue to do the same duties or duties ordered by
the superiors as per the need of the time;
(v). casual workers who acquire the benefit of the scheme
will not be brought on to the permanent pay roll/employee
unless the future policy for regularization/permanent
absorption if any come into force;
(vi). Casual workers who already are getting the benefits
beyond the scheme due to court orders/.direction may be
allowed to continue on the same status;
(vii) wages at daily rates with reference to the minimum of
the pay scale(IDA) for corresponding regular class-IV
employees including DA, HRA, Lunch subsidy and
conveyance allowance at par with the regular class IV
employees as per FCI rules;
(viii) benefits of increment at the same rate as applicable to
regular IV employees as per FCI rules.
7.           It is not disputed before me that the petitioners as well as the
proforma respondents accepted the impugned order and the temporary
status conferred upon them w.e.f 03.06.2016 with all the benefits envisaged
therein. The petitioners and the proforma respondents, total 15 casual
labourers working in the FSDs Leh and Kargil, while accepting the
impugned order also submitted a written undertaking to the respondents
that they shall not claim any regularization, arrears for the work done prior
to 03.06.2016 in any legal forum or before FCI. The undertaking also
envisaged that the beneficiaries of the impugned order shall also withdraw
any case filed by them, if any, and pending before any competent court of
law. The undertaking was sine quo non for extending the benefits of
Government Order aforeasid. The petitioners and proforma respondents
accepted the order and got the benefits as envisaged therein. It is not
discernible from the writ petitions as to what provoked them to approach
this Court after five years of the acceptance of the impugned order by filing
the instant petitions. The petitioners have not only raised their objections to
some of the terms and conditions envisaged in the impugned order, but also
reiterate their claim for regularization on a par with the petitioners of SWP
8             The respondents have filed their objections and have taken a
categoric objection to the maintainability of the petitioner on the ground of
delay and laches, acquiescence and estoppel.
9             Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
material on record, I am of the considered view that this petition is hit by
delay and laches and acquiescence.
10.           Indisputably, the judgment in the case of the petitioners and
the proforma respondents was passed by the Division Bench in LPASW
No. 164/2015 and LPASW No. 192/2015 on 14.09.2015 and the review
petition filed by the FCI against the said judgment was dismissed by the
Division Bench of this Court on 10.05.2016. After dismissal of the review
petition and in compliance to the judgment passed by the Division Bench,
the impugned order was passed by the FCI on 24.11.2016. It is pertinent to
note that with the allegation of non-compliance of the judgment passed by
the Division Bench, the petitioners along with proforma respondents had
moved a contempt petition before the Division Bench. Before the Division
Bench, as noted above, the FCI made a statement that they had issued an
order on 24.10.2016 granting temporary status to the petitioners of SWP
No. 9/2011 and 33./2010 w.e.f 03.06.2016 and that the consequential order
to give benefit to the petitioners and others would be passed within two
weeks. The statement of FCI was accepted by the Division Bench which
was incidentally headed by the Chief Justice, who had presided over the
Bench which had heard and decided the LPAs.
11            It is true that on the date, the contempt proceedings were
closed, the learned counsel appearing for the appellants (petitioners as well
as proforma respondents herein) was not present before the Division
Bench, but the appellants in person were present there. It is, thus, evident
that the appellants, who appeared in person before the Division Bench too
had shown their satisfaction with the order passed and proposed to be
passed by the FCI conferring temporary status on them. Had the appellants
appearing in person objected to the disposal of the contempt petition, the
Division Bench would have surely taken note of such submission and
perhaps passed some appropriate orders. However, it clearly transpires that
the appellants, who had filed the contempt petition, too felt satisfied.
12            The present petition has been filed after five years of passing
of the impugned order.
13            The petitioners as well as the proforma respondents, who were
engaged as casual workers in FSDs Leh and Kargil were given the
temporary status which entitled them to have the minimum of the pay scale
of regular class IV employees working in FCI including DA, HRA, Lunch
subsidy and conveyance allowance on par with regular class-IV employees
of FCI. The impugned order, however, provided that the casual workers
including the petitioners, who were conferred temporary status shall not be
brought on permanent pay roll and shall not become employees of the FCI
unless policy of regularization/permanent absorption is issued by the FCI in
future. The order did contain some conditions which cannot be said to be in
consequence with Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
14            I have already reproduced the terms and conditions of the
impugned order above and find condition No.(iii) debarring the petitioners
and other beneficiaries of the impugned order from taking recourse to
litigation for seeking their regularization and arrears etc., is not sustainable
in law. The employer cannot impose conditions of employment which have
the effect of taking away the right of its employees to seek judicial review
of the actions of the employer. Right to seek judicial review is a vital right
conferred by the Constitution and any terms and conditions of employment
taking away this right, which restrain a person to seek legal remedies for
enforcement of his rights are, null and void. Rest of the conditions do not
offend Article 14 of the Constitution in any manner and, therefore, cannot
be termed as irrational or arbitrary.
15            Indisputably, the petitioners and proforma respondents
accepted the impugned order             wholeheartedly and submitted an
undertaking as sought for by the official respondents in terms of clause (iii)
of the impugned order. Apart from submitting the undertaking, the
petitioners and proforma respondents also communicated their acceptance
of offer in writing in terms of clause (ii) of the impugned order. A quick
reference to clause (ii) is also necessary and the same is reproduced
“(ii). The services of the casual workers who do not fulfill the
criteria fixed for the benefit of the scheme may only be
allowed to continue in the services in case there is any pending
Court case/award/orders of the Court(s) otherwise the services
of the casual workers be dispensed by giving them the notice
16.           The petitioners along with proforma respondents got the
benefits envisaged under the impugned order and worked in that capacity
for almost 5 years without any objection or demur. The petitioners have not
been able to bring to my notice any representation or protest petition filed
by them against the impugned order. It was only in the year 2021, the
petitioners and proforma respondents woke up from the slumber and issued
a legal notice through their counsel to the FCI on 26 th July 2021. This
notice was obviously issued as a run up to the filing of instant petition and
to come out of the delay and laches. As is rightly pointed out by learned
counsel appearing for the official respondents that the petitioners after
having accepted the order with their eyes wide open and without making
any rue or protest cannot be permitted to come to this Court after availing
all the benefits envisaged under the impugned order and that too after a
long period of 5 years. The petitioners as also the proforma respondents are
estopped by their conduct and acquiescence to come to this Court to
challenge the order which they wholeheartedly accepted in the year 2016.
17.           That apart, the Division Bench which considered the contempt
petition filed by the petitioners and others alleging non-compliance of the
judgment of the Division Bench also felt satisfied with the impugned order
passed by the official respondents and, therefore, in the presence of the
petitioners and others closed the contempt proceedings. The reliance by
Mr. Qayoom, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners                  on a
Constitution Bench Judgment of the Supreme Court in Olga Tellis & Ors
vs Bombay Municipal Corporation and ors, 1985 (3) SCC 545 to
contend that there could be no waiver of the fundamental rights and,
therefore, the plea of estoppel and acquiescence cannot be pressed into
service against the petitioners, is totally misplaced. The aforesaid
Constitution Bench Judgment of the Supreme Court is decided in entirely
different context and set of facts. In the aforesaid matter before the
Supreme Court, the petitioners had conceded before the High Court that
they would not claim any fundamental right, in case, their eviction from
their pavement or slum dwellings are effected. Despite having conceded
before the High Court, they filed petitions under Article 32 of the
Constitution of India before the Supreme Court and a plea of estoppel was
taken by State of Maharashtra.
18           Repelling the plea of State of Maharashtra, the Supreme Court
held that there could be no estoppel against the enforcement of
fundamental rights and even if the petitioners had conceded before the
High Court that they would not claim any fundamental right in case of their
eviction from their pavement or slum dwellings, they would not be
estopped from claiming the same before the Supreme Court in the writ
19           The doctrine of estoppels, insofar as it relates to waiver of
fundamental rights is concerned, has been discussed by the Supreme Court
in paras (28) and (29) of the judgment supra which, for facility of
reference, are reproduced hereunder:
“28. It is not possible to accept the contention that the
petitioners are estopped from setting up their fundamental
rights as a defence to the demolition of the huts put up by
them on pavements or parts of public roads. There can be no
estoppel against the Constitution. The Constitution is not only
the paramount law of the land but, it is the source and
substance of all laws. Its provisions are conceived in public
interest and are intended to serve a public purpose. The
doctrine of estoppel is based on the principle that consistency
in word and action imparts certainty and honesty to human
affairs. If a person makes a representation to another, on the
faith of which the latter acts to his prejudice, the former
cannot resile from the representation made by him. He must
make it good. This principle can have no application to
representations made regarding the assertion or enforcement
of fundamental rights. For example, the concession made by
a person that he does not possess and would not exercise his
right to free speech and expression or the right to move freely
throughout the territory of India cannot deprive him of those
constitutional rights, any more than a concession that a
person has no right of personal liberty can justify his
detention contrary to the terms of Article 22 of the
Constitution. Fundamental rights are undoubtedly conferred
by the Constitution upon individuals which have to be
asserted and enforced by them, if those rights are violated.
But, the high purpose which the Constitution seeks to achieve
by conferment of fundamental rights is not only to benefit
individuals but to secure the larger interests of the
community. The Preamble of the Constitution says that India
is a democratic Republic. It is in order to fulfill the promise
of the Preamble that fundamental rights are conferred by the
Constitution, some on citizens like those guaranteed by
Articles 15,16,19,21 and 29, and some on citizens and non-
citizens alike, like those guaranteed by Articles 14,21,22 and
25 of the Constitution. No individual can barter away the
freedoms conferred upon him by the Constitution. A
concession made by him in a proceeding, whether under a
mistake of law or otherwise, that he does not possess or will
not enforce any particular fundamental right, cannot create
an estoppel against him in that or any subsequent
proceeding. Such a concession, if enforced, would defeat the
purpose of the Constitution. Were the argument of estoppel
valid, an all-powerful state could easily tempt an individual
to forego his precious personal freedoms on promise of
transitory, immediate benefits. Therefore, notwithstanding the
fact that the petitioners had conceded in the Bombay High
Court that they have no fundamental right to construct
hutments on pavements and that they will not object to their
demolition after October 15, 1981, they are entitled to assert
that any such action on the part of public authorities will be
in violation of their fundamental rights. How far the
argument regarding the existence and scope of the right
claimed by the petitioners is well- founded is another matter.
But, the argument has to be examined despite the concession.
29.The plea of estoppel is closely connected with the plea of
waiver, the object of both being to ensure bona fides in day-
today transactions. In Basheshar Nath v. The Commissioner
of Income Tax Delhi, [1959] Supp. 1 S.C.R. 528 a
Constitution Bench of this Court considered the question
whether the fundamental rights conferred by the Constitution
can be waived. Two members of the Bench (Das C.J. and
Kapoor J.) held that there can be no waiver of the
fundamental right founded on Article 14 of the Constitution.
Two others (N.H.Bhagwati and Subba Rao,JJ.) held that not
only could there be no waiver of the right conferred
by Article 14, but there could be no waiver of any other
fundamental right guaranteed by Part III of the Constitution.
The Constitution makes no distinction, according to the
learned Judges, between fundamental rights enacted for the
benefit of an individual and those enacted in public interest
or on grounds of public policy”.
20.          The legal position with regard to estoppel and waiver against
the fundamental rights is clearly settled by the Supreme Court in the
aforesaid judgment, but, as stated above, the judgment does not apply in
the instant case. The petitioners before me are not claiming any
fundamental right which is objected to by FCI as having been waived off
by acquiescence.
21           From the narration of events given above, it is evident and
also as is held by the Division Bench of this Court in its judgment dated
14.09.2015 passed in LPASW Nos. 164/2011 and 192/201, the
regularization of services by a casual labour/temporary employee cannot be
claimed as a mater of right, nor the Division Bench in its judgment dated
14.09.2015 has given any finding to the effect that the petitioners and the
proforma respondents were entirely similarly situated with the writ
petitioners of SWP No. 1549/1998 who were regularized under special
circumstances and in compliance to the judgment passed in SWP No.
1549/1998. That apart, it is clear that the petitioners as well as the proforma
respondents had showed their satisfaction with the impugned order before
the Bench hearing the contempt petition. It is because of this reason that the
petitioners and proforma respondents did not raise their grievance before
any authority of the respondents whatsoever till issuance of legal notice in
July 2021 which too was by way of run up to the filing of writ petition.
22            For the reasons aforementioned and in the facts and
circumstances of this case, I am of the view that the judgment of the
Constitution Bench rendered in Olga Tellis’s case (supra) is not attracted
or applicable to the case on hand. These petitions suffer from huge delay
and laches. The petitioners, by their conduct and having acquiesced in the
impugned order are estopped from challenging the same on the ground that
it does not reflect complete compliance of the judgment passed by the
Division Bench on 14.09.2015. Accordingly, both the petitions are
dismissed. However, as held above, this Court finds one of the conditions
i.e condition No. (iii) of the impugned order, bad in the eyes of law and the
same shall be deemed to have been deleted from the impugned order. Other
wise also, the aforesaid condition has outlived its utility and has not been
pressed into service by the respondent-FCI to deny the petitioners any
right, nor shall the petitioners be liable for any action for filing the instant
petitions or in future to enforce their rights in breach of offending clause i.e
condition No.(iii) of the impugned order.
23.           Before parting, I would like to observe that the petitioners may
have lost the battle for the present, but nothing stops them to come to this
Court seeking regularization of their services on the ground of long
officiation independently of the judgments earned by them in the past. It is
also noteworthy that the nature of appointment (temporary status with
several service benefits) offered to the petitioners has all the trappings of
permanent/regular appointment. This Court is sure that the respondent-
Corporation (PSU), being a model employer, is alive to its duty towards its
employees particularly those working at the lowest rung and would not
indulge in any labour practice which is unfair and is tantamount to
exploitation. This Court hopes and trusts that the respondent-Corporation
will, sooner than later, come up with appropriate policy of regularization to
erase the scars that are left after healing of wounds (grant of temporary
status) of the petitioners.