The petitioner is before this Court calling in question the
proceedings in Crime No.235/2018 registered for offences
punishable under Sections 420, 406, 506, 149 of the IPC
pending before the IV Additional CMM Court, Bengaluru.
2.  Heard   Sri.Afsar   Ahmed.S.,   learned    counsel   for
petitioner and Sri.K.S.Abhijith, learned High Court Government
Pleader for respondent No.1.
3. The 2nd respondent is the complainant.           He was an
employee of the TTC News Channel. The news channel did not
get the benefits or the profit that it was intended to. At that
point in time, a notice was issued to all the employees which
reads as follows:
“The repetitive and recurring losses in our TV channel
business have led to the financial crisis in our
organization. Unfortunately, the Board of Directors have
decided to suspend the operations of this business till
further notice. The management, editorial staff and the
marketing staff have failed to generate any revenue. We
are in the process of looking for the new investing
partners. Your all are advised to return the company
equipment and devices whichever is in your custody to
the General Manager, before 11th Sept 2018.            The
salaries till 31st August 2018 shall be distributed to the
terminated employees and to those employees who has
joined or incited the disturbances in the office. The
salaries till 10 September 2018 will be distributed to the
rest of the other employees in between 20th and 25th
October 2018. Whenever we are financially capable to
resume the operations, we will be glad to hire you back,
if available.
Thanking you all for your services,
The notice clearly indicated that the employees will be
terminated due to lack of work and funds to run the TV news
channel and would be hiring them back if they become financial
capable to resume the operations.     After the said notice and
termination, the subject complaint is filed against the petitioner
by   the    2nd   respondent/complainant     alleging   that   the
complainant has been terminated without following due process
of law.
4. If the complainant was a workman in the organization
and had been terminated without following due process of law,
it was open for him to initiate proceedings under the relevant
provisions    before   the  appropriate    forum,    instead   the
complainant sets the criminal law in motion, that too for the
offences under Sections 406 and 420 of the IPC.        Both these
offences under Sections 406 and 420 of the IPC which deal with
criminal breach of trust and cheating which have              their
ingredients in Sections 405 and 415 of the IPC respectively,
cannot be seen to be remotely made out in the case at hand.
WP No. 9520 of 2022
5. The case at hand is the one where the termination of
the complainant happens pursuant to the losses incurred by the
petitioner or the TTC news channel.        Therefore, the criminal
proceedings to be initiated as an alternate method to arm twist
the petitioner instead of knocking the doors of an appropriate
Court for an appropriate relief, cannot be permitted to
continue, as it would result in abuse of the process of law and
miscarriage of justice.
6. For the aforesaid reasons, the following:
(i)      Writ Petition is allowed.
(ii)     Impugned proceedings in Crime No.235/2018
pending     before    the   IV   Additional   Chief
Metropolitan     Magistrate,   Bengaluru    stands
quashed qua the petitioner.