Rule is made returnable forthwith. By consent of the parties,
taken up for final disposal at the stage of admission.
2     The Petitioners assail eligibility criteria in the Notification
issued by Respondent No.2 to the extent that same treats the
Petitioners as outside Maharashtra candidates for admission to the
MAH-CET Examination for the 5 years integrated LLB Course. The
Petitioners further seek directions that they may be treated as
within the State candidates in category-A of the Notification.
3     The Petitioners are the wards of an Army Officer.              The
Petitioners have completed 10th and 12th Examination from Army
Public School, Dhaula Kuan, New Delhi.          It is the case of the
Petitioners that due to various postings of their father, the
Petitioners have been pursuing their education in the Army Public
School, Dhaula Kuan, New Delhi. They have studied in 4 th and 5th
Standard at Pune, State of Maharashtra. The Petitioners have not
passed 10th and 12th standard Examination from the recognized
institution within the State of Maharashtra, hence, are not
considered in the 85% quota reserved for the students of the State of
4      Dr. Chandrachud, learned Advocate for the Petitioners
eruditely canvassed the following propositions :
The Petitioners are born in Maharashtra. Their parents are
also born in Maharashtra.          Their parents have property in
Maharashtra. Yet, the Petitioners are not being considered from the
State of Maharashtra only because they were compelled to attend
10th and 12th standard at Delhi. The father of the Petitioners being in
the office of the Defence Forces, is deployed at various locations
throughout the country. They had passed 10 th and 12th standard at
Delhi only on account of the deployment of their father at various
locations throughout the country.         The Petitioners cannot be
deprived of equal opportunity of education in their parent State only
on account of their father being an Officer in Defence Forces and
being deployed at various locations throughout the country. The
same is unreasonable.       The learned Advocate submits that any
reservation based on domicile and residence is entirely a separate
infringement. It is clear departure from field of justice, fairness and
reasonableness guaranteed by the rule of law.             There is no
justification to validate reservation on the basis of domicile, which is
neither connected to the place of birth, intention to reside at a
particular place, but only limited to completion of 10th and 12th
standard within the State, especially in respect of wards of armed
forces personnel. Deprivation of seats at educational institutions of
national importance to deserving and meritorious candidates merely
because they have completed their 10th and 12th standard outside the
State creates an unjustified classification which offends Article 14 of
the Constitution of India.      Eligibility criteria based on the Board
exams within the State, especially the candidates who are wards of
central Government employees, such as Armed Forces Personnel,
who are deployed throughout the country in service to the nation is
likely to deprive the candidates of CBSE Board, from pursuing the
integrated 5 years law under graduate course in Maharashtra Law
Colleges, as against the other students who have completed the said
exams within the State who shall be facilitated as much as 85%
reservations in merit to colleges within the State.           Thus, the
reservation policy to this extent is discriminatory and needs to be
altered to facilitate the students from all Boards, especially the CBSE
students to be counted as candidates not from outside the State but
within the State, especially since the other criteria of domicile, in its
basic definition is satisfied by the Petitioners.
The learned Advocate further submits that in this case, the
father of the Petitioners is serving the Nation and for that purpose
had to be deployed at various places. It would be arbitrary and
unreasonable not to consider the Petitioners from Maharashtra
State quota though they are born in Maharashtra, their parents are
born in Maharashtra, their properties are in Maharashtra.           The
learned Advocate relied upon the judgment of the apex court in the
case of Meenakshi Malik Vs. Univesity of Delhi & Ors. 1             and
submits that the apex court in the said case held that the condition
that the last two years education should be received in school in
Delhi should be considered as not applicable to the students who
were compelled to leave India as their parents being posted outside
India by the Government.
He also relies on the judgment of the Division Bench of this
Court in the case of Rajiv Purshottam Wadhwa Vs. State of
Maharashtra 2 and submits that in the said case after retirement
the father of the Petitioner therein had taken employment in Dubai.
The Petitioner completed his 10th standard examination in Dubai.
The Rules prescribed that to be considered as student from
Maharashtra quota, the 10th and 12th standard examination shall be
passed in the State of Maharashtra. The apex court, in the said case
held that the condition that the students shall pass 10 th standard
from the institution within the State of Maharashtra shall not
operate to bar the student who is domiciled and/or          permanent
resident of State of Maharashtra. Due to fortuitous circumstances
the students may not have passed 10 th standard from the institution
within the State of Maharashtra. According to the learned Counsel,
in the present case, it is because of the fortuitous circumstances, the
Petitioners were required to take education in 10 th and 12th standard
from outside the State of Maharashtra. Reliance is also placed on
the judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in the case of
Nagpur and Ors. 3 The learned Counsel submits that in the said
case, the Division Bench of this Court held that the requirement of
passing Indian School Certificate Examination from an institution
located in Maharashtra State is not intended to be applied to the
candidates covered by Rule B(3). Servicemen have no control on
posting which can be anywhere, including Maharashtra.            Rule of
denial of admission to a meritorious son / daughter of a serviceman
who is domicile of Maharashtra only because of a fortuitous
circumstance of his being not posted at the time of his ward studying
in 12th standard within the State of Maharashtra cannot have any
nexus to the object of the Rule.       Mere chance cannot be a valid
disqualifying factor. Such a Rule will be arbitrary and unreasonable.
5     Mr. Khedekar, learned Advocate for Respondent No.2 lucidly
submits that the Rule is not discriminatory nor arbitrary.          Such
Rules have been held to be valid. The learned Advocate relies on the
judgment of the Division Bench of this Court in case of Yellamalli
Venkatapriyanka Vs. State of Maharashtra and Anr. 4 and
submits that the Division Bench considering the judgment of the
apex court in the case of Anant Madaan and Others Vs. State of
Haryana5 had held that the preference in admission on the basis of
residence as well as institutional preference is permissible.        The
Division Bench of this Court in the said case held that the Rule of
preference on the basis of domicile / requirement of residence is not
banned, provided it is within reasonable limits i.e. it does not result
in reservation of more than 85% seats in graduate courses and more
than 75% seats in post graduate courses. It had distinguished the
judgment in the case of Rajiv Purshottam Wadhwa (supra) relied
on by the Petitioner. The challenge to the Rules has been negatived
by this Court.     He submits that in the said case also before the
Division Bench, the Petitioner was born in the State of Maharashtra.
She was domicile of Maharashtra. She had completed 10 th standard
from Mumbai (State of Maharashtra) and due to some reasons she
was sent to Kerala to pursue her 11th and 12th class studies, still this
Court held that as she had not completed 12th standard from the
institution within the State of Maharashtra, she was not eligible. In
the present case, the Petitioners have not studied 10 th and 12th
standard from the State of Maharashtra.
6     Before we proceed to appreciate the submissions of the learned
Advocates for the parties, it would be appropriate to reproduce the
relevant Rules of admission, which is as under:
(1)   Eligibility Criteria for Maharashtra State Candidature
(A) The candidates passing SSC and HSC Examination from
a recognized institution in Maharashtra State or the
candidates passing equivalent examination (such as 11+l, A
level in Senior Secondary School Leaving Certificate Course)
from a recognized Board/University of India or outside or from
Secondary Board or equivalent, constituted or recognized by
the Union or by a State Government, which is in Maharashtra;
A candidate who is Domicile of Maharashtra (Candidate should
have Domicile Certificate from the State of Maharashtra) or
born in Maharashtra (Candidate should have a Birth
Certificate mentioning the Place of Birth which is in
1.    If candidate has completed his/her SSC and HSC or
Equivalent Qualifying Examination from the State of
Maharashtra, but are not born in Maharashtra or Candidate
does not Possess the Domicile Certificate from the State of
Maharashtra, then such candidates are not eligible for
Maharashtra State Candidature Type-A. They should fill the
CET Application form as a Out Side Maharashtra State
Candidature Type Candidates i.e. All India Candidature Type.
2.    If candidate has completed his/her SSC & HSC or
Equivalent Qualifying Examination from the State of
Maharashtra, and are not born in Maharashtra but Candidate
has a Domicile Certificate from the State of Maharashtra then
such candidates are eligible for Maharashtra State
Candidature Type-A. They should fill the CET Application form
as Maharashtra State Candidature Type-A.
3.    Candidates who are born in Maharashtra or Candidate
having the Domicile Certificate from the State of Maharashtra
but have not completed his/her SSC & HSC or Equivalent
Qualifying Examination from the State of Maharashtra, then
such candidates are not eligible for Maharashtra State
Candidature Type-A. They should fill the CET Application form
as an Out Side Maharashtra State Candidature (OMS) Type
Candidates i.e. All India Candidature Type.
b.    Maharashtra State Candidature Type-B: the Father or
Mother of the Candidate is domiciled in the State of
Maharashtra (Either father or Mother of the candidate
should have a domicile certificate from the state of
Maharashtra if candidate is not born in Maharashtra/
Candidate does not possess domicile certificate from the state
of Maharashtra).
1.    If candidate has not completed his/her SSC & HSC or
Equivalent Qualifying Examination from the State of
Maharashtra, then such Candidates are not eligible for
Maharashtra State Candidature Type-B though candidates
father or Mother Possess the Domicile Certificate from the
State of Maharashtra. They should fill the CET Application
form as an Out Side Maharashtra State Candidature Type
Candidates i.e. All India Candidature Type.
2.    If candidate has completed SSC & HSC from the State of
Maharashtra & candidate does not possess domicile certificate
from the state of Maharashtra or Birth Certificate from the
State of Maharashtra but Candidate's Father or Mother
Possess Domicile Certificate from the state of Maharashtra,
then such candidates are eligible for Maharashtra State
Candidature Type-B. Such candidate should fill the CET
application form as a Maharashtra State Candidature type.
c.    Maharashtra State Candidature Type-C: - the Father
or Mother of the Candidate is an employee of the Government
of India or Government of India Undertaking who is posted and
reported to duty in the Maharashtra State before the last date
for submitting the Application Form for CAP, provided
candidate should have completed his/her SSC & HSC from the
State of Maharashtra.
1.    If candidate has not completed his/her SSC & HSC or
Equivalent Qualifying Examination from the state of
Maharashtra, then such candidates are not eligible for
Maharashtra State Candidature Type-C. They should fill the
CET Application form as an Out Side Maharashtra State
Candidature Type Candidates i.e. All India Candidature Type.
2.    If candidate has completed his/her SSC & HSC or
Equivalent Qualifying Examination from the State of
Maharashtra, & Candidate's Father or Mother is an employee
of the Govt. of India OR Government of India Undertaking who
is posted and reported to duty in the Maharashtra State before
the last date for submitting the Application Form for CAP, then
such Candidates are eligible for Maharashtra State
Candidature Type-C. They should fill the CET Application
form as a Maharashtra State Candidature Type.
d.    Maharashtra State Candidature Type-D: - the Father
or Mother of the Candidate is an employee of the Government
of Maharashtra or Government of Maharashtra Undertaking
(Provided Candidate should have completed his/her SSC &
HSC or Equivalent qualifying examination from the State of
1.    If the Candidate has not completed his/her SSC & HSC or
Equivalent qualifying examination from the State of
Maharashtra, then such candidates are not eligible for
Maharashtra State Candidature Type-D. They should fill the
CET Application form as an Out Side Maharashtra State
Candidature Type Candidates i.e. All India Candidature Type.
2.    If candidate has completed his/her SSC & HSC or
Equivalent Qualifying Examination from the State of
Maharashtra, & Father or Mother of the Candidate is an
employee ot the Government of Maharashtra or Government
of Maharashtra Undertaking, then such candidates are eligible
for Maharashtra State Candidature Type-D. They should fill
the CET Application form as a Maharashtra State Candidature
e.    Maharashtra State Candidature Type-E: -
The candidates passing SSC and or HSC Examination or
Equivalent Examination from a recognized institution from a
disputed Maharashtra-Karnataka Border Area and whose
Mother tongue is Marathi.
1.    The candidates who have not completed SSC and HSC
Examination or Equivalent Qualifying Examination from a
recognized institution from a disputed Maharashtra-
Karnataka Border Area and whose Mother tongue is not
Marathi, such candidates come under Out Side Maharashtra
State Candidature Type. They should fill the CET Application
form as an Out Side Maharashtra State Candidature Type. i.e.
Candidature Type): - The Candidates having Indian
Nationality are eligible under this Category (Candidate should
have Domicile Certificate from the State where candidate
belongs or Candidate should have a Birth certificate issued by
the respective State Government). OMS [Out Side
Maharashtra State] candidates i.e. All India Candidature
candidates should ill their CET application form
in Open Category.
A) Candidates who have completed their SSC and HSC or
Equivalent qualifying examination from Out Side Maharashtra
State & born Out Side Maharashtra & having a birth certificate
issued by the respective State Government or they possess
Domicile certificate from the respective State are come under
All India Candidature candidate i.e. Out Side Maharashtra
B)     Candidates who have completed their SSC and HSC or
Equivalent qualifying examination from Out Side Maharashtra
State but Born in Maharashtra & having a birth certificate
issued by the Govt of Maharashtra or they possess domicile
certificate from the Govt of Maharashtra State are come under
All India Candidature candidate i.e. Out Side Maharashtra
C)     Candidates who have completed their SSC and HSC or
Equivalent qualifying examination from the State of
Maharashtra but they are not Born in Maharashtra & does not
possess a birth certificate issued by the Govt of Maharashtra
or they do not possess Domicile Certificate from the Govt of
Maharashtra State are come under All India Candidature
candidate i.e. Out Side Maharashtra State Candidature Type.”
7     The amended admission rules are in force since the year 2017.
The Petitioners are desirous of seeking admission for 5 years
integrated degree course (LLB – 5 years). 85% of seats are reserved
for Maharashtra State Candidature and 15% for all over India quota.
The qualifying examination is SSC and HSC or equivalent qualifying
8      It does not appear to be a matter of dispute that the Petitioners
are born in State of Maharashtra. The parents of the Petitioners are
born in State of Maharashtra, the parents of the Petitioners posses
the property at Pune, State of Maharashtra.           The father of the
Petitioners is an Army Officer in the defence forces and is deployed
at various locations throughout the country. The Petitioners are
born in Pune on 26th August 2004. From 2003-2012 the father of
the Petitioners was posted at Jhansi, Baramulla, Meerut and
Gujarat. From 2012 he was posted at Pune. The Petitioners, as such,
studied in 4th and 5th standard in Pune. Then again in 2015, the
Petitioners’ father was transferred to State of Jammu & Kashmir.
The family shifted to Delhi.         Then from      2017 to 2020, the
Petitioners’ father was posted in Delhi and presently he is posted in
eastern part of India. The Petitioners completed their 10 th and 12th
standard from Army School in Delhi. The aforesaid are the admitted
9      It is also to be accepted that the Petitioners had no real choice
and were compelled to study outside the State of Maharashtra for
major part of their educational career, as the father of the
Petitioners was an Army Officer. By the very nature of his service,
the Petitioners’ father was required to be deployed and posted in
various parts of India as culled out above. It is because of the
fortuitous circumstances, the Petitioners’ father, at the time the
Petitioners were studying in 10th and 12th standard was not posted
within the State of Maharashtra, the Petitioners could not take
education in 10th and 12th standard from the institution within the
State of Maharashtra.
10    The Rules of admission to the Educational Institutions, such as
MBBS, Post Graduate Medical Admission have undergone challenge
in various petitions. The Rules have been held to be valid.
11    In case of Archana Sudhakar Mandulkar (supra) the
Division Bench of this Court held that the requirement of passing
Indian School Certificate Examination from an institution located in
Maharashtra State is not intended to be applied to the candidates
covered by Rule B(3). Servicemen have no control on posting which
can be anywhere, including Maharashtra.           Rule of denial of
admission to a meritorious son / daughter of a serviceman who is
domicile of Maharashtra only because of a fortuitous circumstance
of his being not posted at the time of his ward studying in 12 th
standard within the State of Maharashtra cannot have any nexus to
the object of the Rule. Mere chance cannot be a valid disqualifying
12     The apex court, in the case of Meenakshi Malik (supra)
observed that the condition that last two years’ education should be
received in school in Delhi should be considered as non applicable to
the students who had to leave India as their parents being posted
outside India by the Government.
13     The Division bench of this Court in case of Rajiv Purshottam
Wadhwa (Supra) interpreted Rule 4.4 of the Rules framed by the
Maharashtra University of Health Sciences for admission to the
medical colleges in the State to mean that the students will be
eligible to the admission to the first year medical course in the State
if such student has passed 10th standard from the institution within
the State of Maharashtra. However, this will not operate a bar to
student who is domicile or is a permanent resident of State of
Maharashtra for seeking admission though he or she may not have
passed SSC examination from the institution within the State of
Maharashtra.      In the said case the student had passed his 10 th
standard from Dubai and 11 th and 12th standard from the institution
in Mumbai (State of Maharashtra). The Division Bench observed
that the State Government can consider for grant of admission to the
students who are domiciled and/or permanent resident of State of
Maharashtra but due to fortuitous circumstances may not have
passed 10th standard examination within the State. The Petitioner’s
father therein joined defence services in the Indian Air Force and he
retired in June 1979. Upon retirement, the Petitioner’s father took
up an employment at the Airport at Dubai. The Petitioner was born
in 1982 and completed his education till 10th standard in Dubai and
took admission to 11th standard at Kirti College, Dadar, Mumbai and
completed his 11th and 12th standard from the institution in the State
14    Per contra, in case of Yellamalli Venkatapriyanka (supra) ,
the Division Bench considered various judgments of the apex court
and had negatived the challenge to the Rule which required 10 th and
12th standard to be passed from the Institution within the State of
Maharashtra to claim the benefit of State quota.            In the said
judgment, the Court distinguished the judgment of the Division
Bench of this Court in case of Rajiv Purshottam Wadhwa (supra) .
15    The apex court in case of Dr. Tanvi Behl Vs. Shrey Goel and
Ors. 6 has referred the following issues to the larger Bench.
25. Accordingly we would propose the following questions to
be examined by a larger Bench of this Court:
25.1. As to whether providing for domicile/residence-based
reservation in admission to "PG medical courses" within the
State quota is constitutionally invalid and is impermissible?
25.2. (a) If answer to the first question is in the negative and if
domicile/residence-based reservation in admission to "PG
medical courses is permissible, what should be the extent and
manner      of     providing   such    domicile/residence-based
reservation for admission to "PG medical courses" within the
25.2. (6) Again, if domicile/residence-based reservation in
admission to PG medical courses" is permissible, considering
that all the admissions are to be based on the merit and rank
obtained in NEET, what should be the modality
of providing such domicile/residence-based reservation in
relation to the State/e UT having only one medical college?
25.3. If answer to the first question is in the affirmative and if
domicile/residence-based reservation in admission to "PG
medical courses" is impermissible, as to how the State quota
seats, other than the permissible institutional preference
seats, are to be filled up?
16    The said case was with regard to the post graduate medical
17    The Petitioners are born in Maharashtra. For Maharashtra
State Candidature Type-A, two criteria are laid down viz. the
candidate is domiciled in Maharashtra or born in Maharashtra.
Explanation 3 to Rule 3.2(A)(a) further provides that the
candidates who were born in Maharashtra but have not completed
their SSC or HSC or equivalent qualifying examination from the
State of Maharashtra are not eligible for Maharashtra State
Candidature Type A. This explanation 3 to Rule 3.2(A)(a) takes
away the right of a candidate born in Maharashtra or domiciled in
Maharashtra from applying as a Maharashtra State Candidature
Type-A if he has not completed his SSC and HSC or equivalent
qualifying examination from an institution located in the State of
Maharashtra. Whereas, under the Maharashtra State Candidature
Type-C, if father or mother of the Petitioner is an employee of the
Government of India or Government of India Undertaking who is
posted and reported to duty in Maharashtra State before the last
date of submission of form for CAP, provided the candidate should
have completed SSC and HSC can apply for Maharashtra State quota.
In that case, it is not necessary that the candidate or the father
should be domicile or born in Maharashtra.
18    Perusal of the said Rules, it is manifest that the prima donna
consideration for applying from the Maharashtra State quota is that
the   candidate   should   have   passed   10 th and   12th   standard
examination from the institution located within the State of
Maharashtra.    If the candidate has not passed his 10 th and 12th
standard from the State of Maharashtra then though the candidate
or his parents are domiciled in the State of Maharashtra and /or
candidate is born in Maharashtra, he is not to be considered from
the State quota. The said Rule would undermine the domicile based
reservation. The Maharashtra State Candidature Type-A is meant
for the candidate who is domiciled in Maharashtra or born in
Maharashtra. However, further condition of passing 10th and 12th
standard examination from the institution within the State of
Maharashtra would debar a candidate who is domiciled or born in
Maharashtra from taking admission even if because of the fortuitous
circumstances he could not take education in 10th and 12th standard
from the State of Maharashtra.       The present case would be an
illustration of the same. The parents of the Petitioners are born in
Maharashtra, they are permanent residents of Maharashtra, they
have immovable property situated at Pune, State of Maharashtra,
the Petitioners are born in Maharashtra, however, because the
father of the Petitioners is in service of the nation viz. Officer in
Army, is deployed throughout the country and as observed above
was deployed after the birth of the Petitioners, at various States.
The Petitioners could not complete 10 th and 12th standard from the
State of Maharashtra. At the time the Petitioners took admission in
10th standard the father of the Petitioners was posted in Delhi and
immediately, it appears, he was transferred to the eastern region of
the country and in that circumstance, the Petitioners had to
complete their 10th and 12th standard from Delhi.           When the
Petitioners were in 4th and 5th standard, the father of the Petitioners
was posted in Pune, Maharashtra and they took education in 4 th and
5th standard from Pune, Maharashtra. The Rule, in itself may not be
ultra vires. Some standards will have to be set for a domicile based
reservation.   The condition that candidate passing 10 th and 12th
standard from State of Maharashtra may not be unreasonable or
arbitrary. However, further distinction or exception will have to be
made. There may be cases where the candidate / student does not
have a choice, such as the rigours service conditions of the parents
by virtue of which they are posted throughout the country in the
service of the nation and; other, who voluntarily for their business or
any other purposes, go to other State. In the former, it would be an
involuntary and compelling circumstances, whereas in latter, it
would be a voluntary act. The State ought to consider the cases of
the candidates who are domiciled in Maharashtra or born in
Maharashtra but because of the fortuitous circumstances, such as
the service conditions of the parents who are in service of the nation
are required to be deployed outside the State.         In such cases,
relaxation can be provided by the State Government to such
candidates of non completing SSC and HSC from the State of
Maharashtra. If such exception or relaxation is not provided, the
same would be harsh and would be disentitling the candidates
domiciled in Maharashtra or born in Maharashtra from taking
benefit of Maharashtra State quota. On the other hand, even if the
candidate or the parents are not domicile of Maharashtra nor born
in Maharashtra but are employees of the Government of India and
have joined the duty in Maharashtra State just before filling in form
of CAP round and the candidate appears in SSC and HSC
examination from the State of Maharashtra would be eligible for
admission from the Maharashtra State quota.
19    The benefit of Maharashtra State quota is extended (by an
exception) to the candidates whose father or mother is in
Government of India service and is transferred just prior to filling in
the CAP round by the candidate and the candidate who has done
only his 10th and 12th standard from the State of Maharashtra would
be eligible to be considered for the Maharashtra State though not
domiciled in Maharashtra and the candidates who are born in
Maharashtra or whose parents are born in Maharashtra and
domiciled in Maharashtra and are Government of India employee
but because of their posting outside the State of Maharashtra, the
candidate could not study his 10 th and 12th standard from State of
Maharashtra is precluded from taking admission from the
Maharashtra State quota.         The same would be unreasonable.
Basically, the Maharashtra State quota is to be provided for the
persons domiciled, born in the State of Maharashtra. The factual
matrix in case of Meenakshi Malik (supra) decided by the apex
court and in case of Archana Sudhakar Mandulkar (supra) are
similar to the facts of the present case.
20    In    case    of  Rachana   Sanjay   Kuwar    Vs.   State      of
Maharashtra 7 the Division Bench of this Court to which one of us
(S.V.Gangapurwala,J.) was a party, had not permitted the candidate
to be considered from Maharashtra State quota. In the said case, the
candidate had immovable property at Shahada. The father of the
Petitioner was scientist in the Department of Government of India.
The Petitioner passed her SSC and HSC examination from Bhopal.
The Petitioner therein sought admission from the Maharashtra State
quota. this Court denied the relief to the Petitioner therein as the
Petitioner had not challenged the regulations and the rules of the
(Regulations of Administrator to the Full Time Professional
Undergraduate Medical and Dental Course) 2016.
21    In the present case, the Rules are challenged. In view of the
aforesaid discussion though we hold that Rules are not ultra vires,
however, we may hasten to add that same needs to be read down to
provide relaxation or exemption for those candidates who are born
in Maharashtra and whose parents are domicile of Maharashtra but
due to fortuitous circumstances such as the parent is in service of
the Government and serving the nation and due to service condition
is deployed in various parts of the country could not complete their
22    In the light of the above, the Respondents shall consider the
Petitioners for admission from the Maharashtra State quota.
23    Rule is made absolute in the aforesaid terms.
24    The Writ Petition stands disposed of accordingly. No costs.