The petitioners had filed petition for quashing of
Case Crime No. 540 of 2019 registered at P.S. Hazratganj,
It is not in dispute that the petitioners have not
been    named   as   accused   in   the   said   crime.   If  the
petitioners have not been named as accused in the said
crime, the question of quashing of stated FIR or the case
now    under   investigation     by   the   Central   Bureau   of
Investigation (CBI) arising from the said crime, does not
arise as the petitioners will have no locus to seek such
a relief.
In other words, the petitioners not being named as
accused in the said crime or the case now registered by
the   CBI   on   the  basis  of   the   said  crime,   cannot  be
permitted     to   ask   for   quashing    of   the  proceedings
concerning some other persons (accused).
For the same reason, we do not intend to examine the
correctness of the relief claimed under Section 438 of
the   Criminal    Procedure   Code   at   the  instance   of  the
petitioners herein.
It will be open to the petitioners to take recourse
to appropriate remedy, as and when they are named by the
Investigating Agency (CBI) in connection with the stated
offence now under investigation by the CBI.
The Investigating Officer of CBI shall give 48 hours’
advance   notice  to    the  petitioners     before   proceeding
against the petitioners, so as to enable the petitioners
to  take   recourse   to   appropriate    remedy,    as   may   be
All   contentions   available    to  both   sides   are   left
We have passed this order in the peculiar facts of
the   present   case    and   the   response     filed   by    the
respondents in this petition.
On the earlier occasion, the Court had noticed that a
lookout notice was issued against the petitioners. It is
now clarified that the said lookout notice was issued by
the local police (Uttar Pradesh Police) investigating the
crime at that time, which notice has lapsed with the
passage  of  time.   In  that   sense,   the  writ   petition(s)
filed by the petitioners to challenge the said lookout
notice would also not survive for consideration.              That
can  be  pointed  out   to  the   High  Court   where   the   said
petition is pending.
This special leave petition is disposed of in the
above terms.
Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.