Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 248 of 2022
Counsel for Applicant :- Mukesh Chandra Gupta,Shubham Prakash Gupta
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Heard Sri Shubham Prakash Gupta, learned counsel for the applicant
and learned AGA for the State.
A first information report was lodged against the applicant as Case
Crime No. 197 of 2021 at Police Station- Lisarigate, District Meerut
The bail application of the applicant was rejected by learned
Additional Sessions Judge, Meerut, on 17.11.2021.
The applicant is in jail since 07.09.2021, pursuant to the said F.I.R.
Sri Shubham Prakash Gupta, learned counsel for the applicant
contends that the applicant has been falsely implicated in the instant
case. A general and vague role in the assault has been assigned to the
applicant in the FIR. The injured (since deceased) in his statement
under Section 161 Cr.P.C. has identified Shahrukh and Salman as the
assailants who fired the fire arm shot at the deceased. Attention is
called to the postmortem report which opines that the cause of death is
fire arm injury. The prosecution case does not allege that the applicant
used a fire arm and his role is distinct from Shahrukh and Salman.
Learned counsel for the applicant claims congruency in role and seeks
parity in relief granted to co-accused Smt. Kamlawati Devi, who has
been enlarged on bail by this Court on 07.01.2022 in Criminal Misc.
Bail Application No. 49556 of 2021 (Shahrukh Vs. State of U.P.).
Apart from the instant case the applicant does not have any criminal
history. Lastly it is submitted by learned counsel for applicant that the
applicant shall not abscond, and will fully cooperate in the criminal
law proceedings. The applicant shall not tamper with the evidence nor
influence the witnesses in any manner.
Sri I.P. Srivastava, learned AGA for the State could not satisfactorily
dispute the aforesaid submissions from the record. Learned AGA does
not contest that the applicant does not has any criminal history as
disclosed in the bail application.
Courts have taken notice of the overcrowding of jails during the
current pandemic situation (Ref.: Suo Motu Writ Petition (c) No.
1/2020, Contagion of COVID 19 Virus in prisons before the
Supreme Court of India). These circumstances shall also be factored
in while considering bail applications on behalf of accused persons.
I see merit in the submissions of learned counsel for the applicant and
accordingly hold that the applicant is entitled to be enlarged on bail.
In the light of the preceding discussion and without making any
observations on the merits of the case, the bail application is allowed.
Let the applicant- Dilshad @ Dillu be released on bail in Case Crime
No. 197 of 2021 at Police Station- Lisarigate, District Meerut under
Sections 147, 148, 149, 302, 506 IPC, on his furnishing a personal
bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the
court below. The following conditions be imposed in the interest of
(i) The applicant will not tamper with the evidence during the trial.
(ii) The applicant will not influence any witness.
(iii) The applicant will appear before the trial court on the date fixed,
unless personal presence is exempted.
(iv) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly make inducement,
threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case
so as to dissuade him from disclosing such facts to the Court to any
police officer or tamper with the evidence.
In case of breach of any of the above condition, the prosecution shall
be at liberty to move bail cancellation application before this Court.
The computer section is directed to correct the cause title in
conformity with the pleadings.
Before parting the impediment created by the registry official namely
(Sandeep Kumar, Assistant Registrar, deputed in fresh filing section)
in the hearing of the bail application has to be noticed. Specific order
was passed by this Court on 19.01.2022 directing that this matter be
placed in the list of fresh cases on 20.01.2022. The orders are explicit
and bear no ambiguity. However neither the list of fresh cases
depicting the aforesaid case was prepared nor the file was sent to the
court. The Bench Secretary of this Court enquired from the said
official namely (Sandeep Kumar, Assistant Registrar, deputed in fresh
filing section) about his failure to prepare the list of fresh cases
depicting the said case and also not sending file to the Court. The said
official replied that the order was not liable to be complied with due to
various administrative instructions and refused to send the file or
prepare the list. When this was brought to the notice of the Court the
Court directed that the official be summoned. The said official
appeared before this Court. When the Court enquired about his failure
to prepare the list and to sent the file to the Court, he reiterated his
stand by stating that the order cannot be complied with due to
administrative instructions. The said official remained defiant and
reiterated his stand. Subsequently the Court summoned the Registrar
General of this Court to account for non compliance of the order of
the Court. The Registrar General appeared in Court and also ensured
prompt compliance of orders of the Court. The counsel was duly
informed and the bail application was taken up and heard.
The conduct of the said   official (Sandeep Kumar, Assistant Registrar,
deputed in fresh filing section) is clearly contumacious. However this
Court does not deem it appropriate to expend scare judicial time by
drawing contempt against the official. Judicial time has to be used
more fruitfully for the purposes of dispensing justice. But the Court
cannot remain silent spectator to such acts of grave misconduct and
deliberate defiance of orders passed by this Court by officers of the
registry. Such conduct interferes with the administration of justice. In
case such officials are given free run, public at large will lose faith in
the judicial system. Hence in the interest of justice and better
administration of this Court it is directed that departmental action be
initiated forthwith against concerned employee as per law. It is also
open to the High Court to consider whether relaxing of qualitative
requirements and eligibility criteria for appointments and promotion to
responsible posts in the registry of this Court is conducive to good
administration of justice or not.