Case :- PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION (PIL) No. - 574 of 2020
Respondent :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Petitioner :- Gaurav Kumar Gaur,Abhinav Gaur,Aditya
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Arun Kumar,Ashish Mishra,Dhiraj
1.     In conducting hearing of this PIL in online mode, we have heard
Sri Manish Goyal, learned Additional Advocate General assisted by Sri
A.K. Goyal, learned Additional Chief Standing Counsel, Sri Tarun
Agarwal, learned counsel for U.P. State Election Commission, Sri S.P.
Singh, learned Additional Solicitor General of India, Sri Ashutosh
Mishra, learned counsel appearing for the High Court and on behalf of
the Nodal officers appointed by the District Judges, Sri Amrendra Nath
Singh, learned Senior Advocate and President of Allahabad High Court
learned Advocates and Sri Utsav Mishra, 3rd Year B.A. L.LB. Student of
2.     Reports sent by respective Nodal officers appointed by District
Judges under our last order, are taken on record. Affidavit filed on
behalf of the State Election Commission UP is also taken on record. An
application addressed to the Chief Justice and sent on our official mail
ID by one Utsav Mishra is also treated as a miscellaneous application in
the present PIL and, accordingly, is taken on record. An intervener
application filed by one Pal Singh Yadav is granted. Office is directed to
allot regular number to both the above applications.
3.     Sri Manish Goyal, learned Additional Advocate General appearing
on behalf of the State prayed for two days further time by means of a
miscellaneous application to comply with our last order dated 27th April,
2021. He submitted that a comprehensive affidavit was under preparation
to bring about the desired informations and action taken on what had been
directed vide paragraph 26 and 16 respectively of our last order.
4.     Notwithstanding the above request made for adjournment to bring
on record a compliance affidavit , Sri Goyal submitted that Government
was quite conscious and worried for the current Covid surge and
accordingly had not only decided for two days weekend curfew but even
extended it until the coming Wednesday. He submitted that the
government would not leave any stone unturned to curb the present surge
of pandemic as it was quite alive to the alarming situation, but is even
committed to wipe off the Corona virus i.e. Covid-19 from the State by
carrying out massive vaccination drive on a war footing in the days to
come. He admitted that the weekend curfews fetched encouraging results
as Covid graph was flattened now and further extension of curfew to week
days would possibly be able to break the chain. Besides that it was argued
that government was seriously working on the modalities to raise the
currently existing public health infrastructure in the state to meet the
demand in the days to come. He submitted that the police was also doing
commendable job in ensuring compliance of social distancing and
masking up of faces by the people and the results according to him were
also very encouraging.
5.     We do appreciate that the government ultimately realised the
importance of putting in lock down to the public movements in general
and decided to impose full day and night long curfew for consecutively
five days (Saturday to Wednesday) as we had also directed in our earlier
order dated 19th April 2021 for five days long restrictions on public
movements. We are of the view that government would take such further
steps in future also so that not only people but our day and night toiling
front Frontline Corona warriors and workers both in medical lines and
civil and police administration get some respite from this current surge of
pandemic to serve people in a better way.
6.     Since Sri Goyal has sought time to file a detailed affidavit, we are
not referring to various reports submitted by the Nodal Officers in this
order and will deal with those reports in the next hearing that will be held
7.     Sri Amrendra Nath Singh, learned Senior Advocate and President
of Allahabad High Court Bar Association, Sri Raghav Dwivedi, learned
Advocate and Sri Utsav Mishra have again questioned the preparedness of
Government to deal with the current surge of pandemic in the face of the
lacking public health infrastructure to meet the requirement.
8.     Sri Anuj Singh, learned Advocate has submitted that though the
Government has created a portal to show availability of Level-2 and
Level-3 beds in Covid wards and ICUs in various hospitals, both Private
and Government but the data fed for display in the portal was not correct.
He gave an instant example of one Hari Prasad Institution of Medical
Sciences, Lucknow, where the portal in morning at around 9:00 a.m.
showed 190 beds as vacant in Level-2 category but on being contacted
through mobile number provided, the hospital informed Sri Anuj Singh
that there was no bed available. On a pointed query being made as to why
the portal was showing vacant position in the hospital, he received a reply
that the data was not updated.
9.     During the course of hearing, we asked Sri Anuj Singh to dial the
number again of Hari Prasad Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, to
know exactly as to whether the data was correct or not and as to whether
the reply as was received earlier by Sri Anuj Singh remained same, Sri
Anuj Singh, dialed the number again and again and the line was showing
busy, however, ultimately he had been able to connect and reply was that
there was no Level-2 & Level-3 bed available, whereas on the online
portal, during the course of hearing of the case, was showing that there
were vacant positions of beds in both Level-2 and Level-3 category.
10.    This state of affaires that we have come to know about the
management of online portal created by the Government today casts
shadow upon the Covid Hospital Management moreso, in the face of the
fact that the Government althrough had been claiming that there were
sufficient beds in various hospitals and even in the last affidavit, they
showed that there were about 17614 isolation beds and 5510 ICU/ SDU
beds in the various private hospitals in the State and there was no scarcity.
11.    We have also been apprised of the fact that the various private
hospitals and even in Ram Manohar Lohia Hospital, Lucknow the patients
who were being admitted were not taken good care of. It was argued that
though the Government had rushed to engage private hospitals to meet the
requirement of the people in this pandemic but it had not been able to
ensure that these private hospitals treated the people appropriately who
were admitted as Covid patients. Similarly, Sri Anuj Singh, learned
Advocate placed a case of Kings George Medical University Hostpital
where portal showed 3 ICU beds to be vacant 2 days before and when
hospital was contacted, it was informed that there was no vacant ICU
12.    We have been informed that late Justice V.K. Srivastava, was
admitted initially in the morning of 23rd April, 2021 in Ram Manohar
Lohia Hospital, Lucknow but he was not taken care of till evening and it
was only around 7:30 pm when his condition deteriorated, he was placed
on ventilator. It was in the same night he was shifted to Sanjay Gandhi
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow, where he was in
ICU for five days and ultimately succumbed to the Covid- 19 infection.
13.    Sri Manish Goyal is directed to file an affidavit bringing on record
the treatment given to late Justice V.K. Srivastava at Ram Manohar Lohia
Hospital and it will also be explained why he was not taken immediately
to Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow,
immediately in the morning on 23rd April, 2021.
14.    Stories of hoarding of oxygen cylinders and harassment meted out
to those poor citizens who were begging for an oxygen cylinder to save
the life of their near and dear ones, both at the end of district
administration and police administration are being viralled in social
media. The news was also viralled that five patients had died in ICU of a
new trauma centre of Medical College, Meerut on Sunday last. Similarly,
news were also being viralled that one Sun Hospital, Gomti Nagar,
Lucknow and another private hospital at Meerut had taken their hands off
the admitted Covid patients only for the reason that oxygen supply was
not made even after demand. We find these news items showing a quite
contrary picture to one claimed by the Government that there was
sufficient supply of oxygen.
15.    We are at pain in observing that death of Covid patients just for non
supplying of oxygen to the hospitals is a criminal act and not less than a
genocide by those who have been entrusted the task to ensure continuous
procurement and supply chain of the liquid medical oxygen. How can we
let our people die in this way when science is so advanced that even heart
transplantation and brain surgery are taking place these days. Normally,
we would have not directed the State and district administration to enquire
into such news that have been viralled on social media but since the
Advocates who were appearing in this PIL supported such news and even
submitted that more or less situations in other districts of State are the
same, we find it necessary to direct for immediate remedial measures to
be taken by the Government. The District Magistrate, Lucknow and
District Magistrate, Meerut are directed to enquire into the matter of such
news items within 48 hours and submit their reports on the next date fixed
respectively. They are also directed to appear before the Court online on
the next date fixed.
16.    Sri Raghav Dwivedi, learned Advocate has submitted that there was
acute shortage of Remdesivir not only in Government hospitals but also in
the private hospitals and the referral letter system to be obtained from the
Chief Medical Officer and the District Magistrate of the concerned district
so as to make available Remdesivir had further complicated the things and
since there was no supply of Remdesivir to the private hospitals except on
a reference being made through Chief Medical Officer in the District and
those admitted in the private hospitals were not being administered
17.    Since Sri Goyal has to file an affidavit by the next date fixed and
this issue is very much part of our last direction, we need not to reiterate
this further and the State shall deal with extensively in the affidavit by the
next date fixed. The State shall in the meanwhile ensure sufficient supply
of Remdesivir and Tocilizumab drugs to all the hospitals.
18.    Sri Utsav Mishra in his application raised the issue of Police
keeping the oxygen cylinder, Remdesivir Injection and Oximeter
confiscated from illegal possessions, in the Malkhana of various districts,
whereas Remdesivir Injection and Oxygen cylinder which were widely in
demand could have been released to the district administration and should
not have been waisted in the name of case property. He submitted that
Remdesivir Injection was to be kept on a definite temperature so that it
did not get expired and if it is kept at Malkhana, it would certainly expire.
19.    Similarly, oxygen cylinder can also be put to use as it is in great
demand. Oximeters that were confiscated, could also be distributed to the
poor people and keeping all these articles in Malkhana would not be at all
in public interest as it will all go wastage.
20.    Sri Goyal has submitted that he will take up the issue with the State
Government so that proper disposal of the articles like oxygen cylinder,
Remdesivir Injection and oximeter is done and is not waisted.
21.    Sri Utkarsh Mishra, has also submitted that RTPCR reports were
being given after much delay i.e. 3-4 days after the sample was collected
which was not a happy situation in public interest because those who
samples were collected if they were let free and roamed about in society
they might infect others also and also they might infect family members at
home. It was submitted that in cities of Lucknow, Prayagraj, Varanasi and
Meerut the report was being given between 3- 4 days except in Varanasi
where the reports were being given between 2-3 days.
22.    We were also informed that in the district of Prayagraj there were
two RTPCR machines having capacity of 3000-4000 testing samples at
one point of time. Currently, the sample collected in district Prayagraj was
around 5000/- as was also admitted by Sri Goyal, in such a situation we
fail to understand why the respondents were taking time of 3 to 4 days in
giving RTPCR reports.
23.    We, accordingly, direct Sri Goyal to look into the matter and come
up with an affidavit showing the testing capacity of RTPCR Lab for the
districts Lucknow and Prayagraj, Varanasi, Kanpur Nagar, Meerut,
Gorakhpur, Ghaziabad, Gautambudh Nagar, Agra and Jhansi by the next
date fixed.
24.    Sri Amrendra Nath Singh, learned Senior Advocate and President
of Allahabad High Court Bar Association submitted that situation was
quite alarming since lawyers had to render assistance in dispensation of
justice by the High Court, some specific centres should be assigned to
vaccinate every member of the Bar Association. He has suggested that
K.P. Community Centre Hall could be requisitioned for this limited
purpose for sometime.
25.    We, accordingly, direct Sri Goyal to study the feasibility to set up a
vaccination centre specifically where lawyers of the Bar Association and
employees of the High Court at Allahabad. Similar facility may also be
provided to the lawyers of the Lucknow Bench of the High Court. The
endeavour should be to vaccinate maximum number of lawyers as early as
possible and the employees of the High Court both at Allahabad and its
26.    It has also been brought to our notice that a number of gadgets that
could have been put to use for treatment of Covid patients, were lying idle
in Government hospitals. Sri Goyal has assured that he would get the
matter enquired and would apprise the Court of the same on the next date
of hearing.
27.    Sri Amrendra Nath Singh, learned Senior Advocate has further
argued that merely because the Covid graph has flattened, the
administration should not feel relaxed. He argued that if this restriction of
public movement in the name of curfew that had been introduced for
weakened days and Monday and now has been further extended for
Tuesday and Wednesday, it had been imposed two weeks back, the
current situation would have been avoided. He argued that restrictions on
public movements whether in the name of curfew or lockdown was the
only way to check the spread of Covid and break the chain thereof. He
submitted that what Government had done today, could have done two
weeks back. We find substance in the argument advanced by Sri
Amrendra Nath Singh, learned Senior Advocate.
28.    Now, coming to the affidavit filed on behalf of State Election
Commission in response to our order dated 27th April, 2021 in which we
had asked for explanation from it in respect of deaths of the polling agents
and officers that had taken place due to their getting infected by this
deadly virus Covid-19, we find that except seeking a verification from the
District Magistrates/ District Election Officers of all the districts vide
letter dated 28th April, 2021, nothing more has been done. Sri Tarun
Agrawal, while defending the action of the State Election Commission
submitted that the State Election Commission was not shirking away from
its responsibility to comply with the order and sought time as the response
to the letter dated 28th April, 2021 was still awaited.
29.    From the recitals as have come up in the letter dated 28th April,
2021, we find that emphasis was more upon the correctness of the news
item of which we had taken judicial notice than verifying the number of
deaths. We make it clear that any slackness on the part of the Election
Commission on this issue will not be tolerated.
30.    We have been informed that even during the counting of polls of
Gram Panchayal Elections of the State that had taken place on 29th April,
2021 and onwards, the Covid protocol and guidelines were definitely
flouted. People gathered in huge numbers at the counting centres and both
the Election Officers and Police administration had completely failed to
ensure the compliance of Covid guidelines.
31.    We find that in the order of the Supreme Court dated 7 th April, 2021
passed in Special Leave Petition (Civil) Diary No.- 10698 of 2021 it is
recorded that the undertaking was given before the Supreme Court by the
State Election Commission through its Counsel that counting will be
supervised through CCTV cameras to be installed at the designated
counting centres and those who were in charge of the counting centres
would be held responsible for any lapse regarding compliance of Covid-
19 guidelines.
32.     We, accordingly, direct the State Election Commission to produce
before us the CCTV footage of the designated counting areas and centres
both in the form the footage print and also Pen Drive by the next date
fixed , in the first instance relating District Lucknow, Prayagraj, Varanasi,
Gorakhpur, Ghaziabad, Meerut, Gautambudh Nagar and Agra.
33.     We make it clear at the same time that in case if the Commission
itself finds from the CCTV footage that there has been clear violation of
the Covid- 19 protocol and guidelines, it would come up with action plan
in that regard.
34.     The matter is adjourned and is directed to come up again on 7th
May, 2021 at 11:00 am. It is expected that both Sri Manish Goyal, learned
Additional Advocate General and Sri Tarun Agrawal, learned counsel for
the State Election Commission shall come up with comprehensive
compliance affidavit in respect of our order passed on 27th April, 2021 as
well as this order passed today.
35.     We also find that due to inadvertence District Judge, Meerut was
not directed to appoint Nodal Officer. Therefore, we direct the District
Judge, Meerut also to appoint any Judicial officer as Nodal officer in his
district in compliance of our order dated 27th April, 2021 and place the
report before us by the next date fixed.
36.     The Registry is directed to communicate this order to the District
today itself.