Counsel for Applicant :- Siddharth Shankar Dubey
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Heard Sri Siddharth Shanker Dubey, learned counsel for the
applicants as well as Smt Jan Laxmi Tiwari Senanai, learned A.G.A.
for the State and perused the record.
The instant application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed
by the applicants with a prayer to quash the entire criminal
proceedings of Case No. 21 of 2019: State of U.P. Versus Krishna
Kumar and other under Section 363, 366 I.P.C. and Sections 16 and 17
of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, pending
before the court of ASJ/POCSO-II Raibareli and also for quashing of
the charge-sheet No.101/2019 dated 05.02.2019 and quashing of
summoning order dated 08.02.2019.
As per the prosecution version of the F.I.R., on 13.11.2018 at
08.40 A.M. the complainant went to drop off his daughter to her
school and after the end of school hours, the complainant found out
that his daughter did not attend the school that day. The complainant
went home and checked his household trunk and found that the
daughter had fled with Rs.20,000/- along with her. That complainant’s
house is nearby to one neighbour Krishna Kumar Nayi’s house who
lives with his son Avinash alias Shivam wife Shrimati, daughter
Shivani and second son Abhishek as a family. The complainant states
that Avinash alias Shivam was living in some city for purpose of
earning his livlihood. Furthermore, as per the allegations levelled by
complainant on 13.11.2018 at about 8.40 AM in the morning Shivani
and Abhishek dropped off the victim from school to station where
accused Avinash alias Shivam was already present, who manipulated
the victim in running away with him. Also, it is alleged in the F.I.R.
that Krishna Kumar Nayi was connected throughout on the phone and
hence Krishna Kumar Nayi mother Shrimati sister Shivani and brother
Abhishek all are involved in the said crime.
Learned counsel for the applicants further submits that the
entire prosecution story is false. No such incident took place and the
applicants have been falsely implicated in the present case.
Learned counsel for the applicants further submits that before
arguing the case on merits, he wants to draw attention of this Court on
the charge-sheet dated 05.02.2019 submitted by the Investigating
Officer in mechanical manner under Sections 363, 366 I.P.C. and
Section 16 and 17 of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences
Act, 2012, copy of the same is filed as Annexure No.1 to the affidavit,
whereas he further submits that on the charge-sheet, the learned
Magistrate had taken cognizance and passed the summoning order on
08.02.2019. The cognizance was taken on the printed proforma by
filling the sections of IPC, dates and number and in the said proforma
the learned Magistrate without assigning any reason has summoned
the applicants for facing trial. Copy of the cognizance order is also
annexed as Annexure No.2 to the affidavit.
Learned counsel for the applicants further submits that by the
order dated 08.02.2019 cognizance taken by the learned Magistrate on
printed proforma without assigning any reason is abuse of process of
law and the same was without application of mind and was in a
routine manner.
Learned counsel for the applicants further submits that after
submission of charge sheet and cognizance order on printed proforma,
the applicants have been summoned mechanically by order dated
08.02.2019 and the court below while summoning the applicants has
materially erred and did not follow the dictum of law as propounded
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in various cases that summoning in
criminal case is a serious matter and the court below without dwelling
into material and visualizing the case on the touch stone of probability
should not summon accused person to face criminal trial. It is further
submitted that the court below has not taken into consideration the
material placed before the trial court along with charge sheet and,
therefore, the trial court has materially erred in summoning the
applicant. The court below has summoned the applicant through a
printed order, which is wholly illegal.
It is vehemently urged by learned counsel for the applicants that
the impugned cognizance/summoning order dated 08.02.2019 is not
sustainable in the eye of law, as the same has been passed in
mechanical manner without applying the judicial mind, because on the
face     of    record    itself  it   is   apparent    that   impugned
cognizance/summoning order dated 08.02.2019 has been passed by
the Magistrate concerned on printed proforma by filling up the gaps,
therefore the same is liable to be quashed by this Court.
Learned counsel for the applicants has given much emphasis
that if the cognizance has been taken on the printed proforma, the
same is not sustainable.
Per contra, learned A.G.A. for the State submitted that
considering the material evidences and allegations against the
applicants on record, as on date, as per prosecution case, the
cognizable offence against the applicants is made out, therefore,
application is liable to be dismissed but has not denied that the leaned
Magistrate has taken cognizance on the printed proforma.
Accordingly, this case is being finally decided at this stage without
issuing notice to opposite party no.2 and without calling for a counter
I have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the
The main issue for consideration before this Court is that
whether the learned Magistrate may summon the accused person on a
printed proforma without assigning any reason and take cognizance
on police report filed under Sections 173 of Cr.P.C. In this regard, it is
relevant to mention here that a Court can take cognizance of an
offence only when condition requisite for initiation of proceedings
before it as set out in Chapter XIV of the Code are fulfilled.
Otherwise, the Court does not obtain jurisdiction to try the offences
under section 190 (1) of the Cr.P.C. provided that "subject to the
provisions of this Chapter, any Magistrate of the first class, and any
Magistrate of the second class specially empowered in this behalf
under sub-section (2), may take cognizance of any offence-
(a) upon receiving a complaint of facts which constitute
(b) upon a police report of such facts;
(c) upon information received from any person other
than a police officer, or upon his own knowledge, that
such offence has been committed.
(2) The Chief Judicial Magistrate may empower any
Magistrate of the second class to take cognizance under
sub-section (1) of such offences as are within his
competence to inquire into or try."
At this juncture, it is fruitful to have a look so far as the law
pertaining to summoning of the accused persons, by taking
cognizance on a police report filed under section 173 of the Cr.P.C., is
concerned and the perusal of the case law mentioned herein below
would clearly reveal that cognizance of an offence on complaint is
taken for the purpose of issuing process to the accused. Since, it is a
process of taking judicial notice of certain facts which constitute an
offence, there has to be application of mind as to whether the material
collected by the Investigating Officer results in sufficient grounds to
proceed further and would constitute violation of law so as to call a
person to appear before the criminal court to face trial. This discretion
puts a responsibility on the magistrate concerned to act judiciously
keeping in view the facts of the particular case as well as the law on
the subject and the orders of Magistrate does not suffers from non-
application of judicial mind while taking cognizance of the offence.
Fair and proper investigation is the primary duty of the
Investigating Officer. No investigating agency can take unduly long
time in completing investigation. There is implicit right under Article
21 for speedy trial which in turn encompasses speedy investigation,
inquiry, appeal, revision and retrial. There is clear need for time line in
completing investigation for having in-house oversight mechanism
wherein accountability for adhering to lay down timeline, can be fixed
at different levels in the hierarchy, vide Dilawar vs. State of
Haryana, (2018) 16 SCC 521, Menka Gandhi vs. Union of India,
AIR 1978 SC 597, Hussainara Khatoon (I) vs. State of Bihar,
(1980)1 SCC 81, Abdul Rehman Antulay vs. R.S. Nayak, (1992) 1
SCC 225 and P. Ramchandra Rao vs. State of Karnatka, (2002) 4
For the purposes of investigation, offences are divided into two
categories "cognizable" and "non-cognizable". When information of a
cognizable offence is received or such commission is suspected, the
proper police officer has the authority to enter in the investigation of
the same but where the information relates to a non-cognizable
offence, he shall not investigate it without the order of the competent
Magistrate. Investigation includes all the proceedings under the
Cr.P.C. for the collection of evidence conducted by a police officer or
by any person other than a Magistrate (who is authorised by a
Magistrate in his behalf). Investigation consists of steps, namely (i)
proceeding to spot, (ii) ascertainment of the facts and circumstances
of the case, (iii) discovery and arrest of the suspected offender, (iv)
collection of evidence relating to the commission of the offence and
(v) formation of opinion as to whether on the material collected
therein to place the accused before a Magistrate for trial and if so to
take necessary steps for the same by filing a charge sheet under
Section 173, Cr.P.C., vide H.N. Rishbud vs. State of Delhi, AIR
1955 SC 196. Thereafter, the learned Magistrate has to take
cognizance after application of judicial mind and by reasoned order
and not in mechanical manner.
In the case of Bhushan Kumar and Anr. v. State (NCT of
Delhi) and Anr., AIR 2012 SC 1747, the Hon'ble Apex Court was
pleased to observe that section 204 of the Code does not mandate the
Magistrate to explicitly state the reasons for issuance of summons. It
clearly states that if in the opinion of a Magistrate taking cognizance
of an offence, there is sufficient ground for proceedIn the case of
Basaruddin & others Vs. State of U.P. and others, 2011 (1) JIC
335 (All)(LB), the Hon'ble Court was pleased to observed as under:-
"From a perusal of the impugned order, it appears
that the learned Magistrate on the complaint filed
by the complainant has summoned the accused in a
mechanical way filling the date in the typed
expected to go through the allegations made in the
complaint and to satisfy himself as to which
offences were prima facies, being made out against
the accused on basis of allegations made in the
complaint. It appears that the learned Magistrate did
not bother to go through the allegations made in the
complaint and ascertain as to what offences were,
prima facie, being made out against the accused on
the basis of allegations made in the complaint.
Apparently, the impugned order passed by the
learned Magistrate suffers from non-application of
mind while taking cognizance of the offence. The
impugned order is not well reasoned order,
therefore, the same is liable to be quashed and the
petition deserves to be allowed and the matter may
be remanded back to the learned Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Lakhimpur Kheri with direction to him
to go through the allegations made in the complaint
and ascertain as to what offences against the
accused were prima facie being made out against
the accused on the basis of allegations made in the
complaint and pass fresh order, thereafter, he will
proceed according to law."
In the case of Bhushan Kumar and Anr. v. State (NCT of
Delhi) and Anr., AIR 2012 SC 1747, the Hon'ble Apex Court was
pleased to observe that section 204 of the Code does not mandate the
Magistrate to explicitly state the reasons for issuance of summons. It
clearly states that if in the opinion of a Magistrate taking cognizance
of an offence, there is sufficient ground for proceeding, then the
summons may be issued. This section mandates the Magistrate to
form an opinion as to whether there exists a sufficient ground for
summons to be issued but it is nowhere mentioned in the section that
the explicit narration of the same is mandatory, meaning thereby that
it is not a pre-requisite for deciding the validity of the summons
In the case of Sunil Bharti Mittal v. Central Bureau of
Investigation, AIR 2015 SC 923, the Hon,ble Apex Court was
pleased to observe in paragraph no.47 of the judgment as under:
"47. However, the words "sufficient grounds for
proceeding" appearing in the Section are of immense
importance. It is these words which amply suggest that
an opinion is to be formed only after due application of
mind that there is sufficient basis for proceeding against
the said accused and formation of such an opinion is to
be stated in the order itself.."
In the case of Darshan Singh Ram Kishan v. State of
Maharashtra , (1971) 2 SCC 654, the Hon'ble Court was pleased to
observe that the process of taking cognizance does not involve any
formal action, but it occurs as soon as the Magistrate applies his mind
to the allegations and, thereafter, takes judicial notice of the offence.
As provided by Section 190 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, a
Magistrate may take cognizance of an offence either, (a) upon
receiving a complaint, or (b) upon a police report, or (c) upon
information received from a person other than a police officer or even
upon his own information or suspicion that such an offence has been
committed. As has often been held, taking cognizance does not
involve any formal action or indeed action of any kind but occurs as
soon as a Magistrate applies his mind to the suspected commission of
an offence. Cognizance, therefore, takes place at a point when a
Magistrate first takes judicial notice of an offence. This is the position
whether the Magistrate takes cognizance of an offence on a complaint,
or on a police report, or upon information of a person other than a
police officer. Therefore, when a Magistrate takes cognizance of an
offence upon a police report, prima facie he does so of the offence or
offences disclosed in such report."
In the case of Ankit Vs. State of U.P. And another passed in
Application U/S 482 No.19647 of 2009 decided on 15.10.2009, this
Court was pleased to observe in paragraph No.8 of the judgment as
"8. In the beginning, the name of the court, case number,
state                               vs.                .......            under  section                  .........                       P.S.            .........
District ......... case crime No. ........ /2009 also have been
printed and blanks have been filled up by mentioning the
case number, name of the accused, section, P.S. District
etc. by some employee. Below afore cited printed matter,
the                        following                                    sentence  has            been               mentioned                                   in
Below aforesaid sentence, the seal of the court containing
name of Sri Talevar Singh, the then Judicial Magistrate-
III, has been affixed and the learned magistrate has put
his short signature (initial) over his name. The manner in
which the impugned order has been prepared shows that
the learned magistrate did not at all apply his judicial
mind at the time of passing this order and after the blanks
were filled up by some employee of the court, he has put
his initial on the seal of the court. This method of passing
judicial order is wholly illegal. If for the shake of
argument, it is assumed that the blanks on the printed
proforma were filled up in the handwriting of learned
magistrate, even then the impugned order would be
illegal and invalid, because order of taking cognizance of
any other judicial order cannot be passed by filling up
blanks on the printed proforma. Although as held by this
Court in the case of Megh Nath Guptas & Anr V State
of U.P. And Anr, 2008 (62) ACC 826, in which
reference has been made to the cases of Deputy Chief
Controller Import and Export Vs Roshan Lal
(SC): AIR 2000 SC 1456 and Kanti Bhadra Vs State
of West Bengal, 2000 (1) JIC 751 (SC): 2000 (40) ACC
441 (SC), the Magistrate is not required to pass detailed
reasoned order at the time of taking cognizance on the
charge sheet, but it does not mean that order of taking
cognizance can be passed by filling up the blanks on
printed proforma. At the time of passing any judicial
order including the order taking cognizance on the charge
sheet, the Court is required to apply judicial mind and
even the order of taking cognizance cannot be passed in
mechanical manner. Therefore, the impugned order is
liable to be quashed and the matter has to be sent back to
the Court below for passing fresh order on the charge
sheet after applying judicial mind."
In the case of Kavi Ahmad Vs. State of U.P. and another
passed in Criminal Revision No. 3209 of 2010, wherein order taking
cognizance of offence by the Magistrate under Section 190(1)(b) on
printed proforma without applying his judicial mind towards the
material collected by the Investigating Officer has been held illegal.
In the case of Abdul Rasheed and others Vs. State of U.P.
and another 2010 (3) JIC 761 (All). The relevant observations and
findings recorded in the said case are quoted below:-
"6. Whenever any police report or complaint is filed
before the Magistrate, he has to apply his mind to the
facts stated in the report or complaint before taking
cognizance. If after applying his mind to the facts of the
case, the Magistrate comes to the conclusion that there is
sufficient material to proceed with the matter, he may
take cognizance. In the present case, the summoning
order has been passed by affixing a ready made seal of
the summoning order on a plain paper and the learned
Chief Judicial Magistrate had merely entered the next
date fixed in the case in the blank portion of the ready
made order. Apparently the learned Magistrate had not
applied his mind to the facts of the case before passing
the order dated 20.12.2018, therefore, the impugned
order cannot be upheld.
7. Judicial orders cannot be allowed to be passed in a
mechanical manner either by filling in blank on a printed
proforma or by affixing a ready made seal etc. of the
order on a plain paper. Such tendency must be deprecated
and cannot be allowed to perpetuate. This reflects not
only lack of application of mind to the facts of the case
but is also against the settled judicial norms. Therefore,
this practice must be stopped forthwith."
In view of the above, this Court finds and observes that the
conduct of the judicial officers concerned in passing orders on printed
proforma by filling up the blanks without application of judicial mind
is objectionable and deserves to be deprecated. The summoning of an
accused in a criminal case is a serious matter and the order must
reflect that Magistrate had applied his mind to the facts as well as law
applicable thereto, whereas the impugned summoning order was
passed in mechanical manner without application of judicial mind and
without satisfying himself as to which offence were prima-facie being
made out against the applicants on the basis of the allegations made
by the complainant. the impugned cognizance order passed by the
learned Magistrate is against the settled judicial norms.
In light of the judgments referred to above, it is explicitly clear
that the order dated 08.02.2019 passed by the ASJ/POCSO-
II,Raibareli is cryptic and does not stand the test of the law laid down
by the Hon'ble Apex Court. Consequently, the cognizance/summoning
order dated 08.02.2019 cannot be legally sustained, as the Magistrate
failed to exercise the jurisdiction vested in him resulting in
miscarriage of justice.
Accordingly, the present Criminal Misc. Application U/S 482
Cr.P.C succeeds and is allowed. The impugned summoning order
dated 08.02.2019 passed in Case No. 21 of 2019: State of U.P. Versus
Krishna Kumar and others under Section 363, 366 I.P.C. and Sections
16 and 17 of Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012,
pending before the ASJ/POCSO-II Raibareli is hereby quashed.
The matter is remitted back to ASJ/POCSO-II Raibareli
directing him to decide afresh the issue for taking cognizance and
summoning the applicants and pass appropriate orders in accordance
with law keeping in view the observations made by this Court as well
as the direction contained in the judgments referred to above within a
period of two months from the date of production of a copy of this
order.
The party shall file certified copy or computer generated copy
of such order downloaded from the official website of High Court
Allahabad or certified copy issued from the Registry of the High
The concerned Court/Authority/Official shall verify the
authenticity of such computerized copy of the order from the official
website of High Court Allahabad and shall make a declaration of such
verification in writing.