The vacation bench of Rajasthan High Court observed that the High Court cannot direct the authorities as to when and on which date a particular examination is to be conducted.
Essentially, the petitioners alleged that the date of examination for the recruitment to the post of Lab Assistant which is going to be conducted on 28.06.2002 and 29.06.2022 is clashing with certain other examinations. Additionally, the petition sought that the candidates be allowed sufficient time for preparation of the examination because, as per the petitioner, the syllabus for Lab Assistant examination has been amended and in place of the earlier short syllabus, a lengthy syllabus comprising many new topics has been introduced.
The court observed that all the recruitment examinations as well as graduation examinations are not conducted for a single person or a specific group of people. These are the examinations for which an advance time table is prepared by the concerned department and are conducted after months of prior preparation, added the court.
Justice Rekha Borana, while disposing the petition, observed,
"In the opinion of this Court, the said time cannot be said to be insufficient for any student to prepare for the examination. Moreoever, challenge to said amended syllabus has been made in the present writ petition filed on 14.06.2022, that is, just a week prior to the scheduled date of examination. Therefore, the present writ petition cannot be held to be tenable on this ground at such a belated stage."
On the issue of conducting of the other examinations on the same date and clashing of the date of examination, the court opined that such interference cannot be made in the time table and the schedule of the examinations being conducted by the respective departments and authorities.
The court observed that the petitioners may move a representation to the concerned authorities specifically raising their grievances. The court added that the concerned authorities may consider the same keeping in view the larger interest of the students.
Adv. Hari Singh Rajpurohit appeared on behalf of the petitioners.
Case Title: Jaswant Singh & Ors. v. Staff Selection Board, Jaipur & Ors.


