(2 of 4)                 [CW-8717/2022]
(3 of 4)                [CW-8717/2022]
The present petition has been filed basically on two grounds:
firstly, that date of examination for the recruitment to the post of
Lab Assistant which is going to be conducted on 28.06.2002 and
29.06.2022 is clashing with certain other examinations which are
scheduled to be held on the same dates and secondly, that the
syllabus for Lab Assistant examination has been amended and in
place of the earlier short syllabus, a lengthy syllabus comprising of
many new       topics    has    been       introduced         and therefore,  the
candidates deserve to be allowed sufficient time for preparation of
the examination.
A perusal of the record shows that the syllabus as alleged to
be amended, has been amended in the month of April 2022 and
the examination is now going to be conducted on 28.06.2022 and
In the opinion of this Court, the said time cannot be said to
be insufficient for any student to prepare for the examination.
Moresoever, challenge to said amended syllabus has been made in
the present writ petition filed on 14.06.2022, that is, just a week
prior to the scheduled date of examination. Therefore, the present
writ petition cannot be held to be tenable on this ground at such a
belated stage.
So far as conducting of the other examinations on the same
date and clashing of the date of examination is concerned, in the
specific opinion of this Court, such interference cannot be made in
the time table and the schedule of the examinations being
conducted by the respective departments and authorities. All the
(4 of 4)                 [CW-8717/2022]
recruitment examinations as well as graduation examinations are
not conducted for a single person or a specific group of people.
These are the examinations for which an advance time table is
prepared by the concerned department and are conducted after
months of prior preparation.
Moresoever, this Court is not an authority to direct the
authorities as to when and on which date a particular examination
is to be conducted.
In view of the above observations, this Court is not inclined
to interfere in the present writ petition. However, the petitioners
may      move   a   representation          to     the     concerned  authorities
specifically raising their grievances. The concerned authorities may
consider the same keeping in view the larger interest of the
students.
With these observations, the present petition is disposed of.
All the pending applications also stand disposed of.