This revision petition is filed praying this Court to set aside
the judgment of the XII Additional and ACMM (SCCH-8),
Bengaluru in C.C.No.12481/2017 dated 31.10.2019 convicting
the petitioners herein for the offence punishable under Section
138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act (’N.I.Act’ for short) and to
set aside the judgment of the LV Additional City Civil and
Sessions   Judge,   Bengaluru    in   Crl.A.No.2458/2019    dated
17.09.2021 remanding the case to the Trial Court.
respondent/complainant is that the complainant was running an
industry in the name of M/s. Nandini Modulars.       The accused
gave an undertaking to the complainant that he will discharge
the amount of Rs.13,58,921/- within 15 days and also issued
four cheques as security to the said loan amount in favour of the
complainant. On presentation of those cheques, the same were
dishonoured with an endorsement as ‘funds insufficient’. Hence,
the legal notice was issued on 03.02.2017 calling upon the
accused to make payment of the dishonoured cheques amount
and the said notice was duly served on the accused and inspite
of service of notice, the accused had not complied with the
same. Hence, the complaint was filed and cognizance was taken
and the petitioners were secured and they did not plead guilty.
Hence, the complainant examined himself as PW1 and got
marked the documents at Ex.P1 to P60 and the accused not led
any defence evidence. The Trial Court after considering both the
oral and documentary evidence, convicted the petitioners herein.
Hence, an appeal was preferred before the Appellate Court in
Crl.A.No.2458/2019 wherein, the contention was taken that the
complaint is barred by limitation and there is no application filed
before the Trial Court and very initiation of the proceeding
against the petitioners is erroneous and the Court also failed to
take note of the material on record and committed an error in
convicting the petitioners.   The Appellate Court taking note of
the grounds urged in the appeal, framed the points for
consideration whether the complaint is liable to be dismissed in
view of the delay and whether the judgment and sentence
passed by the Trial Court requires interference and answered
Point No.1 as negative and remanded the matter to consider the
same afresh by giving an opportunity to the complainant to file
necessary application for condonation of delay and directed the
Trial Court to decide the application first and thereafter proceed
with the matter as per law relying upon the judgment of the
Apex    Court   in  the  case   of  Pawan     Kumar     Ralli  and
consequently, set aside the order of conviction and sentence
passed by the Trial Court. Hence, the present revision petition is
filed before this Court.
3.     The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners
would vehemently contend that the Appellate Court has wrongly
relied upon the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of
Pawan Kumar Ralli. The judgment of the Apex Court clearly
says that it pertains to the peculiar facts of that case and it is
not laying down a general proposition of law. The counsel would
contend that there was a delay of seven days in filing the
complaint and the Appellate Court wrongly observed that ground
of delay was not raised at all before the Trial Court.      It is
contended that Appellate Court has no power under the Cr.P.C to
remand the case to the Trial Court for the purpose of giving an
opportunity to the complainant to file a condonation of delay
application.   The counsel would contend that by filing the
complaint itself, the delay application ought to have been filed
and the same is not filed and the question of giving an
opportunity does not arise.
4.     The counsel for the petitioners in support of his
argument relied upon the judgment of this Court reported in
2015    (2)   AKR    481   between    G.RAVI    v.  SHIVANAND
REVAPPA REBBANAVAR wherein it is observed that if the
Magistrate for any reason does not condone the delay in filling
the complaint, it would result in dismissal of the complaint.
5.    The counsel for the petitioners also relied upon the
judgment of the Apex Court in Civil Appeal No.6619/2014 dated
05.08.2021    and   brought   to   notice of   this  Court  to the
observations made in paragraph 17, wherein it is held that it was
an order made under Article 142 of the Constitution on the
peculiar facts of that case. The same cannot be applied as
general preposition of law. Law declared by this Court is binding
under Article 141.     Any direction given on special facts, in
exercise of jurisdiction under Article 142, is not a binding
6.    The counsel for the petitioners also relied upon the
judgment of the Apex Court in the case of INDIAN BANK v.
ABS MARINE PRODUCTS PRIVATE LIMITED passed in
18.04.2006 and brought to notice of this Court on paragraph 21
wherein it is held that any direction issued in exercise of power
under Article 142 to do proper justice and the reasons, if any,
given for exercising such power, cannot be considered as law
laid down by this Court under Article 141. It is pointed out that
other courts do not have the power similar to that conferred on
this Court under Article 142 and any attempt to follow the
exercise of such power will lead to incongruous and disastrous
7.    The counsel for the petitioners also relied upon the
unreported judgment of this Court in Crl.A.No.186/2007
dated 23.03.2010 between SRI T.S.MURALIDHAR v. SRI H
NARAYANA SINGH wherein an observation is made that the
learned Magistrate had no jurisdiction to condone the delay in
lodging the complaint after the trial was over and when the case
was posed for arguments on merits.
8.    The counsel for the petitioners also relied upon the
unreported judgment of this Court in Crl.A.No.2640/2011
dated 26.06.2020 between SRI KRISHNAPRASAD v. SRI
DODDAPPA L SHIRUR wherein this Court has relied upon the
judgment of T.S.Muralidhar’s case as referred supra wherein
condoned the delay and remitted back the case to the Trial
9.    The learned counsel for the petitioners relied upon
the unreported judgment of this Court in Crl.P.No.15517/2013
dated    07.11.2015      between   MARUTIRAO       HOSMANI      v.
SURESH wherein an observation is made referring upon the
judgment of the Apex Court reported in (2014) 15 SCC 245 in
the case of PAWAN KUMAR RALLI v. MANINDER SINGH
NARULA and held that taking of cognizance being vitiated and
directed the Magistrate to proceed with the case prior to taking
of cognizance and issuance of process.
10.   The learned counsel for the petitioners also relied
upon the judgment reported in 2019 ACD 1021 (KAR) in the
case of VENKATESH B.C v. STRATEGIC MARKETING AND
RESEARCH TEAM, BENGALURU, wherein an observation is
made that delay of four days infilling the complaint and no
application for condonation of delay filed and held that taking of
cognizance is not justifiable.
11.   The counsel for the petitioners also relied upon the
judgment reported in (2014) 15 SCC 245 in the case of
PAWAN KUMAR RALLI v. MANINDER SINGH NARULA
wherein contended that the exercise of discretion under Article of
142 of Constitution of India is not binding on all the other Courts
except the judgment is binding under Article 141 and exercising
the powers under Section 142 permitted to file an application for
condonation of delay at an initial stage and hence, the general
application is not applicable.
12.   The learned counsel for the petitioners referring all
these judgments would vehemently contend that the order
passed by the Appellate Court in setting aside the judgment of
the Trial Court and remanding the matter to consider afresh
giving an opportunity to file an application for condonation of
delay is not permissible under law and hence, it requires
interference of this Court and set aside the order of remand and
direct the Appellate Court to consider the matter on merits with
regard to the conviction and sentence order passed for the
offence punishable under Section 138 of N.I.Act by the Trial
13.   The learned counsel for the respondent in his
argument he vehemently contend that an application was filed
before the District and Sessions Court in criminal appeal, since
for the first time, the petitioner had raised the objection with
regard to the delay in filing the complaint. Hence, the Appellate
Court considering the said application comes to the conclusion
that deciding such an application is within the exclusive domain
of the Magistrate to exercise his discretion to condone the delay
and not the Appellate Court and also comes to the conclusion
that the Appellate Court cannot usurp the jurisdiction of the Trial
Court. Hence, directed the complainant to prefer an application
under Section 142(b) of the N.I. Act before the Trial Court and
the Trial Court after taking objections from the petitioners herein
shall decide the application first and then proceed in accordance
with law.    Hence, this Court cannot find fault with the order
passed by the Appellate Court in Crl.A.No.2458/2019.           The
learned counsel submits that the Appellate Court in paragraph
No.12 has observed that for the first time, in the appeal memo
and also in the appeal, the contention of delay is raised.     The
learned counsel also made the submission that no application is
filed before the Trial Court for condonation of delay and the Trial
Court after confirming the same on perusal of the entire order
sheet gave an opportunity since for the first time, the question
of delay is raised in the Appellate Court. Hence, the Appellate
Court has not committed any error in setting aside the judgment
of conviction and sentence and remitting the matter for fresh
consideration and in giving an opportunity to file the application.
14.   The learned counsel in support of his argument relied
upon the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Pawan
Kumar Ralli (supra), wherein the issue of limitation raised for
the first time before the High Court was taken note of by the
Appellate Court and the proceedings was quashed without
considering the limitation issue on merits in terms of provision of
Section 142(b) of the N.I. Act and permitted the complainant to
file an application for condonation of delay before the Trial Court
setting aside the order of the High Court and restored the
criminal proceedings.     It is also observed that by making said
observation, the Supreme Court herein was not laying down a
legal proposition that without even filing an application for
condonation of delay at a initial stage, the complainant can be
given an opportunity in respect thereof at any stage of the
15.   The learned counsel also relied upon the judgment of
this Court in the case of G. THIMMAPPA v. SHIVARAJ reported
in ILR 2015 KAR 5064, wherein referring the judgment of the
Apex Court held that the Trial Court dealing with offence
punishable under Section 138 of the N.I. Act has to decide the
application for condonation of delay before issuing process.      If
there is an application for condonation of delay, it must be
considered at the threshold and to proceed only if the delay is
condoned.      It is further held that the proviso to Clause (b) of
Section 142 came to be inserted in the year 2003 keeping in
mind the reasons and objects of the Act and to obviate the
complainant of the hardship. If proceedings are held without
condoning delay, such proceedings do not have any force of law.
If delay is noticed, the Trial Court can even call upon the
complainant to file an application for condonation of delay.
Therefore, it is expected of all the Trial Courts dealing with
offence punishable under Section 138 of the N.I. Act to direct the
office to put-up a specific note about the delay, if any, in filing
the    complaint     and   whether   any  application is  filed  for
condonation of delay.       It is also expected that before issuing
process, the Judge to specifically indicate that there is no delay
in filing the complaint.
16.   The learned counsel also relied upon the judgment of
the Madras High Court in the case of A. RAHAMATHULLAH @
MAULANA v. P.A.K. MANOHRAN reported in 2015 (1) MWN
(Cr.) DDC 75 (Mad.), wherein it is discussed with regard to
introduction of provision as to condonation of delay in filing the
complaint wherein the matter was remanded to the lower Court
with liberty to the complainant to file an application for
condonation of delay showing sufficient cause.
17.   The learned counsel also relied upon the decision of
the Division Bench of this Court in the case of STATE OF
KARNATAKA v. NAGAPPA dated 28.06.1985 passed in
C.R.P.No.3947/1984,       wherein   it  is  held  that  filing  of
application for condonation of delay with time barred appeal
mandatory. Does not attract penalty of dismissal of appeal for
non-compliance of procedural defect.
18.   The learned counsel also relied upon the judgment of
this Court in the case of MARUTIRAO HOSMANI v. SURESH
reported in LAWS (KAR) 2015-11-14 and brought to the
notice of this Court that this Court referred the judgment of
T.S.Muralidhar’s case (supra) which has been referred by the
learned counsel for the petitioner, wherein it is held that the
principles laid down in the judgment in T.S.Muralidhar’s case
(supra) is not a good law.      The learned counsel would submit
that in the said case, application was filed at the stage of Section
313 statement to condone the delay of ten days in filing the
complaint and I.A. and complaint was dismissed and hence the
Court remanded the case to the Trial Court to proceed with the
case from the stage prior to the taking of cognizance. The
learned counsel would vehemently contend that the judgment
relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner in
Venkatesh B.C. case (supra), the said judgment is passed only
hearing one side.       The other judgments which have been
referred have not considered the judgment of the Apex Court in
the case of Pawan Kumar Ralli (supra) and in other unreported
cases also the case was remanded to consider the delay
application. Hence, there is no merit in the petition to entertain
the revision.
19.   Having heard the learned counsel for the petitioners
and the learned counsel for the respondent and also on perusal
of the material available on record, the points that arise for the
(i)   Whether the Appellate Court has committed an
error in setting aside the order and remanding
the matter to the Trial Court to consider the
delay and whether it requires interference of
20.   Having heard the respective learned counsel and also
considering the principles laid down in the judgments referred
supra, admittedly no application was filed before the Trial Court
along with the complaint for condonation of delay. The material
discloses that there is a delay of seven days in filling the
complaint. It is not in dispute that the proviso is made in N.I.
Act under Section 142(b) to condone the delay, if any, in filing
the complaint. On perusal of the order of the Appellate Court, it
is clear that an application is filed before the Appellate Court and
also it is not in dispute that the delay aspect has been raised for
the first time before the Appellate Court and no such defence
was taken before the Trial Court. The said aspect also has been
discussed by the Appellate Court in paragraph No.12 that for the
first time in the appeal memo, the issue of delay has been
raised. The Appellate Court in paragraph No.13 discussed that
the accused nowhere contested the matter on the pretext of
delayed complaint.    It is observed that he participated in the
proceedings on merits and he has waived off the right to claim
that the complaint was delayed. However, for the first time, the
issue of delay is raised before the Appellate Court.           The
Appellate Court also relied upon the judgment of the Apex Court
in the case of Pawan Kumar Ralli’s (supra) and observed that
even the judgment of this Court in the case of Marutirao
Hosamani has held that T.S.Muralidhar’s case cannot stand in
view of the Apex Court’s pronouncement.         Having considered
those judgments, allowed the appeal and set aside the order and
remanded the matter to the Trial Court.
21.  The main contention of the learned counsel for the
petitioners before this Court is that the said judgment is not
applicable since the Appellate Court in the said judgment
invoked Article 142 of the Constitution of India in order to meet
the ends of justice and the impugned judgment of the High
Court quashing the criminal proceedings is set aside and the
criminal proceedings before the Trial Court are restored.     It is
observed that the appellant is permitted to file an application for
condonation of delay before the Trial Court, and if such an
application is filed, the Trial Court shall be at liberty to consider
the same on its own merit.           It has to be noted that this
judgment is passed challenging the order passed by the High
Court invoking Section 482 of Cr.P.C. on the ground that the
said complaint was barred by limitation.            The Apex Court
observed that the issue of limitation is raised for the first time
before the High Court, but in the case on hand, the issue of
limitation is raised for the first time before the Appellate Court.
The Appellate Court also observed in the judgment that the Trial
Court did not get an opportunity to exercise the discretion in
terms of proviso of Section 142 (b) of the N.I. Act to condone
the delay. It is also observed that in these peculiar facts and
circumstances of the case, the High Court ought to have
remanded the matter to the Trial Court for deciding the issue of
limitation and ought to have given an opportunity to the
complainant to file an application for condonation of delay before
22.   It has to be noted that in the case on hand also this
is a peculiar facts and circumstances of the case and no such
contention was taken before the Trial Court by the petitioners
and if they had raised the issue of delay before the Trial Court,
the complainant ought to have been given an opportunity to
make necessary application to condone the delay and admittedly
for the first time, the issue has been raised before the Appellate
Court. Only on the ground that there is a delay, the complaint of
the complainant cannot be thrown to the dustbin.            If such
defence was taken before the Trial Court as directed by this
Court in the case of G. Thimmappa (supra), ought to have filed
an application for condonation of delay.     It is further observed
that if delay is noticed, the Trial Court can even call upon the
complainant to file an application for condonation of delay. No
circumstances was arisen before the Trial Court. It is important
to note that an amendment is brought in the year 2003 to
Section 142 and clause (b) was inserted keeping in mind the
reasons and objects of the Act and to obviate the complainant of
the hardship. The Court has to take note of the wisdom of the
legislature in bringing such an amendment and when the issue is
raised for the first time in the appeal, the Court has to take note
of all these factors into consideration.
23.    I have already pointed out that if a defence was
taken before the Trial Court that there was a delay and if the
complainant has not filed any application after raising the said
issue before the Trial Court, then the very contention of the
petitioners in this case can be accepted, but no such contention
was taken.     No doubt, the Apex Court in the case of Pawan
Kumar Ralli (supra), made an observation that by making the
said observation the Supreme Court was not laying down a legal
proposition    that  without   even   filing  an   application for
condonation of delay at initial stage, the complainant can be
given an opportunity in respect thereof at any stage of the
proceedings. But the fact is that when the issue of limitation is
raised before the Appellate Court, immediately the complainant
has   filed  an   application  before   the  Appellate   Court for
condonation of delay and the Appellate Court comes to the
conclusion that the delay cannot be considered in Appellate
Court usurping the powers of the Trial Court and the same has
to be dealt with by the Trial Court and the same is in accordance
with the judgment of the Appellate Court. Hence, I do not find
any force in the contention of the learned counsel for the
petitioners that the said judgment is laid down invoking Article
142 of Constitution of India.     The Court has to look into the
principles laid down in the judgment and the fact is that the
Appellate Court has observed that in the peculiar facts and
circumstances i.e., with regard to raising of issue of limitation for
the first time in the High Court passed an order and in the case
on hand also, the very same circumstances of issue of limitation
is raised for the first time before the Appellate Court. The Court
has to take note of the very proviso of Section 142(b) of the N.I.
Act which confers jurisdiction upon the Court to condone the
delay i.e. original Court or otherwise the very purpose and
wisdom of the parliament would be defeated.           The issue of
limitation for the first time is raised before the Appellate Court
and the Court exercising the discretion to condone the delay did
not arise at all before the Trial Court and hence I am of the
opinion that the Appellate Court has not committed any error in
setting aside the judgment and directing the complainant to file
necessary application to condone the delay and the Trial Court
by giving an opportunity to the petitioners to consider the said
application. Hence, the very contention of the learned counsel
for the petitioners that the Appellate Court has committed an
error in setting aside the judgment of conviction and sentence
and committed an error in remanding the matter cannot be
accepted. Hence, I answer point No.(i) as negative.
24.   In view of the discussions made above, I pass the
The petition is dismissed.
The original complaint is of the year 2016 and already six
years have been elapsed. Hence, the Trial Court is directed to
dispose of the matter within one year from today.