C.R.R. No. - 2752 of 2018
Assistant Director, Enforcement Directorate, Govt. of India & Ors.
For the petitioners         :         Mr. Ayan Bhattacharya, Adv.,
For the Enforcement Directorate:           Mr. Vipul Kundalia , Adv.,
Judgment on                    :      28.11.2022
A regular case was registered at P.S.CBI BS&FC and FC Kolkata
for offences punishable U/s 120B/420/409 of IPC read with Section-
13 of Prevention of Corruption Act. On the basis of the said FIR
another case was registered by the Enforcement Directorate under the
Provisions of Prevention of Money Laundering Act 2002.
The regular case registered by the CBI was quashed by Hon’ble
Now the question before this court in the instant criminal
revision is whether quashing of a regular case of “scheduled
offence”    shall   automatically    quashed   the  subsequent    case
registered under the provisions of PMLA Act.
In a nutshell the fact of the case is that on the basis of a
complaint made by the Vigilance Officer of the Union bank of India
about the irregularities in the advance account of the petitioners of
the said bank, a regular case No. RCBSK2009E0008 dated 11th
September 2009 was registered at P.S.CBI BS&FC Kolkata for alleged
offences punishable U/s 120B/420/409 of IPC and U/s 13 of
Prevention of Corruption Act.
The Enforcement Directorate/ Respondent No. 1 on the basis of
the aforesaid FIR registered ECLR No. 41/2009/KOL/PMLA dated 23rd
December 2009 and in that initiated investigation under the
provisions of PMLA.
After conclusion of investigation the P.S.CBI BS&FC Kolkata
filed charge sheet before the Learned 14th MM Kolkata against the
petitioners and 5 others for offences punishable U/s 120B read with
Section 420 of IPC.
In parallel to that Criminal Proceeding the Union Bank of India
proceeded to Ld. Debt Recovery Tribunal Kolkata against the
petitioners   for    recovery   of   its  due   aggregating  of    Rs.-
15,57,72,600.15/-(TA Nos.322,323,324 of 2013).
In PMLA proceeding the respondent No.- 1,in exercise of its
power U/s 5 of PMLA, passed a provisional attachment Orders
whereby and whereunder 8 immovable properties worth Rs.- 10.82
Crores were ordered to be provisionally attached and also respondent
No. 1 filed application for confirmation of the aforesaid attachment
order before the Adjudicating Authority PMLA vide a complaint U/s
5(5) of PMLA being O.C No. 421/2015 on 2nd March 2015.
Learned Adjudicating Authority, PMLA was pleased to confirm
the aforesaid provisional attachment order.
Being aggrieved by the order passed by the Adjudicating
Authority petitioner and other defendants filed appeals U/s      26 of
PMLA before the Hon’ble Appellate Tribunal PMLA at New Delhi.
The Hon’ble Appellate Tribunal PMLA vide its judgment and
Order Dated 15th July 2017 was pleased to set aside the above noted
order of Learned Adjudicating Authority and the provisionl attachment
order dated 4th February 2015 passed by the respondent was set
aside. It is the findings of the Hon’ble Appellate Tribunal that the
properties which were subject matter of attachments were acquired
and possessed by the respective owners much before availing of loans
and therefore, no “proceeds of crime” are invested in these properties
and accordingly, properties cannot be attached U/s 5 of PMLA as the
same are not purchased from the alleged “proceeds of crime”. It was
further observed that in the circumstances available the allegation of
money laundering is prima facie found to be not sustainable for the
purpose of attachment under the PMLA 2002.
In the criminal proceeding, Ld. Metropolitan Magistrate was
pleased to frame charge against the petitioners and others for the
offences punishable U/s 420/120B of IPC. The order of framing
charge was challenged by the petitioner before the Ld. Chief Judge,
City Sessions Court Calcutta. Ld. Chief Judge, vide its order Dated 5th
July 2016 in CR No. 92 of 2016 was pleased to stay the operation of
the order of framing of charge by the Learned M.M.
In the proceeding before the Learned DRT Kolkata the bank,
and the present petitioner and others arrived at a settlement and filed
joint application before the Tribunal; wherein the defendants (present
petitioners and others) agreed to pay a sum of Rs. 6 Crores as full and
final settlement of the dues claimed by the Union Bank of India.
Hon’ble DRT Kolkata vide its order dated 27th October 2016 recorded
the terms of settlement and allowed the defendants therein to pay the
settled amount in satisfaction of the claim made by the Union Bank of
The enforcement Directorate, respondent No. 1 filed a complaint
U/s 45 of PMLA (ML Case No.-2 of 2016) against the present
petitioner and proforma respondents on 10th of November 2016 before
the Learned Chief Judge City Sessions Court Calcutta. The said
complaint records the offences U/s 420/120B IPC read with Section
13   Prevention   of   Corruption  Act   as  noted   in  aforesaid  FIR
RCBSK2009E0008 dated 11th September 2009 being “scheduled
offence’’ within the meaning of PMLA. Learned City Sessions Court
while observing that RCBSK2009E0008 dated 11th September 2009
lead to the registration of ECIR No. 41/2009/KOL/PMLA dated 23rd
December     2009,   for  the  purposes   of investigation   under   the
PMLA,2002 was pleased to take cognizance of the offence U/s 4 of the
PMLA and had issued processes to the petitioners and others in the
said complaint.
On the strength of settlement before the Learned DRT Kolkata
with the Union Bank of India, the present petitioners & others filed
one CRR No. 1682 of 2018 before this Hon’ble Court to seek quashing
of proceeding in above noted GR Case No. 2406 of 2011 arising Out of
RCBSK2009E0008 dated 11th September,2009 arising pending before
Hon’ble Court was pleased to quash the proceeding against the
petitioners in connection with GR Case No. 2406 of 2011 vide its
judgment and order dated 2nd August 2018.
By virtue of the facts above mentioned it is the submission of
the petitioners that the very existence of scheduled offence is thus
negated and accordingly the questions of existence of any “proceeds of
crime” thereof does not arise. Such being the fact, the subsequent
proceedings/case in connection under PMLA cannot survive and the
same is liable to be quashed. It is the further prayer of the petitioner
that the proceeding of PMLA case being ML case No. 2 of 2016
pending the Learned Chief Judge, City Sessions Court Calcutta would
tantamount to gross abuse of process of court and would defeat the
ends of Justice.
Accordingly,    petitioner’s  pray   for  quashing    ECIR     No.
41/2009/KOL/PMLA dated 23rd December,2009 and proceeding
arising therefrom (being M.L. Case 2 of 2016) pending before the ld.
In support of his contention Ld. Advocate appearing on behalf of
the petitioner cited decision passed by the Hon’ble Apex Court three
Judges Bench in Vijay Madanlal Chowdhury and Ors vs. Union of
India and Ors.
He further argued that the ratio of Vijay Madanlal Chowdhury
was also accepted by the Hon’ble High Court at New Delhi in a bunch
of cases of same nature. In a subsequent criminal appeal being No.
1254 of 2022 Hon’ble Supreme Court has adopted the ratio of Vijay
Madanlal Chowdhury case.
So he argued that this being position of law, the instant ECIR
case registered by the respondent No. 1 Enforcement Directorate and
the M.L. case pending before the Learned Chief Judge, City Sessions
Court, Calcutta required to be quashed.
Ld. Advocate appearing on behalf of the respondent No. 1
Enforcement Directorate submitted that by virtue of the PMLA case
the property of huge amount was seized. Though the bank has arrived
at a settlement vide OTS before the DRT Kolkata but the criminal
activities of the petitioners can not be wiped out. He further argued
that huge amount of public money was involved in this case and the
petitioners have deliberately committed the crime for which the
proceeding under PMLA was initiated. He further argued that Hon’ble
Supreme Court in different cases specifically directed that the High
Court should not exercise its jurisdiction under 482 Cr.P.C. in
economic offences. In support of his contention he cited a judgment of
Telengana High Court passed in Ishoonarang & Ors. Vs. State of
Heard the Ld. Advocates perused the petition as well as
decisions by Hon’ble High Court.
In Vijay Madanlal Chowdhury & Ors. Vs. Union of India and
Ors. Hon’ble Apex Court( three Judges Bench has formulated that –
Para 187 (v) (d) The offence under Section
3 of        the 2002 Act is dependent on
illegal gain of property as a result of
criminal activity relating to a scheduled
offence. It is concerning the process or
activity connected with such property,
which constitutes the offence of money-
laundering. The Authorities under the
2002 Act cannot prosecute any person on
notional basis or on the assumption that
a scheduled offence has been committed,
unless   it   is   so  registered   with  the
jurisdictional     police   and/or    pending
enquiry    /trial   including   by    way   of
criminal complaint before the competent
forum.     If    the    person    is   finally
discharged/acquitted      of  the   scheduled
offence or the criminal case against him
is quashed by the Court of competent
jurisdiction, there can be no offence of
money laundering against him or any one
claiming such property being the property
linked     to   stated   scheduled     offence
It further appears that Hon’ble Delhi High Court in a bunch of cases
has adopted the same view of Vijay Madanlal Chowdhury case and
quashed the ECIR case registered by the Directorate of Enforcement.
In Criminal appeal No. 1254 of 2022 (Parvathi Collur and Anr. vs.
State of Directorate of Enforcement) Hon’ble Supreme Court has also
adopted the same ratio of Vijay Madanlal Chowdhury case.
I have also perused the judgment of Ishoonarang of Telengana High
Court cited by the respondent Enforcement Directorate. In Para- 48,49,50 of
the said Judgment of Hon’ble Telengana High Court has held that –
48. The Enforcement Directorate has been
investigating the present case like other cases
where the company takes loan, purposefully
defaults on the loans and in the end get away
by paying OTS with the bank, where they pay
only small percentage of the loan dues and
thus cause undue loss to the bank while
enriching themselves. It is at investigation
stage. The petitioners have to cooperate with
the Investigating Officer by appearing before
him pursuant to the summons issued by the
49. In the present case also, the total OTS
payment done by petitioner No. 4 is only a
small fraction of total dues. The details of the
same are specifically mentioned in the tabular
form mentioned supra. The allegation against
petitioner No. 4 is that it has caused a massive
loss of Rs. 182.99 Crores to the public sector
banks and the same is also specifically
mentioned in the complaint dated 30.06.2018
and 29.02.2020 by the Central bank of India
and Bank of Maharashtra. The said money
ultimately belongs to the public and tax
payers. Thus, prima facie, the petitioners have
committed fraud not only against one or two
banks, but against the public in general and it
is a ‘loan fraud’ and it is an ‘economic offence’.
50. Such economic frauds adversely affect the
financial and economic well- being of the
Nation and have implications which lie beyond
the    domain     of  a   mere  dispute   between
petitioner No. 4 and the above said banks. The
mere fact that the banks which are already
under stress to clear the NPAs from their books
accepted      the   OTS,   will not  absolve  the
petitioners from criminal charges. The Apex
Court      in    the    above   said    judgments
categorically held that in economic offences, it
is not proper for the High Court to exercise its
inherent powers under Section – 482 of the
Cr.P.C to quash the FIRs/ charge sheets. It is
nothing but stalling investigation/ enquiry
initiated by the Authorized Officer under the
provisions of PMLA.
The above finding of Hon’ble Telengana High Court is quite justifiable;
but in considering this present facts and circumstances of the case and by
virtue of ratio laid down in Vijay Madanlal Chowdhury the findings has no
leg to stand.
Let me consider whether the offence under PMLA can stand alone by virtue
of the provisions of law has laid in the statute itself as well as by the dictum
of Hon’ble Apex court in Vijay Madanlal Chowdhury.
The offence of money laundering has been defined U/s 3 of PMLA
2002 Section 3 is read as follows-
(3) It shall come into force on such date as the
Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates
may be appointed for different provisions of
this Act and any reference in any such
provision to the commencement of this Act
shall be construed as a reference to the coming
into force of that provision.
The proceeds of crime has defined U/s 2(u) of the said Act 2002.
2(u) “proceeds of crime” means any property
derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, by
any person as a result of criminal activity
relating to a scheduled offence or the value of
any such property [or where such property is
taken or held outside the country, then the
property equivalent in value held within the
country [or abroad]].
[Explanation – For the removal of doubts, it is
hereby clarified that “proceeds of         crime”
include property not only derived or obtained
from the scheduled offence but also any
property which may directly or indirectly be
derived or obtained as a result of any criminal
activity relatable to the scheduled offence;]
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Vijay Madanlal Chowdhury has
correctly pointed out that the offence U/s 3 of 2002 Act is dependent on
illegal gain of property as a result of criminal activity relating to a scheduled
Hon’ble Delhi High court is also of the same view in Harish Fabiani &
Ors. Vs. Enforcement Directorate and Anrs. that –
The    Undeniable      sequitur   of  the   above
reasoning is that firstly, authorities under the
PMLA cannot resort to action against any
person      for    money-laundering      on    an
assumption that the property recovered by
them must be proceeds of crime and that a
scheduled      offence   has    been   committed;
secondly, the scheduled offence must be
registered with the jurisdictional police or
pending inquiry by way of complaint before the
competent forum; thirdly, in the event there is
already a registered scheduled offence but the
person named in the criminal activity relating
to a scheduled offence is finally absolved by a
Court of competent jurisdiction owing to an
order of discharge, acquittal or quashing of the
criminal case of the scheduled offence, there
can be no action for money laundering against
not only such a person but also any person
claiming through him in relation to the property
linked to the stated scheduled offence.
On the basis of the above discussion made by the Hon’ble Apex Court
and Hon’ble High Courts. This court is a view that the pendency of PMLA
case cannot be sustained at this juncture. Moreover, Hon’ble Appellate
Tribunal PMLA is of specific finding that no proceeds of crime of the PMLA
case has arisen from the regular case No. RCBSK2009E0008. The said
regular case has already been quashed by this court. Thus, at the situation
there is no proceeds of crime by virtue of order of quashing of the regular
The quashing of FIR of regular case automatically created a situation
that the offences, stated and alleged in the FIR has no existence; thus the
“Scheduled Offence” has also no existence after quashing of the FIR. When
there is no “Scheduled Offence”, the proceeding initiated under the
provisions of Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002 cannot stand alone.
Thus, the question answered in affirmative.
Thus, I find it necessary to invoke the inherent power of this court
enumerated U/s 482 Cr.P.C. to quash the ECIR case initiated under PMLA
2002. The pendency of the M.L. case No.- 2of 2016 before the Chief Judge,
City Sessions Court, Calcutta would tantamount to be an abuse of process
of court.
In result thereof the instant criminal revisional application has merit
to entertain and it is allowed. The FIR registered by the respondent being
ECIR No. 41/2009/KOL/PMLA dated 23rd December 2009 is hereby
All   proceedings     arising  out    from    the   said    ECIR   No.
41/2009/KOL/PMLA dated 23rd December 2009 are set aside.
The M.L. case No. 2 of 2016 arising out of the above mentioned ECIR
Case pending before the Ld. Chief Judge, City Sessions Court, Calcutta
along with connected applications/ proceedings thereof is hereby quashed.
Any connected CRAN application if pending along with this CRR is
hereby also disposed of.
Any order of stay passed by this Court during the pendency of this CRR is
also vacated.