1.           Feeling aggrieved and dis-satisfied with the judgment of
conviction and order of sentence dated 29/30.10.2009, passed by the Court
of Sessions, Jalandhar, whereby the appellant was held guilty under
Sections 302 and 201 of the IPC and was sentenced to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for life and to pay a fine of Rs.2,000/- under Section 302 of
IPC, in default thereof, to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for six
months and was sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for seven
years and to pay a fine of Rs.1,000/- under Section 201 of IPC, in default
thereof, to further undergo rigorous imprisonment for three months, the
appellant has preferred the present appeal under Section 374 of Criminal
Procedure Code (for short ‘Cr.P.C.’) with a prayer to set aside the impugned
judgment of conviction and order of sentence dated 29/30.10.2009 and to
acquit him of the charges.
2.           In the instant case, the law was set in motion with the recording
of the statement of Shakuntla w/o the appellant (Ex.PA) and the same is
“ It is stated that I am resident of aforesaid address and am
doing labour work. I have four sons and three daughters.
The name of my elder daughter was Gurpreet Kaur, who was
aged about 16 years.           My husband Surinder Pal is an
habitual drinker and is an idle. I used to earn our livelihood
by doing labour work alongwith my daughters. On 08.09.08
at about 2.30 p.m. I alongwith my daughters Gurpreet Kaur
and Amandeep Kaur had gone to the fields of Kulwinder
Ram son of Ram Krishan resident of Raipur for cutting
fodder from the land which is situated near our village and
we had returned to our house in the evening at about 6.00
p.m. after cutting the fodder. On return to the house, I saw
that my husband, Surinder Pal had purchased a bottle of
liquor after selling the wheat and was consuming the same.
I restrained him from taking liquor but he started giving me
beating. My elder daughter Gurpreet Kaur after lifting a
stick (Danda) gave its blow on the flank of my husband and
asked him as to why he is beating my mother. My husband
after leaving me started giving beating to my daughter with
stick and due to fear, she entered inside and my husband
chased her and started giving beating to my daughter and
throttled her neck and Gurpreet Kaur died at the spot. I
started weeping loudly.         Then my husband Surinder Pal
threatened me and my children if you raised shouting or
narrated this occurrence to any body then he will also treat
them like Gurpreet Kaur. I along with my children passed
the night while sitting and weeping out of fear.        In the
morning, my husband told the neighbourers that Gurpreet
Kaur had died due to heart attack. This incident was then
widely known in the village and many people gathered there.
At about 8.00 p.m. in the morning when Gurpreet Kaur was
being bathed for carrying her to cremation ground then
Veena wife of Buta Ram, Jatinder Kaur wife of Ranjit Kumar
and Bimla wife of Kewal Ram resident of Daduwal noticed
injuries on the person of Gurpreet Kaur and there was mark
of throttling on her neck. They disclosed this fact to the
respectable who restrained Surinder Pal not to perform
funeral of Gurpreet Kaur at present.            On returning of
respectable, Surinder Pal put the dead-body of Gurpreet
Kaur on a cot and carry it to the cremation ground after
threatening my younger daughters Satkar, Deepa, Amarjit
and Jagdish son of Resham Lal, where Surinder Pal had
already collected wood and performed the funeral of
Gurpreet Kaur. My husband Surinder Pal had disposed of
the dead-body of Gurpreet Kaur after giving her injuries and
throttling her neck. I alongwith my brother Naresh Kumar
son of Jamuna Dass resident of village Dheena who had
come to my house after coming to know about the incident
was proceeding to the Police Station for giving intimation
when you have met me at the Bus Stand of village Daduwal.
I have gone recorded my statement. I am the complainant.
Legal action be taken. I have heard my statement and admit
the same to be correct/ Naresh Kumar son of Shakuntla wife
of Surinder Pal.”
3.           After the reporting of the matter to the police at 12.30 p.m. on
09.09.2008, the FIR was registered in the instant case. The police party
visited the spot, prepared rough site plan Ex.-PB, Scaled site plan Ex.-PH of
the place of occurrence. On 11.09.2008, SI Pritam Singh, PW-4 went to the
cremation ground and collected the ashes and bones, which were converted
into a parcel and the parcel was sealed with the seal ‘PS’ and took the same
into possession vide memo Ex.-PC. The said memo was attested by Prithi
Raj Singh, Shakuntla PW-2/complainant and Naresh Kumar, PW-1. Later,
he arrested the appellant/accused and upon disclosure statement by him,
Pritam Singh, SI recovered a danda from him, which was kept concealed in
the bushes by the site of the canal in the limits of village Daduwal. The
sketch was attested by Prithi Raj Singh, HC and he prepared the rough site
plan of the place of recovery Ex.-PF. The danda so recovered from the
accused was MO-1. On completion of the investigation, the challan under
Section 173 Cr.P.C. was presented in the Court of the Area Magistrate. The
Court of Sessions Judge, Jalandhar ordered framing of charges against the
appellant under Sections 302 and 201 of IPC and the trial formally
commenced. During the course of trial, the prosecution relied upon the
testimonies of the eight witnesses, namely, Naresh Kumar PW-1, Shakuntla
5, HC Shamsher Singh, PW-6, MHC Kuldip Singh PW-7 and Kirpal Singh
4.          During his examination under Section 313 of Cr.P.C., the
accused denied all the incriminating circumstances appearing in the
prosecution evidence against him. On an application under Section 315
Cr.P.C. by the accused, the permission was granted to him to appear as a
defence witness and he appeared as DW-1 and closed the evidence
thereafter.  Ultimately, the trial Court held the appellant guilty under
Sections 302 and 201 of IPC and was sentenced to various imprisonments,
as mentioned above.
5.          We have heard learned counsel for the appellant and learned
State counsel at length and have perused the evidence on record.
6.          On marshalling the entire evidence and the documents on
record, we do not agree with the view taken by the trial Court. There were
many serious infirmities in the case of the prosecution and consequently, no
reliance can be placed on the prosecution witnesses to hold the appellant
guilty of the charges under Sections 302 and 201 of IPC.
7.            After hearing both the sides, the following points emerge for
consideration by this Court to determine whether the charges against the
accused are proved or not. Even the arguments raised by both the sides are
also centered around these following issues:-
A) Whether the material witnesses produced by the prosecution
are reliable and trustworthy?
B) Whether the death of Gurpreet Kaur was homicidal?
C) Whether the recovery of ‘Danda’ connects the accused with
the commission of crime or not?
(A)           Whether the material witnesses produced                by    the
prosecution are reliable and trustworthy?
In order bring whom the guilt of the appellant, the prosecution
primarily relied upon the testimonies of PW-1 Naresh Kumar, PW-2
Shakuntla, PW-3 Jaswinder Kaur and PW-4 SI Pritam Singh, who was the
Investigating Officer. The prosecution has placed heavy reliance on the
testimonies of the aforesaid witnesses to contend that the charge under
Sections 302 and 201 of IPC is made out against the appellant.
Consequently, we would deal with the testimonies of these following
(i) PW-2 Shakuntla:- PW-2 Shakuntla, who is wife of the
appellant and mother of Gurpreet Kaur (deceased) is the most
material witness of the prosecution. She stated that when the
appellant/accused was confronted as to why he has purchased
the liquor, he has started beating Shakuntla PW-2 and Gurpreet
Kaur (Deceased). Shakuntla PW-2 started weeping and her
daughter- Gurpreet Kaur came forward to save her.            The
accused picked a danda and gave blow in her flank. Then, the
accused left her and started beating Gurpreet Kaur. The
accused bolted the door from inside and started beating her.
When she raised alarm, the accused threatened her to face the
same consequences.
From the site plan and the admission of various
witnesses, it is apparent that the family of the appellant and
Shakuntla PW-2 was residing in a house, which is surrounded
by many houses in a village. She could have very well called
the neighbours or could report the matter to the police, as the
accused had bolted himself with Gurpreet Kaur in a room. Her
testimony further shows that in the morning people from the
locality had collected, still nobody preferred to report the
matter to the police. Still further, Shakuntla PW-2 stated that
before cremating the dead body of Gurpreet Kaur, her dead
body was given a bath by Veena, Bimbo and Bimla and they
told her that infact Gurpreet Kaur had been strangulated to
death. Firstly, the said three ladies were the most material
witnesses, but none of them was examined. Again it is observed
that many persons had gathered at the spot and three ladies,
who had given bath to the dead body, did not report the matter
to anyone in the village, even though it was a homicidal death.
Shakuntla-PW-2 further stated that the accused with the help of
her sons, had cremated the dead body, in spite of protests by the
villagers. Again the testimony does not inspire confidence as
the age of all the sons of appellant was less than 16 years and
they were small children, who would not be in a position to
oppose the villagers. Still further, PW-2 Shakuntla admitted
that there were number of residential houses around her house
and people from those houses had come to the spot. Still
further, even after the accused bolted the door from inside, she
had not called anyone from the neighbour nor she reported the
matter to the police at that time. The other five children were
with her, but they had also not raised any alarm on account of
fear of the accused. Again the conduct of PW-2 Shakuntla is
unnatural and unbelievable. After all, PW-2 Shakuntla was the
mother of Gurpreet Kaur and even Gurpreet Kaur was eldest of
all the children. It is unbelievable that the complainant
preferred not to call anyone from the neighbourhood nor
reported the matter to the police, even though, it was a thickly
populated area. Even admittedly, when PW-2 Shakuntla came
to know about beating of her daughter, she did not raise any
alarm nor sent any intimation to anyone. Even, she did not call
any doctor nor even call her brother Naresh Kumar PW-1, who
was residing nearby in the same district. Rather she admitted
that the appellant/accused had himself given a message to
Naresh Kumar PW-1 on telephone and on receipt of the said
message, he came. She further admitted that the neighbours
had been stopping him from taking the dead body for cremation
but he cremated the dead body with the help of his children.
Over all, the testimony of PW-2 did not inspire confidence.
She had ample opportunity for several hours to report the
matter to the villagers as well as the police. However, she
waited till cremation and within 3-4 hours of the cremation, she
reported the matter to the police. Even when the accused had
bolted himself inside a room, she remained a mute spectator
and neither made a telephone call to her brother nor called her
neighbours or the police.
(ii) PW-1 Naresh Kumar:- Again it is observed that the
testimony of PW-1 Naresh Kumar is a self-contradictory. He
did not depose with regard to the material particulars of the
crime. Though, he claims that Shakuntla is his sister, but he
did not remember the name of any of her daughter. He did not
depose with regard to the date and time of occurrence, even
though he is stated to be a government employee. Still further,
he stated when he asked the accused about the cause of death,
he was told that she was ill and died. Whereas the villagers had
been saying that the accused himself had killed his daughter.
He was declared hostile by the learned Public Prosecutor and
was also cross-examined by the learned Public Prosecutor.
Even his cross-examination did not advance the case of
prosecution in any manner. Rather, his evidence is more of
hear-se nature and appears to be shaky.
(iii) PW-3 Jaswinder Kaur:- As per the complainant, the dead
body of Gurpreet Kaur was given bath by Veena, Bimbo and
Bimla and they told Shakuntla PW-2 that infact Gurpreet Kaur
had been strangulated to death. The prosecution did not
examine the said three witnesses and introduced Jaswinder
Kaur PW-3 as one of the witness, who had given bath to the
dead body of the deceased- Gurpreet Kaur. She deposed that
she came to know that the accused had killed his daughter.
When she along with other ladies gave a bath to the girl, she
found that there were bluish, brushes and abrasion on the dead
body. She came out and informed the Panchayat that the girl
had died due to injuries. Surprisingly even she did not inform
the police. Still further, it is unbelievable that the Panchayat
members had come to know about the death of the girl due to
injuries and nobody reported the matter to the police till her
cremation was over. Even her testimony does not help the case
of prosecution in any manner.
(iv) PW-4- SI Pritam Singh:- SI Pritam Singh, PW-4 was the
most material witness of the prosecution with regard to the
process of investigation.        He stated that on 09.09.2008, he
along with other police officials had gone to the Village Dhanni
in connection with patrolling and Prithi Raj HC and other
police officials met him at that place. From them, again he
came to know that some girl had died in village Daduwal under
mysterious circumstances. He went to the place of occurrence
and inspected the spot and even prepared the rough site plan
Ex.PB.     Again a perusal of rough site plan EX.-PB would
reveal that no incriminating evidence was found at the place of
occurrence.    It is apparent from the testimony of PW-4 SI
Pritam Singh and rough site plan Ex.PB that nothing has been
recovered from the spot and even no signs of resistance etc.
were found at the spot. Still further two well built rustic ladies
i.e. the complainant and the deceased were beaten up allegedly
by the appellant, but any bangles etc., pieces of cloth, torn
cloths etc. were not recovered by the police from the place of
occurrence. Even the accused was arrested on 11.09.2008 and
the evidence is silent with regard to any injuries suffered by
him. Shakuntla PW-2 is a rustic lady and even her daughter
was aged more than 16 years. However, as per the prosecution,
there were no injuries on the person of the appellant.
Consequently, even his testimony does not help the case of
prosecution in any manner.
The prosecution examined HC Surjit Singh as PW-
5, HC Shamsher Singh as PW-6, MHC Kuldip Singh as PW-7
and Kirpal Singh as PW-8. The testimony of the said witnesses
is formal in nature.
(B)           Whether the death of Gurpreet Kaur was homicidal?
In the impugned judgment, the learned Sessions Judge has held
on the basis of the above testimonies that the death of Gurpreet Kaur was
homicidal. To prove the charge under Section 302 of IPC, the prosecution
is obliged to prove that the death of Gurpreet Kaur was homicidal and the
prosecution had utterly failed in discharging the said burden. As observed
above, PW-1 Naresh Kumar, PW-2 Shakuntla and PW-3 Jaswinder Kaur
had ample opportunity to report the matter to the police. Even admittedly,
the place of occurrence was situated in a thickly populated area and the
appellant was an ordinary labourer. However, no one chose to report the
matter to the police nor restrained the appellant from cremating the dead
body till the arrival of the police. Rather the dead body was cremated on the
next day at about 8.00 am in the morning and even the ladies of the village
had noticed that there were bruises and injuries on the person of Gurpeet
Kaur (deceased). Still further, the matter was immediately reported to the
police after 2-3 hours of the cremation.        Still further, no post-mortem
examination of the dead body was conducted and it is unsafe to hold only
on the basis of oral testimonies of the witnesses that the death was
homicidal in the instant case. Still further, as per PW-4 Pritam Singh SI,
bones and ashes were collected from the cremation ground and the parcel
was sent to the office of Chemical Examiner. However, the prosecution had
not tendered the report of chemical examiner. In absence of any medical
reports, forensic report or any other related evidence, it cannot be held that
the death in the instant case was homicidal. More so, as discussed above,
the evidence led by the prosecution is not found to be creditworthy.
(C)          Whether the recovery of ‘Danda’ connects the accused with
the commission of crime or not?
That the prosecution examined PW-4 SI Pritam Singh, who
conducted the investigation initially and had visited the place of occurrence.
During his testimony, he stated that he had recovered the danda. Later on,
the accused was arrested and he made a disclosure statement that he had
kept concealed the danda in bushes by the site of canal in the limits of
village Daduwal. The sketch of the danda was prepared. However, PW-4
Pritam Singh admitted that he had not found any blood stain on the danda
MO-I. Even he had not taken any finger impressions from the danda, even
though the same was recovered on 11.09.2008. Still further, it is a matter of
common knowledge that in this part of the country, danda is found in almost
every house in a village and the recovery of danda from the appellant cannot
be construed as an incriminating circumstance.
8.           The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Criminal Appeal No.1699 of
2007 titled as “Paramjeet Singh @ Pamma Vs. State of Uttarakhand”,
decided on 27.09.2010 has held as under:-
“11. A criminal trial is not a fairy tale wherein one is free to
give flight to one's imagination and fantasy. Crime is an event
in real life and is the product of an interplay between different
human emotions. In arriving at a conclusion about the guilt of
the accused charged with the commission of a crime, the court
has to judge the evidence by the yardstick of probabilities, its
intrinsic worth and the animus of witnesses. Every case, in the
final analysis, would have to depend upon its own facts. The
court must bear in mind that "human nature is too willing,
when faced with brutal crimes, to spin stories out of strong
suspicions." Though an offence may be gruesome and revolt
the human conscience, an accused can be convicted only on
legal evidence and not on surmises and conjecture. The law
does not permit the court to punish the accused on the basis of
a moral or suspicion alone. "The burden of proof in a criminal
trial never shifts and it is always the burden of the prosecution
to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt on the basis of
acceptable evidence." In fact, it is a settled principle of
criminal jurisprudence that the more serious the offence, the
stricter the degree of proof required, since a higher degree of
assurance is required to convict the accused. The fact that the
offence was committed in a very cruel and revolting manner
may in itself be a reason for scrutinizing the evidence more
closely, lest the shocking nature of the crime induce an
instinctive reaction against dispassionate judicial scrutiny of
the facts and law. (Vide : Kashmira Singh v. State of Madhya
Pradesh, AIR 1952 Supreme Court 159; State of Punjab v.
2407; Shankarlal Gyarasilal Dixit v. State of Maharashtra,
v. State of West Bengal, (2003) 12 SCC 377; and Aloke Nath
Dutta & Ors. v. State of West Bengal, 2007(1) RCR
12. In Sarwan Singh Rattan Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR
1957 Supreme Court 637, this Court observed :
"Considered as a whole the prosecution story may be
true; but between 'may be true' and 'must be true' there
is inevitably a long distance to travel and the whole of
this distance must be covered by legal, reliable and
unimpeachable evidence [before an accused can be
convicted].”
9.           We have considered the entire evidence and the documents on
record and hold that the view taken by the trial Court is certainly not a
possible and plausible view. In view of the observations made above, in our
considered opinion, the conclusions drawn by the trial Court are wholly
unsustainable and contrary to the settled principles of law. Extending the
benefit of doubt to the appellant, he is ordered to be acquitted of the
10.          Accordingly, the present appeal is allowed and the judgment of
conviction and order of sentence dated 29/30.10.2009, passed by the Court
of Sessions, Jalandhar, is set aside. The appellant stands acquitted and his
bail /surety bonds are discharged. The appellant is ordered to be released
forthwith if not requirement in any case. Case property, if any, be disposed
off as per law, after expiry of period of limitation. The trial Court record be
sent back.