1.     This hearing has been done through hybrid mode.
2.     If there is one film that transcends generations of Indians, it is
‘SHOLAY’. The said film, its characters, dialogues, settings, box office
collections are legendary. Undoubtedly, ‘SHOLAY’ is one of the biggest,
record-breaking films that India has ever produced, in the history of Indian
3.     The present suit has been filed by Sholay Media and Entertainment
Pvt Ltd. and Sippy Films Pvt. Ltd. against Defendant Nos. 1 to 8 who are
described hereinbelow. Defendant Nos. 1 to 3 are members of the Patel
family: Mr. Yogesh Patel, Mr. Jayesh Patel and Ms. Bhavna Patel and
Defendant No.4 is ‘Sholay.com Pvt. Ltd’. The said Defendants have
registered the domain name ‘www.sholay.com’, published a magazine using
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                        Page 1 of 30
the mark/name Sholay and have put on sale various merchandise, using
scenes and names from the movie ‘SHOLAY’. Defendant No.5 –
Netangle.com Pvt. Ltd. is a company registered by Defendant Nos. 1 to 3 as
well. Defendant Nos. 6, 7, and 8 are controlling entities of the domain name
4.     The film ‘SHOLAY’ was produced by Mr. G. P. Sippy and the censor
certificate for the film was issued on 8th August 1975, who was running M/s.
Sippy Films. It was released on Independence Day i.e., 15th August 1975.
Several well-known actors and actresses namely, Mr. Sanjeev Kumar, Mr.
and Amjad Khan, featured in the said film. It would not be inapposite to
state that ‘SHOLAY’ has acquired a cult status and the film’s appeal has cut
across geographical boundaries, language, ideology, class, etc. It has been
rightly described as a film which is a part of India’s heritage. Some of the
dialogues used in this film such as ‘Jo dar gaya, samjho mar gaya’, ‘Ai
chhammia’, ‘Arre o Sambha’, Kitne aadmi the?’ are part of colloquial
language in the Hindi heartland. It received unbeatable reviews which led to
the movie being run ‘Housefull’ for more than five years. As per the Plaint,
the movie is stated to have very unique features some of which are:
i. ‘SHOLAY’ was the first Indian movie to market its background
music/songs and dialogues.
ii. The film made use of several cinematic innovations, such as the
use of 70 mm format with 6 track stereophonic sound.
iii. SHOLAY chalked up the record of maximum shows and the
highest number of prints (1100) among Indian movies. In fact,
it continues to have over 100 prints in circulation even today.
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                              Page 2 of 30
5.     Enormous investment went into the making of the film. The mention
of the word ‘SHOLAY’ immediately creates a connection with the movie
‘SHOLAY’. There are industry estimates which claim that, although the
words ‘SHOLAY’ may have a dictionary meaning in Hindi (specifically,
‘burning coal’), upon the movie going public, the word ‘SHOLAY’ came to
be associated only with the film.
6.     The rights in the word ‘SHOLAY’, which is also a registered
trademark, have been recognised by Courts in favour of the Plaintiff. In
judgment dated 24th August, 2015, in CS(OS) 1892/2006 titled Sholay
Media and Entertainment Pvt. Ltd. and Anr. v. Parag Sanghavi and Ors.
the history of the Plaintiff Companies and the devolution of rights was
summarised and the Court had recognised the rights of the Plaintiffs herein -
Sholay Media and Entertainment Pvt. Ltd. and Sippy Films Pvt. Ltd., in the
mark ‘SHOLAY’. It was also observed that the copyright in the film which
was produced by Sippy Films Pvt. Ltd. vests in the producer, in terms of
Section 17 in the Copyright Act, 1957. The findings of the Court are
extracted hereinbelow.
7.    The grievance of the Plaintiffs in the present case is that upon coming
across a magazine released in December, 2000 titled “IT-Information
Technology”, the Plaintiffs learnt that the Defendants had registered the
domain name ‘www.sholay.com’. The magazine was accompanied by a free
compact disk (“CD”) containing the advertisement of the website. In the
said article published in the magazine, the representation made was that the
biggest Bollywood blockbuster has hit the internet. The article claimed
‘SHOLAY.com’ is a comprehensive site that offers you much more than its
Bollywood alias did. In the said advertisement of the website, the
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                           Page 3 of 30
Defendants sought to create an entertainment portal having various services
such as chat, e-greetings, countdowns, horoscopes kid zone, classifieds,
matrimonial, and grocery store, as depicted below. The website covered
various subjects including, politics to cricket, finance to shopping, news
updates, and bulletins from Bollywood. The said advertisement is set out
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                         Page 4 of 30
8.    The logo used by the Defendant on the CD is also extracted below:
9.      The Plaintiff also learnt that the Defendants had filed a trademark
application dated 11th February 1999 bearing Serial No.75638935 for the
mark ‘SHOLAY’ with the United States Patent and Trademark Office
(“USPTO”) in Class 42, as also in India. The said application with the
USPTO was filed in the name of a Company called ‘SHOLAY.COM., INC’,
which was based out of Bridgewater, New Jersey. In India, the trademark
application, was filed by the Defendant No.5 Company - Netangle.com Pvt.
Ltd. which was registered in Hyderabad with Mr. Jayesh Patel, Ms. Bhavna
Patel and Mr. Yogesh Patel as its directors.
10.    The Defendants also registered Defendant No.4-Company by the
name of Sholay.com Pvt Ltd. The said name was objected to by the
Plaintiffs under the provisions of Section 22 of the Companies Act, 2013.
The Regional Director, Southern Region, Registrar of Companies, Chennai,
in its order dated 20th December, 2000 directed the Defendant No. 2 to
delete the word ‘Sholay’ from its existing name. The relevant observations
of the Regional Director in its order dated 20th December, 2000 are extracted
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                         Page 5 of 30
''to delete the word SHOLAY from its existing name
and change to some other prefix appropriately, within
three months from the date of this order".
"Undoubtedly it is true that the movie SHOLAY was
one of the most successful films in the Indian film
industry and thus it has acquired a unique reputation
and goodwill. Also, the material placed before me
shows that there has been a wide coverage by all
leading newspapers regarding the achievements of
Sholay and also the proposed new projects of the
applicant company.
The respondent company's name is Sholay.com Pvt Ltd
and no significance of any nature was shown for the
word SHOLAY and thus it is undesirable in terms of
Guideline No. 23 framed under Section 20 of the
Companies Act, 1956. In view of the reputation the
word SHOLAY earned, the public may bonafide believe
that Sholay.com Pvt. Ltd is associated with or an
associate of Sholay film or the company which is the
owner of the said film.”
11.    A writ petition being W.P. (C) No. 4823 of 2001 was filed by the
Defendants challenging the above order before the High Court of Madras.
Vide final order dated 22nd April, 2003 allowing the writ petition, the
impugned order dated 20th December, 2000 passed by the Regional Director,
Company Affairs, Southern Region, was set aside solely on the ground of
violation of principles of natural justice. The operative portion of the said
order reads as under:
“ 10. It is not in dispute that the petitioner has
registered its name as “Sholay.Com" as early as on
21.12.1999. A direction has been given in the
impugned order to the writ petitioner to delete the
name "Sholay" and change the said name to some
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                          Page 6 of 30
other prefix. Such a direction would certainly affect
the right accrued on the petitioner, by virtue of the
incorporation of the company and consequentially its
trade.
11. Hence, in my considered view, in the
absence of a reasonable opportunity to defend the
application filed by the second respondent seeking
for a direction under Section 22 of the Companies Act,
the impugned order is liable to be set aside.
Accordingly, the impugned order is set aside solely
on the ground of violation of principles of natural
justice. The first respondent is directed to hold the
enquiry on 5.5.2003 commencing from 10.00 a.m. and
if necessary on a further date fixed by him, duly
intimate to either parties and pass orders on merits of
the case after hearing both the petitioner and the
second respondent. I make it clear that I have not
expressed any opinion on the merits of the rival claims.
12. With the above observation, the impugned
order is set aside and the writ petition is allowed. No
costs.”
12.    As per the Plaint, the manner in which the Defendants sought to
misappropriate the rights of the Plaintiffs in the mark ‘SHOLAY’ has been
elucidated below:
“i) registering the same as a series of domain names,
c) e-sholay.com,
ii) Using SHOLAY as a trademark on their website,
www.sholay.com in relation to various online services
such as “Sholay Jobs”, “Sholay Calendar”, “Sholay
Chat”, “Sholay matrimony”, “Sholay e-messages” etc.
iii) Incorporating companies with the name SHOLAY,
including the following:
iv) Applying to register the name SHOLAY as a
trademark in India and the United States of America.”
13.    Apart from the above, the Defendants were also using a similar logo,
colour scheme, and device and offering Ganpati silver coins, sweets and
savouries from Indian Mithai shops, DVDs of the movie ‘SHOLAY’ on
their website. The word ‘SHOLAY’ was also being used as a metatag by the
Defendants on their web pages.
14. The use of the mark ‘SHOLAY’ on the internet caused actual confusion
which has been narrated in the Plaint. A search of the word ‘SHOLAY’
returned the Defendants’ website in the list of results on various search
engines, causing actual instances of confusion. The said instances have been
summarised in paragraph 41 of the Plaint as under:
i. On August 26, 2000, the CEO of Plaintiff No. 2, Mr. Sascha
Sippy, received a letter from iAnswers.com, a New York based
organisation, which stated as follows:
"The other day I notice that the company sholay.com
has solicited us to become one of our affiliate partners.
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                           Page 8 of 30
If I am not mistaking you are in charge of this company
and I was wondering if we could set up a meeting to
discuss how iAnswers.com and sholay.com may become
partners beyond a simple affiliate relationship.”
ii. In and around January 2001, during a meeting between Mr. Sascha
Sippy and Ms. Judi Kilachand, director of Business Programs for
the Asia Society at New York, in relation to the movie SHOLAY
and the Plaintiffs website esholay.com, Ms. Kilachand remarked
that she was under the impression that the plaintiffs owned the
website www.sholay.com. Mr. Sippy then clarified to Ms.
Kilachand that this was not their website, wherein Ms. Kilachand
further remarked that this website was being heavily promoted
amongst the Indian community in the US.
15.    According to the Plaintiffs, such use constitutes infringement, passing
off, dilution and tarnishment of the well-known mark ‘SHOLAY’. The
Plaintiffs, thus, filed the present suit seeking permanent injunction
restraining the infringement of their registered trademark ‘SHOLAY’ by the
Defendants, passing off, damages, rendition of accounts, delivery up, etc.
The reliefs sought by the Defendants are extracted below:
“(i) An order for permanent injunction restraining the
Defendants, their directors, partners or proprietors as
the case may be, their principal officers, servants and
agents from operating any business, making, selling,
offering for sale, advertising, or in any other manner
dealing in any goods or services, under the name
SHOLAY or any other name which is identical with or
deceptively similar to the Plaintiffs trademark
SHOLAY as an essential or dominant feature thereof,
whether in the physical world or on the Internet and
from doing any other thing as is likely to lead to
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                             Page 9 of 30
passing off of the websites, business or goods/services
of the Defendants as and for those of Plaintiffs;
(A) An order for permanent injunction restraining the
Defendants, their principal officers, partners or
proprietors as the case may be, servants and agents
from manufacturing, selling, offer for sale, advertising,
directly or indirectly dealing in any goods/services
infringing the Plaintiff’s trademark SHOLAY under
application no.No.928687 and 966278 or any other
mark which is deceptively similar to the Plaintiffs
registered trademark SHOLAY or doing any other
thing amounting to infringement of the Plaintiff’s
registered trademark.
(B) An order for permanent injunction restraining
the Defendants, their principal officers, partners or
proprietors as the case may be, servants and agents
from manufacturing, selling, offer for sale,
advertising, directly or indirectly dealing in any
goods/services infringing the Plaintiffs trademark
SHOLAY under registration Nos. 967055, 928686,
966276, 966277 and 966279 or any other mark which
is deceptively similar to the Plaintiffs registered
trademark SHOLAY or doing any other thing
amounting to infringement of the Plaintiffs registered
trademark.
(ii) An order for permanent injunction restraining the
Defendants, their directors, partners or proprietor as
the case may be, their principal officers, servants and
agents from registering domain names incorporating
the name SHOLAY or any other deceptive variant
thereof or using such names on the Internet, so as to
lead to passing off of the website, business and
goods/services of the Defendants as and for those of
(iii) An order for permanent injunction restraining the
Defendants, their directors, partners or proprietor as
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                          Page 10 of 30
the case may be, their principal officers, servants and
agents from operating any business, and making,
selling, offering for sale, advertising, promoting or in
any other manner dealing in any goods or services,
under the trading style name SHOLAY or any other
name which is identical with or deceptively similar to
the Plaintiff’s trademark SHOLAY as an essential or
dominant feature thereof, whether in the physical
world or on the Internet and from doing any other
thing as is likely to lead to passing off of the websites,
business and goods/services of the Defendants as and
for those of Plaintiffs;
(iv) An order for permanent injunction restraining the
Defendants, it's partners or proprietor as the case may
be, it's principal officers, servants and agents and all
others acting for and on it's behalf from passing off the
Defendant's website as and for that of the Plaintiffs, by
including the Plaintiffs trademark SHOLAY or any
other receptively similar trademark thereto as a
metatag in the source code of the Defendant's website,
and thereby passing off such website as and for that of
(v) An order for permanent injunction restraining the
Defendants, their directors, partners or proprietor as
the case may be, their principal officers, servants and
agents from operating any business, making, selling,
offering for sale, or in any manner dealing in any
goods or services, under the name SHOLAY or any
other name which is identical with or deceptively
similar to the Plaintiff’s trademark SHOLAY as an
essential or dominant feature thereof, on the Internet
or otherwise and from doing any other thing as is
likely to dilute the Plaintiffs trademark SHOLAY or to
lead of tarnishment of the asset, which is the movie
title corporate name and trademark SHOLAY.
(vi) An order for transfer of all domain names
incorporating the name SHOLAY or any deceptively
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                          Page 11 of 30
similar variation thereof including sholay.com,
sholay.net,         e-sholay.com,       sholaychat.com,
sholayindia.com, sholaymall.com, sholaynews.com,
sholayonline.com. sholayradio.com, sholaytv.com,
Mysholay.com,        Asksholay.com,    sholay.fm         and
sholay.co.in to the Plaintiff and for delivery-up of all
impugned materials, including but not limited to
brochures, stationery and other printed matter, for
purposes of destruction and/or erasure;
(vii) An order for rendition of accounts of profit
illegally earned by the Defendants on account of the
infringing activities and a decree for the amount
ascertained be passed in favour of the Plaintiff;
(viii) An order of damages of 10 lakhs which the
Plaintiff has suffered by way of the Defendants'
infringing activities, such activities having seriously
eroded, diluted and reduced the value of the Plaintiff’s
trademark SHOLAY and caused the Plaintiff loss of
business, reputation and untold hardship.
(ix) An order for costs in these proceedings; and”
16.    Vide order dated 21st August, 2001 in the present suit, an ex parte ad
interim injunction was granted in the following terms:
It is an application for exemption. Allowed,
subject to all just exceptions.
Suit No. 1714 /2001 & IA 7665/2001(Be numbered).
Plaint be registered as suit.
Summons in the suit and notice of the
application be issued to the defendants by ordinary
process as well as by Regd. AD cover, returnable on
It has been contended by Mr. V.P. Singh,
learned counsel for the plaintiff that the plaintiff has
been using the word Sholay in relation to
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                           Page 12 of 30
cinematography films, vinyl records, audio tapes and
DVDs etc and has also made application for
registration of trade mark ‘Sholay’ in relation to
various goods, details of which have been given at
page 9 of the application. The Plaintiff has also in
order to expand its presence and operation on the
internet registered itself in the names of
SHOLAYENT.COM and SHOLAYTWO.COM’
It has been contended by Mr. V.P. Singh,
learned counsel for the plaintiff that defendants 1 and
2 are directors of defendant no.4. Defendant no.5 is a
sister concern of defendant no.4. Defendant no.3 who
is wife of defendant no.2 and she is one of the directors
of defendant no.5. Defendant no.6-Sholay.com Inc and
defendant no.7 -Sybanet communications Inc. and
defendant no.8- Sholay DOT Co. Incorporation are
using the word ‘Sholay’ to enchash the reputation and
good will of the plaintiff's trade name ‘Sholay’ which
has acquired tremendous clout, good will and
reputation and word SHOLAY has assumed secondary
meaning. It was also contended by Mr. V. P. Singh,
learned counsel for the plaintiff that from the perusal
of the documents placed on record at page 240, 241
and 318, it will be borne out that the defendants are
using the internationally known film Sholay's name
produced by plaintiff no.2 which has now been gifted
to plaintiff no.1 in advertising ‘Sholay.com’. At page
242 of the documents, the Defendants have been used
on the letter head of their website Sholay.com to the
following effect:-
“The biggest Bollywood blockbuster has hit the
Net too. Sholay.com is a comprehensive site that offers
you much more than its Bollywood alias did.”
From the perusal of the documents, pleadings
and after hearing arguments of learned counsel for
the plaintiff/ applicant, a prima facie case is made out
by the applicant for grant of an ex parte injunction
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                          Page 13 of 30
limited to the extent that defendants are restrained
from using film Sholay its characters, songs,
sequences, clippings in the manner whatsoever so as
to promote its website Sholay.com till the next the
next date of hearing. They are further restrained
from using the word Sholay in relation to any film
which they want to their website Sholay.com.
Plaintiff to comply with the provisions of Rule 3
of Order 39 C.P.C. within one week.”
17.    Thereafter, the Defendants entered appearance and filed an
application challenging the territorial jurisdiction of this Court. During
pendency of the present suit, some of the trademark applications of the
Plaintiffs in relation to the mark ‘SHOLAY’, which were also pleaded in the
Plaint, were granted registration. The Plaintiff sought amendment of the
Plaint to add the said registrations which was allowed on 28th August, 2006.
18.    Vide judgment dated 27th January, 2010, the application under Order
7 Rule 11 CPC was allowed and the Plaint was returned. The Plaintiffs filed
an appeal against the said order - FAO (OS) No.222 of 2010 titled Sholay
Media and Entertainment Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. v. Mr. Yogesh Patel & Ors. By
order dated 13th March, 2014, the judgment dated 27th January, 2010 was set
aside and CS (OS) No. 1714/2001 was restored along with the interim
injunction. The operative portion of the said order is set out below:
“3. The impugned order is patently erroneous and
overlooks that the respondents have distributed CDs
along with the December issue of IT Magazine which
was extensively circulated in Delhi in which
respondent's website SHOLAY.COM was advertised.
The learned Single Judge has overlooked that when the
CD was loaded it displayed the website
www.sholav.com with prominence such that any user
would click the same on the link to be transported to
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                            Page 14 of 30
respondent's website and in turn could then avail of
various services such as e-greetings/e-chat and goods
such as DVDs sold by the respondent. The learned
Single Judge has overlooked that the respondent's
website is a virtual store with the ‘essential interactive
features’ that permits a visitor to order goods or
services and communicate with the respondents via e-
mail. Cumulatively read there are sufficient pleadings
to show the respondents promoting their business
actively in Delhi.
6. The appeal is allowed. Impugned order dated April
27, 2010 is set aside. CS (OS) No.1714/2001 is
restored. Pending applications which were dismissed
as a result of the plaint being returned are revived and
so are the interim injunctions which were operating.”
19.    In the written statement, the Defendants took the stand that they are in
the business of computer products. It is urged that the intention of the
Plaintiffs is to extract money from the Defendants who have created a
popular website called www.sholay.com, registered by the Defendants in the
USA. The case of the Defendant was that the suit did not disclose a cause of
action. The Defendants urged that a movie title is not entitled to any rights
and, hence, there can be no passing off. The Plaintiffs, however, rely on
Krishika Lulla v. Shyam Vithalrao Devkatta and Ors. [(2016) 2 SCC 521],
to rebut that contention.
20.    It was further urged that the order dated 20th December, 2000 passed
by the Registrar of Companies and extracted hereinabove, was stayed by the
Madras High Court, vide order dated 13th March, 2001. In fact, the Plaintiff's
plea that there was no stay of the said order was false. The Defendants also
claimed that the website did not have any resemblance to the movie
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                             Page 15 of 30
‘SHOLAY’ and the word ‘SHOLAY’ has a common dictionary meaning. In
addition, third-party use of the mark ‘SHOLAY’ was also cited. The
Defendants also challenged the reputation of the Plaintiffs.
21.    In the year 2016, the present suit was amended again due to further
registrations granted in favour of the Plaintiffs in relation to the mark
‘SHOLAY’. The various trademark registrations presently valid and
subsisting are set out below:
2.       SHOLAY       928619         9       Video films, tapes,
cassettes etc.
3.       SHOLAY       966272         14      Clocks, wristwatches,
costume,          Jewellery
4.       SHOLAY       928687         16      Albums, Articles of
paper etc.
5.       SHOLAY       966273         18      All kinds of leather
and imitations of
6.       SHOLAY       967054         21      Cleaning material like
backets etc.,
7.       SHOLAY       966274         25      T-shirts, jeans, caps
8.       SHOLAY       966275         28      Stuffed toy figures and
toy animals etc.
9.       SHOLAY       966276         29      Meat, fish, poultry
and game etc.
10.      SHOLAY       966277         30      Coffee, tea, cocoa,
sugar rice etc.
13.     SHOLAY         966271          9       Video films, tapes,
cassettes, etc.
14.     SHOLAY         928686          9       Video films, tapes,
cassettes, etc.
22.    Mediation was explored to resolve the disputes. However, the same
had failed. There has been no appearance on behalf of the Defendants 20th
March, 2019 onwards. The interim order already granted on 21st August,
2001 was confirmed on 14th March 2022 by this Court. Even today, none
appears for the Defendants.
23.      Mr. Anand, ld. Counsel appearing for the Plaintiffs submits that he
has filed his written submissions and has urged that the Defendants were
misusing the mark ‘SHOLAY’. He further argued that the Defendants’
adoption of the mark was not bona fide or innocent. The Defendants did not
adopt the mark ‘SHOLAY’ only as a part of the domain name being
www.sholay.com, but also in the following manner:
i.    by registering a series of domain names;
ii.   by using the word ‘SHOLAY’ as part of the corporate name;
iii.  by applying for the registrations of the mark ‘SHOLAY’ in
India as also in the USA;
iv.   by using an identical logo of ‘SHOLAY’;
v.    by offering the DVD of the Plaintiff’s film ‘SHOLAY’ on their
vi.   by using the name ‘SHOLAY’ as a meta tag.
24.    The Plaintiffs revealed the intention of the Defendants to foreclose the
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                            Page 17 of 30
natural expansion of the Plaintiffs in the virtual space. The various defences
raised by the Defendants in the written statement have also been addressed
by the Plaintiffs in their written submissions.
25.     The Defendants have already been proceeded ex parte in this matter.
The rights in the mark ‘SHOLAY’ vesting in the Plaintiff’s has already been
judicially recognised in the decision dated 24th August, 2015 in CS(OS)
1892/2006 titled Sholay Media and Entertainment Pvt. Ltd. and Anr. v.
Parag Sanghavi and Ors.
26.    Thus, the question that arises is whether any ex parte evidence would
be required in this case. On behalf of the Plaintiffs, the following two
aspects have been urged:
i. That the rights in the mark ‘SHOLAY’ vest in the Plaintiffs,
ii. That the Defendants conduct constitutes infringement and
violation of statutory and common law rights in the mark
27.     Insofar as the first aspect of the rights of the Plaintiffs, is concerned,
the same has already been recognised in the earlier judicial decision dated
24th August, 2015 in CS(OS) 1892/2006 titled Sholay Media and
Entertainment Pvt. Ltd. and Anr. v. Parag Sanghavi and Ors. The findings
in the said decision are set out below:
“3. The plaintiffs are the copyright owners and
administer all intellectual property in respect of 32
cinematograph films, including the iconic and eternal
hit film "SHOLAY". The other hits in the Sippy
repertoire of films include films such as ‘Johar
Mehmood in Goa', Bhramachari', Bandhan', Andaz',
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                             Page 18 of 30
Phool', Sheshensha Hameshaa' etc.
4. The history of the plaintiffs companies and
devolution of rights in the film is summarized herein
a) 26th November, 1954: Plaintiff No.2 was
incorporated under the leadership of the late Mr. G.P.
Sippy to produce and handle distribution of
cinematograph films. Certificate of Incorporation and
Memorandum and Articles of Association of plaintiff
No.2 has been exhibited as Ex PW 1/3 and Ex PW 1/4.
b) 3rd August, 1965: M/s Sippy Films, a partnership
firm, was formed. Films belonging to the Sippy
repertoire were produced through this firm. Table
summarizing the dates of appointment and retirement
of various members of the Sippy family who became
partners in the firm and Directors of plaintiff No.2 has
been marked as Mark A.
• Mr. Ajit Sippy (defendant No.7), through whom
defendant Nos.3, 5 and 6 claimed to have
acquired certain rights, was admitted as a
partner of M/s Sippy Films on 1st January, 1976
and retired on 15th September, 1976. The
retirement deed by virtue of which defendant
No.7 relinquished all rights in the Sippy
repertoire has been exhibited as Ex PW1/5.
c) 10th September, 1997: Plaintiff No.2 was admitted
as a partner in the partnership firm. The deed of
partnership has been marked as Mark N.
d) 11th September, 1997: M/s Sippy films, the erstwhile
partnership firm has only two partners remaining i.e.
Mr. Vijay Sippy and plaintiff No.2. The deed of
partnership has been marked as Mark O.
e) 17th April, 1998: Dissolution of the partnership firm
on the death of Mr. Vijay Sippy. Extract from the
Register of Partnerships certifying the dissolution of
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                         Page 19 of 30
M/s Sippy Films has been exhibited Ex PW1/9. After
dissolution of the partnership firm, plaintiff No.2
through Mr. Sascha Sippy, the sole heir of Mr. Vijay
Sippy and one of the Directors of plaintiff No.2,
continued to exercise all rights in the Sippy repertoire
and the name Sippy Films' came to denote a
proprietary concern of plaintiff No.2. The last will of
Mr. Vijay Sippy in favour of his son Mr. Sascha Sippy
has been marked Mark C.
f) 11th September, 2000: Plaintiff No.1 was
incorporated in order to capitalize on the brand value
and merchandising potential inherent in the iconic hit
film ‘Sholay'. Copies of the certificate of
Incorporation, Articles and Memorandum of
Association of plaintiff No.1 has been exhibited as Ex
PW 1/11and Ex PW 1/12. The gift deed dated 14th
September, 2000 whereby plaintiff No.2 transferred all
the right, title and interest in the film Sholay to plaintiff
No.1 has been exhibited as Ex PW1/13.
16. As a consequence of gift deed dated 14th
September, 2000, the copyright in the cinematographic
film SHOLAY stood transferred to plaintiff No.1. Thus,
plaintiff No.1 is the owner of the copyright as well as
all common law rights in the cinematographic film
SHOLAY and the constituent parts of the
cinematographic film SHOLAY. By virtue of being the
owner of copyright in the cinematographic film
SHOLAY as well as those of its constituent parts i.e.
the screenplay, script, sound recordings (i.e., songs
and recording of the back ground music), musical
works, lyrics, artwork etc. the plaintiffs are thus
according certain exclusive rights under Section 14 of
the Copyright Act, 1957. These exclusive rights accord
plaintiff No.1 the exclusive right to exploit the
cinematographic film SHOLAY under Section 14(d) of
the Copyright Act, 1957.”
28.    In view of the above conclusions, the aspect of rights vested in the
Plaintiffs stands adjudicated and there appears to be no challenge to the
same. Ld. Counsel for the Plaintiff has submitted that the said judgement is
not under challenge.
29.    Thus, only the second issue remains to be considered, as to whether
the future use of the word/mark/name ‘SHOLAY’ is liable to be injuncted.
The Defendants do not dispute the following facts:
i. That the Defendants have registered various domain names                  with
the mark ‘SHOLAY’.
ii. That the Defendants have applied for registrations of the marks in
India and in the USA.
iii. That the Defendants are using the word ‘SHOLAY’ as a
prominent part of their corporate name.
30.     The Defendants only seek to justify their use of the Plaintiffs’ mark
‘SHOLAY’ by urging that:
i. Film titles are not entitled to protection and that they have applied
for registration earlier.
ii. There is no probability of confusion on the internet and that
‘SHOLAY’ is a dictionary word.
31.    In respect of the above contentions of the Defendants, following the
rationale of the judgment of the ld. Single Judge of this Court in Disney
Enterprises Inc. & Anr. v. Balraj Muttneja &Ors. [CS (OS) 3466/2012
decided on 20th February, 2014], this Court is of the opinion that no
evidence needs to be adduced inasmuch as the facts are not seriously in
dispute in this case. The same has been reiterated by the Court in S. Oliver
Bernd Freier GMBH & CO. KG v. Jaikara Apparels and Ors. [210 (2014)
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                            Page 21 of 30
DLT 381], as also, in United Coffee House v. Raghav Kalra and Ors. [2013
(55) PTC 414 (Del)]. The relevant observations from the judgment in
Disney Enterprises Inc. (supra), are as under:
“3. Though the defendants entered appearance
through their counsel on 01.02.2013 but remained
unrepresented thereafter and failed to file a written
statement as well. The defendants were thus directed to
be proceeded ex-parte vide order dated 04.10.2013and
the plaintiffs permitted to file affidavits by way of
exparte evidence.
4. The plaintiffs, despite having been granted sufficient
time and several opportunities, have failed to get their
affidavits for leading ex-parte evidence on record.
However, it is not deemed expedient to further await
the same and allow this matter to languish, for the
reason that I have in Indian Performing Rights
MANU/DE/0582/2013 held that where the defendant
is ex parte and the material before the Court is
sufficient to allow the claim of the plaintiff, the time
of the Court should not be wasted in directing ex
parte evidence to be recorded and which mostly is
nothing buta repetition of the contents of the plaint.”
32.    Since the Defendants have not entered appearance and led evidence in
support of the contentions raised, the defences raised by the Defendants in
their pleadings are considered hereinbelow:
i.     Contention: That the Defendants applied for the mark ‘SHOLAY’ on
16th April, 1999 in India and 11th February, 1999 in the USA, prior to
the Plaintiffs. The Defendants also incorporated the Defendant No.4-
Company with the name ‘SHOLAY’ as early as on 21st December,
1999. Admittedly, the Plaintiffs applied for registrations in the USA
in the year 2000 and in India, the earliest application dates back to
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                          Page 22 of 30
Finding: The Defendants claim that their application is prior to the
application and registration of the mark by the Plaintiffs. This claim is
bereft of any force, inasmuch as the film ‘SHOLAY’ of the Plaintiffs
was released in the year 1975, much before the application for
registration and the incorporation of the Company by the Defendants.
The manner of use of the word ‘SHOLAY’ by the Defendants, is not
descriptive, but is a clear indication of an association with the
Plaintiffs’ film. The offering of the CD and the DVD of the film
‘SHOLAY’ on the website of the Defendants shows that the
Defendants’ adoption is, in fact, mala fide and dishonest. Moreover,
the Defendants have registered a series of domain names identical and
deceptively similar to the name of the film ‘SHOLAY’, which cannot
be justified in any manner, especially when the Defendants own and
could have used any of their other registered domain names, such as
‘zerozone.com’. Their use of identical domain names is nothing but
an attempt to encash the goodwill enjoyed by the blockbuster movie
‘SHOLAY’ of the Plaintiffs. The Plaintiffs clearly have a cause of
action under Section 27 of the Trademarks Act, 1999 to sue for
passing off. The mark ‘Sholay’ enjoys continued goodwill in India.
As and when more and more media have evolved for the
communication of a film, the rights in ‘SHOLAY’ have been
licensed/assigned by the Plaintiffs. The mark ‘SHOLAY’ has already
been recognised as a well-known mark. Thus, the mere earlier
trademark applications or use as part of a corporate name would not
vest any prior rights in favour of the Defendants.
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                          Page 23 of 30
ii.    Contention: The goods and services offered by the Plaintiffs and
Defendants are different, unrelated and not overlapping.
Finding: The Plaintiffs have a large number of registrations as set out
hereinabove. The activities of the Defendants would be covered by
most of these registrations. The content in a movie is no longer
merely restricted to theatrical screening, but also to online platforms
and other electronic platforms. Thus, the internet has itself created an
additional market for ‘SHOLAY’, which is a film nearly 50 years old.
The adoption by the Defendants is with complete knowledge of the
Plaintiffs’ film, especially considering that the Defendants’ companies
are being run by Indians, who are more than likely to be aware of the
film ‘SHOLAY’. The goods and services being offered can be
considered as being off shoots emanating from the Plaintiffs.
iii.   Contention: Titles of films cannot be Trademarks.
Finding: The word ‘SHOLAY’, is the title of an iconic film, and
consequently, as a mark having been associated with the film,
produced and now vesting in the Plaintiffs, cannot be held to be
devoid of protection. Certain films cross the boundaries of just being
ordinary words and the title of the film ‘SHOLAY’ is one of them.
Titles and films are capable of being recognised under trademark law
and in India ‘SHOLAY’ would be a classic example of such a case.
On this issue, the Supreme Court in Krishika Lulla & Ors. V. Shyam
Vithalrao Devkatta & Anr. [(2016) 2 SCC 521] has held as under:
“19. We are thus, of the view that no copyright
subsists in the title of a literary work and a plaintiff or
a complainant is not entitled to relief on such basis
except in an action for passing off or in respect of a
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                            Page 24 of 30
registered trade mark comprising such titles. This
does not mean that in no case can a title be a proper
subject of protection against being copied as held in
Dicks v. Yates where Jessel M.R. said “there might be
copyright in a title as for instance a whole page of
title or something of that kind requiring invention” or
as observed by Copinger (supra).”
Similar is the view taken by the ld. Single Judge of this Court in
Kanungo Media (P) Ltd. v. RGV Film Factory & Ors. [2007 SCC
OnLine Del 314], wherein it was observed as under:
“18. Whether titles of single literary works can be
registered as trade mark or not has itself become
debatable in the US, though in the case of titles of
series of literary work, judicial opinion is that they
are registrable. However, it is not necessary to go
into this debate inasmuch as the plaintiff's title
‘Nisshabd’ for its film is not registered as trademark.
The case at hand is, therefore, while applying the
legal protection given to such titles under the Trade
Marks Act is to be considered on the principle
applicable in the cases of passing off of such
trademarks. In passing off, necessary ingredient to be
established is the likelihood of confusion and for
establishing this ingredient it becomes necessary to
prove that the title has acquired secondary meaning.
Thus, in case of unregistered title following
ingredients are to be proved in order to triumph in an
injunction suit:—
(i) Title has acquired the secondary meaning;
(ii) There is likelihood of confusion of source,
affiliation, sponsorship or connection of potential
buyers/audience/viewers.”
iv.   Contention: The Defendants contend that ‘Sholay.com’ is a website
on the internet which is used by educated persons, which would
consequently lead to lesser likelihood of confusion.
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                           Page 25 of 30
Finding: Insofar as internet usage is concerned, the said platform is
now being accessed by billions of users across the world who may
range from very educated to even illiterate people. In this day and age,
the internet as a medium has become a platform for dissemination,
communication and empowerment to the common man. Thus, in the
opinion of this Court, the contention that the internet is only being
used by educated persons is unacceptable. It would be easy for any
person, not just educated individuals, to establish a connection
between the Plaintiffs’ film and the Defendants’ website. The use of
identical logos, marks and names originating from the movie
‘SHOLAY’ further confound the issue. Moreover, the chances of
confusion which have been narrated in the Plaint and extracted
hereinabove, leave no doubt in the mind of the Court that there is
every likelihood of confusion.
v.     Contention: The subject matter of the present suit is substantially
similar to that in the proceedings in the writ petition filed before
Finding: The writ petition being W.P. (C) No. 4823 of 2001, filed
before the Madras High Court which emanated under Section 22 of
the Companies Act was of limited scope. The said writ petition now
stands disposed of. The present suit is a broad suit seeking prayers
qua infringement, passing off, dilution, etc. The use of the mark
‘SHOLAY’ as part of domain names and company names, etc. are
completely illegal and unlawful in these facts. The acclaimed status of
the film ‘SHOLAY’ in India has also been recognised by the Bombay
High Court while dealing with a case relating to another movie titled
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                          Page 26 of 30
‘Veere Di Wedding’. In the said judgement in Anil Kapoor Film Co.
Pvt. Ltd. v. Make My Day Entertainment & Anr [2017 SCC OnLine
Bom 8119], Justice G.S. Patel has observed the following in relation
“20. Finally, there is the title itself. It is a common
place phrase in one or more of our many vernacular
tongues. It means “my best friend’s wedding”. There
are, I imagine, titles of some books and movies (and
songs or melodies) that by themselves are sufficiently
unique: Gravity’s Rainbow, perhaps, or The Catcher
in the Rye, To Kill A Mockingbird, and so on. In
cinema, too, this may be so: Citizen Kane, Blade
Runner, many of the Bond movies (Goldfinger,
Thunderball, The Quantum of Solace), Aguirre the
Wrath of God, Fitzcarraldo, etc. But the fact that the
title is unique is not in itself sufficient to establish
reputation, nor is the fact that there has been a
previous book or a film with the same name. There is
absolutely no shortage of films that have exactly the
same title but are very different otherwise and share
nothing else in common. These instances put us
squarely within the frame of the ration in KM Multani:
in that case, too, there were two competing films with
the same name but nothing else. There exist many films
with exactly the same title but different contents. It is
not shown, or even urged, that for these films an action
in passing off succeeded, was ever filed, or even could
have been filed merely because the two titles were the
same. George Tillman Jr’s 2009 Notorious is about as
far as it is possible to be from Alfred Hitchcock’s 1946
work of the same name; and this is true too of several
others. There is not a suggestion in the plaint that,
apart from the title, there is any commonality between
the Plaintiff’s forthcoming film and that of the 1st
Defendant. When therefore the Plaintiff argues that an
action in passing off lies in respect of a title of a film,
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                            Page 27 of 30
though not in copyright infringement, this is
inaccurate. A work may gain reputation on publication
or release. In showing reputation, a plaintiff must show
that his work with that name is associated in the public
mind only with that film or book, one that exists. When
the title is unusual or unique, it might make the task of
a plaintiff somewhat easier, but I think it is difficult to
conceive of a reputation attaching to a non-existent
thing — a film not made or a book not written — no
matter how unique the title. Where the title is more
commonplace, the burden of establishing a reputation
might lie heavier; but that burden is never discharged
by saying only, as the present Plaintiff does, that it has
plans to make a movie with a particular title and
others have spoken of it. Films with names Gaslight,
Birth of a Nation, Casablanca, Bicycle Thieves, or
hundreds of others; and, closer home, of films with
commonplace titles like Zanjeer, Deewar, Anand,
Pyaasa or Sholay — the list is endless — are all
instances of film that, with possibly ordinary titles,
acquired a reputation in those titles upon their release.
The ‘reputation’ of these films has, over time, been so
established that the titles uniquely connote these films
and no other. I do not think that is even remotely true
of the Plaintiff’s yet-to-be-made film. Thus, when a
plaintiff claims passing off in a title simpliciter,
independently of any content similarity, he reaches
well beyond the considerations of KM Multani (where,
incidentally, there was, in relation to reputation, an
overview of the content). It is, I think, prima facie
exceedingly difficult to conceive of reputation
attaching to a title alone, of a thing not in existence,
divorced entirely from content. This burden is not,
prima facie, sufficiently discharged to warrant an ad-
interim injunction.”
33.   The highlighted      portion of the paragraph          above judicially
acknowledges the reputation in the film title ‘SHOLAY’, which is now
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                          Page 28 of 30
34.     Under the facts and circumstances of the present case, the following
directions are issued:
i.     The present suit is decreed in terms of the reliefs sought in paragraph
60(i) to (vi) as also 60(viii) and (ix) of the Plaint. Accordingly, the
Defendants, their directors, partners, proprietor and anyone acting for
and on their behalf are restrained from using the name ‘SHOLAY’ in
respect of any goods and services and also from using the domain
name ‘Sholay.com’ and making any reference to the movie
‘SHOLAY’ or using any images or clippings from the said movie, as
also from selling merchandise using the name SHOLAY or any
images from the said cinematographic film. The Defendants shall also
stand restrained from using any variation of the mark/name
‘SHOLAY’ on the internet or otherwise including use as a metatag in
the source code.
ii.    In terms of the relief as sought in paragraph 60(vi), the concerned
domain names registrars are directed to transfer the infringing domain
names to the Plaintiffs, within one week of the receipt of the present
order and the details of the Plaintiffs.
iii.   The statement of costs has been filed by the Plaintiffs. The same is
taken on record. Though, the cost statement has been filed showing
expenses to the tune of Rs.6,58,036.00/- on various accounts
including court fee, miscellaneous expenses and legal fee. It is also
submitted by ld. Counsel for Plaintiffs that a substantial quantum of
services were rendered even on pro bono basis. Considering the
observations of the Supreme Court on the issue of costs to be awarded
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                          Page 29 of 30
in commercial matters in Uflex Ltd. v. Government of Tamil Nadu &
Ors. [Civil Appeal Nos.4862-4863 of 2021, decided on 17th
September, 2021], actual costs ought to be awarded, keeping in mind
the bill of costs, including counsel fees. In the present case, the
Defendants have contested this matter for over 20 years. The adoption
of the mark ‘SHOLAY’ by the Defendants was clearly mala fide and
dishonest, owing to the use of the infringing logo, designs, selling of
the DVD of the film ‘SHOLAY’ on the Defendants’ website, etc. For
the reasons contained above, this Court is convinced that this is a fit
case for award of costs to the Plaintiffs. Accordingly, the present suit
is decreed for a sum of Rs.25,00,000/- as costs and damages, in terms
of the relief as sought in paragraph 60(ix) of the Plaint.
35.      The Defendant shall pay the said amount within three months, failing
which, the Plaintiff is permitted to avail of its remedies in accordance with
law for execution of the decree.
36.       All pending applications are also disposed of. Decree sheet be drawn
(corrected & released on 23rd May, 2022)
CS(COMM) 8/2016                                                             Page 30 of 30