Prayer in W.P.No.15230 of 2022: Writ Petition is filed under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India humbly praying “to issue a WRIT OF
MANDAMUS or any other appropriate Writ, or order, or direction, in the
nature of a Writ, it is therefore prayed that this Hon'ble Court may be pleased
to set aside /quash the permission by which the Respondent Nos.1 and 2
granted permission for the transfer of 1000 crocodiles from the respondent
No.4 facility to the Respondent No.3 facility, and consequentially issue
directions to quash and set aside the permission granted by the Respondent
No.2 to the Respondent No.3 to operate a Zoo and to pass such further or
other orders as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper in the
circumstances of the case and thus render justice.
Prayer in W.M.P.No.14406 of 2022: Writ Miscellaneous Petition is filed
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India humbly praying to direct the
Respondents 1 and 2 to an inquiry and investigation be directed into the
management and affairs of the Respondent No.3 by an independent agency
like CBI, CID or Special SIT constituted by this Court and based on the
report, action be taken or directed to be taken against the Respondent No.3
and to pass such further or other orders as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit
and proper in the circumstances of the case and thus render justice.
Prayer in W.M.P.No.14407 of 2022: Writ Miscellaneous Petition is filed
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India humbly praying that this
Hon'ble Court may graciously be pleased to issue any other appropriate Writ,
or order, or direction, in the nature of a Writ, it is therefore prayed that this
Hon'ble Court may be pleased direct the Respondent No.1 and 2 from giving
any permission to Respondent No.3 for acquiring, purchasing, exchanging or
selling any animals from any other zoos in Tamil Nadu, India or abroad and
to pass such further or other orders as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and
proper in the circumstances of the case and thus render justice.
For Petitioner     : Mr.H.Agrawal for Dr.S.K.Samy
The Writ Petition is filed as a Public Interest Litigation to set aside
/quash the permission by which the respondent Nos.1 and 2 granted
permission for the transfer of 1000 crocodiles from the respondent No.4
facility to the respondent No.3 facility, and consequentially to quash and set
aside the permission granted by the respondent No.2 to the respondent No.3
to operate a Zoo.
2.With the consent of both the petitioner as well as the respondent's
counsel the main writ petition is taken up for hearing and is disposed of by
this order.
3.“The greatness of a nation and its moral progress can be judged by
the way its Animals are treated” – M.K.Gandhi.
“51-A.Fundamental duties. --- It shall be the duty of every citizen of India
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment
including forest, lakes, rivers and wildlife, and to have
compassion for living creatures.”
4.In this Public Interest Litigation we are called upon to address the
issue of the validity of transfer of 1000 crocodiles from the 4th respondent
Zoo to the 3rd respondent Zoo in t
“51-A.Fundamental duties. --- It shall be the
duty of every citizen of India ----
environment including forest, lakes, rivers and
wildlife, and to have compassion for living creatures.”
he light of the provisions of the Wild Life Protection
Act, 1972 and the rules framed there under.”
5.Our nation culturally has always been Ecocentric. We believe in
peaceful co-existence with all creatures and our love and reverence for the
animal world is reflected in our religion, folklore, art and craft. From ancient
times we are known to have protected, venerated and conserved wild life.
The legacy of protection of wild animals and plants is reflected in the
constitution 42nd Amendment Act, 1976 by which Article 51-A was inserted
in Part IV-A of the constitution. Article 51-A reads as follows:
“51-A.Fundamental duties. --- It shall be the duty of
every citizen of India ----
(g) to protect and improve the natural environment
including forest, lakes, rivers and wildlife, and to have
compassion for living creatures.”
6.The constitution under Schedule VII List III Entry 17-B provides for
Protection of Wild Animals and Birds. Tracing the power to the above, the
Parliament enacted the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972 with the object of
protection of wild animals and birds with a view to ensuring the ecological
and environmental security of our country.
7.Section 38-H of the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972 mandates that
without the recognition of the Authority, no Zoo can be operated. Zoo is
defined under See 2(39) of the Act. The Recognition of Zoo Rules, 2009 was
enacted laying down the procedure for recognition of Zoos', renewal of
recognition, classification of Zoos' and matters incidental thereto. In the
light of the provisions of the Act and the Recognition of Zoo Rules (RZR)
2009 the issues raised before us will be answered.
The petitioner is an Ex-Service Man and an environment and animal
lover and as such he has filed the public interest litigation.
9.According to the petitioner in the year 2019, the respondent No.3
made an application to the 2nd respondent for recognition to operate a
Rescue, Rehabilitation center and Zoo in the village Kanalus, Taluk Lalpur,
District Jamnagar, Gujarat. After compliance of the prescribed formalities
the 2nd respondent granted the recognition for operating the mini zoo for a
period of three years upto August, 2023. The writ petitioner after referring to
various provisions of the Act objected to the grant of permission stating that
the same were in violation of the provisions of the Wild Life Protection Act
1972, and the Recognition of Zoo Rules, 2009.
10.According to the petitioner the 3rd respondent is not operating the
Zoo, rescue and rehabilitation center         in accordance with the law and
regulations. The Petitioner elaborately discussed the rules framed under the
Act to drive home the point that the 2nd respondent could not have permitted
the 3rd respondent zoo to bring in 1000 Crocodiles to it's facility from the 4th
respondent zoo.
11.The petitioner contended that under the Wild Life Protection Act,
National Zoo Policy or the recognition of Zoo Rules, there is no provision to
give approval or recognition to a private organization to establish a private
Zoo.        The petitioner further contended that the categorization of the 3rd
respondent facility as a Mini Zoo was against the provisions of the Act and
the Rules, in as much as the criteria for Mini Zoo are that it should have less
than 10 Hectares of land, less than 1 Lakh visitors in a year, less than 10
species of animals and less than 100 animals. On the other hand the Master
Layout filed by the 3rd respondent is for an area of 101.2 Hectares of land, 79
species of animals and more than 750 animals, which in fact qualifies for the
category of a large Zoo. According to the petitioner, the incorrect and
unlawful categorization of the 3rd respondent facility would allow the 3rd
respondent to operate as a large Zoo, but without complying the standards
and norms applicable to the large Zoo. Further contention of the petitioner
was that in the Master Plan published by the 3rd respondent it appears that
the regulations in respect of enclosures were not followed and the
approval/recognition was given without physical verification of the
enclosures and therefore the recognition ought to be quashed and set aside.
12.The petitioner contended that the 3rd respondent Zoo was allowed
to operate a Rescue and Re-habitation Center within the Zoo, which is a
violation of Rule 2(j) of the Recognition of Zoo Rules 2009 (as amended in
2013) (hereinafter referred to as RZR). The said Rules stipulate that a
Rescue Center cannot be intertwined or run together or within a Zoo, but it
has to be a separate establishment.
13.The petitioner further contended that the Master Lay out could not
have been approved by the 2nd respondent for the reason that it houses an
Administrative Office, which is likely to be used as a housing unit or quarters
for the staff of the 2nd respondent and this is not permitted as per the
schedule of standards and norms i.e. the Recognition of Zoo Rules (RZR).
14.The petitioner contended that the 3rd respondent private Zoo was
allowed to enter into acquisition and exchange of animals, which is not
permissible under Wild Life Protection Act (WLPA), National Zoo Policy
(NZP) and Recognition of Zoo Rules (RZR).                The petitioner further
contended that the 3rd respondent Zoo has no expertise in the field, therefore
preference and weightage should be given only to Government Zoos, State
Government Zoos and Municipal Authorities Zoos which have a proven track
record.
15.The petitioner in the light of the above facts prayed to set
aside/quash the permission granted by the 2nd respondent to the 4th
respondent to transfer 1000 crocodiles from the 4th respondent zoo to the
3rd respondent zoo and consequentially to set aside/quash the permission
granted by the 2nd respondent to the 3rd respondent to operate the Zoo.
16.The 2nd, 3rd and 4th respondents filed counters which are dealt with
briefly as here under.
17.The  2nd    respondent    in   its   counter   submitted    that     the
permission/approval was granted to the 3rd respondent vide letter dated
14.02.2019 under Section 38-H(1A) of the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972 to
establish the greens Zoological Rescue and Rehabilitation Kingdom at Jam
nagar, Gujarat on conditions stipulated therein. Subsequently an application
under Section 38-H(1,3,4) of the Act was received from the zoo operator. The
said application was evaluated and it was observed that the rescue center had
been established but the main zoo and rescue center were in development
stage. Hence permission was granted for a period of three years for operation
of Rescue center only vide order dated 17.08.2020. According to the 2nd
respondent Rule 2[(1 A)] of the Schedule of RZR of 2009 permits the
respondent to recognize Rescue Centers for orphaned wild animals, subject
to the availability of appropriate housing and upkeep infrastructure. With
regard to the       categorization of the 3rd respondent as a Mini Zoo in the
website, it was contented that it was only a default category, which was
temporary in nature considering that there was no specific category for Re-
habitation/Rescue Centre. The 2nd respondent categorically submitted that in
law         there was no embargo on private companies/firms to operate a
Zoo/Rescue Center.         The 2nd respondent referred to Rule 2 (m) of the
Recognition of Zoo Rules (RZR) to contend that the definition of Zoo
Operator explicitly recognized Zoos other than Zoos owned or controlled by
the Central Government or the State Governments.
18.The 2nd respondent further contended that Section 2 (39) of the Wild
Life Act defines a Zoo as an establishment, whether stationary or mobile,
where captive animals are kept for exhibition to the public [and includes a
circus and rescue centers but does not include an establishment]. The 2nd
respondent further contended that the contention that the law and rules
framed under the Act do not provide for operation of a private Zoo, is
contrary to the National Zoo Policy, 1998 which calls for a synergy between
various government agencies, non-government agency and people at large for
achieving the objectives of the Act.          In so far as the transfer of 1000
crocodiles from the 3rd respondent is concerned, it was contended by the 2nd
respondent that under Rule 11 of the Recognition of Zoo Rules, 2009 every
Zoo was required to submit an inventory of animals in collection to the
Central Zoo Authority by the 30th day of April for the ensuing year in Form II
and that on an examination of the 4th respondent's inventory for the year
2019-20, it was observed that there was presence of exceptionally high
number of Mugger (Crocodylus Palustris) in the 4th respondent Zoo. Based
on the         said examination the 3rd respondent addressed a      letter dated
12.06.2020 to the 4th respondent to submit a comprehensive scientific
proposal regarding possibility of exchange of excessive captive bred Mugger
with other Zoos or their re-introduction in the wild.
19.The 4th respondent in it’s reply expressed it's willingness for a
possible acquisition of Marsh crocodiles in their collection by other Zoos.
The 4th        respondent’s letter further contained some valuable suggestions
regarding the CZA’s Guidelines on minimum dimension of enclosures for
housing animals of different species in Zoos. Thereafter the 2nd respondent
revised the guidelines on stocking density of various crocodilian species in
Indian Zoos. By virtue of the said guidelines the 2 nd respondent as a one-
time revision, permitted housing of 33 Muggers in 400 Sq.Mts. in rescue
centres.
20.In pursuance of the said revised guidelines the 2nd respondent issued
advisory to all the Directors/Curators/Officer-Incharge of Zoos affording
them an equal opportunity to acquire Muggers from the 4th                  respondent
subject to the conditions set forth therein. In response to the said advisory
few proposals were received from various Zoos including the proposal of the
3rd respondent. The said proposal of the 3rd respondent was scrutinized by
the Central Zoo Authority Secretariat and the 2nd                respondent granted
approval for transferring of surplus 350:650 Muggers from the 4th respondent
to the 3rd respondent Rescue Center under Section 38-I of the Wild Life
(Protection) Act, 1972 vide letter dated 09.04.2021.
21.In so far as the area for housing the transferred/acquired Muggers at
the 3rd respondent zoo was concerned, it was found that the approved
Master (Layout) Plan of the satellite rescue facility of the 3rd respondent had
earmarked a total area of 16847 Sq.Mts. for housing the 1000 crocodiles in
the off-display satellite rescue facility which was           well within the limit
prescribed in the CZA Advisory. The 2nd respondent in the back drop of the
legal as well as the factual averments contended               that the petitioner’s
contentions were inaccurate and inconsistent with the existing laws and the
same deserved to be rejected as fictitious and baseless.
22.The 3rd respondent filed the counter giving a brief summary of
itself. The 3rd respondent contended that a proposal was given by Reliance
Industries Ltd (Zoo Operator) under Section 38(H) Sub Section 2 of the Wild
Life (Protection) Act, 1972 for the proposed establishment of a Zoo in the
Village Kalanus, Taluk Lalpur, District Jamnagar, Gujarat. The proposal was
accepted by the 2nd respondent. After a detailed scrutiny and analysis of the
proposal on 14.02.2019, the CZA granted approval to establish the Zoo,
Rescue and Re-habitation Center under Section 38(H) (1A) of the said Act
subject to certain conditions stipulated therein. The CZA evaluated the 3rd
respondent facility on 08.08.2020 and being satisfied with the compliance of
the norms and standards the CZA granted approval and recognition on
17.08.2020 with validity period of three years i.e. 16.08.2023. The 3rd
respondent contended that there has been a strict compliance of the Act and
the Rules and the contentions to the contrary deserved to be rejected.
23.According to the 3rd respondent, the Master Layout Plan annexed
to the public interest litigation was an old plan and there were amendments
made subsequently to the Master Plan. According to the 3rd respondent, the
approval was for a large area of 425 acres, which encompasses within itself a
Zoo , separate rescue & rehabilitation Center, satellite rescue and
rehabilitation centers.      The 3rd respondent further contended that it has
employed a large number of personnel who have expertise in the field to man
and run the Zoo. According to the 3rd respondent, it is not just a Zoo, but
also a rescue, rehabilitation center and research center and the facilities
dedicated there to are for the welfare of the animals which would not be
open to visitors and public .
24.According to the 3rd respondent the entire public interest litigation
was misconceived , in as much as the petitioner failed to note that the
transferred crocodiles are to be rehabilitated in dedicated rescue centers and
would not be a part of the Zoo. According to the 3rd respondent the transfer
is not hit by Section 38 and the transfer is done in the interest of the welfare
of the crocodiles and as such the transfer is governed by the Act. The 3 rd
respondent referred to various provisions of the Act and the Rules to counter
the contention of the petitioner that a private organization cannot operate the
Zoo and further that no approval for transportation of the crocodiles could
have been granted as the same was contrary to the scheme of the Act and the
25.The 3rd respondent in reply to the contentions of the petitioner as
regards the experience of the 3rd respondent contended that the same were
baseless and that the 3rd respondent had an established and experienced
staffing pattern with the staff meeting world class standards.            The 3rd
respondent also submitted that the housing and rehabilitation of the
crocodiles were as per the approved plans and the crocodiles were not kept in
any common enclosure . The 3rd respondent contended that the entire domain
of Zoo operations and animal handling is an extremely sensitive and highly
specialized expert domain. With regard to the transfer of crocodiles, the 3rd
respondent reiterated the contentions of the 2nd respondent on the legal
aspect of the transfer of 1000 crocodiles from the 4th respondent zoo to the 3rd
respondent zoo.         The 3rd    respondent in paragraph 11 of its counter
categorically stated that when no other Zoos or the rescue centers expressed a
serious desire to rehabilitate the crocodile, it was the 3rd respondent which
offered to house the crocodiles in its zoo.
26.The 4th respondent in its counter contended that the 3rd respondent
zoo was inspected thoroughly by the Trustee Mr.Romulus Whitaker and other
experts and biologist working with the Trust and it was found that the 3 rd
respondent had earmarked an area of 15 acres with the state of the art
facilities which were in the interest of the crocodiles and other reptiles. The
3rd respondent had further decided to engage 4th respondent’s then Director,
Assistant Curator and a few other staff who had vast experience in housing
the crocodiles, feeding and handling them. It was only on the satisfaction of
the facilities offered by the 3rd respondent, the 4th respondent by letter dated
21.11.2000 offered the transfer of crocodiles and other reptiles to the 3rd
respondent Zoo at Jamnagar, Gujarat, after getting the permission from the
2nd respondent. The said offer was accepted by the 3rd respondent and a
Memorandum of Understanding was executed between the 3rd and 4th
respondents on 08.01.2021 for transfer of surplus animals from the 4th
respondent to the 3rd respondent. According to the 4th respondent the entire
purpose behind the said agreement was the welfare of the animals and no
consideration or sale of the said animals had taken place. The 2 nd respondent
on an application made, after following due procedure granted permission on
the said application and thereafter the process of transfer of the said
crocodiles and other reptiles commenced. The 4th respondent contended that
as on date of the counter 300 mugger crocodiles had been safely transferred
under valid permission to the 3rd respondent zoo.
27.The 4th   respondent also filed the photographs along with the
counter to enable the comparison of the animals from their original home to
the transferred home. The 4th respondent also reiterated that the transfer of
the crocodiles to the 3rd respondent zoo was not essentially for display only
and that display and off-display areas were to be separate and distinct.
According to the 4th respondent the petitioner had made allegations casually
without an understanding of the operations of zoos and rescue centers which
are distinct and separate in nature. The 4th respondent further submitted that
the writ petition deserved to be dismissed on the ground that it was
speculative and made without any verification, research or study.
28.The learned counsel for the petitioner raised the following
contentions at the time of hearing.
“1.That the Wild Life Protection Act and Rules
made thereunder do not provide for operation of a private
2.The recognition of the 3rd respondent as a mini
zoo is contrary to the Act and the Rules in as much as the
area of land and number of animals proposed in the
Master Layout is more and this allows the respondent
No.3 to breach the standards and norms provided in the
Rules of 2009.
3.The grant of permission by the 2nd respondent to
the 4th respondent to transfer 1000 crocodiles to the 3rd
respondent zoo is illegal and illogical because the 3rd
respondent zoo as per the Master Layout did not have the
requisite area for housing the transferred crocodiles.”
29.The learned counsel referred to the provisions of the Wild Life
Protection Act and Rules in support of his contentions.
30.The learned counsel for the 2nd respondent submitted that there was
no bar to the establishment and operation of a private Zoo under the Wild
Life Protection Act and Rules. The learned counsel further submitted that
though the 3rd respondent Rescue Center is categorised as a Mini Zoo the
permission was granted for operating only the rescue center which is very
much permissible under the Act and Rules. The learned counsel further
submitted that it was found on examination of the annual report of the 4 th
respondent that there was a surplus of crocodiles in the 4th respondent Zoo
and therefore in the interest and welfare of the crocodiles a decision was
taken to transfer 1000 crocodiles to the 3rd      respondent facility and the
transfer was permitted strictly in accordance with the Act and Rules. The
counsel further submitted that only on satisfaction of the facilities provided
in the 3rd       respondent Zoo particularly with reference to the area the
permission was granted.
31.The 3rd respondent counsel supported the submissions of the 2nd
respondent. The 3rd respondent counsel submitted that the entire domain of
Zoo operations and animal handling is an extremely sensitive and highly
specialized expert domain. Under the registration scheme of the chapter IV A
of the Wild Life Protection Act, 1972 , the Central Zoo Authority is the
competent authority entrusted in law to deal with all the issues relating to
Zoo, such as the present one. The 3rd respondent counsel in his written
submission raised objections on the maintainability of the writ petition
stating that the petitioner had failed to exhaust the alternate remedy before
the competent authority and had filed this writ petition before this Hon’ble
32.The learned counsel for the 3rd respondent submitted that the
transfer of the crocodiles was an arrangement between the 3rd and 4 th
respondents duly sanctioned by the 2nd respondent and absolutely legal and
justified in as much as it was in accordance with law.
33.The 4th respondent counsel also supported the submissions of the 2nd
respondent and the 3rd respondent on the transfer of 1000 crocodiles from
the 4th respondent zoo to the 3rd respondent zoo. According to the counsel
the 3rd respondent’s Rescue Center was inspected thoroughly by its Trustee
Mr.Romulus Whitaker and other experts and biologist working with the Trust
and it was found by all concerned that the 3rd respondent had earmarked an
area of 15 acres with state of the art facilities which were in the interest of the
crocodiles and therefore the transfer was supported.
34.The learned counsel further submitted that the photographs annexed
to the typed set of papers would pellucidly reveal that the surplus crocodiles
in the 4th respondent zoo were comfortably housed in the 3rd respondent’s
center and therefore the welfare of the animals which is the paramount
concern should alone be considered, moreso, when the legal requirements
were fully satisfied.
35.We have heard the learned counsel for the respective parties and we
have perused the records.
36.The moot questions to be decided in this writ petition which is filed
as a Public Interest Litigation is whether the transfer of 1000 crocodiles to
the 3rd respondent center from the 4th respondent center is legally valid or
not.       Further whether the grant of permission to the 3rd respondent to
establish and operate the Zoo is valid and in consonance with the Wild Life
Protection Act and the Rules made there under.
37.The object of the Wild Life Protection Act is as follows:
“The Act to provide for the protection of wild
animals, birds and plants and for matters connected
therewith or ancillary or incidental thereto with a view
to ensuring the ecological and environmental security of
the country.”
38.The Act provides inter alia for the legal frame work for the
protection of various species of wild animals and management of the
habitation and regulation among others. The Act further provides that no zoo
shall be operated unless an application for recognition is made to the Central
Zoo Authority in the prescribed form and the same is approved by the
authority. Therefore there is a total bar to the operation of a zoo without
previous recognition by the authority.
39.In this context Section 38 H (1) which provides for recognition of
zoos is extracted hereunder.
“(1) No zoo shall be operated without being
recognised by the Authority: Provided that a zoo being
operated immediately before the date of commencement of
the Wild Life (Protection) (Amendment) Act, 1991 may
continue to operate without being recognised for a period
commencement]       and    if   the    application   seeking
recognition is made within that period, the zoo may
continue to be operated until the said application is
finally decided or withdrawn and in case of refusal for a
further period of six months from the date of such refusal.
2[(1A) On and after the commencement of the Wild Life
(Protection) Amendment Act, 2002 a zoo shall not be
established without obtaining the prior approval of the
40.According to the petitioner there cannot be a private zoo and the
zoos are usually operated either by the Central Government or the State
Government. As far as the operation of the zoo by a private operator is
concerned Rule 2 (m) of the Recognition of the Zoo Rules, 2009 states as
“2(m) “Zoo Operator” means the person who has
ultimate control over the affairs of the zoos provided that
I. in the case of a firm or other association of
individuals, any one of the individual partners or members
II. in the case of a company, any director, manager,
secretary or other officer, who is in-charge of and
responsible to the company for the affairs of the zoo; or
III. In case of zoo owned or controlled by the Central
Government or any State Government or Union Territory
Administration or any Trust or Society funded by the
Central Government or a State Government or a Union
Territory Administration, the Secretary of the concerned
Department of that Government, or as the case may be the
Union Territory Administration, shall be deemed to be the
41.Therefore from the definition of zoo operator it is explicit that there
can be a private zoo apart from the zoos operated by the State Government
or the Central Government. Rule 2(m) r/w Section 2(39) of the Wild Life Act
would make it clear that the parliament did not intent to curtail the operation
of zoo by the private firms/companies.            It is pertinent to note here the
National Zoo Policy of 1998 which calls for the synergy between various
government agencies, non-government            agency and people at large for
achieving the objectives of the Act, which is             inter alia the protection
of the Wild Life. The relevant provision of the National Zoo Policy is
extracted hereunder for better appreciation of the above statement.
“The amendment of the Wildlife (Protection) Act,
in 1991, provided for the enforcement of mandatory
standards and norms for management of Zoos through
the Central Zoo Authority. However, it is realised that
the objectives of the Act can be achieved only through
co-operation and participation of various government
agencies, non-governmental organisations and people at
large.”
We are therefore of the view that the contention of the petitioner that
the the Act does not provide for private zoos cannot be accepted.
42.The definition of Zoo is given in Section 2(39) of the Wild Life
Protection Act, 1972, wherein the Zoo is defined as follows:
“[(39) “zoo” means an establishment, whether
stationary or mobile, where captive animals are kept for
exhibition to the public [and includes a circus and rescue
centres but does not include an establishment] of a
licensed dealer in captive animals.]”
43.From the above definition it is clear that even a rescue center is
included in the definition of a Zoo. It is to be noted here that it is the
categorical stand of the 2nd respondent that the 3rd respondent is permitted to
establish a Zoo, but approval for operation is given only for the rescue center
vide permission letter dated 17.08.2020 for a period of three years from the
date of recognition.
Classification of zoos.….(1) For the purposes of deciding standards
and norms for recognition of zoo and monitoring and evaluating its
performance, the zoo, on the basis of area, number of visitors, number of
species and animals, endangered species and number of animals of
endangered species in its collection shall be taken into consideration and the
zoo shall accordingly be classified into following four categories as specified
45.The category and the criteria for qualifying to the category are as
SI. Category                         Criteria for Qualifying to the category
Area of No. of No. of No. of No.                       of No.          of
the Zoo visitors species animals endangered               animals of
(hectares) in a year                       species        endangered
46.A rescue center is covered by the definition of zoo under sec 2 (39)
of the Wild Life Act. There is no specific category assigned to rescue center
so by default the rescue center is covered by the category of mini zoo and
that too as a temporary measure . In the light of the categorical stand taken
by the 2nd respondent it is clear that the 3rd respondent is permitted to
operate only as a rescue and rehabitation center and no category as such is
assigned the 3rd respondent Zoo. It is the case of the respondents that the
research centers are facilities dedicated for the animals welfare and care only
and as such not open to visitors. The counsel for the 2 nd respondent
reaffirmed the said statement by relying on Rule 1(8) of the Schedule to the
Recognition of Zoo Rules 2009. It is therefore clear that 3rd respondent Zoo
is only a Rescue Center and display is prohibited under the above rule.
Therefore the contentions No.1 & 2 of the petitioner are untenable and
rejected.
47.The learned counsel for the petitioner strenuously argued that the
2nd respondent ought not to have approved the transfer of 1000 crocodiles
from the 4th respondent zoo to the 3rd respondent zoo.
48.It is relevant to extract here Rule 38-I of the Wild Life (Protection)
“[38-I.Acquisition of animals by a zoo.-(1) Subject to the
other provisions of this Act, no zoo shall acquire, sell or
transfer any wild animal or captive animal specified in
Schedules I and II except with the previous permission of the
(2)No zoo shall acquire, sell or transfer any wild or captive
animal except from or to a recognised zoo.]”
From the above it is clear that the previous permission of the Authority
is a sine quo non for transfer. The procedure adopted by the 2nd respondent
for granting approval/permission under Section 38(I) is given hereunder
“[11.Maintenance of records and submission of
inventory.-(1) Every zoo shall maintain record of the births,
acquisitions, deaths and disposals of animals of each species
in its collection in the nammer and in the format determined
by the Central Zoo Authority and the inventory of the animals
in the collection of each zoo, along with the details mentioned
above for each financial year shall be submitted to the
Central Zoo Authority by 30th day of April of the ensuing year
It is seen that the Rule 11 of RZR, 2009 requires even recognized zoo to
submit an inventory of animals in its collection to the Central Zoo Authority
by the 30th day of April for the ensuing year in Form II. On an examination
of the 4th respondent's inventory for the year 2019-20, it was observed that
there was a presence of exceptionally high number of Mugger (Crocodylus
Palustris) in the 4th respondent Zoo. The 2nd respondent addressed a letter
dated 12.06.2020 to the 4th respondent to submit a comprehensive scientific
proposal regarding the possibility of exchange of excessive captive bred
Mugger with other Zoos or their re-introduction in the wild.                The 4th
respondent in it’s reply dated 26.06.2020 expressed its willingness for a
possible acquisition of Marsh crocodiles in their collection by other Zoos.
49.In the said letter some valuable suggestions regarding the CZA’s
Guidelines on minimum dimension of enclosures for housing animals of
different species in Zoos was also shared. In answer to the 4th respondent’s
communication the 2nd respondent vide the memorandum dated 22.12.2020
issued revised guidelines on stocking density of various crocodilian species
in Indian Zoos. By virtue of the said guidelines the 2nd respondent as a one-
time revision, permitted housing of 33 Muggers in 400 Sq.Mts. in rescue
centres.
50.On the basis of the revised guideline the 2nd respondent addressed a
letter dated 09.10.2020 to all the Directors/curators and the officer in charge
of zoos giving them an equal opportunity to acquire muggers from the 4 th
respondent zoo subject to the conditions set forth therein. A few proposals
were received from different zoos. The proposal of the 3rd respondent dated
06.04.2021 regarding the acquisition of the surplus muggers from the 4 th
respondent was scrutinized by the CZA Secretariat and thereafter the
approval was granted for transfer of surplus 350:650 Muggers from the 4th
respondent to the 3rd respondent Rescue Center under Section 38-I of the
Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 vide letter dated 09.04.2021.
51.It is pertinent to note here that as per the revised guidelines the area
to house the muggers in rescue centre is 33 individuals for 400 sq.mts. But
the 3rd respondent Centre had earmarked a total area of 16847 sq.mt for
housing 1000 crocodiles in the off-display satellite rescue facility which is
well within the limit prescribed in the CZA Advisory. It is also to be pointed
out here that the decision to transfer 1000 muggers from the 4th respondent
zoo to the 3rd respondent zoo was studied even by the 4th respondent whose
trustee Mr.Romulus Whitaker inspected the 3rd respondent centre with other
experts and biologist working in the trust and only after satisfaction with the
3rd respondent facilities which were found to be state of art facilities the
proposal was accepted,         that too,   in the interest of the welfare of the
crocodiles Even otherwise the competent authority has found that the total
area of 16847 sq.mt earmarked for housing 1000 crocodiles in the off-display
satellite rescue facility is well within the limit prescribed in the CZA
Advisory. Therefore when the experts in the field have expressed their
satisfaction on the facilities provided by the 3rd respondent rescue centre, we
do not propose to interfere with the same, moreso when no materials to
contravert the same are placed before us.
52.The Hon'ble Supreme Court in catena of cases has laid down the
contours of judicial review in expert matters. We would refer to just one
judgment as it was also a case under Wildlife Protection Act. The apex court
in the case of Centre for Environmental Law, World Wide Fund-India Vs.
Union of India reported in 2013 (8) SCC 234, while dealing with the
necessity of a second home for Asiatic lions of Gir forests held as follows.
“57)...... Statutorily, therefore, it is the duty of
NBWL to promote conservation and development of
Wildlife with a view to ensuring ecological and
environmental security in the country. We are, therefore,
of the view that the various decisions taken by NBWL
that Asiatic Lion should have a second home to save it
from extinction, due to catastrophes like epidemic, large
forest fire, etc., which could result in extinction, is
justified. This Court, sitting in the jurisdiction, is not
justified in taking a contrary view from that of NBWL.”
53.We are therefore of the opinion that the objections of the petitioner
to the transfer of the 1000 crocodiles from the 4th respondent to the 3rd
respondent rescue centre is devoid of merits and without any factual basis
and as such rejected as untenable.
54.We would like to mention here that the Hon’ble Supreme Court
in the above referred case has held that the approach to such issues should
be Ecocentric and not Antropocentric. The Court has held that egocentric is
life centered, nature centered where nature          includes both human and non-
humans. Anthropocentric on the other hand is always                 human interest
focused. The rescue and rehabilitation of the crocodiles in issue have to be
viewed from Ecocentric angle. Wild animals are not the property of state or
central governments, any organization or persons , they are the wealth of the
nation and so no one can claim ownership of them. The fauna and flora are
to be protected for the environmental security of the nation for future
generations. The welfare of the animals should be the prime concern and the
guiding light in matters concerning them. In the present case the 4th
respondent has submitted that it does not have the funds to look after the
surplus crocodiles and it has also vouched for the welfare of the crocodiles
in       the   3rd respondent rescue   center. Further we have perused the
photographs produced by the 4th respondent to show how comfortably the
crocodiles are housed in the 3rd respondent’s Rescue centre compared to the
crammed way in which they were kept in the 4th respondent zoo.
55.Before parting with the case we would like to record our
displeasure on the frame of the prayer in the Writ Petition. We are perplexed
at the prayer in the writ petition. The petitioner has made a vague prayer for
quashing the permission granted for transfer of the 1000 crocodiles and the
permission granted to the 3rd respondent to operate the zoo without praying to
quash the specific orders passed in this regard and of which he had
knowledge. The amended master plan was also ignored. As pointed out by
the respondents there is lack of verification, research and study of the case
and yet made a prayer to refer the matter to CBI, CID or Special SIT for
investigation. Inspite of the said short comings we have entertained the PIL
only because of our concern for the welfare of the animals in question and to
reject the prayer for investigation by CBI, CID or Special SIT.
56.In the light of the above discussion we are of the considered view
that the writ petition has no merit and hence the same is dismissed. There
shall be no order as to costs. Consequently, the connected miscellaneous
petitions are dismissed.