1. The present petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed for setting aside the
order dated 30.9.2022 passed by the learned Additional District and Sessions Judge,
Court No.3, Ballia on Application No.96 Kha filed under Section 321 Cr.P.C. in
Session Trial No.12 of 2015 (State Vs. Ramdev Ram and others), arising out of
Case Crime No.38 of 2010, under Sections 406, 409, 419, 420, 467, 468 and 471
IPC and Sections 13(1)(c) and 13(2) of Prevention of Corruption Act, Police
Station Kotwali, District Ballia, pending in the aforesaid court.
2. The complainant, Dev Nandan son of Hari Narain, who claims himself to be the
proprietor of Dev Construction Company, had given a complaint to the
Secretary/Manager of the District Cooperative Bank, Bhrigu Ashram, Ballia
alleging that some imposter had opened the account in the name of Dev
Construction Company in District Cooperative Bank, Bhrigu Ashram, Ballia and
the entire money was withdrawn by the said imposter fraudulently. The bank
conducted a detailed enquiry and a direction was issued to the Branch Manager for
lodging an FIR.
3. In pursuance to the aforesaid direction, the FIR was registered at Police Station
Kotwali, District Ballia at Case Crime No.38 of 2010, under Section 409 IPC by
Rama Shanker Rai, a bank official on 21.5.2010. The FIR would disclose that one
Ajay Kumar Sharma, Son of Akshaya Lal Sharma had opened the account in the
name of Dev Construction Company and had withdrawn the deposited amount.
4. Petitioner no.1 is a apolitical activist and a business man. He is sitting Member
of Legislative Assembly from Rasra Constituency of District Ballia and is engaged
in several social activities for upliftment of poor people, such as solemnizing
marriages of poor couples and engaging them in employment and distribution of
food grains to the needy poor people. It is also said that during COVID-19
pandemic, petitioner no.1 made available about 500 oxygen cylinders along with its
accessories to the District Hospital, Ballia from his own resources. He is a reputed
man and commands respect in every walk of life. The complainant is also in
construction business and he carries out the construction work and take contracts in
the name of his proprietorship of Dev Construction Company.
5. It is said that Dev Nandan, sole proprietor of Dev Construction Company, under
the influence of his father, who was a Minister, had opened an account in the
District Cooperative Bank, Ballia. It is said that Dev Nandan had withdrawn the
amounts from the bank, which was deposited in the said account in respect of the
payment received for construction work carried out by Dev Construction Company.
The account opened in the District Cooperative Bank, Bhrigu Ashram, Ballia was
closed on 4.10.2004 and, thereafter, no transaction was made from the said account.
It is said that the complaint regarding fraudulent withdrawal of amount from the
said account of Dev Construction Company was made on 30.10.2008 by Dev
Nandan i.e. after four years from the date of closing down the account.
6. On this complaint, an enquiry was conducted by the bank and the matter was
transferred to the CBCID for investigation. The CBCID after investigating the
offence, filed charge sheet under Sections 406, 409, 419, 420, 467, 468 and 471
IPC and Section 13(1)(c) and 13(2) of Prevention of Corruption Act. Cognizance
was taken on the charge sheet and the petitioners were summoned to face the trial.
The petitioners obtained bail from the learned trial court itself.
7. It is further said that the complainant and the accused named in the FIR,
thereafter, had settled the dispute amicably and the complainant gave an affidavit in
the trial court stating that he would not have any objection if the application under
Section 321 Cr.P.C. for withdrawal from prosecution of the petitioners is allowed.
8. The Government vide its order dated 8.11.2019 had taken a decision to withdraw
from prosecution in the said case in the public interest and permissioin was granted
to the Public Prosecutor to move an application under Section 321 Cr.P.C. for
withdrawal from prosecution.
9. In pursuance to the Government Order dated 8.11.2019, District Magistrate,
Ballia vide order dated 14.11.2019 directed the Joint Director (Prosecution),
Prayagraj (Allahabad) to file an application under Section 321 Cr.P.C. seeking
withdrawal from prosecution of the petitioners.
10. The Public Prosecutor after considering the facts and circumstances of the case
and the evidence available on record, moved a detailed application under Section
321 Cr.P.C. in the court of Special Judge, MP/MLA, Allahabad on 9.6.2020 praying
for withdrawal from prosecution of the petitioners in the said case. However, the
learned trial court has rejected the said application vide impugned order dated
11. Learned trial court has held that the matter appears to be serious in nature, and
the learned Public Prosecutor has not applied his independent mind while moving
the application under Section 321 Cr.P.C. for withdrawal from prosecution. He has
merely said in the application that the Government had taken a decision to
withdrawn from prosecution. It was also said that while filing the said application,
no prior permission was taken from the High Court and granting permission to
withdraw from prosecution would not be in the public interest.
12. Sri Dileep Kumar Gupta, learned Senior Advocate assisted by Sri Ashok Kumar
Pandey, learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the observation of the
learned trial court that the learned Public Prosecutor had not applied his
independent mind while filing the said application under Section 321 Cr.P.C., does
not borne out from the record. If the application filed by the Public prosecutor is
perused, it would disclose that the learned Public Prosecutor has marshalled the
facts and circumstances of the case, and has come to the conclusion that
continuation of the proceedings would not be in the interest of justice and no
purpose would be served as the dispute was personal in nature, and the parties had
settled their dispute amicably. The complainant himself filed an affidavit before the
learned trial court to that effect.
13. In support of his contention, learned counsel for the petitioners has placed
reliance on the judgement of this Court rendered in Criminal Revision No.12 of
2021, State of U.P. Vs. The Court of Special judge, MP/MLA/Additional Sessions
Judge, Raibareli and others, decided on 12.7.2022, wherein this Court has
observed that while considering the application for withdrawal from prosecution,
the Court is required to consider whether the withdrawal from prosecution would
further the cause of justice or not, and whether it would be in public interest to
allow the withdrawal from prosecution. If the complainant himself is not
supporting the prosecution, there would be no chance of conviction of the
petitioners and the Court’s time would get wasted in futile exercise and, therefore,
it would be in the interest of public interest to avoid wasting of the Court’s time. In
such a case, the application for withdrawal from prosecution should be allowed.
14. On the other hand, Sri J.B. Singh, learned AGA has not disputed the facts and
circumstances of the case and has submitted that the Government after considering
the relevant facts and circumstances of the case, had permitted the learned Public
Prosecutor to move an application under Section 321 Cr.P.C. to withdraw from
15. I have considered the submissions advanced on behalf of the learned counsel
for the parties and perused the record.
16. The application under Section 321 Cr.P.C. filed by the Public Prosecutor would
disclose that he had not only considered the facts and circumstances of the case, but
also considered the evidence in a fairly detail manner. The dispute between the
parties appears to be personal in nature. The offence was allegedly committed in
the year 2008 and we are in 2023, and till date charge has not been framed. The
complainant himself has given an affidavit before the learned trial court in support
of the application for withdrawal from prosecution. The finding recorded by the
learned trial court that the learned Public Prosecutor had not applied his
independent mind while filing the application under Section 321 Cr.P.C., is not
borne out from the record. The application under Section 321 Cr.P.C. would
disclose that the learned Public Prosecutor has applied his independent mind and
finding that continuation of the proceedings against the petitioners would not be in
the public interest and withdrawal from prosecution would further cause of justice,
he has moved the said application.
17. It is also well settled law that the criminal proceedings are result of
personal/private dispute, the same can be quashed by the High Court in exercise of
its powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C., if the parties have arrived at a compromise as
held by the Supreme Court in the cases of B.S. Joshi and others versus State of
Haryana and another:(2003) 4 SCC 675, Nikhil Merchant versus C.B.I. and
another: (2008) 9 SCC 677, Manoj Sharma versus State and others: (2008) 16
SCC 1, Gian Singh versus Station of Punjab: (2010) 15 SCC 118 and Narinder
Singh and others versus State of Punjab and another: (2014) 6 SCC 466.
18. Having considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and
the facts and circumstances of the case, I am of the view that the impugned order
passed by the learned trial court rejecting the application filed by the Public
Prosecutor under Section 321 Cr.P.C. for withdrawal from prosecution is liable to
be set aside.
19. Thus, the present petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 30.9.2022
passed by the learned Additional District and Sessions Judge, Court No.3, Ballia on
Application No.96 Kha filed under Section 321 Cr.P.C. in Session trial No.12 of
2015 (State Vs. Ramdev Ram and others), arising out of Case Crime No.38 of
2010, under Sections 406, 409, 419, 420, 467, 468 and 471 IPC and Section 13(1)
(c) and 13(2) of Prevention of Corruption Act, Police Station Kotwali, District
Ballia, is hereby set aside and the application filed by the learned Public Prosecutor
under Section 321 Cr.P.C. for withdrawal from prosecution is hereby allowed.
Consequences to follow.