The petitioner in O.P.No.405 of 2010 before the Family
Court, Kollam is the appellant. She filed O.P.No.405 of 2010
seeking recovery of money and return of gold ornaments and
movables. The Family Court as per the common judgment in
O.P.Nos.404     and    405 of  2010   dated   26.08.2015    allowed
O.P.No.405 of 2010 only in part. The appellant was allowed to
recover a few movables included in the petition schedule. Her
claim for recovery of money and return of gold ornaments was
declined. Aggrieved by the said part of the decree, this appeal has
been filed under Section 19(1) of the Family Courts Act, 1984.
2.     Notice was directed to be served on the respondent
as per order dated 08.01.2016. The respondent entered
appearance through his learned counsel. The appeal was
admitted on 29.03.2017.
3.     Heard the learned counsel appearing for the appellant
and the learned counsel appearing for the respondent.
Mat.Appeal No.13 of 2016
4.    The marriage of the appellant and the respondent
was solemnised on 18.08.2002. Betrothal of the marriage was
held on 09.06.2002. On that day, Rs.5 lakhs was entrusted by
the father of the appellant to the respondent. On the occasion
of the marriage, the appellant was given 100 sovereigns of
gold ornaments. After the marriage, respondent was given
Rs.1 lakh by the father of the appellant to avail a locker
facility. The gold ornaments of the appellant were kept in the
locker availed in her name. The entire gold ornaments were
eventually appropriated by the respondent. Later, an amount
of Rs.2 lakhs was given by the father of the appellant to the
respondent for purchasing a property in the name of the
5.    The relationship between the appellant and the
respondent eventually became estranged. O.P.No.404 of 2010
was filed by the respondent for a decree of dissolution of
marriage. O.P.No.405 of 2010 was filed by the appellant for
recovery of gold ornaments, movables and realisation of
money. O.P.No.404 of 2010 was decreed and the marriage
Mat.Appeal No.13 of 2016
was dissolved. O.P.No.405 of 2010 was not decreed as prayed.
The appellant would contend that the Family Court without
appreciating the evidence in a proper perspective, rejected
her claim for return of gold ornaments and realisation of
6.     The appellant would urge that her oral testimony
along   with    the    evidence of PWs.2   to  4  and   Exts.A5
photographs sufficiently proved the fact that the appellant had
100 sovereigns of gold at the time of marriage. PW1 deposed
before the court that the gold ornaments kept in the locker
availed in the name of the appellant were taken away and
misappropriated by the respondent. Regarding payment of Rs.
5 lakhs, evidence of PW1 and PW4, who is a family friend, was
let in. The appellant claims that the evidence amply proved
payment of Rs.5 lakhs. But the Family Court did not accept
that evidence stating flimsy reasons. The learned counsel
appearing for the appellant would submit that oral testimonies
of PWs.1 and 4 with respect to the practice prevailing in the
area of making payment of money at the time of betrothal is
Mat.Appeal No.13 of 2016
convincing. Mere denial by RW1 in the box was given
overemphasis by the Family Court. It is further submitted that
trivial inconsistencies in the evidence of PWs 1 and 4 was
highlighted by the Family Court in order to disbelieve them,
which is wrong. It is also submitted that even the admission
of the respondent that 50 sovereigns of gold ornaments were
given to the appellant at the time of marriage was not acted
upon by the Family Court. Accordingly, the learned counsel
contended      that   findings of   the Family Court  regarding
misappropriation of gold ornaments and Rs.5 lakhs paid at the
time of betrothal are liable to be reversed.
7.    As regards payment of Rs.1 lakh for availing locker
facility in the name of the appellant and another Rs.1 lakhs
for the purchase of the property, the Family Court took the
view that the evidence goes contrary to the pleadings of the
appellant. The contention of the appellant is that Rs.1 lakh
was paid for availing a locker in the name of the appellant.
Admittedly a locker facility was availed in the name the
appellant. PW1 admitted that her gold ornaments were kept in
Mat.Appeal No.13 of 2016
the locker availed in her name. The further evidence is to the
effect that Rs.1 lakh deposited for availing the locker facility
was later withdrawn and the same along with another Rs. 1
lakh paid by the father of the appellant was utilised by the
respondent to purchase a property.
8.     The respondent produced Ext.B1, a sale deed in
the name of the appellant, in order to prove that Rs.2 lakhs
paid by the father of the appellant was towards sale
consideration of that property. As per Ext.B1, a property
belonging to the sister of the respondent was conveyed in
favour of the appellant. The same is the sale transaction made
mention of by the appellant also, for which consideration of
Rs.2 lakhs was paid. The sale is in favour of the appellant.
Therefore, the said amount cannot be claimed by the
appellant    saying     that the payment  was    made   to  the
respondent and it was misappropriated by him. Rejection of
that claim by the Family Court cannot be said to be incorrect.
9.     The appellant relies on the oral testimonies of
PWs.1 and 4 to substantiate that Rs.5 lakhs was paid to the
Mat.Appeal No.13 of 2016
respondent at the time of betrothal. The betrothal was on
09.06.2002. What was averred in the petition is that on the
occasion of betrothal Rs.5 lakhs was paid to the respondent.
It may say that further details need not have been pleaded,
since pleadings need contain only material facts. But when the
evidence tendered in respect of such facts pleaded, contain
inconsistencies, lack of detailed pleadings impel the court to
doubt the evidence.
10.    PW1 gave evidence that Rs.5 lakhs was paid by his
father reaching the house of the respondent along with her
brother, uncle and PW4. It follows that PW1 did not witness
handing over of the money. PW4 deposed that on a Thursday
the betrothal took place and on that day he accompanied the
father of the petitioner to the house of the respondent for
handing over the money. PW4 explained that he was working
with Kerala State Financial Enterprises and by availing leave
only he attended the betrothal function. 09.06.2002, the day
of betrothal, is a Sunday as per the Gregorian calendar. If so,
the oral testimony of PW4 becomes suspicious. No other direct
Mat.Appeal No.13 of 2016
evidence with respect to the payment of Rs.5 lakhs to the
respondent is available on record. It was in the said
circumstances the Family Court held that the evidence was
insufficient to prove payment of Rs.5 lakhs to the respondent
in connection with the marriage.
11.    The learned counsel for the appellant would submit
that Rs. 5 lakhs was paid in connection with the marriage and
therefore it is dowry. The practice prevalent in the area was
not to make such payments in public and therefore the father
of the bride and others went to the house of the bridegroom
and handed over the money. Since payment of dowry is
prohibited by law it was done so and hence the evidence
naturally would be scanty.
12.    The ancillary question arises is as to, can there be a
decree as sought by the appellant in respect of money and gold
ornaments allegedly given in consideration of the marriage,
which is dowry. As giving and taking dowry is an offence under
Section 7 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, is it possible to
seek recovery of the dowry amount and gold ornaments ?
Mat.Appeal No.13 of 2016
13.   After considering the scope and ambit of Section 6
of the Dowry Prohibition Act, a Three-Judge Bench of the Apex
Court in Bobbili Ramakrishna Raju Yadav and others v.
State of Andhra Pradesh and another [(2016) 3 SCC
309] held that if the dowry amount or articles of married
woman was placed in the custody of his husband or in-laws,
they would be deemed to be trustees of the same. The person
receiving dowry articles or the person who has dominion over
the same, as per Section 6 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, is
bound to return the same within three months after the date
of marriage to the woman in connection with whose marriage
it is given. If he does not do so, he will be guilty of a dowry
offence under this Section. The section further lays down that
even after his conviction he must return the dowry to the
woman within the time stipulated in the order.
14.   The     Dowry  Prohibition  Act  contemplates    two
aspects; the first, prohibition of taking or giving or abetting of
giving or taking of dowry and making such acts punishable.
The second is, creation of obligation under Section 6 of the
Mat.Appeal No.13 of 2016
Dowry Prohibition Act on those who receives dowry to transfer
of the same to the beneficiary, and till then the person holds it
in trust for the benefit of the woman. When taking or giving or
abetting of giving or taking of dowry is punishable, any such
transaction tantamount to a void transaction. As per Section
23 of the Contract Act, 1872 if the object or consideration of
an agreement is forbidden by law, that agreement is void. The
question then is, can there be a valid claim for recovery of the
money and the gold thus given. The Legislature itself has
provided in Section 6 of the Dowry Prohibition Act that the
person who took the dowry shall give it to the woman, and in
the interregnum to hold it in trust for the benefit of the
woman. Therefore, it is the right of a woman to file a suit to
recover the amount and gold from the person who held the
dowry in trust, if that person has not transferred the trust
property in favour of the woman. It follows that the claim in
the original petition is permissible in law.
15.    Provisions of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 have
no strict application to the proceedings before the Family
Mat.Appeal No.13 of 2016
Courts owing to Section 14 of the Family Courts Act. That
does not however dispel the application of the basic principle
that in a civil case, facts are to be proved at least by
preponderance        of  probabilities, if to get   a   decree. In
Dr.N.G.Dastane v. Mrs.S.Dastane [AIR 1975 SC 1534], a
Three-Judge Bench of the Apex Court explained when can it
be said that the fact is proved by preponderance of
probabilities as follows:-
“The belief regarding the existence of a fact may thus
be founded on a balance of probabilities. A prudent
man faced with conflicting probabilities concerning a
fact situation will act on the supposition that the fact
exists, if on weighing the various probabilities he links
that the preponderance is in favour of the existence of
the particular fact. As a prudent man, so the court
applies this test for finding whether a fact in issue can
be said to be proved. The first step in this process is
to fix the probabilities, the second to weigh them,
though the two may often intermingle. The impossible
is weeded out at the first stage, the improbable at the
second.”
16.    In Bexy Michael v. A. J. Michael [2010 (4) KHC
376] the matter in issue was a claim for return of gold and
money. The Court held that absolute certainty is not the
requirement under Section 3 of the Evidence Act. In a civil
case rival contentions and rival evidence will have to be
considered, assessed, evaluated, and weighed to come to a
conclusion about whether the burden on the claimant has
been discharged. The standard of proof, therefore, is by a
preponderance of probabilities.
17.    The evidence brought on record by the appellant
should be appreciated in the light of the aforesaid principle of
law. Having considered the entire evidence concerning the
above aspects we find no infirmity to the findings of the
Family Court that the evidence is insufficient to substantiate
the claim for recovery of Rs.2 lakhs as well as Rs.5 lakhs from
the respondent. Hence, the said findings are not liable to be
interfered with.
18.    When the petitioner contended that she was given
100    sovereigns      of gold ornaments  and   got   13  more
Mat.Appeal No.13 of 2016
sovereigns of gold ornaments from her relatives, the case of
the respondent is that she had only 50 sovereigns of gold
ornaments. Ext.A5 is the photographs of the marriage
function. From Ext.A5 photographs, it can be seen that the
petitioner wore a good amount of ornaments at the time of
marriage. Whether it was 100 sovereigns or 50 sovereigns is
not able to be decided on a mere perusal of Ext.A5. PW1
asserted that she had 100 sovereigns. PW2 is the proprietor
of   Panikkassery      Jewellers.  He deposed that  the gold
ornaments for the marriage function of the appellant were
purchased from his shop. But he did not say that the
appellant bought 100 sovereigns from him.
19.    PW3 is a teacher and social worker. She deposed
that she intervened in the dispute between the appellant and
the respondent, but she was unsuccessful in resolving the
difference of opinion between them. Evidence of PW3 is not
helpful to prove the case of the appellant that she had 100
sovereigns of gold at the time of marriage. RW1 the
respondent would depose that the appellant had only 50
Mat.Appeal No.13 of 2016
sovereigns of gold ornaments. On a comparative analysis of
oral evidence let in by either side, the preponderant view is
that the appellant had 100 sovereigns of gold when her
marriage was solemnised. The success of the claim of the
appellant, however, depends on the question of whether the
ornaments       were     entrusted   to the  respondent     and
misappropriated by him.
20.    This Court considered the question as to upon
whom is the burden of proof in a petition claiming the return
of gold ornaments given to the bride at the time of the
marriage in Pankajakshan Nair v. Shylaja and another
[2017 (1) KHC 620]. The Court observed as follows: it is
quite natural that once the marriage is over and the bride has
come to the house of the in-laws, there is the possibility of
the ornaments being entrusted to the elders as trustees for
keeping the articles during the subsistence of marriage. There
is a duty cast on the defendants to disprove this fact and also
to prove the fact it was taken by the plaintiff at the time she
left the house. What the Court held is about the possibility of
Mat.Appeal No.13 of 2016
things being happened, and not of any presumption available
in law.
21.    This Court considered the question as to when it
can be said that there is entrustment in a suit for recovery of
money and gold said to have been given at the time of
marriage in Abubakkker Labba and another v. Shameena
K. B. and another [2018 (3) KLT 196]. In that, the claim
was to return money and gold ornaments that were allegedly
given to the wife in connection with the marriage. Claim
against the parents of the husband was the question posed
before the Court.        It was held that there cannot be a
constructive or presumptive entrustment, without actual
physical delivery of the same to the parents of the husband
and it must be specifically pleaded and proved by sufficient
evidence, by the claimant wife. Merely on the evidence that
the bride had worn gold ornaments, at the time of marriage, it
cannot be held that the ornaments, which were worn at the
time of marriage, were entrusted to the father and mother of
the bridegroom.
22. In Binod v. Sophy [2019 (4) KLJ 128] this
Court took the view that the wife while making a claim for
gold ornaments will have to prove the entrustment of gold
23. In Rajesh P. P. and another v. Deepthi P. R.
[2021 (4) KHC 242] it was held, it is a customary practice
in our country, particularly in our state, among all the
communities, that parents would gift gold ornaments to
their daughters at the time of marriage as a token of love.
Indian parents start making jewellery for their daughters
from their birth to make sure that they have enough golden
jewellery for their marriage. Thus, it would be unrealistic for
a Court to insist on documentary evidence regarding
ornaments that had changed hands at the time of marriage.
The Court can, certainly, act upon oral evidence if it is found
credible and trustworthy. It is also quite common that when
the bride moves to the house of the groom after the
marriage, she takes all her ornaments and entrusts the
Mat.Appeal No.13 of 2016
same, except a few required for daily wear, to her husband
or in-laws for safe custody. Such entrustment also could be
established by the sole testimony of the wife since,
normally, no independent witness would be available to
witness the same. Once such entrustment is made, a trust
gets created. Being a trustee, the husband or his parents,
as the case may be, is liable to return the same.
24. In Leelamma N.P v. M.A.Moni [2017 (3) KHC
340] a Division Bench of this Court held that once it is
proved that gold ornaments were entrusted by the wife to
the husband, the burden is on the husband to prove, what
happened to the gold ornaments. It is further held that if it
was taken by the wife when she left the matrimonial home,
the same has to be proved by the husband.
25. Indisputedly, a locker was availed in the name of
the appellant. PW1 deposed that her gold ornaments,
except a few ones for her daily use, were kept in the said
locker. The allegation of the appellant is that on some
Mat.Appeal No.13 of 2016
subsequent occasions, the respondent obtained the gold
ornaments and he misappropriated the same. From the oral
evidence of PW1, it cannot be seen that the respondent
ever operated the locker. There is no other evidence in that
respect. She deposed that some ornaments were taken
from the locker and many were kept in it. Keeping the
ornaments of the appellant in a locker in her own name
cannot amount to the entrustment of the same to the
respondent. In the nature of the said evidence, it is not
possible to find that the ornaments; whole or any part,
were entrusted to the respondent. Only if the fact of
entrustment of the gold ornaments to the respondent is
proved, the appellant can claim return of such ornaments.
The finding of the Family Court that there is lack of
evidence to prove the entrustment of gold ornaments to the
respondent is therefore not liable to be interfered with.
Accordingly, we hold that the decision of the Family Court to
reject the claim of the appellant for the return of gold
Mat.Appeal No.13 of 2016
ornaments and money does not suffer from any infirmity.
Hence, this appeal fails and the same is dismissed.