PRAYER : Writ Petition filed Under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India to issue of Writ of Mandamus, directing the 1st respondent to pass
order in petitioner's stay petition filed on 19.08.2021 after granting personal
hearing to my counsel and atleast with period that may be stipulated by this
The writ on hand has been instituted to direct the 1st respondent to
pass orders in the petitioner's stay petition filed on 19.08.2021, after
granting personal hearing to the counsel for the petitioner and for that
purpose, the period also may be stipulated by this Court.
2. The petitioner states that land to an extent of 3227 sq.feet at
No.181, M.T.H.Road, Villivakkam, Chennai – 600 049 belongs to the 4th
respondent temple and the superstructure originally belonged to the father of
the petitioner Mr.D.Kandasamy, who has developed the superstructure. The
petitioner further states that on 22.11.1990, by a registered Sale Deed, his
father had sold the superstructure along with the Lease Hold Rights to his
brother namely Mr.D.Kumarasamy. After the death of the father of the
petitioner, his brother Mr.D.Kumarasamy / 5th respondent has executed
Settlement Deed in favour of the petitioner through his Power Agent in
Document No.1015 of 2011, which was registered by the Sub-Registrar.
3. The petitioner states that pursuant to the said Settlement Deed, the
petitioner is a permissible tenant and he is in continuous possession and
enjoyment of the property till date by letting out to tenants. The petitioner
claims that he pays the admitted rent regularly. He requested the 4 th
respondent for name transfer as he had done some minor repairs in the
property. The temple authorities filed O.S.No.6587 of 2015 for permanent
and mandatory injunction against Mr.D.Kumarasamy and the petitioner, not
to put up any illegal construction in the temple property and the said suit is
pending.
4. The petitioner states that the 4th respondent has been then and there
arbitrarily increasing the rent and the said increased rent is also being paid
by the petitioner. However, the receipts are given in the name of
Mr.D.Kumarasamy. The petitioner has stated that the 4th respondent has
terminated the Lease Deed on 29.07.2008 and thereafter, the suit in
O.S.No.6587 of 2015 is filed for injunction not to put up any illegal
construction in the temple properties. Under these circumstances, the
competent authorities initiated action under Section 78 of the Tamil Nadu
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1959 [hereinafter referred
to as “HR & CE Act”] and passed the order of eviction and the 2 nd
respondent / Commissioner of Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments
Department passed an order of eviction under Section 78(4)-1 of the HR &
CE Act, 1959 in proceedings dated 10.04.2018. The eviction order has been
communicated to the petitioner and thereafter, the petitioner filed an appeal
and the appeal is pending.
5. The petitioner earlier filed W.P.No.27951 of 2019 and this Court
passed an order on 20.07.2019, directing the petitioner to deposit a sum of
Rs.10,00,000/- before the third respondent temple and the petitioner paid the
said amount and thereafter, this Court directed the 1st respondent to number
the appeal and dispose of the appeal on merits and in accordance with law.
Accordingly, the appeals are numbered and pending before the 1st
respondent.
6. The grievance of the writ petitioner is that during the pendency of
the appeal, the respondents are initiating steps to evict the petitioner as the
1st respondent has not granted any interim stay of the order of eviction.
Therefore, the petitioner is constrained to move the present writ petition for
a direction, to direct the 1st respondent to dispose of the Stay Petition.
7. The learned Government Advocate appearing on behalf of the
respondents disputed the contentions raised on behalf of the petitioner by
stating that the petitioner is an encroacher. At no point of time, he is
recognized as a lessee by the temple authorities. He is not at all a lease
holder. Further, the petitioner or the said Mr.D.Kumarasamy or his brother
Mr.D.Kandasamy (father of the petitioner) are unable to produce any
document to establish that the competent authorities have entered into a
valid lease agreement with any of these persons. In the absence of any valid
lease deed executed under the provisions of the HR & CE Act, the petitioner
or his father or Mr.D.Kumarasamy shall be recognized as a tenant or
leaseholder under the provisions of the HR & CE Act.
8. Admittedly, the petitioners have not produced any document to
establish that the petitioner or the said Mr.D.Kumarasamy is the leaseholder
and holding a lease document to establish their case. In such circumstances,
the       lease   presumably  entered  with   the  temple    authorities    with
Mr.D.Kumarasamy was terminated by the authorities on 29.07.2008 itself.
After termination of the assumed lease, the authorities instituted a Civil Suit
in O.S.No.6587 of 2015. The said suit is also pending. Therefore, the
petitioner has not established even a semblance of right, so as to occupy the
temple property. The petitioner is an encroacher and illegal occupant, who
has sublet the premises in favour of some other third parties and collected
huge amount of rent by abusing the temple properties and therefore, the
petitioner has committed a serious offence of dealing with the temple
properties in an illegal manner for his personal and unjust gains.
9. The learned Government Advocate appearing on behalf of the
respondent / Department made a submission that the assumed lease was
terminated on 29.07.2008 and the petitioner has not paid even the fair rent
fixed and thereafter, actions were initiated against the petitioner and the
petitioner being an encroacher / illegal occupant, who sublet the temple
properties was declared as an encroacher and further, action under Section
78 of the Act was initiated to evict the petitioner. The competent authority
passed an order of eviction on 10.04.2018 and an appeal was filed by the
petitioner, which is now pending.
10. The learned Government Advocate appearing on behalf of the
respondents reiterated that the petitioner has not established any right and
further, he has not produced any document to establish his case that he is
holding any lease document or any other evidences to establish that he is
recognized as a tenant by the competent authorities. Thus, there is no reason
whatsoever to consider the writ petition filed by the petitioner. It is brought
to the notice of this Court that the petitioner has not submitted any
application for name transfer or to grant a fresh lease or otherwise.
11. The learned Government Advocate appearing on behalf of the
respondents brought to the notice of this Court that as per the fair rent
fixation done by the competent authorities, the petitioner has to pay the
arrears of Rs.50,40,000/-(Rupees Fifty Lakhs Forty Thousand only) and he
has not paid the same. Under Section 34 of the HR & CE Act, alienation of
temple property is impermissible and any such alienation in the absence of
sanction by the Commissioner is null and void. Therefore, all the occupants
in the temple properties in the present case are illegal occupants and the
petitioner has abused the temple properties for his personal gains and earned
huge sum of money by subletting the property in favour of other third
parties. Such illegality is being continued for several years, despite the fact
that the suit was instituted by the temple. Consistent action taken by the
temple failed at the instance of the petitioner as the petitioner is adopting a
tactics of prolonging and protracting the issues one way or other by filing
several petitions and litigations. Such tactics adopted is to be dealt with in
an appropriate manner.
12. Considering the arguments and in order to consider the grievances
advanced by the petitioner, a prima facie case is to be established and a right
and its violation must be traced out. In the absence of establishing any right,
the Courts would not consider the grant of any relief. Thus, for entertaining
a writ petition, the right is to be established by the petitioner at the first
instance.
13. Let us now look into the facts, so as to understand whether the
petitioner has established any right for the purpose of considering his
grievances.
14. The petitioner, in his own affidavit filed in support of the present
writ petition, categorically admitted the fact that the land to an extent of
3,227 sq. ft., at Door No.181, M.T.H. Road, Villivakkam, Chennai-49,
belongs to the fifth respondent-temple. The petitioner states that the
superstructure belongs to his father late Mr.D.Kandasamy. His father
executed a registered Sale Deed and sold the superstructure along with
leasehold rights to the brother of his father Mr.D.Kumarasamy. The
petitioner further states that the said Mr.D.Kumarasamy-sixth respondent
further executed a Settlement Deed in favour of the petitioner through his
15. An analysis of the abovesaid statement made by the petitioner
would reveal that the petitioner claims to be the authorised leaseholder of
the subject temple, namely, Arulmigu Agatheeswara Swamy Thirukkoil,
Villivakkam, Chennai-49. However, the petitioner has not produced any
Lease Deed or documents to establish that his father late Mr.D.Kandasamy
was a leaseholder recognised by the Temple Authorities. The father of the
petitioner sold the superstructure in the temple property in favour of his
brother Mr.D.Kumarasamy. The said Mr.D.Kumarasamy executed a
Settlement Deed in favour of the petitioner. Even Mr.D.Kumarasamy, who is
the sixth respondent, in the present writ petition or on his behalf, the
petitioner has not filed any Lease Deed or permission from the
Commissioner, HR&CE Department, recognising him as an authorised
tenant or leaseholder.
16. At the outset, when a question is asked by this Court, the learned
counsel for the petitioner is unable to submit that any of these persons are
having any valid lease documents properly executed by the Temple
Authorities at any point of time. Thus, for all purposes, this Court has to
consider the fact that none of the parties, are holding any valid Lease Deed
or Tenancy Agreement executed by the Competent Authorities of the temple
or the HR&CE Department.
17. In this backdrop, this Court has to consider the manner in which
the temple property has been dealt with for many years by the said late
Mr.D.Kandasamy, Mr.D.Kumarasamy and the petitioner herein.
18. Paragraph-3 of the affidavit filed by the petitioner in support of
this writ petition, reveals that the petitioner claims as a permissible tenant,
however, the petitioner has not filed any documents to establish that he is
the permissible tenant by the Competent Authorities of the temple in respect
of the property. The petitioner, in paragraph-3 of the affidavit, categorically
admitted that he has let out the temple properties to other third
parties/tenants. Further, says that he is paying the admitted rent, but which
Authority admitted the rent is not established.
19. Though the petitioner states that he requested the fourth
respondent for name transfer, the same has not been done. However, the
respondents in their counter states that no such application for name transfer
is submitted by the petitioner. However, the question of name transfer would
not arise in the present case, as there is no valid Lease Deed either in favour
of the petitioner or in the name of Mr.D.Kumarasamy.
20. The petitioner raised a grievance that the fourth respondent-temple
arbitrarily increasing the rent. Contrarily, it is pleaded by the respondents
that a fair rent is fixed by following the provisions of the Hindu Religious
and Charitable Endowments Act [hereinafter referred to as the 'Act', in short]
under Section 34-A. The fair rent is to be fixed in accordance with Section
34-A of the Act. Further, it is admitted by the petitioner that the Lease Deed
was terminated on 29.07.2008 in respect of the sixth respondent-
Mr.D.Kumarasamy. But neither the Lease Deed or any other evidence has
been produced to that effect.
21. Admittedly, the Authorities filed O.S.No.6587 of 2015 for an
injunction restraining the petitioner and the said Mr.D.Kumarasamy from
putting up any illegal constructions. The said suit is pending. Under these
circumstances, the Competent Authorities invoked Section 78 of the Act, by
treating the petitioner as an encroacher and passed an order of eviction on
10.04.2018. The said order has been taken by way of an appeal before the
first respondent and the said appeal is pending.
22. This Court is of the considered opinion that the manner in which
the temple properties were dealt with by the petitioner, sixth respondent and
the father of the petitioner are absolutely in violation of the provisions of the
Act and they are not only encroachers and illegal occupants, but utilised the
property of the temple in an unlawful manner for their personal and unjust
gains. Even as per the own statement of the petitioner, he sublet the premises
of the temple. Thus, it is shocking that the temple properties are dealt with
by these illegal occupants in an illegal manner and the Authorities though
initiated action, this Court has to record that such actions initiated are not
only insufficient, but raises a doubt about the active or passive collusion on
the part of such Competent Authorities of the temple.
23. Section 34 of the Act, enumerates 'alienation of immovable Trust
property'. Sub section (1) of Section 34 stipulates that “Any exchange, sale
or mortgage and any lease for a term exceeding five years of any immovable
property, belonging to, or given or endowed for the purpose of, any religious
institution shall be null and void unless it is sanctioned by the Commissioner
as being necessary or beneficial to the institution”.
24. The learned counsel for the petitioner filed additional typed set of
papers to establish that a 99 years Lease Deed was executed in April, 1936
in favour of one Mr.V.Chinnathambi Mudaliyar. Another Settlement Deed
dated 15.07.1964 is also filed by the petitioner, wherein one Mr.Sundara
Vadivelu Mudaliyar, S/o. Late V.Chinnathambi Mudaliyar, executed the
Settlement Deed in favour of Tmt.S.Maragatham, W/o.C.Sundara Vadivelu
Mudaliyar. The said Tmt.S.Maragathammal executed a Sale Deed on
13.10.1967 in favour of late Mr.D.Kandasamy, who is none other than the
father of the petitioner. Therefore, as per the petitioner, the subject temple
property was purchased by the father of the writ petitioner from one
Tmt.S.Maragathammal in the year 1967.
25. All such documents executed are directly hit by Section 34 of the
Act. The petitioner has not produced any order granting sanction by the
Commissioner. Thus, any such exchange, sale or mortgage or any lease for a
term not exceeding five years without the sanctioning of the Commissioner
is null and void.
26. In the present case, the 99 years Lease Deed executed by one
Dharmakartha Govinda Reddiyar itself is null and void. There are further
Settlement Deeds or the Sale Deeds also cannot be held as valid. The temple
property, which is meant for the benefit of the temple, can never be allowed
to be encumbered in a different manner and in such circumstances, the
Courts are bound to step in and deal with the issues properly.
27. The “Deity ” in the temple is a “minor” and the Court should be
astute to protect the interests of an idol in any litigation. Therefore, when the
trustee or the Executive Officer or the custodian of the idol, temple and its
properties, leave the same in lurch, any person interested in respect of such
temple or worshiping the 'Deity' can certainly be clothed with an adhoc
power of representation to protect its interest. Where the persons in
management of a temple failed to protect the interest of the temple
diligently, the Court is empowered to take notice of such facts and deal with
the issues in an appropriate manner. The Court is bound to take notice of the
fact that the Executive Officers appointed in the temples are being changed
periodically and in many a case, they do not get fully acquainted with the
history or affairs of the temple. If there is lapses, slackness or negligence on
the part of the Executive Officer and the trustees of the temple, “it is the
duty of the Court to ensure that the 'Deity' does not suffer thereby. The
Courts should be astute to protect the interests of an idol in any
28. Fraudulent and illegal encroachments of temple properties is a
crime against the society at large. Misappropriation of the funds of the
temple is undoubtedly an offence and all such offences are to be registered
and the offenders are liable to be prosecuted by the State as the State is the
controller of these temples and the offences are also committed against the
State. Temple properties are allowed to be looted by few greedy men and by
few professional criminals and land grabbers. Active or passive contribution
and collusion by the officials of the HR & CE Department cannot be
overruled. These lapses, negligence, dereliction of duty on the part of such
public officials are also to be viewed seriously and all appropriate actions in
this regard are highly warranted.
29. The properties of deities, temples and Devaswom Boards, require
to       be     protected   and    safeguarded     by   their Trustees/Archaks/
Sebaits/employees. Instances are many where persons entrusted with the
duty of managing and safeguarding the properties of temples, deities and
Devaswom Boards have usurped and misappropriated such properties by
setting up false claims of ownership or tenancy, or adverse possession. This
is possible only with the passive or active collusion of the concerned
authorities. Such acts of 'fences eating the crops' should be dealt with
sternly. The Government, members or trustees of Boards/Trusts, and
devotees should be vigilant to prevent any such usurpation or encroachment.
It is also the duty of courts to protect and safeguard the properties of
religious        and   charitable   institutions   from   wrongful   claims      or
misappropriation.
30. Therefore, beyond the private right, a public right is involved in
such matters. When a public right is involved and the allegations are far
more serious, then the Courts are expected to step-in and deal with such
matters sternly and in an appropriate manner, failing which, the High Court
is failing in its duty to exercise its Constitutional obligations.
31. In the present case, the petitioner is not only an encroacher, but
abused the property of the temple for his personal gains. The petitioner,
admittedly, sublet the temple properties to several third parties and earned
huge amount from and out of the temple properties. The period of illegality
and the quantum of amounts collected from and out of the temple properties
by the petitioner, are also to be looked into by the Competent Authorities of
the HR&CE Department by conducting an elaborate enquiry. Any such
abuse is established and if the Authorities Competent are also in collusion
for such abuse, then all further actions are highly warranted.
32. As per the counter filed by the fifth respondent, the petitioner has
not paid the fair rent and further not submitted any application for transfer of
tenant or the grant of lease in his favour. The petitioner was never
recognised as a tenant under the fifth respondent-temple. Thus, the petitioner
was treated as an encroacher and proceedings under Section 78 of the Act,
was initiated. The petitioner has sublet the premises of the temple, viz., in
the ground floor four shops and one Party Hall is functioning. In the first
floor, Gym is functioning and in the second floor, one Rest Room and
Godown are functioning. So far the petitioner has not only enjoying the
temple properties in an illegal manner, but derived profit from the temple
properties and the profit gained is running to several lakhs.
33. The High Court is not expected to close its eyes in respect of such
patent illegalities in dealing with the temple properties. The High Court has
its constitutional obligation in such circumstances to step-in and protect the
interest of the minor idol and issue appropriate orders.
34. Though the relief, as such, sought for in the present writ petition,
is to direct the first respondent to dispose of the stay petition, considering
the nature of the illegality and perusal of the documents, this Court is of an
opinion that while dealing with the temple properties, Courts at no
circumstances be unnecessarily protect the illegal occupants, who are
abusing the properties of the temple for their personal and unjust gains. In
view of such facts and circumstances, this Court is inclined to pass the
(1) The relief, as such, sought for in the present writ petition,
(2) Respondents 1 to 5 are directed to complete the eviction in
all aspects and take over possession of the temple properties and deal with
the same in accordance with the provisions of the Act and more specifically
for the benefit of the temple administration;
(3) Respondents 1 to 5 are directed to conduct an enquiry and
assess the financial loss occurred to the subject temple and initiate all
appropriate actions against all the persons concerned for the recovery of the
(4) Respondents 1 to 5 are directed to look into the active or
passive collusion on the part of the Authorities in dealing with the temple
properties in such a manner and initiate appropriate action against all those
Authorities, who have contributed for the maladministration of the temple
(5) The abovesaid exercises are directed to be done as
expeditiously as possible.
35. With the above directions, the writ petition stands disposed of.
However, there shall be no order as to costs. Consequently, connected
miscellaneous petition is closed.