The petitioner has filed this present petition while praying for
quashment of the impugned order of detention dated 14.02.2022 which is
contained in Annexure P/5.
2.            The facts of the case reveal that the petitioner is working as
salesman in Government Fair Price Shop, Khodri No.1 under Anusuchit Jaati
seva Sahakari Samiti Nigwani, Tahsil-Kotma, District-Anuppur. On account of
some complaint, a show cause notice was issued to the present petitioner being
salesman of the Government Fair Price Shop in question as well as one Dinesh
Kumar Bhatt who was Manager of the aforesaid Fair Price Shop.
3.            The show cause notice was to the effect that there were
irregularities in distribution of the food grains amongst the beneficiaries and
the allegations of misappropriation of food grain as well and not maintaining
the stock properly. This show cause notice was issued on 02.02.2022. Here it is
relevant to mention that the notice in question was not against the petitioner in
person, on the contrary, the same was addressed to the society i.e. Anusuchit
Jaati Seva Sahakari Samiti Nigwani and to the shop. Yet, it appears that the
petitioner being salesman of the shop submitted his reply to the said show cause
notice on 04.02.2022. However, all of a sudden, another show cause notice was
issued to the petitioner and the Manager dated 04.02.2022 on the same
allegations which were leveled in the show cause notice dated 02.02.2022. The
petitioner submitted his reply to the said show cause notice dated 04.02.2022.,
however, the reply was submitted by the petitioner on 14.02.2022 and on
14.02.2022 itself, the Collector-cum-District Magistrate, District-Anuppur, in
purported exercise of powers conferred under Section 3 of Prevention of Black
Marketing and Maintenance of Supplies of Essential Commodities Act, 1980
passed an order of detention against the present petitioner as well as one Dinesh
Prasad Rao (Bhatt) who is Manager of the aforesaid Fair Price Shop.
4.            The order dated 14.02.2022 was also followed by another
document containing reasons for detention. The reasons for detention vide
document dated 14.02.2022 were communicated to the petitioner on the same
day i.e. 14.02.2022, however, the petitioner was afforded an opportunity to
submit a representation before the State Government. The said order of
detention was eventually confirmed by the State Government vide order dated
17.02.2022 and the same has been brought on record by the respondents
alongwith their return.
5.           Learned counsel for petitioner though assailed the order of
detention on various grounds but ultimately during the course of argument, the
counsel confined his challenge to the impunged order on the ground that the
petitioner was not granted opportunity to submit the representation before the
Detaining Authority. The submission of the counsel for the petitioner is that the
document dated 14.02.2022 by which, the reasons for detention were
communicated, granted an opportunity to the petitioner to submit a
representation before the State Government. According to the petitioner, this
communication by the Collector-cum-District Magistrate was bad in the eye of
law particularly in view of the law laid down by the Full Bench of this Court in
the case of Kamal Khare vs. State of M.P. and others passed in
6.           Learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that Article
22(5) of the Constitution of India specifically provides that in a case of
detention, the Authority passing order of detention is oblige to afford an
opportunity to the person concerned to make a representation to the authority
which has passed the order of detention. Thus, counsel for the petitioner
submitted that the issue involved in the petition stands fully covered by the Full
Bench decision in the case of Kamal Khare (supra).
7.            Per-contra, learned counsel for respondent while supporting the
order of the detention submitted that the petitioner was granted opportunity to
submit representation before the State Government and therefore, there was no
violation of any statutory provisions and moreover according to the
respondents, the order of detention was confirmed within a period of 3 days by
the State Government and thus, looking to the severity of the allegations which
reflect in the show cause notice, the order of detention was proper.
8.            We have heard learned counsel for the parties at length.
9.            The question in the present case pertaining to affording of an
opportunity to make representation before the Authority in accordance with
Article 22(5) of Constitution of India is settled by the decision of the Full Bench
in the case of Kamal Khare (supra). The Full Bench has held as follows:-
“30. Now coming to the question as to what would be the effect of
not informing the detenu that he has a right of making
representation, apart from the State Government and the Central
Government, also to the detaining authority itself, the Constitution
Bench of the Supreme Court in Kamlesh Kumar Ishwardas Patel
(supra) even examined this aspect in paragraph No.14 of the report
“14. Article 22(5) must, therefore, be construed to mean
representation against the order of detention which can be
detaining authority, i.e. the authority that has made the
order of detention or the order for continuance of such
detention, who is competent to give immediate relief by
revoking the said order as well as to any other authority
which is competent under law to revoke the order for
detention and thereby give relief to the person detained.
The right to make a representation carries within it a
corresponding obligation on the authority making the
order of detention to inform the person detained of his
right to make a representation against the order of
detention to the authorities who are required to consider
such a representation.”
10.           The aforesaid directives of the Full Bench makes it unequivocally
clear that the authority passing an order of detention is obliged/duty bound to
afford opportunity of hearing to the detainee to make a representation against
the order of detention. Apparently in the present case, no such opportunity was
granted to the petitioner to submit a representation before the Detaining
Authority. However, on the contrary, an opportunity was given to submit a
representation before the State Government, however, this was not proper
particularly in view of the law laid down by the Full Bench in the case of
Kamal Khare (supra). Therefore, without touching the other aspects of the
matter, we find that the order impugned pertaining to detention of the petitioner
contained in Annexure P/5, deserves to and accordingly quashed. However,
liberty is granted to respondent No.2 to proceed against the petitioner under the
Essential Commodities Act and the orders framed thereunder.
11.           Thus, the writ petition is allowed.