01.       The power of investigation without knowing the province of
investigation is the bane of police investigation proving to be failure in
bringing home successful prosecution of criminal cases in the courts of
law. The present case presents the exact scenario rendering the very FIR
and the so called investigation there under exposed to serious challenge.
02.       Of the seven enlisted grounds by the Hon’ble Supreme Court of
India in case of “State of Haryana and others Vs Ch. Bhajan Lal and
others” reported in AIR 1992 SC 604 for exercise of inherent powers
under section 482 of Cr.P.C., 1973 relatable to an FIR generated
investigation of a criminal case, grounds figuring at serial number 5 & 7
“(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd
and inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can
ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for
proceeding against the accused.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide
and/or where the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior
motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite
him due to private and personal grudge.’’
03.       The facts of the present case fall squarely within the catch of
the said two grounds which renders the FIR in the present case attended
with the so-called investigation there under liable to be questioned and
04.       The operative facts of the case are that an FIR no. 0023/2022
dated 17.03.2022 came to be registered by the complainant-respondent 2
herein, by personally visiting the Police Station Majalta, district
Udhampur for registering the complaint against the petitioner. The
contents of the complaint are produced herein to self state the event in the
context whereof the FIR was getting registered by the respondent 2
against the petitioner:-
“ Today one complainant namely Kajal Devi D/o Jagdish
Chand R/o Battal, tehsil Majalta alongwith her father given a
written application in English language against Ajay Partap
@ Kalu S/o Om Bhadur R/o Kakraii tehsil Majalta district
the contents of application is as. To The Station House
Officer, Police Station Majalta. Subject:- An application of
KAJAL DEVI D/o Sh. JAGDISH CHAND, R/o village Battal,
tehsil Majalta, district Udhampur with a request to take
action against one AJAY PARTAP ALIAS KALU S/o Sh.
OM BHADUR R/o village Karkrai, tehsil Majalta, district
Udhampur who has taken signature on Marriage Agreement
fraudulently by forcing the applicant to sign on document
under coercion and threats and without any consent. Sir, the
complainant/applicant      most     humbly     and   respectfully
submitted as under: 1. That the complainant/applicant is
permanent resident of above noted address and presently
undergoing GNM Training at Nursingh Dev College near
Nand Palace Udhampur. 2. That one Ajay Partap who is
stranger and made intimacy with the applicant making
repeated approached on one pretext of the other. Even the
said accused could manage approaching to frauds of the
applicant. 3. That it is on 21.10.2021 while the aforesaid
applicant was at her house and started her journey to attend
the college at Udhampur the said accused with some
unknown people along with one lady stopped vehicle and
asked to applicant to board in the vehicle with protest that
aforesaid applicant will be dropped at Udhampur on the way
to her college as the vehicle is being drawn to Udhampur
only. But the suppress the said accused have forcibly taken to
the applicant to some unknown place and forced her to sign
the document by giving threats of killing in case the aforesaid
applicant fails to do so. Also the said accused have given
threats of killing in case she tells this thing to anyone else. 4.
That it is submitted that so far aforesaid applicant has not
made any physical contact with the said accused. Moreover,
the said document “ Marriage Agreement” is unregistered
document has not valid in the eyes of law and has liable to be
invalid as cancelled and same the document has been signed
under coercion, threats and under pressure and liable to be
treated as null and void. It is most humbly prayed that the
document Agreement Marriage may be taken as cancelled
with further request to register complaint and take action
against the accused under law for committing fraud, with the
applicant. Yours faithfully, KAJAL DEVI D/O Sh. Jagdish
Udhampur (U.T of J&K) Dated: 15.03.2022”
05.      On the basis of the complaint so registered by the respondent 2,
the FIR against the petitioner got registered for commission of offences
under section 366 & 506 of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), 1860. Section
366 IPC pertains to kidnapping, abducting or inducing the woman to
compel her marriage etc., and section 506 IPC pertains to punishment for
criminal intimidation. By no stretch of reading and reference, the
respondent 2, who was major at the time of alleged incident, ever faintly
hinted any act of omission or commission against the petitioner
amounting or attempting outraging the modesty of the respondent 2 lest
that of subjecting the respondent 2 to an offence of rape or any attempt
06.       The petitioner, on getting confronted with registration of said
FIR against him, came rushing to this Court with the present petition
under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for seeking
quashment of the said FIR by divulging the facts from his end that the
petitioner and the respondent 2, on their own volition and free-will, had
forged marital ties, which being a runaway marriage, and for that even
got a marriage agreement dated 21.10.2021 executed and duly notarized
accompanied with solemnization of marriage taking place in Arya Samaj
07.       In support of the averments made in the petition, the petitioner
came to disclose & annex a notarized copy of the marriage agreement
dated 01.10.2021 duly witnessed by two persons, copy of Aadhar Card of
the respondent 2 mentioning her date of birth to be of 22.04.2000 along
with school related documents of the respondent 2 and Arya Samaj
Mandir marriage related photographs Thus, the petitioner sought to
question the very intent and genuineness of the said FIR on the ground
that after the solemnization of marriage on 21.10.2021, the respondent 2
had even gone back on the very same day to her parental house on the
understanding with the petitioner that she would not be saying to her
parents about the fact of her having solemnized the marriage with the
petitioner for which she needed time to make her parents understand and
reconcile for accepting the petitioner as husband of the respondent 2 so as
to ward off any later trouble in their marital relationship getting posed
from the parental side of the respondent 2. As per the petitioner’s
understanding, as averred in the petition, the respondent 2 acting under
the parental pressure, came to register the said FIR bearing her allegation
against the petitioner only to the extent of so-called abducting or inducing
her to compel her marriage and criminal intimidation on the day when the
execution and registration of marriage agreement and the performance of
marriage ceremony in Arya Samaj Mandir had taken place.
08.        This Court, in terms of an order dated 07.04.022, while
entertaining the present petition and directing notice to the respondents,
had come to direct the continuation of the investigation to its conclusion
but no filing of the final police report ( criminal challan) upon the
outcome of the investigation before a competent court of law without
prior permission of this Court.
09.        During the pendency of the present petition, this Court came to
be approached with an application dated 06.06.2022 filed by and on
behalf of the S.H.O. Police Station, Majalta for seeking permission for
production of challan related to said FIR no. 0023/2022 for offences,
which included addition of offences under section 376/328/109 IPC,
along with originally mentioned offences under section 366/506 IPC.
10.       In response to the said application of the S.H.O. Police Station,
Majalta, this Court came to direct production of the case diaries and the
record of investigation for the purpose of adjudicating the present petition
under section 482 Cr. P.C. in the fullness of facts and circumstances of
the case instead of putting a simpliciter disposal thereof merely on the
plea of the respondent 1 that the final police report/ challan in the case
was ready to be filed.
11.       By having the case diaries along with purported Police
Report/Challan awaiting to be presented by the S.H.O. Police Station,
Majalta for the purpose of subjecting the petitioner to face trial in the
court of law, this Court got an opportunity to scan and examine the said
record to find itself seriously concerned about the manner in and mindset
with which the so-called investigation in the case came to take place to
the extent of even getting mention of offences under section 376 IPC in
the case against the petitioner as if for the Police to present a woman,
who being respondent 2 in the present case, as being a victim of rape was
a matter of ritual and routine.
12.       The purported final police report/challan, which came
accompanying with the case diary file, reflects that while carrying out
investigation in the FIR under section 366 & 506 IPC, the Investigating
Officer had come to examine at the very first instance the parents of the
respondent 2 by having their statement under section 161 Cr. P.C.
recorded on 18.03.2022. The parents of respondent 2 along with one non-
relative witness namely Kuldeep Raj also got examined on the very same
date and said three witnesses were examined by the Investigating Officer
relating to their purported version only to the offences as mentioned in
FIR which being 366/506 IPC and not, by any remote reference, any
allegation even to the extent of outraging the modesty of respondent 2
lest that of committing any rape of the respondent 2 was ever made.
13.        The Investigating Officer handling the case, for the reasons
which are nothing but reflective of taking the investigation as a fun
venture on his part, took the respondent 2 for her examination under
section 164 Cr. P.C. before the Judicial Magistrate Ist. Class on
22.03.2022. Thus, after having first examined the respondent 2’s parents
and so called non-relative witness, all of whom were saying nothing with
respect to any rape related incident concerning the respondent 2, the
Investigating Officer had taken the respondent 2 for her examination on
22.03.2022 in which examination before the Judicial Magistrate Ist Class,
the respondent 2 had come to make a one line passing whisper therein to
the extent that the petitioner had earlier committed rape of the respondent
14.        By reference to this single line whisper, the Investigating
Officer concerned had added offence under section 376 read with section
366/506 IPC in the said FIR. Now, in case the investigation was to attend
to offence of rape under section 376 IPC as per the said 164 Cr.P.C
statement, it was expected of the Investigation Officer to have carried
forward his investigation to each and every aspect of the accusation
related to said offence but it did not bother the concerned Investigation
Officer to examine any other witness, make site examination of the place
of alleged rape, undertake the collection of evidentiary material. Nothing
of that sort was ever examined and done by the Investigating Officer
other than the three already examined persons as witnesses in the case for
commission of offences under section 366/506 IPC and still the so-called
final police report/challan came to be prepared by the Investigating
Officer on the basis of which the S.H.O. Police Station, Majalta came
forward with the application for allowing presentation of challan in the
case for commission of offences under sections 376/328/109 IPC.
15.       Thus, without any addition of facts being brought on record on
the basis of an investigation with respect to the alleged event of so-called
commission of rape of the respondent 2, the Investigating Officer
concerned did the paper work in the name of the investigation for the
purpose of booking the petitioner for the commission of offence of rape
as well.
16.       A perusal of the record presented before this court, a fact
emerges that for the purpose of registration of FIR no. 0023/2022 dated
17.03.2022, the respondent 2 had submitted a typed application bearing
her signature and the said application is dated 15.03.2022 but visit to the
Police Station was made on 17.03.2022. This typed & signed application
of the respondent 2 is pointing to the fact that writing of the said
application was done with all consciousness and awareness in which not
even a reflection of an act of alleged rape against her has been hinted by
the respondent 2 and rather it has been very clearly mentioned in the said
application that there was no physical contact of the respondent 2 with
the petitioner. The tone and tenor of the said application was actually for
seeking the intervention of the Police to retrieve and get hold of the
marriage related agreement from the petitioner so that the respondent 2
and her parents are able to wash away the said aspect of the so-called
marriage of the petitioner and the respondent 2 from getting public at the
end of the petitioner. The Investigation Officer had least bothered to even
go and examine the Pujari of the Arya Samaj Temple who had carried out
the purported marriage rituals so as to know as to whether the physical
presence of the respondent 2 in joining the purported ceremony was
under duress/coercion or was seemingly voluntary. Even the Notary
Public, before whom the petitioner and the respondent 2 had subscribed
themselves to the execution of the purported marriage agreement, was
left unexamined by the Investigation Officer to probe as to under which
circumstances and with what demeanour the respondent 2 was acting and
appearing before him or for that matter ever appeared before him.
17.        This application of the respondent 2 gets translated into FIR for
offences under section 366 IPC and then proceeds to creation of a case of
rape of the respondent 2 by the petitioner. This is nothing but a flight of
fancy on the part of the Investigating Officer of the case, in which the
Investigating Officer concerned was least sensitive even to the very social
and personal reputation of the respondent 2. In the eventuality of the
challan being presented as it is, for which the permission had come to be
sought by the S. H. O. Police Station, Majalta from this Court, then that
would have meant the respondent 2 being stamped with status of a victim
of rape at the hands of the petitioner but without any supporting factual
basis in the very said police report (challan). While the respondent 2 had
lodged the complaint in order to safeguard her reputation from the guilt
of having subscribed herself to so-called marriage with the petitioner, on
the other hand she was sought to be subjected to bear that shame of being
a rape victim at the hands of the petitioner by the so-called investigation
at the hands of the Investigating Officer in the case.
18.        Thus, this Court is convinced that not only the FIR in itself but
even the entire course of so called investigation as conducted in the case
by the Police Officer concerned is nothing but sham and shoddy, which
deserved to be nipped in the bud before it results damaging to the
reputation of the respondent 2 on one hand for all time to come but also
subjects the petitioner to misconceived criminal persecution in the name
of police challan having been filed by reference to the said FIR.
19.        Feeling concerned by the state of facts and circumstances, a
perception cannot avoid to gather a sort of confirmation that while the
Police Investigation acts with relish to exhibit its harassment bearing
power of investigation aiming more to quick fix the facts into its view
point of accusation but faintly knows the province of investigation out of
which the full facts are to be drawn out to prove the script of the crime in
all its details. While the power of investigation is given by the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, the province of investigation is provided by
the Indian Evidence Act, 1872. Section 3 of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 provides when a “Fact” is to be held Proved/Disproved and Not
proved before a Court of law. It is by this principle of proof that a court
of law enables itself to make verdict in a case/cause, be it a civil or
criminal cause getting trial before it. It is through the field of facts as
envisaged under the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 that the police
investigation has to charter itself to identify the true facts of accusation.
The very definition of “Fact in Issue” & “Relevant Fact as given in the
very opening of section 3 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 are
encyclopaedic of what is to come out before a court of law either in a
civil case or criminal case before it in which a court of law has to make
an adjudication. It is with respect to this definition of “Fact” that
definition of expressions “Proved, Disproved and Not Proved” come into
play through judgment making of a court of law dealing with trial of
case/cause. The Police Investigation has to be led and driven by the
domain concepts of “Facts in Issue” and “Relevant Facts.” If a given
Police Investigation has least bothered to follow the script of said two
domains, then in the name of Police Investigation what is taking place
would be nothing but paper collection and compilation venture by the
Investigation Officer so as to claim the service credit of having prepared
and submitted a police report/challan in a court of law unmindful of its
soundness and sustainability in a court of law.
20.           The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India has in the case of
Pooja Pal versus Union of India (2016 AIR SC 1345) dwelled upon the
subject and state of police investigation in a criminal case. Para 88 and
89, through their brevity pick the breadth of the matter, and are
reproduced herein to bear the appreciation and understanding:
“88.   Adverting to the role of the police to be one for protection of
life, liberty and property of citizens, with investigation of
offences being one of its foremost duties, it was underscored in
Manohar Lal Sharma vs. Principal Secretary and others
(2014)2SCC 532: (AIR 2014 SC 666) that the aim of
investigation is ultimately to search for truth and to bring the
offendor to book. The observations of Lord Denning in his
rendering in “The Due Process of Law” First Indian Reprint
1993 page 102 were alluded to at page 553 as under:
“In safeguarding our freedoms, the police play a vital role.
Society for its defence needs a well-led, well-trained and well-
disciplined force of police whom it can trust; and enough of
them to be able to prevent crime before it happens, or if it does
happen, to detect it and bring the accused to justice.
The police, of course, must act properly. They must obey the
rules of right conduct. They must not extort confessions by
threats or promises. They must not search a man’s house
without authority. They must not use more force than the
occasion warrants.”
89.   The avowed purpose of a criminal investigation and its
efficacious prospects with the advent of scientific and technical
advancements have been candidly synopsized in the prefatory
chapter dealing with the history of criminal investigation in the
treatise on Criminal Investigation – Basic Perspectives by Paul
B. Weston and Renneth M. Wells:
“Criminal investigation is a lawful search for people and things
useful in reconstructing the circumstances of an illegal act or
omission and the mental state accompanying it. It is probing
from the known to the unknown, backward in time, and its goal
is to determine truth as far as it can be discovered in any post-
factum inquiry.
Successful investigations are based on fidelity, accuracy, and
sincerity in lawfully searching for the true facts of an event
under investigation and on an equal faithfulness, exactness, and
probity in reporting the results of an investigation. Modern
investigators are persons who stick to the truth and are
absolutely clear about the time and place of an event and the
measurable aspects of evidence. They work throughout their
investigation fully recognizing that even a minor contradiction
or error may destroy confidence in their investigation.
The joining of science with traditional criminal investigation
techniques offers new horizons of efficiency in criminal
investigation. New perspectives in investigation bypass reliance
upon informers and custodial interrogation and concentrate
upon a skilled scanning of the crime scene for physical evidence
and a search for as many witnesses as possible. Mute evidence
tells its own story in court, either by its own demonstrativeness
or through the testimony of an expert witness involved in its
scientific testing. Such evidence may serve in lieu of, or as
corroboration of, testimonial evidence of witnesses found and
interviewed by police in an extension of their responsibility to
seek out the truth of all the circumstances of crime happening.
An increasing certainty in solving crimes is possible and will
contribute to the major deterrent of crime – the certainty that a
criminal will be discovered, arrested and convicted.”
21.       In the name of the investigation in the present case, only an
empty formality has been carried out by the Investigation Officer/s
leaving the truth of the case a casualty. In fact, the very FIR on the face
of it pointed towards a fact that its latent objective was to force the
petitioner to part with the marriage related documents and photographs
for enabling the respondent 2 to act as per the dictate of her parents. Thus
FIR and its so called investigation are act of abuse of process of law
aimed against the petitioner and others named therein and as such both
deserve to be quashed and are accordingly so quashed.
22.       The record of the Case Diary file be returned to the SHO Police
Station concerned.