Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 4573 of 2021
Respondent :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Appellant :- Rajesh Kumar Pandey,Ambreesh Kumar
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.,Arvind Singh
Heard Shri Rajesh Kumar Pandey, learned counsel
for the appellant, Shri Rabindra Kumar Singh,
learned Additional Government Advocate assisted
by Sri Prashant Kumar Singh, learned Brief Holder
representing the State and Shri Ravi Prakash,
learned counsel, holding brief of Shri Arvind Singh,
learned counsel appearing for opposite party No.
This criminal appeal has been filed against the
order dated 01.10.2021 passed by the Special
Judge, Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, Auraiya whereby the
learned Judge rejected the bail application moved
on behalf of the appellant in Bail Application No.
1146 of 2021, arising out of Case Crime No. 80 of
2021, under Sections 504, 506, 376, 328 IPC,
Section 67(A) of Information and Technology Act
and Section 3(2)(v), 3(1)Da and 3(1) Dha of the
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, police station Ayana,
The facts that formed the bedrock of this appeal
are that a first information report was lodged by
the victim herself on 09.7.2021 for the alleged
incident which took place on 23.6.2021 inter alia
with the allegations that on 23.6.2021 at about
11.30 AM when she was waiting for the
conveyance at the road, at that time appellant,
who lives in the same village, was passing through
by truck, who stopped the truck and enquired from
the victim as to where is she going and offerred
her to sit on his truck. When the victim boarded
the truck, the appellant offered her cold drink and
after     consuming            the      same    she     became
unconscious. Thereafter, the appellant took her to
a lonely place and committed rape on her and also
made her nude video. On 09.7.2021, the appellant
along with co-accused also abused the victim's
husband by caste derogatory words and
threatened him of dire consequences.
It is contended by the learned counsel for the
appellant that there was inordinate delay in
lodging the first information report for which no
plausible explanation has been rendered by the
prosecution. It is further submitted by the learned
counsel for the appellant that in the medical
examination report no spermatozoa was found,
which belied the case of the prosecution. Learned
counsel for the appellant also submits that the
appellant has falsely been implicated in this case
and that he has no concern with the alleged
incident. It is also contended that the victim is
engaged in extracting money from the innocent
persons, failing which she has falsely implicated
the appellant in the present case with false and
concocted story.
Lastly, it is submitted by the learned counsel for
the appellant that there is no chance of the
appellant fleeing away from the judicial process or
tampering with the prosecution evidence. The
appellant does not have any criminal history and is
languishing in jail since 02.9.2021and in case, he
is released on bail, he will not misuse the liberty of
bail and cooperate with the trial.
Per contra, learned Additional Government
Advocate and learned counsel appearing on behalf
of opposite party No. 2/ first informant have
opposed the prayer for bail by contending that the
victim in her statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C.
has fully supported the prosecution version by
specifically stating that the appellant after getting
her intoxicated, committed rape on her and made
video thereof. They further contend that along with
the case diary, CD of viral video of the victim is
also annexed.
Hon'ble Supreme Court in a catena of judgement
has held that mere delay in lodging the FIR is no
ground to doubt the prosecution case when it is
properly explained.
In Tara Singh and others Vs. State of Punjab,
AIR 1991 SC 63, Hon'ble Supreme Court held that
mere delay in lodging the FIR by itself cannot give
scope for an adverse inference leading to rejection
of the prosecution case outright. It is well settled
that the delay in giving the FIR by itself cannot be
a ground to doubt the prosecution case. Knowing
the Indian conditions as they are we cannot expect
these villagers to rush to the police station
immediately after the occurrence.
Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Punjab Vs.
Gurmit Singh and others, 1996 SCC (2) 384
In our opinion, there was no delay in the lodging of
the FIR either and if at all there was some delay,
the same has not only been properly explained by
the prosecution but in the facts and circumstances
of the case was also natural. The courts cannot
over-look the fact that in sexual offences delay in
the lodging of the FIR can be due to variety of
reasons particularly the reluctance of the
prosecutrix or her family members to go to the
police and complain about the incident which
concerns the reputation of the prosecutrix and the
honour of her family. It is only after giving it a cool
thought that a complaint of sexual offence is
generally lodged.
So far as the contention of the learned counsel for
the appellant that no spermatozoa was found in
the sample of the vaginal swab, it is noted that the
incident took place on 23.6.2021 whereas the
medical examination of the victim was done on
10.7.2021, i.e. after 17 days of the incident. The
lifespan of sperm in a woman's body while fertile
cervical fluid is present is generally three days.
However, most sperm die within minutes after
ejaculation inside the vagina or outside the
woman's genital tract. Once sperm enter the
woman's genital tract, the cervix and uterus, most
die within 1-2 days, but some can survive up to 5
days and thus the longest that the sperm can
survive in fertile cervical fluid or the uterus is five
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Narayanamma vs
(5) 436 has held as under:
"With regard to the vaginal smear examination
conducted at a different hospital, Dr Reeta, PW 3
has reported that no spermatozoa was seen on it,
and the absence of sperms has been viewed
against the version of the prosecutrix. It was never
elicited from the prosecutrix as to whether the two
persons who committed rape on her had reached
orgasm emitting semen in her private parts. No
presumption can be made that penetration of
penis in the private parts of a rape victim must
necessarily lead to the discovery of spermatozoa.
It is a question of detail and has to be put to test
by cross-examination. Otherwise also there may
be various other factors which may negative the
presence of spermatozoa such as faulty taking of
the smear, its preservation, quality of semen etc.
The absence of spermatozoa prima facie could not
be allowed to tell against the version of the
Having heard learned counsel for the parties and
examined the matter in its entirety, I find that the
appellant not only committed rape upon a helpless
victim, but also made video of the same and got it
viral. The Court noticed that crime against women
in general and rape in particular is on the increase.
It is an irony that while we are celebrating
women's rights in all spheres, we show little or no
concern for her honour. It is a sad reflection on the
attitude of indifference of the society towards the
violation of human dignity of the victims of sex
crimes. We must remember that a rapist not only
violates the victim's privacy and personal integrity,
but inevitably causes serious psychological as well
as physical harm in the process. Rape is not
merely a physical assault - it is often destructive of
the whole personality of the victim. A murderer
destroys the physical body of his victim, a rapist
degrades the very soul of the helpless female.
Considering the overall facts and circumstances of
the case as well as keeping in view the
submissions advanced on behalf of parties, gravity
of offence, role assigned to appellant, severity of
punishment, I do not find any good ground to
release the appellant on bail.
In view of the above, the order dated 01.10.2021
passed by the Special Judge (SC/ST Act), Auraiya is
upheld. Accordingly, the bail application is rejected
at this stage.
It is clarified that anything observed in this order is
limited to the extent of determination of this bail
application and will in no way be construed as an
expression on the merits of the case. The trial
court shall be absolutely free to arrive at its
independent conclusions on the basis of evidence
to be adduced uninfluenced by anything
mentioned in the order.
Location: High Court of Judicature at