1.               Rule.  Rule made returnable forthwith.                Heard
finally by consent of both the parties.
2.               The petitioner contends that she is child in conflict
with law and lodged with the Government Girls Observation
Home, Amravati.           She is in custody of Observation Home,
Amravati as she had committed offence under Section 302 of
the Indian Penal Code and crime is registered against her vide
Crime No.141/2022. Crime No.101/2021 was also registered
as petitioner was not traceable on the basis of report lodged
by her mother under Section 363 of the Indian Penal Code.
During the investigation it revealed to the Investigating Officer
that petitioner is pregnant and, therefore, offence was
registered under Section 376 read with Section 4 of the
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012. The
petitioner, who is in custody of Observation Home as she had
committed offence under Section 302 of the Indian Penal
Code.       She is also victim of sexual assault and, therefore,
another crime was registered bearing No.101/2021 on the
basis of report lodged by her mother.
3.               It is the contention of the petitioner that she is
from economically weak section and, therefore, she is unable
to up-bring the child. Due to said incident she had suffered
and is suffering because of sexual abuse. She has undergone
the agony and she will go through the same in future also.
Therefore, she seeks permission from this Court directing the
respondent No.2 to terminate her pregnancy which is of 12
weeks. She further submitted that she is also facing financial
hardship, therefore, permission may kindly be granted to her
for terminating her pregnancy under the prevailing bona fide
facts and circumstances. The pregnancy of the petitioner is
unwanted and the same violate her personal liberty.
4.               By the order dated 07.06.2022 the report of the
Medical Board was called for.          The report of the Medical
Board dated 14.06.2022 is tendered across the bar and is
taken on record. The Medical Board opined that the petitioner
had pregnancy of 16 weeks and has consented for the
pregnancy to be terminated.
5.               Heard learned counsel for the petitioner.
6.               Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that
in view of sexual abuse, petitioner is carrying the pregnancy.
She hails from economically weak section. She undergone the
trauma and in future also she would have to suffer mental
agony. The pregnancy is unwanted. The petitioner is also
facing financial hardship. In the circumstances, permission be
kindly granted to terminate the pregnancy.
7.               In view of the provisions of Section 3(2)(b)(i) of
the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 a pregnancy
may be terminated if continuance of the same would involve a
risk of grave injury to the physical or mental health of the
pregnant woman. This provision has to be read along with
sub-section (3) of Section 3 which denotes that in determining
whether the continuance of a pregnancy would involve such
risk of injury to the health as is mentioned in sub-section (2)
may be taken into account while considering such type of
applications.        These provisions are to be read along with
sub-section (1) of Section 5 of the said Act to make the
provisions of the Act meaningful and reflective of the ground
realities.      The Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971
has been enacted to provide for the termination of certain
pregnancies by registered medical practitioners and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. Regarding
the termination of pregnancy it is to be seen whether there is a
danger to the life or risk to the physical or mental health of a
woman. Section 3 of the Act deals with the situation when
pregnancy may be terminated by the registered medical
practitioners.          For better understanding we reproduce
Section 3 hereunder :
“Sec.3. When Pregnancies may be terminated
by registered medical practitioners –
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), a
registered medical practitioner shall not be
guilty of any offence under that Code or
under any other law for the time being in
force, if any pregnancy is terminated by him
in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section
(4), a pregnancy may be terminated by a
(a) where the length of the pregnancy does
not exceed twelve weeks, if such medical
practitioner is, or
exceeds twelve weeks, if not less than two
registered medical practitioners are,
of the opinion, formed in good faith, that -
(i) the continuance of the pregnancy would
involve a risk to the life of the pregnant
woman or of grave injury to her physical or
(ii) there is a substantial risk that if the
child were born, it would suffer from such
physical or mental abnormalities as to be
seriously handicapped.
alleged by the pregnant woman to have been
caused by rape, the anguish caused by such
pregnancy shall be presumed to constitute a
grave injury to the mental health of the
pregnant woman.
Explanation 2 – Where any pregnancy occurs
as a result of failure of any device or method
used by any married woman or her husband
for the purpose of limiting the number of
children, the anguish caused by such
constitute a grave injury to the mental health
of the pregnant woman.
(3) In determining whether the continuance of
a pregnancy would involve such risk of injury
to the health as is mentioned in sub-section
(2), account may be taken of the pregnant
woman’s actual or reasonable foreseeable
environment.
not attained the age of eighteen years, or,
who, having attained the age of eighteen
years, is a [mentally ill person], shall be
terminated except with the consent in writing
of her guardian.
(b) Save as otherwise provided in clause
(a), pregnancy shall be terminated except with
the consent of the pregnant woman.”
8.               Section 4 deals with place where pregnancy may
be terminated. Section 5 of the Act states about the situation
when Sections 3 and 4 would not apply.
9.               It is submitted by the learned counsel for the
petitioner that the financial condition of the petitioner is
weak.        Said pregnancy is unwanted.           She has undergone
physical as well as mental trauma and, therefore, she be
permitted to terminate her pregnancy.                   Admittedly, the
petitioner is staying in a custody of Observation Home. She is
also charged for the offence punishable under Section 302.
She is also victim of sexual abuse. On the basis of the report
lodged by the mother of the petitioner offence was registered
as the petitioner was subjected for the sexual assault. She is
minor. Thus, the surrounding circumstances shows that she
has undergone mental trauma.
10.              The Hon’ble Apex Court in catena of decisions like
in the case of Suchita Srivastava vs. State, reported in (2009)
9 SCC 1 expressed the view that the right of a woman to have
reproductive choice is an insegragable part of her personal
liberty as envisaged under Article 21 of the Constitution of
India. She has a sacrosanct right to her bodily integrity. In
the case of X vs. Union of India, reported in (2016)14 SCC
382 observed that the said provision deals with termination of
pregnancies         of different   durations     and      the     procedure
contemplated thereof.         It is observed by the Hon’ble Apex
Court that termination of pregnancy which is necessary to
save the life of the pregnant woman is permissible.                        It is
further observed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court by considering
the report of the Medical Board that the risk of the petitioner
continuation of her pregnancy of 24 weeks could gravely
endanger her physical and mental health.                  In the case of
Sarmishtha Chakraborty vs. Union of India, reported in
2017(6) ALL MR 473 (S.C.). Hon’ble Supreme Court again
confronted with the prayer made by the petitioners, husband
and wife, for constituting medical board to assess the
pregnancy of the wife and directing termination of the
pregnancy. In that case Supreme Court considered the report
of the medical board and observed that the petitioner wife
would suffer mental injury if the pregnancy was continued
and there would be multiple problems if the child was born
alive.       Again, this issue was considered by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in the case of A vs. Union of India, reported in
(2018) 4 SCC 75 wherein also Hon’ble Supreme Court after
evaluating the report of the medical board permitted the
petitioner to undergo medical termination of her pregnancy.
11.              This Court has also recently in the case of MS. X.
vs. State of Maharashtra, and another reported in 2022(3)
Mh.L.J. 67 dealt with the issue and observed that if the
pregnancy exists for more than 24 weeks and in the opinion of
the Registered Medical Practitioners formed in good faith,
continuation of such pregnancy would involve a risk to the life
of the pregnant woman or grave injury to her physical or
mental health, the pregnancy can be medically terminated. It
is further observed by this Court that it is also clear that where
any pregnancy is alleged by any pregnant woman to have been
caused by rape, the anguish caused by such pregnancy is
presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of
the pregnant woman.
12.              In the present case also petitioner is unmarried.
She is not only a victim of sexual abuse. She is lodged in the
Observation Home. Her financial condition is also weak. She
has already undergone the trauma due to the sexual assault
on her. She is also suffering mentally as she is also charged
for the offence punishable under Section 302 of the Indian
Penal Code. She contended that said pregnancy is unwanted.
Admittedly, she cannot be forced to give birth to a child. As
observed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court that it is the right of
woman to have reproductive choice. She has a choice to give
birth to the child or not.
13.              In the above circumstances the Medical Board
opined that the pregnancy could be terminated if petitioner is
a minor girl. She is subjected for sexual assault. It is difficult
for her to carry said pregnancy under above circumstances.
She also pleaded that it is unwanted pregnancy.                        In such
circumstances if the child is born she would not able to receive
financial and emotional support from her family members. It
would be difficult for her to raise the child as she does not
have any source of income. In such circumstances and taking
overall view of the matter, we are of the view that declining
such permission to the petitioner would tantamount to
compelling her to continue with her pregnancy which in the
circumstances will not only be a burden on her, but it would
also cause grave injury to her mental health.
14.              In the above circumstances, we grant liberty to the
petitioner to undergo medical termination of her pregnancy.
Hence, we proceed to pass following order :
(i)          Writ Petition is hereby allowed.
(ii)         We direct the respondent No.2 to terminate
unwanted          pregnancy    of  16   weeks      of    the      petitioner
immediately.
Observation Home, Akola shall escort the petitioner to the
Medical Board to enable her to appear before the Dean,
Government Medical Board and College, Akola on 1.7.2022.
(iv)          The fees of the counsel appointed to represent
the petitioner shall be in accordance with the rules.
(v)         An authenticated copy be supplied to the learned
counsel for the petitioner as well as the respondents for taking
necessary steps.
15.              Rule is made absolute in the above terms.