The petitioner is impugning the order dated 28.02.2022
(Annexure P-6) passed by learned Additional District Judge, Yamuna
Nagar vide which his appeal preferred against the order dated
19.01.2022 (Annexure P-4) passed by learned Civil Judge (Jr. Divn.),
Yamuna Nagar at Jagadhri, for grant of interim relief, by ordering the
restoration of electricity connection in his shop, was dismissed.
Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that
the impugned order suffers from patent illegality and being violative of
the fundamental rights of the petitioner, deserves to be set aside. He
submits that the Courts below while passing the impugned orders failed
to appreciate that the petitioner was in possession of the suit property
and since electricity is a basic amenity, he could not be deprived of the
same. He further contends that the electricity connection was
disconnected by respondent No.1 with an ulterior motive so as to force
the petitioner to vacate the suit property. He still further contends that
the malafides on the part of respondent No.1 are writ large from the fact
that he had filed a suit for seeking possession of the suit property
(Annexure P-3) against the petitioner subsequent to the suit for
permanent injunction instituted by the petitioner. In support of his
submissions, learned counsel has placed reliance upon Dilip (dead)
through LRs Vs. Satish and others : 2022(9) Scale 759 and Dipali
Per contra, learned counsel appearing for respondent No.1
while vehemently controverting the submissions made by the counsel
opposite, contends that it was a matter of record that as per the rent
agreement dated 07.07.2021, the lease pertaining to the suit property, in
favour of the petitioner stood expired on 30.09.2021. Hence, in the
circumstances, the petitioner had no right to continue being in
possession of the suit property. Learned counsel further submits that
respondent No.1 had even terminated the tenancy of the petitioner vide
legal notice dated 04.10.2021, hence, the status of the petitioner now
was of a illegal occupant and as such he had no right to claim
restoration of electricity connection.
I have heard learned counsel and perused the relevant
material on record.
Admittedly, respondent No.1 has filed a suit for possession
of the suit property along with recovery of mesne profits, which is still
pending adjudication, therefore, the question as to whether the
petitioner is an illegal occupant of the suit property or not, or as to
whether he is liable to be evicted or not, would be a matter of trial. The
fact of the matter is that the petitioner is in possession of the suit
property and still further his eviction has not yet been ordered by a
competent Court of law.
It cannot be over-emphasized that electricity being a basic
necessity, is an integral part of right to life as enshrined under Article
21 of the Constitution of India. Therefore, as long as the petitioner is in
possession of the suit property, he cannot be deprived of electricity.
In the facts and circumstances, without commenting upon
merits of the suits instituted by both the parties, the instant revision
petition is allowed and the impugned orders are set aside. The
electricity connection of the suit property be restored subject to
payment of requisite charges by the petitioner, if any, till the final
decision of the suit filed by him. It is clarified that the petitioner shall
continue to pay the electricity charges regularly.
Anything contained hereinabove shall not be construed to
be an expression of opinion on the merit of the suits pending between
the parties.