2.    The present Criminal Misc. Application is filed under section
482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 for quashing and
setting aside FIR being Cr. No.11216010220200 of 2022
registered with Pethapur Police Station, Gandhinagar on
15.05.2022 for the offences under sections 387, 389, 120B, 143,
147, 149, 323, 504, 506(2) and 342 of Indian Penal Code, 1860.
3.    As per the allegations made in present FIR, earlier one FIR
bearing number 11201002210014 was registered with CID
Crime Police Station, Ahmedabad Zone under Sections 406,
409, 420, 120(B), 465, 467, 468, 471, 477(A) of the IPC on
08.12.2021 against present complainant. A settlement arrived
at between the parties and the said FIR was quashed by an
order of this Court. It is further alleged that thereafter, on
15.05.2022, a meeting was held between present accused
persons, in which, present complainant was also remained
present. All the accused persons forced the complainant to
sign the certain papers / documents against his will. It is
further alleged that at the relevant time, the petitioner, who is
a practicing lawyer, was also present in the meeting and has
also participated in the commission of the offences under
sections 387, 389, 120B, 143, 147, 149, 323, 504, 506(2) and 342
of Indian Penal Code, 1860.
4.    Heard learned Senior Advocate Mr. B. B. Naik with learned
Senior Advocate and Mr. Asim Pandya assisted by learned
Advocate Mr. Aniq Kadri for the petitioner, Mr. Mitesh Amin,
learned Public Prosecutor for Respondent No.1-State and
Mr.Yash Patel, learned Advocate for Respondent No.2-
5.    Mr. B.B.Naik, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the
petitioner submits that the present petitioner is a designated
Senior Advocate practicing before this Court and is very
innocent and has been falsely arraigned as accused in the
impugned FIR. The allegations made in the FIR do not
constitute any offence or make out a case against the present
petitioner. He further submits that allegation in the FIR does
not disclose commission of a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by the police officer under section 156(1) of the
Code of Criminal Procedure. He        further submits that the
allegations made in the FIR are so absurd and inherently
improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever
reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground for
proceeding against the petitioner. He submits that present
criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with a malafide
and is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for
wreaking vengeance on the petitioner and with a view to
malign his reputation and with a personal grudge since the
petitioner appeared for the other side. He therefore submits
that present FIR filed against the present petitioner may be
quashed.
6.    On the other hand, Mr. Mitesh Amin, learned Public
Prosecutor submits that bare reading of the FIR, it discloses
commission of cognizable offence and hence, the Hon’ble
Court may not interfere under section 482 of the Criminal
Procedure Code to quash the FIR. He further submits that
considering the nature and gravity of allegations, the
seriousness of the alleged offence, the High Court may not use
discretionary power under section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure in favour of the present petitioner. He
submits that the police authority had tried to record the
statement of the petitioner and hence, the police authority had
visited all the relevant places where the petitioner accused
may be found, but unfortunately the petitioner is not
cooperating with the investigation. He further submits that
since registration of the FIR, the petitioner is not available at
his known places, his mobile phone is found switch of and
considering his such conduct and behavior, as he is not
available and he is not participating in investigation, there are
all chances that he may temper with different evidences. All
other accused are also not available at their known places
hence investigation is also suffering.
7.    I have heard learned Senior Advocate appearing for the
petitioner and learned Public Prosecutor appearing for the
respondent – State and learned advocate appearing for the
original complainant. Having gone through the FIR, it cannot
be said that the allegations made in present FIR do not
disclose any cognizable offence. The allegations are very
serious in nature and therefore, the same are required to be
investigated by the Investigating Agency at this stage. It is to
be noted that without even giving the sufficient time, even to
the investigating agency, the petitioner has rushed to this
Court and has prayed to quash the criminal proceedings
under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The
Investigating Officer must be given some reasonable time to
investigate the allegations and to find out the veracity of the
truth. Merely because the petitioner is an advocate is no
ground not to permit the investigating agency into the
allegations made against him and to quash the criminal
proceedings at the threshold. As observed in the earlier round
of the litigation, the petitioner represented the co-accused and
therefore, as such it cannot be said that he is unknown to the
transaction between the parties. If the allegations found to be
true, it is a very serious matter as being an advocate and that
too, a designated senior advocate is expected to be an upright
and he is supposed to know the law. Therefore, at this stage,
no interference of this Court in exercising the powers under
Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is called for
and the Investigating Agency cannot be restrained in
performing the statutory duties under the relevant provisions
of Code of Criminal Procedure.
8.    At this stage, in a recent decision of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in case of Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. Vs. State of
Maharashtra and Ors., reported in 2021 (19) SCC 401, is
required to be referred to. After taking into consideration the
earlier decision on exercising the powers under Section 482 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure including the decision of
State of Haryana V. Bhanaj Lal, reported in 1992 Supp (1) SCC
335 and others. The Hon’ble Surpreme Court has observed in
Para 37 and 80, which are as under:
“37. Then comes the celebrated decision of this Court in the case of
Bhajan Lal (supra). In the said decision, this Court considered in
detail the scope of the High Court powers under section 482
Cr.P.C. and/or Article 226 of the Constitution of India to quash the
FIR and referred to several judicial precedents and held that the
High Court should not embark upon an inquiry into the merits
and demerits of the allegations and quash the proceedings without
allowing the investigating agency to complete its task. At the same
time, this Court identified the following cases in which
FIR/complaint can be quashed:
“102.(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report
or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and
accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any
offence or make out a case against the accused.
(2)    Where the allegations in the first information report and other
materials, if any, accompanying the FIR do not disclose a
cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police
officers under section 156(1) of the Code except under an
order of a Magistrate within the purview of section 155(2) of
the Code.
(3)    Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or
complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same
do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a
case against the accused.
(4)    Where the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a
cognizable offence but constitute only a non-cognizable
offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer
without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under
section 155(2) of the Code.
(5)    Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so
absurd and inherently improbable on the basis of which no
prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
(6)    Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the
provisions of the Code or the Act concerned (under which a
criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and
continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a
specific provision in the Code or the Act concerned,
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the
aggrieved party.
(7)     Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with
mala fide and/or where the proceeding is maliciously
instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on
the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and
personal grudge.”
In the above decision, the Apex Court came to the conclusion
“80. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, our final
conclusions on the principal/core issue, whether the High Court
would be justified in passing an interim order of stay of
investigation and/or “no coercive steps to be adopted”, during the
pendency of the quashing petition under section 482 of Cr.P.C
and/or under of the Constitution of India and in what
circumstances and whether the High Court would be justified in
passing the order of not to arrest the accused or “no coercive steps
to be adopted” during the investigation or till the final
report/chargesheet is filed under section 173 of Cr.P.C., while
dismissing/disposing of/not entertaining/not quashing the
criminal proceedings/complaint/FIR in exercise of powers under
section 482 of Cr.P.C. and/or under section 226 of the Constitution
of India, our final conclusions are as under:
i)       Police has the statutory right and duty under the relevant
provisions of the Criminal Procedure contained in
Chapter XIV of the Code to investigate into a cognizable
ii)      Courts would not thwart any investigation into the
cognizable offences;
iii)     It is only in cases where no cognizable offence or offence
of any kind is disclosed in the first information report
that the Court will not permit an investigation to go on;
iv)      The power of quashing should be exercised sparingly
with circumspection, as it has been observed, in the
‘rarest of rare cases (not to be confused with the
formation in the context of death penalty).
v)    While examining an FIR/complaint, quashing of which is
sought, the court cannot embark upon an enquiry as to
the reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the
allegations made in the FIR/complaint;
vi)   Criminal proceedings ought not to be scuttled at the
vii)  Quashing of a complaint/FIR should be an exception
rather than an ordinary rule;
viii) Ordinarily, the courts are barred from usurping the
jurisdiction of the police, since the two organs of the State
operate in two specific spheres of activities and one ought
not to tread over the other sphere;
ix)   The functions of the judiciary and the police are
complementary, not overlapping;
x) Save in exceptional cases where non-interference
would result in miscarriage of justice, the Court and the
judicial process should not interfere at the stage of
investigation of offences;
xi)   Extraordinary and inherent powers of the Court do not
confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the Court to act
according to its whims or caprice;
xii)  The first information report is not an encyclopaedia
which must disclose all facts and details relating to the
offence reported. Therefore, when the investigation by
the police is in progress, the court should not go into the
merits of the allegations in the FIR. Police must be
permitted to complete the investigation. It would be
premature to pronounce the conclusion based on hazy
facts that the complaint/FIR does not deserve to be
investigated or that it amounts to abuse of process of law.
After investigation, if the investigating officer finds that
there is no substance in the application made by the
complainant, the investigating officer may file an
appropriate report/summary before the learned
Magistrate which may be considered by the learned
Magistrate in accordance with the known procedure;
xiii) The power under section 482 of Cr.P.C. is very wide, but
conferment of wide power requires the court to be more
cautious. It casts an onerous and more diligent duty on
xiv)  However, at the same time, the court, if it thinks fit,
regard being had to the parameters of quashing and the
self-restraint imposed by law, more particularly the
parameters laid down by this Court in the cases of R.P.
Kapur (supra) and Bhajan Lal (supra), has the jurisdiction
to quash the FIR/complaint;
xv)   When a prayer for quashing the FIR is made by the
alleged accused and the court when it exercises the power
under section 482 of Cr.P.C., only has to consider whether
the allegations in the FIR disclose commission of a
cognizable offence or not. The court is not required to
consider on merits whether or not the merits of the
allegations make out a cognizable offence and the court
has to permit the investigating agency/police to
investigate the allegations in the FIR;
xvi)  The aforesaid parameters would be applicable and/or the
aforesaid aspects are required to be considered by the
High Court while passing an interim order in a quashing
petition in exercise of powers under section 482 Cr.P.C.
and/or under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
However, an interim order of stay of investigation during
the pendency of the quashing petition can be passed with
circumspection. Such an interim order should not require
to be passed routinely, casually and/or mechanically.
Normally, when the investigation is in progress and the
facts are hazy and the entire evidence/material is not
before the High Court, the High Court should restrain
itself from passing the interim order of not to arrest or
“no coercive steps to be adopted” and the accused should
be relegated to apply for anticipatory bail under section
438 Cr.P.C. before the competent court. The High Court
shall not and as such is not justified in passing the order
of not to arrest and/or “no coercive steps” either during
the investigation or till the investigation is completed
and/or till the final report/chargesheet is filed under
section 173 Cr.P.C., while dismissing/disposing of the
quashing petition under section 482 Cr.P.C. and/or under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
xvii) Even in a case where the High Court is prima facie of the
opinion that an exceptional case is made out for grant of
interim stay of further investigation, after considering the
broad parameters while exercising the powers under
section 482 Cr.P.C. and/or under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India referred to hereinabove, the High
Court has to give brief reasons why such an interim order
is warranted and/or is required to be passed so that it
can demonstrate the application of mind by the Court
and the higher forum can consider what was weighed
with the High Court while passing such an interim order.
xviii) Whenever an interim order is passed by the High Court of
“no coercive steps to be adopted” within the aforesaid
parameters, the High Court must clarify what does it
mean by “no coercive steps to be adopted” as the term
“no coercive steps to be adopted” can be said to be too
vague and/or broad which can be misunderstood and/or
misapplied.”
9.    In view of the above finding given by the Apex Court in case
of Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. (Supra), it transpires that
the power of quashing of criminal proceedings should be
exercised very sparingly and with circumspection and that too
in rarest of the rare cases and it was not justified for the Court
in embarking upon an inquiry as to the reliability or
genuineness or otherwise of the allegations made in the FIR or
the complaint and that the inherent powers do not confer any
arbitrary jurisdiction on the Court to act according to its
whims and fancies.
“It is well settled that at the stage when the High Court
considers a petition for quashing criminal proceedings under
section 482 of the Cr.P.C, the allegations in the FIR must be read
as they stand and it is only if on the face of the allegations that
no cognizable offence, as alleged has been made out, that the
Court may be justified in exercising its jurisdiction to quash.”
10. At the time of hearing the application, a query raised that
whether Criminal Misc. Application filed only under Section
482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure can be entertained
before filing of the charge sheet.
11. In case of State of West Bengal and Ors. Vs. Sujit Kumar Rana,
reported in (2004) 4 SCC 129, the Apex Court has determined
“33. From a bare perusal of the aforementioned provision, it
would be evident that the inherent power of the High Court is
saved only in a case where an order has been passed by the
criminal court which is required to be set aside to secure the ends
of justice or where the proceeding pending before a court
amounts to abuse of the process of court. It is, therefore, evident
that power under section 482 of the Code can be exercised by the
High Court in relation to a matter pending before a court; which
in the context of Code of Criminal Procedure would mean 'a
criminal court' or whence a power is exercised by the court under
the Code of Criminal procedure. Once it is held that the criminal
court had no power to deal with the property seized under the
Act, the question of the High Court's exercising its jurisdiction
under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure would not
arise.
12. In case of State of Punjab Vs. Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar and
Anr. reported in (2011) 14 SCC 770, the Apex Court has
“51. The inherent power of the Court under Section 482 of the
CrPC is saved only where an order has been passed by the
criminal Court which is required to be set aside to secure the ends
of justice or where the proceeding pending before a Court,
amounts to abuse of the process of Court. Therefore, such powers
cannot be exercised by the High Court in relation to a matter
pending before a criminal court or where a power is exercised by
the Court under Cr.P.C. Inherent powers cannot be exercised
assuming that the statute conferred an unfettered and arbitrary
jurisdiction, nor can the High court act at its whim or caprice. The
statutory power has to be exercised sparingly with
circumspection and in the rarest of rare cases. (Vide Kurushetra
University V. State of Haryana and State of W.B. Vs. Sujit Kumar
13. In view of the judgments delivered by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court, I am of the humble opinion that before filing of the
charge-sheet the learned Magistrate / Criminal Court has no
material before it and therefore, present Criminal Misc.
Application under section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure cannot be entertained, but before filing of the
charge-sheet any citizen aggrieved by the registration of the
FIR has to invoke the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India read with section 482 of the Code of
14. Applying to the law laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court
in case of Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. (Supra) to the
facts of the case in hand, this Court is of the firm opinion that
this is not a fit case to entertain present application and to
quash the criminal proceedings in exercising the powers
under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure at the
threshold. The submissions made on behalf of the petitioner
that he is an innocent and/or he has not committed any
offence alleged is premature and too early to opine on the
same without permitting the Investigating Agency to
investigate the allegations made in the FIR.           Even prayer
made with regard to stay the criminal proceedings and/or no
coercive steps be taken against the petitioner are also to be
rejected.
15. In view of the above and for the reasons stated herein above,
no case is made out to quash the FIR / criminal proceedings
at this stage while exercising the powers under Section 482 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure. If after investigation, it is
found that the petitioner has committed any offence as alleged
in that case he will be charge-sheeted and the petitioner may
take recourse to the law. On the other hand, after
investigation, if no case is found against the petitioner, the
Investigating Officer may file the closer report, which may be
considered by the competent Court in accordance with law.
But, in any case, at this stage, the FIR is not to be quashed in
exercising the powers under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure without permitting the Investigating
Agency to investigate into the allegations made in the FIR. At
this stage, it is required to be noted that the petitioner and
other accused are not cooperating the Investigating Agency in
the investigation. Further, the Apex Court has reiterated that
High Courts cannot invoke jurisdiction under section 482 of
Cr.P.C. to quash proceedings unless no offence is made out on
plain reading of the allegations in the FIR as they stand.
16. For the reasons stated above, present application fails and the
same deserves to be dismissed and is accordingly dismissed.
Rule is discharged with no order as to costs.