This appeal by the convict is directed against the judgment
and order of conviction and sentence dated 06.06.2019 delivered in
Sessions Trial (T-1) 31 of 2015 by the Addl. Sessions Judge, Court
No.5, West Tripura, Agartala. The appellant has been convicted under
Sections 376(2)(f) of the IPC and sentenced to suffer rigorous
imprisonment for 10 years and also to pay a fine of Rs.5000/- and in
default of payment of fine the appellant shall also suffer further simple
imprisonment for 2 (two) months.
[2]         Genesis of the prosecution is rooted in the complaint filed
by one Anju Das (PW-4) disclosing that on 10.09.2012 the informant
went out of her house for performing works under REGA leaving the
victim alone in her house. Around 4 pm accused (Pintu Ghosh) allured
the victim on the pretext of feeding chocolate, chips etc and took the
victim to his house and committed rape upon the victim therein. On
hearing alarm of the victim, Smt. Manti Ghosh (PW-5) wife of elder
brother of accused rescued the victim when the accused fled away.
[3]         Based on the said complaint dated 11.09.2012, Agartala PS
case No. 246 of 2012 under Section 376(2)(f) of the IPC was registered
and taken up for investigation. On completion of the investigation, final
report was submitted in the court sending up the appellant to face the
trial. The said case was registered in the court of the Chief Judicial
Magistrate, West Tripura, Agartala. Since the offences disclosed in the
police report are exclusively triable by the court of Sessions, on taking
cognizance, the police papers were committed to the court of the
Sessions Judge. In due course, the case was transferred to the court of
the Asst. Session Judge, Court No.1 West Tripura, Agartala, from where
the case was withdrawn and made over to the court of Additional
Sessions Judge herein after referred to as the trial court.
[4]         The trial court on 15.01.2014 framed the charge against the
appellant under Section 376(2)(f) of the IPC for committing rape upon a
minor girl (the name has been withheld for protection of her identity)
aged about 4 years, daughter of Sri Dilip Das of West Dukli, Kali Tilla
Madhuban. The appellant pleaded innocence and claimed to face the
[5]         In order to substantiate the charge prosecution adduced 8
witnesses and introduced 9 documentary evidence including the medical
examination report (Exbt-9). On completion of the recording of the
prosecution evidence, the appellant was examined under section 313 of
the CrPC to have his say on the incriminating material those surfaced in
the evidence led by the prosecution. The appellant reiterated his plea of
innocence and stated the evidence as brought against him are
fabricated. On appreciation of the evidence, the trial judge returned the
finding of conviction by the impugned judgment having observed that
from the evidence of the victim and her mother (PW4) it has been
established beyond reasonable doubt that she was taken by Pintu in his
house by telling that he would give her chips and chocolate etc and then
the accused undressed her and inserted her penis into her vagina is also
not only admissible and relevant as to the conduct of the victim girl but
also constitutes corroboration of her statement being made immediately
after return of PW4. As per provisions of section 157 of the Evidence
Act, read with illustration (j) to section 8 of the Evidence Act.
[6]        The said finding of conviction has been challenged by the
appellant broadly on the grounds that the said finding has emerged
from improper appreciation of evidence inasmuch as appreciation has
not been carried out by the established canons. It would have inferred
that the prosecution story is unnatural, improbable and fabricated one.
The evidence of PW-2, in particular, cannot inspire any confidence for
the purpose of convicting the appellant. Thus, the charge having not
been proved beyond reasonable doubt. The appellant is entitled to
acquittal from the charge by setting aside the impugned judgment and
[7]          Mr. S. Ghosh, learned Addl. P appearing for the state has at
the outset submitted that the prosecution has established the charge
with sufficient evidence and conforming to the standard.
[8]          For the purpose of definition the term woman is defined
under the IPC as a female human being of any age. In the present case
on hand, the victim girl is minor four years still the case is not
registered under POCSO rather it has been registered under Section
376(2)(f) where the minor girl is to be treated as woman. The victim
girl when examined before the court as a prosecution witness (PW3)
she was of 10 years of age by then. And the court has taken all
measures to find out her mental ability to depose and after preliminary
test and being convinced the court has proceeded with recording her
evidence. The complaint made by the mother (PW4) of the victim on
the date of incidence before the police station and her evidence deposed
before the court, she has not shaken. The evidence given by her is
affirmed. Likewise the child has narrated her version and the act
committed by the accused has been explained in due course. Even the
evidence of the victim girl is not shaken. There is no reason to disbelief
the complaint filed by the mother and the evidence of the victim girl. It
is clear from the evidence of the victim girl as she has categorically
stated that the accused penetrated her private part into her private
part. Because of pain, she cried and immediately the sister-in-law,
Manti Ghosh (PW5) of the accused-appellant rushed to the scene and
scolded the accused. The elder brother of the accused also rushed to
the scene of occurrence and also scolded the accused. PW5 being the
eye witness to the incidence Smt. Manti Ghosh (PW5) in her cross
examination has been accused of changing her version          and deposed
before the court stating that the victim girl at the age of 4 visited her
house to play with her one and a half year infant child. But when PW5
informed the victim that her infant child will not be able to play with her
asked her not to disturb him and go away from her house, the victim
girl started raising hue and cry. This statement of PW5 stands
unbelieved as no minor girl would raise her voice when she is asked not
to play with any child. This court also opines that this witness in order
to protect her brother-in law-has changed her version.
[9]          While discussing the admissibility of the evidence of child
the trial court has observed that a child testimony can vary as it can be
doctored by way of torture and coercing, and is not subject to absolute
self authority and assessment. In a landmark judgment of Hon’ble
Supreme Court in Suresh Vs. State of UP it was established that a
testimony of a five year old child shall be admissible, so long as the
child is able to comprehend and understand the question of the given
issue. Hence it was declared that there is no minimum required age of a
person to legally testify in the Court. Section 118 of Indian Evidence Act
mentions who is considered as competent enough to testify in the court
of law. It provides that all persons shall be competent to testify unless
the court considers that they are prevented from understanding the
questions put to them or from giving rational answers to those
questions, by tender years. Hence, it become clear that one shall testify
in case in competent enough and if not considered otherwise by the
court of law.
[10]         While considering the evidence advanced by the mother
(PW4) of the victim, the trial court has rightly observed that a mother is
a protector disciplinarian and friend of a child. A mother is also a
selfless loving human who sacrifices many of her wants and needs for
the wants and needs of her child. A mother works hard to make sure
that her child is safe equipped with the knowledge skills and abilities to
make it a competent human being. It is for that reason, it is
unbelievable to say that a mother would put her daughters entire life at
stake by involving her in a serious matter like the case at hand. PW4
being mother of the victim girl would never put her daughter’s entire
name, fame and even entire life at stake by giving her daughter a label
of a victim of sexual assault.
Having observed thus, this court is not inclined to interfere
judgment passed by the trial court and affirms the same.
Accordingly, the appeal stands dismissed.