Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 23834 of 2022
Counsel for Applicant :- Ram Prakash Upadhyay
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Raj Bahadur Verma
Committee, Jaunpur is present before the Court.
The affidavit of compliance has been filed and the
same is taken in the record.
The affidavit of compliance discloses that the
C.W.C. had taken prompt measures to ensure that
the benefits and the protective provisions of the
POCSO Act, 2012 read with POCSO Rules, 2020
are implemented without any delay in the service
of justice. A recommendation for grant of legal aid
was made to the High Court Legal Services
Authority on 15.07.2022. Form A and Form B were
provided to the C.W.C., Jaunpur on 27.05.2022.
The affidavit of compliance on its part has stated
that the F.I.R. was lodged prior to the judgement of
this Court in Criminal Misc. Bail Application No.
46998 of 2020 (Junaid Vs State of U.P. and
another) reported at 2021 (6) ADJ 511. However,
after the orders were passed by this Court, the
police authorities took appropriate action and
served necessary documents upon the C.W.C. The
C.W.C., district-Jaunpur on its part has also
recommended                  for       grant         of  financial
aid/compensation to the victim which has partially
been disbursed.
The Court appreciates the assistance of the
Personal appearance of Shri Rajmani Mishra,
Chairman, Child Welfare Committee, Jaunpur is
Court Allahabad has been empanelled counsels to
represent the victims. However, it is noticed that
very few lady counsels have appeared for the
In such circumstances, the High Court Legal
Services Committee, High Court Allahabad is
requested to appoint lady counsels to represent the
victims especially when the victims are minor girls.
Heard Shri     Ram Prakash Upadhyay, learned
counsel for the applicant, learned A.G.A. and Shri
Raj Bahadur Verma, learned counsel who has
entered    appearance     on     behalf   of    the
victim/informant on the recommendation made by
the CWC to the High Court Legal Services
By means of this bail application the applicant has
prayed to be enlarged on bail in Case Crime No.97
of   2021    at   Police   Station-Gaurabadshahpur,
District-Jaunpur under Section 376 IPC and
Section 3/4 of the POCSO Act and Section 3(1)(b)
and Section 3(2)(v) of the SC/ST Act, 1989
(amended Act, 2015). The applicant is in jail since
The bail application of the applicant was rejected
by learned Additional Sessions Judge/Special
Judge,    POCSO      Act   (Ananya),   Jaunpur    on
The    victim    is   a   speech-impaired    person.
Considering her disability, there is no delay in
lodgment of the F.I.R.
Learned A.G.A. submits that the applicant was
named in the F.I.R. and hence, there was no cause
for test identification parade. The applicant has
been otherwise identified by witnesses.
The offence is grave. The likelihood of the
applicant committed the offence is borne out from
the records. At this stage no case for bail is made
Without going into the merits of the case, the bail
application is dismissed.
Interest of justice will be served by directing the
learned trial court to expedite the trial within a
stipulated period of time.
The trial court is directed to conclude the trial
within a period of one year from the date of receipt
of a certified copy of this order. The learned trial
court shall proceed with the hearing on a day to day
basis to ensure that the above stipulated timeline of
one year is strictly adhered to. All witnesses also
are directed to cooperate with the trial proceedings.
The learned trial court shall promptly take out all
strict coercive measures against all the witnesses in
accordance with law who fail to appear in the trial
proceeding.
Police and administrative authorities of the State
are also directed to ensure that the coercive
measures adopted by the court are given effect to in
a scrupulous manner to ensure the presence of the
witnesses on the appointed date before the trial
court.
The learned trial judge shall submit a fortnightly
report on the progress of trial and the steps taken to
ensure that the trial is concluded within a stipulated
period of time to the learned District Judge,
Digitally signed by ASHISH NAYAN
Location: High Court of Judicature at