The Supreme Court on Wednesday, as an interim arrangement, allowed Bharat Singh Chauhan to continue as the Secretary of All India Chess Federation till August 15, 2022.
The vacation bench of Justices MR Shah and Aniruddha Bose
 permitted Chauhan to discharge the duties while taking into consideration the 44th World Chess Olympiad which is scheduled to take place from July 2 to August 10 in India.
"As it is reported that the nation is holding a prestigious Chess Olympiad in the country from 28.7.2022 to Aug 10, 2022 and the same is not affected further in any manner, we direct the appellant to be continued as Sec of the Federation till Aug 15. 2022 by interim arrangement only. The same shall be without the rights of the parties pending in the appeal before the HC & subject to further order that may be passed by the DB within the time stipulated herein above. Within the same, the plea is disposed above,"
 the bench said in its order.
The directions were issued while the Top Court was considering a SLP assailing Delhi High Court's interim order dated June 2, 2022 passed by the bench of Justices Najim Waziri and Vikas Mahajan staying Chauhan's election as the Secretary of the Federation.
Appearing for Chauhan, the counsel contended that the Division Bench of the High Court had passed the order in haste, without giving any sufficient opportunity either to the appellant or the Union Government.
It was also contended that as such the main writ petition which was not maintainable was yet to be considered by the Single Judge. Counsel further argued that the Single Judge had rejected the interim relief at that stage and the question with regards to injunction was yet to be considered.
On the other hand, counsel for Ravindra Dongre argued on the manner in which the election was conducted in which the appellant was elected the Secretary to submit that the High Court has not committed any error.
While granting the interim relief of reinstating Chauhan till August 15, the bench disposed of the appeal and asked the Union of India and Chauhan to file a detailed affidavit before the division bench of the High Court within a period of 4 weeks.
The Top Court also directed the division bench to pass a fresh order including the grant of any interim order after giving opportunity to all concerned within period of 4 weeks thereafter
Case Title: 
Bharat Singh Chauhan v Ravinder Singh| SLP(C) 10500/2022


