3.    The petitioner is principally aggrieved by the imposition, by the
learned Additional Rent Controller (“learned ARC”) on the petitioner,
of costs of ₹ 5 lacs, for “misusing the process of law and causing
inconvenience to the Government machinery”.
4.    An eviction order was passed in favour of the petitioner and
against the respondents by the learned ARC (the Predecessor in office
of the officer, who passed the impugned order), on 4th November,
5.      The petitioner applied for execution of the said order. Warrants
of possession were directed to be issued by the learned ARC on 22nd
March, 2022. Consequent thereupon, the Bailiff visited the premises
of the respondents on 11th April, 2022. When the Bailiff reached the
premises of the respondents, Mr. Sanjay Saini, who is Respondent 2,
informed the Bailiff that the petitioner had, in writing, allowed
Respondent 2 two months’ time to vacate the premises. Noting this
fact, the Bailiff filed his report before the Court of the learned ARC.
6.      Learned ARC appears to have taken unnecessarily adverse
notice of these facts. Learned ARC has, in the impugned order dated
21st April, 2022, recorded, in no uncertain terms and without mincing
words, his displeasure at the fact that, having got warrants of
possession issued by the learned ARC, because of which the Bailiff
had to visit the premises of the respondents in order to ensure their
eviction, the petitioner nonetheless granted the respondents two
months’ time to vacate. According to the learned ARC, though time
was granted by the petitioner voluntarily, at the time when he visited
the premises of the respondents with the Bailiff, the conduct of the
petitioner indicated that “he wanted to put pressure upon the JDs by
getting the Warrants of Possession issued from the Court”. This,
according to the learned ARC, amounted to an abuse of process of law
and caused great loss to the Government exchequer, as the Bailiff
and the police officials were Government Servants, who had to spare
time from their other official duties in order to get the Warrants of
Possession executed. The learned ARC has characterized the case as
“a classic case of abuse of process of law and abuse of Government
machinery by the DH with an intention to harass and intimidate the
7.      Learned Counsel for the petitioner submits that there was no
cause for the learned ARC to express such displeasure in the matter, as
he had fairly agreed to allow the respondents two months’ time to
vacate the premises only because, when he visited the premises with
the Bailiff in order to get the warrants of possession executed, the
respondents pleaded for time to vacate the premises as they were using
it for commercial purposes. He submits, with justifiable chagrin, that
the grace shown by him in allowing the respondents time as sought,
has resulted in his having to suffer costs of ₹ 5 lacs as imposed by the
impugned order.
8.      The present petition is also accompanied by an affidavit of
Respondent 2 in which he has confirmed thus:
“2. I say that on 11.04.2022, on my request and on
the request of my family members, the petitioner has
granted two months time to us to hand over the
vacant peaceful possession of the property. The
petitioner has given the said time on humanitarian
ground to ensure that the goods of the respondents
may not be thrown out on the road. I and my entire
family is obliged to the petitioner for granting the
said time.”
9.      To say the least, the impugned order is completely unwarranted
on facts and in law. Frankly, I am unable to understand the reason for
the learned ARC having expressed the sentiments that he has chosen
to express in the impugned order. There was no justification
whatsoever, in my view, for the learned ARC to take exception at all,
much less such serious exception, to the fact that the petitioner had
fairly agreed to allow the respondents to continue in the tenanted
premises for two more months. It is not as though the petitioner had
earlier granted time to the respondents and, concealing the said fact,
had got warrants of possession issued. At the time when warrants of
possession were issued, the respondents had not asked for any further
time to continue in the premises. It was only when the petitioner
visited the premises with the Bailiff that the respondents pleaded for
further time, which was fairly granted by the petitioner.
10.    It is indeed ironical that an eminently fair attitude, exhibited by
the petitioner, aroused the wrath of the learned ARC and invited, on
the head of the petitioner, costs of ₹ 5 lacs.
11.     Mr. Kunal Kalra, learned Counsel for the petitioner, further
submits that his client was made to wait for two days in the Court
from morning till evening, before the impugned order came to be
passed.
12.    This Court unequivocally expresses its discomfiture at the
manner in which the impugned order has come to be passed. In order
that the career of the learned ARC, who appears to be a fairly young
Judicial Officer, is not prejudiced, I deem it appropriate to close this
matter by setting aside the impugned order insofar as it imposes costs
of ₹ 5 lacs to the petitioner, with a word of advice to the learned ARC
to ensure that, in future, a great degree of temperance is exhibited by
him in discharge of his judicial functions. Unwarranted and needless
hypersensitivity is not expected of Judicial Officers, who are expected,
at all times to maintain composure and poise, befitting the office they
hold.
13.     This   petition  stands  allowed    in   the   aforesaid   terms.
Miscellaneous application is also disposed of.
14.     Let a copy of this order be communicated to the learned ARC
who passed the impugned order dated 21 st April, 2022, at whichever
posts he happens to be holding as on date.