      HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE FOR RAJASTHAN AT
               S.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 17451/2021
 Chetan Choudhary S/o Keshari Mal Choudhary, Aged About 66
 Years, Resident Of Purana Jata Vass, Barmer.
                                                        ----Petitioner
 1.      The Union Of India, Through Its Joint Secretary (Co-Op)
         And Central Registrar, Room No. 244, Department Of
         Agriculture, Cooperation And Farmers Welfare, Ministry Of
         Agriculture And Farmers Welfare, Krishi Bhawan, New
         Delhi 110001.
 2.      Superintendent Of Police, SOG And ATS, Office Of The
         Special Operation Group Rajasthan Police, Jaipur Delhi
         National Highway, Jaipur Rajasthan.
 3.      Adarsh Credit Cooperative Society Ltd., Through Its
         Managing Director/chief General Manager, Registered And
         Head Office 14 Vidya Vihar Colony, Ashram Road,
         Usmpanpura, Ahmedabad, Gujarat.
                                                    ----Respondents
 For Petitioner(s)        :  Mr. Surendra Bagmalani through V.C.
 For Respondent(s)        :  Mr. Mukesh Rajpurohit, ASG through
                             Mr. Mrigraj Singh Rathore through
                      JUSTICE DINESH MEHTA
1.    The limited grievance that the petitioner has raised in this
case is that the petitioner had made certain deposits in the
respondent No.3 Adarsh Credit Co-operative Society Ltd. under
various    schemes     and   heads,     however,  subsequently      the
respondent No.3 establishment has been closed and at the
instance of respondent No.1, a Liquidator was also appointed.
2.    The counsel for the petitioner submits that meanwhile the
deposits of other creditors have been released, however, the
deposits made by the petitioner have not been released. The
petitioner makes a limited prayer that the respondents may be
directed to take a decision on the claim application of the
petitioner for seeking release of the amount lying deposited with
the respondent No.3.
3.    Accordingly, the respondents are directed to take a decision
on the application filed by the petitioner expeditiously, preferably
within a period of ninety days from the date of receipt of copy of
this order strictly in accordance with rules and guidelines
governing the field.
4.    The writ petition accordingly stands disposed of.
5.    The stay application also stands disposed of accordingly.
