The hearing has been conducted through hybrid mode (physical and
virtual hearing).
1. This petition seeks initiation of contempt proceedings against the
respondent for wilful disobedience of the order dated 04.12.2019
passed by the learned Principal Judge, Family Courts. As per the said
order, the statement of learned counsel for the respondent was
recorded by the said court to the effect that the respondent does not
wish to pursue the petition, as the matter has been amicably settled
between the parties in terms of the settlement agreement dated
07.09.2019 i.e. both the parties have mutually agreed to dissolve their
marriage.    However, the respondent’s presence in court is not
recorded on the said date. The petition was disposed-off on the basis
of the submission of Mr. Sumit Rathi, the respondent’s counsel.
2. The learned Amicus Curiae draws the court’s attention to the dicta of
this court in Rajat Gupta vs. Rupali Gupta, 2018 SCC OnLine Del
9005, Cont. CAS(C) 772/2013, which has held inter alia as under:
63. Question (C) Whether any guidelines are
required to be followed by the Court while recording the
undertaking/agreement of the parties with respect to a
petition under Section 13B(1) or a motion under Section
13B(2) of the Act, 1955 or both for obtaining divorce?
Answer: The general guidelines suggested to be
followed      by     the     Court      while     recording
undertaking/agreement of the parties are as below: —
(1) If the parties amicably settle their inter se
disputes and differences, and arrive at a settlement,
whether of their own accord, or with the aid and
assistance of the court or on exercising the ADR
processes (mediation/conciliation/Lok Adalat), or
otherwise, the settlement agreement that may be
drawn up, must incorporate the following: —
i) Record in clear, specific and unambiguous
language, the terms/stipulations agreed upon
ii) Record in clear, specific, simple and
unambiguous language, the mode, manner,
mechanism and/or method for the implementation
or compliances of the terms/stipulations agreed
iii) Record an undertaking of the parties that they
will abide by and be bound by the agreed
terms/stipulations of the settlement agreement;
iv) Stipulate a fine or penalty as may be agreed
upon, in the event of a default of the agreed
terms/stipulations of the settlement agreement by
v) Provide for the consequences of the breach of
the terms/stipulations of the settlement agreement;
vi) Record a declaration of both the parties in
unequivocal and unambiguous terms that they have
agreed on each and every term recorded in the
settlement agreement, after carefully reading over
and fully understanding and appreciating the
contents, scope and effect thereof, as also the
consequences of the breach thereof, including
payment of the fine/penalty, if so agreed;
vii) The settlement agreement must state that the
terms have been settled between the parties of their
own free will, violation and consent and without
there being any undue pressure, coercion,
influence, misrepresentation or mistake (both of
law and fact), in any form whatsoever. It should
also be stated that the settlement agreement has
correctly recorded the said agreed terms.
(2) The settlement agreement may include a
term/stipulation that the parties have agreed that they
would dissolve their marriage by mutual consent, which
necessarily has to be in accordance with the law, as
provided under Section 13B of the Hindu Marriage Act.
(3) The settlement agreement may include other
terms/stipulations settled between the parties including
payment of money, transfer of moveable/immovable
properties as for example,                jewellery/stridhan,
maintenance amounts, alimony etc. or plans for the
custody of the children/visitation rights of children. The
said terms must be scrutinized by the court to satisfy itself
that they are in accordance with the spirit of law and are
enforceable and executable.
(4) On the said settlement agreement being
presented, along with a report (in the event the settlement
is arrived at through mediation or conciliation or Lok
Adalat) to the court where the proceedings between the
parties are sub judice, the said court should apply the
procedure and principles to be followed by a civil court
under and/or analogous to the provisions of Order XXIII
Rule 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
(5) To avoid any ambiguity or misunderstanding on
the part of either of the parties, at a later stage, a clear
and unambiguous undertaking to the court must be
recorded.
(6) The statements of the parties may be recorded
by the court after putting them on oath in the following
a) the parties should affirm the terms of the
b) the fact that they have executed the settlement
agreement after fully understanding the terms, consents,
c) that the same has been arrived at of their own
d) that they would be liable for penal consequences
in case of breach.
(7) In the alternative, the court may direct the
parties to file their respective affidavits affirming the
terms and conditions of the settlement. If considered
necessary, the court may ask the parties to formally prove
not only the said affidavits, but also the settlement
agreement executed by them.
(8) The Court must apply its judicial mind to satisfy
itself that the settlement arrived at between the parties is
not only bonafide, equitable and voluntary in nature, but
is enforceable in law and is not opposed to public policy.
The court must also satisfy itself that there is no
impediment of any nature in accepting the said settlement
and the undertakings of the parties and binding them
down thereto.
(9) After perusing the settlement agreement,
recording the statements of the parties and/or examining
the affidavits filed by them, as the case may be, the Court
must specifically accept the statements of the parties
and/or the undertakings given by them as also the
terms/stipulations of the settlement agreement and direct
that they shall remain bound by the same.
(10) Depending upon the jurisdiction of the Court,
appropriate orders/decree be passed. The said
order/decree, as the case may be, should clearly spell out
the consequences of breach, violation of any of the terms
of the settlement agreement. In the event any fine/penalty
has been agreed to be paid under the terms of the
settlement agreement or in case of breach of the same,
the order shall state that the said amount will be
recovered from the defaulting party. The parties must be
informed that they will be liable to be punished for
contempt of court in the event of any
breach/violation/willful/deliberate disobedience of the
terms of the settlement agreement.
(11) A decree/order shall be passed by the Court in
respect of the subject matter of the suit/proceedings. For
those matters/disputes that are not the subject matter of
the suit/proceedings, where a settlement has been
reached before a non-adjudicatory ADR fora, the Court
shall direct that the settlement agreement shall be
governed by Section 74 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act (in case of a settlement through
conciliation) and/or Section 21 of The Legal Services
Authorities Act, 1987. (in respect of a settlement by a
Mediator or a Lok Adalat) [Refer: Afcons Infrastructure
(12) If the obligations under the settlement
agreement/undertaking/consent        order/decree      are
breached by one party, then, at the instance of the
aggrieved party, appropriate orders shall be passed in
accordance with law.
(13) For breach of the undertaking given to the
concerned court or willful/deliberate violation of a
consent order/decree, if so approached or otherwise, the
court would take appropriate action as permissible in law
to enforce compliance by the defaulting party by
exercising contempt jurisdiction as contemplated under
Section 2(b) of the Contempt of Court Act, 1971. This will
however exclude any coercive orders compelling the
defaulting party to give its consent for grant of a decree
of divorce by mutual consent, notwithstanding any
settlement/undertaking given by the parties before any
fora.
3. Clearly, what is required is that the settlement ought to be recorded in
clear and unambiguous terms, that such terms ought to have been
understood by the parties; that they should have been of their volition
and their statement before the court ought to have been recorded on
solemn oath. The learned Amicus Curiae submits that none of the
essential elements of the said procedure prescribed by the Division
Bench have been followed.
4. The court would note that the mediation settlement has handwritten
clauses which are not in seriatim. They have not been signed at each
place where clauses have been inserted. To obviate any doubts, each
such handwritten clause ought to have been countersigned by all the
parties. That not being done, it raises doubts about the parties being
ad idem apropos the said clauses. Furthermore, the same was not
reproduced in an undertaking before the learned Family Court.
Instead, a statement of counsel for the parties was recorded, without
solemn affirmation. The respondent submits that she cannot be held
liable for a statement she did not make before the court in terms of the
said judgment as apparently all outstanding monies were payable by
the husband.
5. This court by its order dated 04.09.2019 in BVG INDIA LTD vs.
Navin Saini, CM (M) 1311 of 2019, has held inter alia as under:
7. As a matter of caution, it is directed that Id. Mediators
are requested to not allow any handwritten notations or
words, in the Mediation/settlement agreements especially
if the same are not countersigned/initialled by the
Mediator himself, as in the present suit. This has led to
complications and subsequent proceedings being filed
between the parties. The present order be communicated
to all the Mediation Centres in the District Courts as also
the SAMADHAN - the Delhi High Court mediation centre.
Copy of this order be sent to the worthy Registrar General
for communication to the Mediation centre of all the
District courts.”
6. The practice of handwritten clauses needs to be discontinued
forthwith,     unless   it is  countersigned     or   initialled by  the
Mediator/Counsellor in the presence of the parties as well as by the
parties. Often when a settlement is recorded, it is after a lot of
dialogue between the parties, who have invariably suffered long
litigations, harassment and much anguish. They may not know the
finer points of recording of the mediated settlement agreements;
therefore, it becomes the duty of the Mediator/Counsellor to ensure
that the settlement agreement is recorded specifically in terms of the
dicta of this court in Rajat Gupta (supra). The learned Family Court
too shall ensure that whenever a settlement agreement is recorded, it
is in accordance with the aforesaid dicta. In cases of default, the
agreement may be referred back to the mediation centre for correcting
the anomaly. The learned Family Court shall ensure that the recording
of the settlement/undertaking of the parties is in terms of Rajat Gupta
7. The learned Amicus Curiae also relies upon the dicta of this court in
Rosey Sailo Damodaran vs. Nitin Damodaran, 2019 SCC OnLine Del
7159, in which it was held inter alia as under:
8. The scope of contempt proceedings in cases where the
defaulting party has retracted or failed to co-operate to give its
consent at the point of first motion or second motion or at any
stage before the divorce decree is passed, despite having an
undertaking to that effect, in cases of divorce petition by mutual
consent is limited. The Courts, acting in their contempt
jurisdiction, do not have the power to compel the defaulting
party to give his/her consent despite having an explicit
agreement to that effect. However, the court can still hold the
defaulting party liable for contempt for retracting from such an
undertaking only if, a plea that as a consequence of default by
the defaulting party, he/she has been placed in a
disadvantageous position or has suffered an irreversible/grave
prejudice is set out. The court in such a case, in exercise of its
inherent powers of contempt, has the requisite jurisdiction to
entertain the petition and direct restoration of status quo ante
in every possible way and direct the defaulting party to
disgorge all the benefits/advantages that would have ensued in
its favour and restore the parties to the same position which
was there before giving consent. Apart from it, the court has the
discretion to punish the defaulting party for civil contempt
depending on the facts of a given case.
16. Further, Rule 25 (a) of the Mediation and Conciliation
Rules, 2004 sets out the procedure for the court to ratify the
settlement reached between the parties. The Rule reads as
"Rule 25: Court to fix a date for recording settlement and
passing decree.
(a) On receipt of any settlement, the court shall fix a date
of hearing normally within seven days but In any case not
beyond a period of fourteen days. On such date of hearing. If
the court Is satisfied that the parties have settled their dispute
(s). It shall pass a decree In accordance with terms thereof."
17. The petitioner herein never personality appeared before the
learned Principal Judge, Family Court. Even the respondent
did not personally appear. Only the learned counsel for the
respondent made a statement that the matter stands settled
between the parties as per the mediation settlement Ex. P-2 and
he sought permission to withdraw the petition. The petition was
allowed to be withdrawn with liberty to the respondent herein
to revive the proceedings in case the petitioner herein does not
abide by the terms and conditions of the mediation settlement.
The satisfaction stipulated In Rule 25 is a judicial satisfaction
and could be reached at only after verifying from both the
parties, their objective, willingness and satisfaction towards the
terms of the settlement. The said Rule escaped the attention of
the learned Principal Judge, Family Court.
8. In the present case, the petitioner has not paid Rs.21 lakhs to the
respondent-wife.
9. The Supreme Court in Abhishek Kumar Singh Vs. G. Pattanaik &
Ors., 2021 SCC OnLine SC 416, has held that the contempt would be
only when the same is deliberate in the face of the court order and it
has caused prejudice to the other party.
10.As noted hereinabove, since the settlement agreement recorded
between the parties is not in terms of the decision of the Division
Bench, nor was any undertaking of the respondent recorded before the
learned Family Court, nor was an affidavit directed to be filed or filed
affirming the terms of the settlement; the settlement agreement does
not form a part of the court order. Accordingly, it cannot be said that
the respondent has committed contempt of court. No contempt is
made out.
11.This court records its gratitude to Ms. Prabhsahay Kaur, the learned
Amicus Curiae, for her assistance.
12. The petition stands disposed-off in terms of the above.
13. However, at this stage, the learned counsels for the parties seek time
to obtain instructions apropos whether they would like to go for
mediation before the Delhi High Court Mediation and Conciliation
14.At request, renotify on 05.10.2021.