The petitioner, a     Healthcare    Global  Enterprises   Limited
(hereinafter referred to as ‘the Company’ for short) is before this
Court calling in question order dated 27-02-2019 by which the
Ministry  of  Chemicals    and   Fertilizers in  the   Department     of
Pharmaceuticals imposes a cap on trade margin of 30% and directs
manufacturers to fix their retail price based on price at first point of
sale of the product of non-scheduled formulations containing in all
those 42 drugs listed in the said order.
2. Shorn of unnecessary details, facts in brief that are
germane for consideration, as borne out from the pleadings, are as
The petitioner claims to be the largest provider of cancer care
and is in the forefront of the battle against cancer and claims to
have 20 comprehensive cancer care centers across the nation. The
petitioner further claims that it has been successfully able to
provide innovate and cost-effective methods of treatment and
management of cancer. It operates a hub and spoke model and has
been acclaimed of both commitment and quality of health care.
The petitioner fits into the definition of retailer in any of the
enactments that are necessary to be considered in the case at
hand. The issue that drives the petitioner to this Court in the
subject petition is the order of the Ministry of Chemicals and
Fertilizers in the Department of Pharmaceuticals at the National
Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority imposing a cap of 30% upon
manufacturers for select anti cancer drugs identified by the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare as being essential for the treatment of
cancer invoking its power under the Drugs (Prices Control) Order,
the policy to keep the margin to a maximum extent of 30% to the
manufacturers is what is promulgated under the Notification. The
petitioner, a retailer who runs cancer care centers and deals with
these medicines which are used to combat cancer rushes to this
Court once the Notification comes about on 27-02-2019 contending
that   the  petitioner  being  a  stockist,  the  cap   laid on   the
manufacturer would result in his business getting affected inter alia.
This Court declined to grant an interim order of stay of any kind of
the order impugned but by a detailed order noticed that in the
event the petitioner succeeds, his interest would be protected.
3. Heard Sri Deepak Bhaskar, learned counsel appearing for
the petitioner and Sri M.B.Nargund, learned Additional Solicitor
General of India appearing for the respondents.
4. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner would
contend that the National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Authority who
has now issued the Notification is not empowered under the Price
Control Order to fix ceiling price or retail price of non-scheduled
formulations. The non-scheduled formulations are to be determined
only by the market force and cannot be subject to any regulation.
There is no extraordinary circumstance for fixing of ceiling price or
retail price of any drug invoking its power under the Price Control
Order and, therefore, the cap that is laid at 30% is arbitrary and
imposes an unreasonable restriction on the petitioner’s right under
Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India which depicts right to
trade. He would further contend that the Price Control Order is
arbitrary, unreasonable and bears no application of mind for
capping the trade margin of 42 drugs at 30% and seeks quashment
of the order of such capping.
5. On the other hand, the learned Additional Solicitor General
of India would vehemently refute the submissions to contend that
under the Prices Control Order, the Government is empowered to
put a cap on the price of either the manufacturer or the retailer. It
is the manufacturer whose price is now capped and not the retailer
and the petitioner cannot claim to be an aggrieved person by
issuance of the impugned order as it is not the manufacturer. He
would contend that for the public good essential drugs can be
placed under the price control order as the market forces are
charging 900% over and above the manufacturing cost and the cap
is on all the anti-cancer drugs.  It is in paramount public interest
that it is issued and it was to be in operation for a period of one
year and later have to be increased by 10%.            Therefore, no
manufacturer even can claim that they can continue to impose
900% margin over a cancer drug which is needed to every citizen
suffering from such a disease. He would, therefore, seek dismissal
of the petition.
6. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions
made by the respective learned counsel and perused the material
on record. In furtherance whereof, the only issue that falls for my
“Whether the policy of Government of India in the
imposition     of  cap   on   trade   margin    of   30%      on  the
manufacturer is arbitrary and unreasonable?”
7. The Government of India in the Ministry of Chemicals and
Fertilizers by a notification on 07-12-2012 promulgated National
Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy, 2012.      The policy initially comes
about in the wake of aftermath of Chinese aggression resulting in
the promulgation of the Drugs (Display of Prices) Order, 1962 and
the Drugs (Control of Prices) Order, 1963.                They were all
promulgated under the Defence of India Act.          Based on this, the
National Pharmaceuticals Pricing Policy, 2012 was notified. The
objectives of the policy are as found in the said Notification reading
“2. Objectives of the Present Policy.
As stated above, in its present form, the Drug Policy of
1994 needs to be modified in the contest of changed global
environment for industry as well required changes in the
mechanism to make available essential medicines to the
masses. The objective is to put in place a regulatory
framework for pricing of drugs so as to ensure availability
of required medicines – “essential medicines” – at
reasonable prices even while providing sufficient
opportunity for innovation and competition to support the
growth of industry, thereby meeting the goals of
employment and shared economic well being for all. The
reasons are further elaborated later in the Pricing
The key principles are also enunciated in the said policy.         Clause
(xii) of the policy which deals with non-price control drugs reads as
“(xii) Non-price Control Drugs: Under the existing price
control regime, the prices of Non-Scheduled Drugs are
monitored and in case the prices of such drugs increase by more
than 10% in a year, subject to certain criteria, Government
fixed the prices of such medicines from time to time. In the
proposed policy, all essential drugs are under price control. It
would follow that non-essential drugs should not be
under a controlled regime and their prices should be fixed
by market forces. However, in order to keep a check on
overall drug prices, it is proposed that prices of such
drugs be monitored on regular basis, and where such
price increase at a rate of about 10% per annum is
observed, the Government would be empowered to have
the price of these drugs reduced to below this limit, for
next 12 months.”
The objective of the policy was to put in place a regulatory
framework for pricing of drugs so as to ensure availability of
required medicines – “essential medicines” – at reasonable prices
even while providing sufficient opportunity for innovation and
competition to support the growth of pharmaceutical industry. The
key principle of the policy was regulation of price of drugs on the
basis of essentiality of such drugs which would be different from the
economic criteria/market share principle hitherto adopted in the
drug policies. ‘Essentiality’ was the key feature.
8. Exercising its powers conferred under the Essential
Commodities Act, 1955 and in supersession of the Drugs (Prices
Control) Order, 1995, the Government of India notifies the Drugs
(Prices Control) Order 2013 (hereinafter referred to as ‘the Prices
Control Order’ for short). Certain clauses of the Price Control Order
are germane to be noticed. Clause 2 deals with definitions. Ceiling
price is defined under clause 2(d) and reads as follows:
“(d)   “ceiling price” means a price fixed by the Government
for Scheduled formulations in accordance with the
provisions of the Order.”
Retail price is dealt with under clause 2(z) and reads as follows:
(z)    “retail price” means the price fixed by the Government for
a new drug under paragraph 5;
Clause 5 dealing with calculation of retail price of a new drug for
existing manufacturers of scheduled formulations reads as follows:-
“5. Calculation of retail price of a new drug for
existing manufacturers of scheduled formulations. – (1)
The retail price of the new drug available in domestic market
shall be calculated as provided in sub-paragraph (1) of
paragraph-4.
(2)(i) The price to retailer of a new drug, not available in
domestic market, shall be fixed by the Government on the
principles of “Pharmacoeconomics” o the new drug, on the
recommendation of a Standing Committee of Experts formed
under paragraph-15.
(ii) The retail price of such new drug shall be fixed by
adding sixteen per cent margin to retailer on the price to retailer
as fixed in item (i).”
Clause -7 deals with margin to retailer and it reads as follows:
“7. Margin to retailer. – While fixing a ceiling price of
scheduled formulations and retail prices of new drugs, sixteen
percent of price to retailer as a margin to retailer shall be
allowed.”
Clause-10 deals with pricing of the formulations covered under
Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 1995, and it reads as follows:
“10. Pricing of the formulations covered under
Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 1995.- (1) The prices of
scheduled formulations, which are also specified in the First
Schedule to the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 1995, fixed and
notified under the provisions of the said order, up to 31st May,
2012, shall remain effective for further one year i.e, up to 30th
May 2013 and the manufacturers may revise the prices of such
scheduled formulations as per the annual wholesale price index
for the previous calendar year announced by Department of
Industrial Promotion and Policy and thereafter the formula as in
sub- paragraph (1) of paragraph 4 of this Order shall be applied
for fixing the ceiling prices of such formulations.
(2) The prices of scheduled formulations, which are also
specified in the First Schedule to the Drugs (Prices Control)
Order, 1995, fixed and notified under the provisions of Drugs
(Prices Control) Order, 1995 after 31st May, 2012, shall remain
effective for one year from the date of notification of such prices
under Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 1995 and immediately
thereafter the manufacturers may revise the prices as per the
annual wholesale price index for the previous calendar year
announced by Department of Industrial Promotion and Policy
and on the 1st April of succeeding financial year, the formula as
in sub-paragraph (1) of paragraph 4 of this Order shall be
applied for fixing the ceiling prices of such schedule
formulations.
(3) The prices of scheduled formulations, which are
specified in the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 1995 but not
specified in the First Schedule of this order, fixed and notified
under the provisions of the said order, up to 31st May, 2012,
shall remain effective for further one year i.e. up to the 30th May
2013 and thereafter prices of such formulations shall be
regulated as in case of other non-scheduled formulations as
stated in paragraph 20 of this Order.
(4) The prices of scheduled formulations, which are
specified in the Drugs (Prices Control) Order, 1995 but not
specified in the First Schedule of this order, fixed and notified
under the provisions of the said order, after 31st May, 2012,
shall remain effective for one year from the date of notification
of such prices and thereafter prices of such formulations shall be
regulated as in case of other non- scheduled formulations as
stated in paragraph 20 of this Order.”
Clause-19 forms the soul of the Order, dealing with fixation of
ceiling price of the drug under certain circumstances and it reads as
“19. Fixation of ceiling price of a drug under certain
circumstances: Notwithstanding anything contained in this
order, the Government may, in case of extra-ordinary
circumstances, if it considers necessary so to do in public
interest fix the ceiling price or retail price of any Drug for such
period, as it may deem fit and where the ceiling price or retail
price of the drug is already fixed and notified, the Government
may allow an increase or decrease in the ceiling price or the
retail price, as the case may be, irrespective of annual wholesale
price index for that year.”
Clause 20 deals with monitoring the prices of non-scheduled
formulations and it reads as follows:
“20. Monitoring the prices of non-scheduled
formulations.- (1) The Government shall monitor the
maximum retail prices (MRP) of all the drugs, including the non-
scheduled formulations and ensure that no manufacturer
increases the maximum retail price of a drug more than ten
percent of maximum retail price during preceding twelve
months and where the increase is beyond ten percent of
maximum retail price, it shall reduce the same to the level of
ten percent of maximum retail price for next twelve months.
(2) The manufacturer shall be liable to deposit the
overcharged amount along with interest thereon from the date
of increase in price in addition to the penalty.”
9. On a reading of the afore-quoted clauses of the Prices
Control Order what would emerge is, the ceiling price which is the
price fixed by Government for the scheduled formulations can be
regulated.    So is the retail price.      The power available for such
regulation is under clause-19 which begins with a non-obstante
clause reading “Notwithstanding anything contained” in this order,
the Government may, in extraordinary circumstances, if it considers
necessary, to do so in public interest, fix the ceiling price or retail
price of any drug for a particular period. The Government is also
empowered to vary the price of a drug that is already fixed and
notify increase or decrease in the ceiling price or the retail price
irrespective   of  annual     wholesale     price  index for that  year.
Therefore, the fixation of ceiling price of a drug is a power available
notwithstanding anything contained in the Prices Control Order.
Clause 20 also permits monitoring of non-scheduled formulations by
Government. Non-scheduled formulations form the subject matter
of the present petition. Clause 20 empowers the Government to
monitor maximum retail prices of all the drugs including non-
scheduled formulations to ensure that no manufacturer increases
the maximum retail price of a drug more than what is found in
clause 20. Schedule-I to the said order enlists what drugs that
would come within the ambit of such control.           Based upon the
aforesaid policy and the Prices Control Order, the Government of
India in the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers notifies the order
dated 27-02-2019, the impugned order. Clauses 6, 10 and 15 of
the Order read as follows:
“6. And whereas, the Authority noted that while the
scheduled formulations currently under price cap form 16-17 per
cent of the pharma industry, the only control on the
remaining non-scheduled drugs is by ensuring that the annual
price increase is not more than 10%. The Government has
been examining options for rationalisation of prices in this
segment in a graded manner. One major factor that
contributes to high drug prices in India, is the
unreasonably high trade margins. Trade margin is the
difference between the price at which the manufacturers
sell the drugs to stockiest/distributors (price to
stockiest) and the final price to patients (maximum retail
price).”
10. And whereas, the Authority noted that ‘Cancer is one
of the leading causes of adult illness and death due to chronic
and non-communicable diseases (NCD) in India. As per WHO
estimate, there are approximately 18 million cases globally and
1.5 million in India alone. There were 8 lakhs cancer deaths in
India in 2018. The number of new cases is estimated to rise to
do9uble in India in 2040. The financial burden associated with
cancer can force parents and households to acute misery and
even insolvency. It is also noted that out of pocket (OOP)
expenditure on cancer hospitalization is about 2.5 times of
overall average hospitalization expenditure. While catastrophic
expenditure on cancer inpatient treatment is highest among all
NCDs, poor health financing mechanisms and heavy reliance on
out of pocket healthcare payments compels several cancer
patients to resort to distressed means for treatment financing.
In fact, some studies on India suggest that about 60 and 32
percent households resort to borrowings and contributions (from
friends and relatives) respectively for cancer hospitalization. It is
estimated that almost more than 50% cancer patients avail the
private sector facilities and out of pocket expenses in the Health
care including cancer care is about around 65%.”
15. And whereas, invoking paragraph 19 of DPCO,
2013, the Government hereby puts a cap on trade margin
of 30% and directs manufacturers to fix their retail price
based on price at first point of sale of product
(hereinafter referred as Price to Stockist), as formulated
in Table-A, of the non-scheduled formulations containing
any of the 42 drugs listed in Table B (whether individual
or in combination irrespective of dosage strength, dosage
form and/or route of administration.”
The order notices the authority i.e., Pharmaceuticals Pricing
Authority and the scheduled formulations are under the price cap of
16-17 per cent in the Pharma industry. The only control on the
remaining non-scheduled drugs is by ensuring that the annual price
increase is not more than 10%. Seeking to rationalize prices in that
segment in a graded manner, the order is promulgated as high drug
prices in India were unreasonable.       The trade margin was the
difference between the price on which the manufacturer sells drugs
to stockists and the final price when it reaches the patients. Clause
10 supra notices that cancer is one of the leading causes of adult
illness in India and then imposes a price cap on the trade margin of
30% to the manufacturer in terms of clause 15. How the amount
would work out is also found in Table-A appended to the
Government order and the names of drugs are given therein. The
drugs are 42 in number, all of them are drugs that are meant to be
treated for patients suffering from cancer. They are anti-cancer
drugs. Clause (m) of the said order directs that the price so fixed
shall be valid for one year from the date of notification and any
violation of the Order was to be brought to the notice of the
Authority as they were all cancer drugs supplied to hospitals and
were required monitoring of maximum retail prices of such
10. The foundation to the afore-quoted regulatory measures
taken by Government lies in a resolution notified on 29-08-1997 by
the Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers by establishing an
independent     body   called  the   National   Pharmaceutical   Pricing
Authority. The resolution reads as follows:
(Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals)
New Delhi, the 29th August, 1997
F.No.33/7/97-PI-1.- Whereas the prices of bulk drugs
and the formulations included in the Scheduled categories are
being fixed by the Government of India as per the Drugs
(Prices Control) Order, issued from time to time under the
provisions of Section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955
(10 of 1955) and the Government have been experiencing that
the present mechanism for the fixation and revision of prices
of bulk drugs and formulations is cumbersome, complicated
and time consuming.
2. And whereas, after careful consideration, the
Government is of the opinion that to streamline and
simplify the procedure and to bring about a greater
degree of transparency as well as objectivity, as expert
body should be constituent with the powers, inter alia,
to fix prices and notify the changes therein, if any, ofd
bulk drugs and formulations, from time to time, under
the Drugs (Prices Control) Order;
3. Therefore, the Government have now decided to
establish an independent body of experts to be called as
the      National    Pharmaceutical       Pricing  Authority,
consisting of a Chairperson in the status of the
Secretary to the Government of India, Members having
expertise in the field of pharmaceuticals, economics and
cost accountancy and Member Secretary in the status of
Joint Secretary/ Additional Secretary to the Government
of India, and the same is entrusted with the task of
price-fixation revision and other related matters such as
updating the list of drugs under price control by
inclusion and exclusion on the basis of the established
criteria/guidelines. The National Pharmaceutical Pricing
Authority shall be empowered to take final decisions,
which shall be subject to review by the Central
Government as and when considered necessary. The
Authority shall also monitor the prices of decontrolled drugs
and formulations and oversee the implementation of the
provisions of the Drugs (Prices Control) Order. In addition to
the above mentioned functions, the Authority is entrusted with
certain other functions as detailed in the Schedule annexed to
the Resolution.”
The National Pharmaceutical Pricing Authority was to monitor the
prices of de-controlled drugs and oversee the implementation of the
Drugs (Prices Control) Order which was then existing.             The other
functions of the Authority are as found in the Schedule which read
Other functions of the National Pharmaceutical Pricing
(1)    To implement and enforce the provisions of the Drugs (Price
Control) Order in accordance with the powers delegated to it;
(2)    To deal with all legal matters arising out the decisions of the
(3)    To monitor the availability of drugs, identify shortages, if
any, and to take remedial steps;
(4)    To collect/maintain data on production, exports and imports,
market share of individual companies, profitability of
companies etc. for bulk drugs and formulations;
(5)    To undertake and/or sponsor relevant studies in respect of
pricing of drugs/pharmaceuticals;
(6)    To recruit/appoint the officers and other staff members of
the Authority, as per rules and procedures laid down by the
(7)    To render advice to the Central Government on
changes/revisions in the drug policy;
(8)    To render assistance to the Central Government in the
parliamentary matters relating to the drug pricing.”
11. On a coalesce of the afore-quoted regulatory orders
notified by Government of India what would unmistakably emerge
is that Government of India is empowered to promulgate a pricing
policy and regulate prices of certain drugs which are even of non-
formulation as formulated drugs are already in the Schedule to the
Order. Non-formulated drug is what is sought to be controlled now.
The key feature of the policy as noted hereinabove is ‘essentiality’.
Therefore, the drugs that are sought to be controlled are essential
drugs,     essential   for  combating      cancer.    The     reasons for
promulgation of the said policy are found in the Notification itself.
The notification records that there were eight lakhs cancer deaths in
India in 2018 alone and number of new cases are estimated to be
on the rise; 50% of cancer patients avail private sector facilities and
out of pocket expenses in the health care including the cancer care
is about 65%; one major factor that contributed to high drug prices
in India were the unreasonably high trade margins. An expert
committee of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare was
constituted to examine the issue of manufacturers selling certain
drugs to the consumers at about 900 per cent more than the
regular price of a drug. The High Court of Punjab and Haryana in
the case of RANBAXY LABORATORY LIMITED V. STATE OF
HARYANA observed that there was no legal provision in force to
save the consumer from naked fleecing of consumers by drug
manufacturers. All these factors were looked into and 43 anti
cancer medicines were brought under price control. Therefore, it is
not a case where the price control policy that comes about is either
unreasonable or arbitrary for this Court to entertain a challenge to
the said policy that too at the hands of a retailer and not the
manufacturer. Even otherwise it is such regulatory policy of keeping
of price that is sought to be questioned before this court seeking a
judicial review of the said policy. Whether this Court can by way of
judicial review obliterate or even tinker with the policy is what
needs to be considered.
12. It is the aforesaid regulatory policy of the price that is
sought to be questioned before this Court seeking a judicial review
of the said policy, in exercise of the jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India. Whether this Court can by
way of judicial review annul or even tinker with the policy, is what
is to be considered.
13. The afore-quoted clauses, on the face of them, read as
products of policy making, by the Ministry of Chemicals and
Fertilizers, in the Department of Pharmaceuticals.           They are
decisions taken to monitor and regulate the price control of anti-
cancer drugs. It is trite, that policy is a system of decision making
guided by interest than by principle, the interest in the case at hand
is public, as they are all anti cancer drugs which are now sought to
be regulated. It cannot be forgotten that the policy is only a course
of action to deal with a subject matter. An Authority, statutory or
otherwise, is entitled to choose a course of action that it thinks
necessary or expedient in public interest. The Courts have always
exercised judicial restraint and circumspection over the wisdom of
the policies of the Government or statutory authorities, save in
circumstances     where      such    policy   demonstrates     caprice,
arbitrariness, unreasonableness or is whimsical, so as to offend the
tenets of Article 14 of the Constitution of India. This is the only
parameter that would permit constitutional Courts to tinker with the
policy particularly of the kind impugned.
14. Reference being made to the judgment of Frankfurter,J.
of the U.S. Supreme Court in the case of TROP v. DULLES1,
becomes apposite.       The learned Judge, in his dissenting opinion,
has observed as follows:
encroaching nature”. Judicial Power is not immune
against this human weakness. It also must be on guard
against encroaching beyond its proper bounds, and not
the less so since the only restraint upon it is self-
Rigorous observance of the difference between limits of
power and wide exercise of power - between questions of
authority and questions of prudence - requires the most alert
appreciation of this decisive but subtle relationship of two
concepts that too easily coalesce. No less does it require a
disciplined will to adhere to the difference. It is not easy to
stand aloof and allow want of wisdom to prevail to
disregard one's own strongly held view of what is wise in
the conduct of affairs. But it is not the business of this
Court to pronounce policy. It must observe a fastidious
regard for limitations on its own power, and this
precludes the Court's giving effect to its own notions of
what is wise or politic. That self-restraint is of the
essence in the observance of the judicial oath, for the
Constitution has not authorized the judges to sit in
judgment on the wisdom of what Congress and the
executive Branch do”.
In yet another view Lord Justice Lawton in LAKER AIRWAYS v.
DEPARTMENT OF TRADE2 has held as follows:
“In the United Kingdom aviation policy is determined by
ministers within the legal framework set out by Parliament.
Judges have nothing to do with either policy-making or the
carrying out of policy. Their function is to decide whether a
minister has acted within the powers given to him by statute or
the common law. If he is declared by a Court, after due process
of law, to have acted outside his powers, he must stop doing
what he has done until such time as parliament gives him the
powers he wants. In a case such as this I regard myself, as
a referee. I can blow my judicial whistle when the ball
goes out of play; but when the game restarts I must
neither take part in it nor tell the players how to play”.
(Emphasis supplied)
The afore-quoted observations of those learned Judges have been
reiterated in plethora of judgments by the Apex Court. In terms of
what is laid down in the afore-quoted judgments, what would
unmistakably emerge is, for a Judge in terms of his inputs cannot
assume the role of a supreme adviser to the administration on
policies governing innumerable activities of the State, particularly in
today’s context of over-expanding horizons which come into the ken
of such policy making. By taking oath of office as a Judge, an
ordinary man turns himself into a man with a magic wand and
qualifies himself to be an unquestionable authority, to advice on
such policies, is inconceivable.     It is further trite that the Court
would not sit in the arm chair of those experts who have
promulgated such policy and overrule them, save in circumstances,
as narrated hereinabove.
15. In the case at hand no such circumstance is brought to
the notice of this Court by the petitioner for the policy to be termed
as arbitrary, whimsical, unreasonable and contrary to any statutory
provisions resulting in illegality. All that the petitioner contends is
that its right under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India is
taken away. Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution which gives right to
a citizen to practice any profession or to carry on any trade or
business cannot be construed to be so absolute, as even the
fundamental rights are couched with reasonable restrictions. What
the petitioner now seeks to contend by way of a challenge to the
Order is that his profit would come down as he is only a retailer;
the cap is on the manufacturer but the effect is on the retailer. This
cannot be a ground for a judicial review of the impugned policy
much less, on the ground that it violates Article 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution of India.
16. It is further germane to notice that manufacturers
Association had knocked at the doors of the High Court of Bombay
calling in question this Prices Control Order of 2013 on the strength
of which the present impugned order emanates.                     The Indian
Pharmaceutical Alliance and another had approached the High Court
of Bombay in W.P.No.2700 of 2014 calling in question certain
notifications on price control of drugs – those enlisted in National
List of Essential Medicines, 2011. Clause 19 of the Prices Control
Order (supra) also fell for consideration before the Division Bench.
The Division Bench in INDIAN PHARMACEUTICAL ALLIANCE
AND ANOTHER v. UNION OF INDIA3 holds as follows:
18. It is common ground that the Government has
been conferred with the power as afore-noted to be
exercised as a part of the duty towards the public. Every
power of this nature is, therefore, coupled with a duty,
which is to be performed in public interest. That is how
an overriding power under para 19 is conferred and to act
in extraordinary circumstances and if the Government
considers necessary so to do in public interest.
19. It is not for this court to interfere with the working or
functioning of experts in the field. It can be safely concluded
that the NPPA is a body of experts. It is guided by para 19 and
the DPCO as a whole so also the constitutional mandate
indicated above. The power under para 19 and which is
discretionary is coupled with a duty. The extraordinary
circumstances and the public interest by themselves are guiding
W.P.No.2700 of 2014 decided on 26.09.2016
factors and even if there are separate guidelines, which may
have been issued but now withdrawn, does not mean that there
is nothing to guide the exercise of power in terms of this para.
Once the aim and object of DPCO is to ensure that essential
medicines are made available at affordable prices and the
directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India guide the
authorities, then, we do not see any substance in the
contentions of Ms. Pereira. In any event, the withdrawal of the
guidelines is prospective and would not affect the impugned
20. Though in the affidavit in rejoinder it is urged
that there are no extraordinary circumstances and merely
because there are some conflicts and internal competition
between pharmaceutical companies, para 19 cannot be
invoked, as submitted by Ms. Pereira, we do not think
that the impugned orders suffer from arbitrariness or
total non application of mind. According to the
petitioners, no extraordinary circumstances have been
indicated. However, we must read each of these orders in
their entirety. The orders indicate and in one case in the
preamble it is indicated as to how the exercise of power
is guided by the above regime. Secondly, the market failure
in respect of the pharmaceutical companies in the context of
India can be attributed to several factors, but the main reason is
that the demand of medicines is largely prescription driven and
a patient has very little choice in this regard. The impugned
notifications indicate as to how the NPPA considered the matter
in detail. It found that market failure alone may not constitute
sufficient grounds for Government's intervention, but when such
failure is considered in the context of role the pharmaceuticals
play in the area of public health, which is a social right, such
intervention becomes necessary, especially when exploitative
pricing makes medicines un-affordable and beyond the reach of
most and also puts huge financial burden in terms of out of
pocket expenditure on health care. The guidelines apart, the
NPPA considered the matter in detail. It started with inter-brand
price variation in respect of single ingredient formulations in
eight therapeutic groups, namely, anti-cancer, HIV/AIDS, anti-
TB, anti-Malaria, cardiovascular, anti-diabetics, anti-asthmatic
and immunological (sera/vaccines) and wherever the MRP of the
brands of medicine of a particular formulation exceeds 25% of
the simple average price, the same will be capped at the 25%
level. The notifications indicate as to how there is very high
incidence of cardiovascular diseases in the country, which is
estimated to affect around 10% of the population and is
responsible for 25% of the deaths in the age group of 25 to 69.
The affidavits in reply do not supply any additional reasons but
are elaborating as to how the said diseases are affecting even
the young generation of Indian population. The reasons and
which are to be found in the notification itself, therefore, do not
suffer from arbitrariness. Even if the guidelines stand
withdrawn, there are internal checks and balances. They
would guide the Government in exercising the
discretionary powers in terms of para 19. It is not as if in
individual cases these powers cannot be questioned.
However, in the facts and circumstances, we are satisfied
that in judicial review we should not interfere with the
exercise of power by the Central Government. It is not for
us to then probe as to whether the circumstances
indicated are extraordinary or not. Even otherwise, we
are satisfied that they were indeed extraordinary. Given
the increasing number of patients and suffering from afore-
noted diseases, we do not think that the Government has
exceeded its power or was not justified in exercising it. It has
been indicated with sufficient clarity in the affidavits
placed on record that the member companies/
manufacturers have not filed their individual grievances
nor have they filed individual petitions. Some of the
members have accepted the notifications, which are
impugned,       by   filing   their   price lists.      In such
circumstances, if the intent is that essential and life
saving medicines ought to be available to all, then, all the
more we are not in agreement with Mr. Pereira that the
writ petition deserves to succeed. We have found from
the affidavits placed before us on behalf of the
respondents that by implementation of the price
notification, the common man has been benefited. The
administration of these drugs and medicines, coupled
with lifestyle changes, therefore, go in a long way in
reducing the threat to the life of number of patients
inflicted by serious diseases.
21. As a result of the above discussion and without
in any manner touching any larger issues, we are of the
opinion that the first prayer for striking down the
guidelines does not survive in the light of the withdrawal
of the guidelines. As far as the second and third prayers
are concerned, we do not think that the impugned
notifications are required to be interfered with in our
extraordinary, equitable and discretionary jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. We have
indicated elaborately our reasons for such non-
interference. Hence, for the above reasons, the writ
petition fails. It is dismissed.”
The Division Bench holds that the price notification issued is for the
benefit of common man and, therefore, no interference was called
for with the policy of Government in the price control. The
petitioners therein tossed the said order before the Apex Court in
S.L.P.No.30089 of 2016 only to be dismissed in limine in terms of
its order dated 24-10-2016. Therefore, the challenge akin to what
is now made has already been dealt with by the Division Bench of
the Bombay High Court against which the Apex Court declined to
17. Insofar as the judgment relied on by the learned counsel
for the petitioner in the case of MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND
FERTILIZERS, GOVERNMENT OF INDIA v. CILPA LIMITED –
(2003) 7 SCC 1 is concerned, there can be no qualm about the
principle enunciated by the Apex Court in the aforesaid judgment.
The Apex Court also holds that it is axiomatic that the contents of
the policy document cannot be read and interpreted as statutory
provisions and further holds that breach of a policy decision by itself
is not a ground to invalidate the delegated legislation.    The facts
obtaining before the Apex Court in Cipla Limited was inclusion of
certain bulk drugs in the First Scheduled to the Drugs Price Control
Order. Analysing the policy and the role of the Government as a
delegate of legislative power the Apex Court summarises the issue
at paragraph-9 of the said judgment to hold that while classifying
the drugs for the purpose of price control it is not open to the
Government to flout or debilitate set norms which it professed to
follow in the interest of transparency and objectivity. The facts
obtaining in the case at hand are entirely different from what fell for
consideration before the Apex Court. Therefore, the said judgment
is inapplicable to the facts of the case. The judgment rendered by
the High Court of Delhi would not lend any assistance to the
petitioner, as the judgment rendered by the High Court of Bombay
referred to supra was considering this very price control policy.
Therefore, the said judgment would lend complete assistance to the
respondent/Union of India. Hence, none of the judgments relied on
by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner would merit any
further consideration for they being not applicable to the facts of
the case at hand.
18. The control now made of high trade margin by way of
Trade Margin Rationalisation Approach, is towards anti-cancer
drugs. Cancer is, in public domain, one of the leading causes of
adult illness and death. As per World Health Organization estimate
18 million cases globally and 1.5 million in India, are the fatalities
as a result of Cancer. The number of cases is estimated to rise to
twice to what it is now, by next 15 years and the expenditure on
cancer inpatient treatment is today the highest among non-
communicable diseases. Cancer patients in India incur heavy
expenditure and cancer drugs need to become somewhat affordable
so that whenever a treatment is required, it can be treated at the
earliest, to the rich and the poor alike.      If such policy is not
promulgated, the poor or the middle class which forms a majority of
the population of this country, can be seen to be succumbing to the
disease due to high prices that the manufacturers project resulting
in its unaffordability. Therefore, the challenge to the Government
order by a retailer whose motive inter alia is profit and the
challenge inter alia is loss of profit, cannot be countenanced.
19. For the aforesaid reasons, finding no merit in the petition,
it is accordingly dismissed.