Mr. Hrishikesh Mundargi a/w Ms. Pravada Raut, Advocates for the
Ms M. R. Tidke, APP for the Respondent-State.
Mr. Ramesh Badi a/w Mr. Ajay Bhise, Advocate for the Intervener.
Mr. Sagar G. Patil, API, Shiroli MIDC Police Station, Kolhapur, present.
.         In anticipation of arrest in Crime No. 63 of 2022, registered with
Shiroli MIDC Police Station, District Kolhapur, for the ofences punishable
under Sections 305, 504, 506 r/w 34 of the Indian Penal Code and Sections
75 and 87 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,
2015, the applicant is praying for pre-arrest protection.
2.        The bail is claimed on usual grounds. Besides that, it is contended
that the allegations at its face value, nowhere discloses adequate mens rea.
It is submitted that the applicant being a Chairman and disciplinary
authority, his act of reprimanding student cannot be construed as sufcient
instigation to commit suicide. The State opposed bail by contending that
the applicant’s act of humiliating, abusing and continuous harassing
student amounts to sufcient instigation. The deceased student committed
suicide within few hours from the incident. The applicant has created the
circumstance, which caused deceased to end his life. The investigation is
in progress, therefore, bail is prayed to be rejected.
3.        At the instance of report dated 02 nd April, 2022, lodged by the
Informant Ramchandra Budkar, the crime came to be registered.              The
Informant’s grandson (deceased) was studying in 10th Standard at Symbolic
International School. The applicant was a Chairman of the school whilst his
wife was a Principal. On 01st April, 2022, the Informant received telephonic
massage calling him to attend the school. When he went to the school, he
was asked to take his grandson (deceased) back to the house. On inquiry
deceased boy disclosed that while he was playing football, inadvertently
goal post guard hit a girl, causing her injury. He disclosed that the applicant
had scolded and abused him in flthy language. Immediately the Informant
met the applicant to inquire the matter.         The applicant said that his
grandson has caused injury to a girl.         His grandson is ill-cultured, no
chances of reformation and he is slum boy. He also stated that the school
Principal had informed him that in past also deceased had behaved unruly.
He was informed that deceased should be rusticated from the school. The
applicant also uttered bad words to the deceased in presence of one school
teacher. Thereafter, the Informant took his grandson to his house, who
within few hours committed suicide by way of hanging.
4.        The applicant’s learned Counsel submitted that the applicant was a
Chairman and disciplinary authority of the school. His disciplinary action
would not suggest that he intended by such an act to instigate the deceased
to commit suicide. He would submit that unless there is adequate mens
rea, the act to abusing to the student cannot be termed as sufcient
“abetement” within the meaning of Section 107 of the Indian Penal Code.
To substantiate said contention, he relied on the decisions in cases of Geo
Varghese V/s. State of Rajasthan & another1, Dr. Mrs. Seema Ajay
Bhoosreddy & another V/s. The State of Maharashtra2, Sanju Alias
Sanjay Singh Sengar V/s. State of M. P.3, Madan Mohan Singh V/s.
State of Gujarat and another4, Soumya Manoharan Manutuparambil
V/s. The State of Maharashtra in Bail Application No. 527 of 2015,
decided on 23rd March 2015 and Ms. Lovina Pankaj Bhatia V/s. Central
Bureau of Investigation & another in Criminal Revision Application No.
40 of 2011, decided on 12th August, 2011. Noted the principles laid down in
above referred decisions. However, each case depends upon the facts and
circumstances of the case.
5.        It emerges from FIR that the concerned incident took place on 01 st
April, 2022 in the school. Particularly in presence of the Informant, the
applicant had used bad words to a tender aged boy.            Notably in the
supplementary statement the informant stated humiliating words uttered by
the applicant, which are as follows:
6.        It is well settled that each case depends upon facts and
circumstances of the case. Whether a person has abetted in the
commission of suicide, could only be gathered from the facts of particular
case. There can be indirect act of incitement for commission of suicide. On
examining entire investigation paper it reveals that there are several
complaints of the parents against the applicant about misbehavior with
students. As regards to the case in hand, the utterances of the applicant
are objectionable. No doubt, he can reprimand students, but not in such a
language which would shatter the tender mind.
7.        The learned APP would submit that there can be hardly direct
evidence about abetment.               In this regard my attention is invited to
Paragraph No. 18 of the decision of Supreme Court in the case of Praveen
Pradhan V/s. State of Uttaranchal and Another5 which reads as below:
“18. In fact, from the above discussion it is apparent that
instigation has to be gathered from the circumstances of a
particular case. No straitjacket formula can be laid down to fnd
out as to whether in a particular case there has been instigation
which forced the person to commit suicide. In a particular case,
there may not be direct evidence in regard to instigation which
may have direct nexus to suicide. Therefore, in such a case, an
inference has to be drawn from the circumstances and it is to be
determined whether circumstances had been such which in fact
had created the situation that a person felt totally frustrated and
committed suicide. More so, while dealing with an application for
quashing of the proceedings, a court cannot form a frm opinion,
rather a tentative view that would evoke the presumption referred
to under Section 228 Cr.P.C.”
8.        As per the statements of witnesses, the applicant has scolded the
deceased minor boy in unruly manner. He had also called his parents to the
school.      In presence of teacher and the Informant (grandfather) again
scolded in unparliamentary words (quoted above). Prima facie it suggests
that the applicant has created impression in the mind of student to put him
in deep frustration. It requires to be noted that there is a direct link of the
applicant’s act since within few hours from the episode, the child has ended
his life by suicide. Always the criteria for regular bail and pre-arrest bail
difers from fact to fact. A young student has lost his life in proximity from
the act of the applicant.       Investigation is in progress.    The applicant’s
custodial interrogation is necessary. No case is made out to grant pre-
arrest protection, hence, the application stands rejected.