( By Sri K.Nageshwarappa, HCGP for R1,
and Smt. Veena Maravanthe-Party-in-person
This Criminal Revision Petition is filed under Section 397
read with Section 401 of Cr.P.C., praying to call for the records
and to set aside the impugned judgment dated 05.09.2013 in
C.C.No.17019/2011, passed by learned II ACMM, Bengaluru
and judgment dated 01.12.2016 in Crl.Appeal No.503/2013
passed by learned learned LI Addl. City Civil & Sessions Judge
at Bengaluru City (CCH 52) at Bangalore and acquit the
petitioner by allowing the above petition.
1.     The State of Karnataka by
( By Sri K.Nageshwarappa, HCGP for R1,
and Smt. Veena Maravanthe-Party-in-person
This Criminal Revision Petition is filed under Section 397
read with Section 401 of Cr.P.C., praying to call for records and
to set aside the impugned judgment dated 05.09.2013 in
C.C.No.17019/2011 passed by learned II ACMM, Bengaluru and
judgment dated 01.12.2016 in Crl.Appeal No.503/2013 passed
by learned LI Addl. City Civil & Sessions Judge at Bengaluru
City (CCH 52) thereby suspending the conviction of petitioner
and acquit the petitioner by allowing the above petition in the
interest of justice.
These Criminal Revision Petitions having been heard
through Physical Hearing/Video Conference and reserved for
orders on 20.07.2022, coming on for pronouncement of orders
this day, the Court made the following:
The     petitioner     in   Criminal    Revision       Petition
No.1612/2016 was accused No.1 and petitioner in Criminal
Revision Petition No.1613/2016 was accused No.2 in
C.C.No.17019/2011,          in   the   Court    of     the    learned
(hereinafter for brevity referred to as `trial Court'),
wherein respondent No.2           in both the Criminal Revision
Petitions was the complainant.        Along with present
petitioners, one Sri Subbanna, who is said to be the
husband of accused No.2 and father of accused No.1 was
also arraigned as accused No.3, however, lis pendence
before the trial Court, accused No.3 having reported to be
demised, the case against him stood abated. The accused
Nos.1 and 2 were tried by the trial Court for the offences
punishable under Section 498-A read with Section 34 of
Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter for brevity referred
to as `IPC') and Sections 3 and 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act,
1961 (hereinafter for brevity referred to as `D.P.Act'). By
its impugned judgment dated 05.09.2013, the trial Court
convicted accused Nos.1 and 2 for the offences punishable
under Section 498-A read with Section 34 of IPC and
Sections 3   and 4 of D.P.Act.    On 07.09.2013, the trial
Court pronounced the order on sentence.
2. Aggrieved by the judgment of conviction and order
on sentence passed by the trial Court, the accused Nos.1
and 2 preferred an appeal in Criminal Appeal No.503/2013,
before the learned LI Addl.City Civil and Sessions Judge, at
Bengaluru City, (hereinafter for brevity referred to as the
`Sessions Judge’s Court'), which after hearing both side,
dismissed the appeal filed by the accused by its judgment
dated 01.12.2016. Being aggrieved by the same, accused
Nos.1 and 2 have preferred the present revision petition.
3. The respondent No.1-State is being represented by
learned High Court Government Pleader in both the
4.  The   petitioner in   Criminal   Revision     Petition
No.1612/2016 is appearing as party-in-person both for
himself and also for the petitioner in Criminal Revision
5. During the pendency of these revision petitions,
the complainant was got impleaded as respondent No.2 in
Criminal Revision Petition No.1612/2016, vide order dated
11.10.2018      and     in  Criminal     Revision       Petition
No.1613/2016, vide order dated 15.02.2022 and she is
also appearing as party-in-person.
6.    Records from the      trial Court      and Sessions
Judge’s Court pertaining to the matter were called for and
the same are placed before the Court.
7. During the pendency of these revision petition, the
petitioner in Criminal Revision Petition No.1612/2016 filed
IA.No.1/2020, under Section 482 of Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter for brevity referred to as
`Cr.P.C.'), seeking permission to produce few documents.
This Court by its observation dated 15.02.2022, observed
that in revision, receiving of additional evidence is not
permitted, however, whether the said application was
maintainable or not would be considered at the time when
this revision petition is heard on merits.
8. Heard the arguments of the petitioner – party-in-
person in Criminal Revision Petition No.1612/2016, who is
also appearing for petitioner in Criminal Revision Petition
No.1613/2016 and the learned High Court Government
Pleader for the respondent. Perused the materials placed
before this Court.
9. After hearing both side, the points that arise for
my consideration in this revision petition are:
(i)  Whether the concurrent finding recorded
by the trial Court, as well as the Sessions Judge’s
Court that the accused committed the alleged
offences punishable under Section 498-A read with
Section 34 of Indian Penal Code, 1860 and Sections
3 and 4 of Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961, warrants
any interference at the hands of this Court?
(ii) Whether IA.No.1/2020 deserves to be
10. The petitioner in Criminal          Revision Petition
No.1612/2016 as party-in-person in both the petitions in
his argument submitted that PW-1 to PW-4 are all family
members of respondent No.2, as such, they are related
and interested witnesses, hence, their evidence ought not
to have been admitted by the trial Court.               He further
submitted     that   the   reliance  placed     on    the    E-mail
correspondences was also against Section 65-B of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (hereinafter for brevity referred
to as `Evidence Act'). Further stating that there is faulty
appreciation of evidence by the trial Court and the
Sessions Judge's Court, the petitioner prayed to allow the
petitions as prayed.
11. Learned     High Court Government Pleader in his
brief argument submitted that evidence of PW-1 to PW-4
establishes beyond reasonable doubt that cruelty was
practiced upon the complainant. Merely because PW-1 to
PW-4 said to be the family members of the complainant,
that itself is not a criteria to disbelieve their evidence. He
further stated that when the E-mail correspondences were
marked as exhibits, there was no objection from the
accused, as such, now they cannot raise such an objection
for appreciating those documents.           However, he fairly
concedes that the evidence of none of the prosecution
witnesses speaks about the date of the alleged demand
and alleged payment of dowry and who are all present at
the time of the alleged demand for and payment of dowry.
He also submitted that the evidence is also bereft of the
details as to when and in what manner the cruelty was
practiced upon the complainant.    Still, he submitted that
the    conviction  against  the   present      petitioners    is
12. Though respondent No.2 in Criminal Revision
Petition No.1612/2016 was the complainant in the trial
Court was permitted to come on record as respondent
No.2, however, by the order dated 15.02.2022, it was
made clear that respondent No.2 Smt.Veena Maravanthe
can assist learned High Court Government Pleader while he
addressing his arguments on the merits of the case, but,
she cannot argue independently in both the revision
petitions.    However, at the specific request of said
respondent No.2 and with no objection from the petitioners
in both the revision petitions, the respondent No.2 was
also permitted to address her arguments, wherein she only
submitted that Exs.P-5 to P-19 which are the E-mails are
still in the Inbox of her Computer system.            Citing the
judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court in Sonu alias Amar –vs-
State of Haryana, reported in (2017) 8 SCC 570, she
submitted that since the accused did not object for
producing those E-mails and marking them as Exs.P-5 to
P-19 in the trial Court, now at a belated stage, they cannot
raise any objection with respect to those documents.
13. The summary of the case of the prosecution in
the trial Court was that on the date 23.04.2008, the
marriage    between    CW-1   Smt.Veena      Maravanthe       and
accused No.1 Dr.Shashidhar Subbanna was performed in
Road,    Bengaluru,   according   to  the   Hindu     rites   and
customs.    It was an arranged marriage.        At the time of
marriage, accused No.1 was given with a golden ring,
silver articles and a sum of `50,000/- as dowry.              The
marriage    was   celebrated   in  a  grand     manner. After
marriage, the complainant – Smt.Veena Maravanthe was
residing with accused No.1 in her matrimonial home.          At
that time, the accused No.1 started pressurising the
complainant stating that she should pursue M.S. studies
and take care of the maintenance of the house.         He also
started saying that he does not want to have any children
for two years. He also asked her to get money from her
parents to go to United States of America. After accused
No.1 left for America, accused Nos.2 and 3 took the
complainant with them and left for United States of
America and leaving her there, accused Nos.2 and 3
returned to India.   However, during her stay in United
States of America, all the accused used to harass the
complainant mentally on several trivial issues and accused
Nos.2 and 3 used to demand a baby immediately and
telling the complainant that since she is getting old, it
would be too late for her to get a child, however, accused
No.1 was not interested to have children.        The accused
No.1 deliberately neglected to get continued or renewed
the VISA of the complainant and kept her application for
Green Card also pending. On the other hand, he sent the
complainant    back  to  Bengaluru,   India.       When     the
complainant returned to the house of accused Nos.2 and 3
in Bengaluru after her return from United States of
America, the accused Nos.2 and 3 started subjecting her
again to mental harassment and started telling her that
accused No.1, who is their son, being a doctor with three
Degrees, would have fetched more dowry had he married
any other girl. As such, they started demanding from her
the additional dowry to be brought by her from her
parental house.    Thus, all the accused Nos.1 to 3 have
subjected the complainant to cruelty and also have
demanded and accepted the dowry and were putting
further demand for additional dowry. The said complaint
given by the informant (CW-1) Smt.Veena Maravanthe was
registered for the offences punishable under Sections
498-A read with Section 34 of IPC and Sections 3 and 4 of
14. Seven witnesses were examined on behalf of the
prosecution to prove the alleged guilt against the accused.
Among them, PW-1 (CW-1) Smt.Veena Maravanthe is the
complainant, who is admittedly the wife of accused No.1,
which accused is the petitioner in Criminal Revision Petition
No.1612/2016.     PW-2 (CW-2) – Sridhar M., and PW-3
(CW-3) – Ramakrishna are admittedly the elder brothers of
PW-1. PW-4 (CW-4) Asha Venkatesh is the elder sister of
PW-1.    PW-7    (CW-8)    S.   Radha,    the     then    Police
Sub-Inspector of the complainant Police Station, who has
received the complaint given by the complainant and
registered as per Ex.P-1 and after registering in their
station  Crime   No.52/2010    against   the    accused,     has
submitted FIR to the Court as per Ex.P-20 and drew a
scene of offence panchanama as per Ex.P-2, seized the
photographs of the marriage, Wedding Invitation card and
Marriage Certificate and recorded the statement of few
witnesses in the matter.
15. PW-5 (CW-9) Naveen Kulkarni, the then Police
Sub-Inspector of the complainant police station has stated
about taking up further investigation in the matter and
after accused Nos.2 and 3 appeared before him with the
anticipatory bail, he enlarged them on bail and handed
over further investigation to CW-10.
16. PW-6 (CW-10) Govindaraju has stated that by
the time he took up further investigation in the matter
from PW-5, the investigation was already completed, as
such, being then Police Inspector of complainant-Police
Station, he has filed charge sheet in the matter.
17. The evidence of PWs.1, 2, 3 and 4 that marriage
of   PW-1    with    accused    No.1   was     performed       in
Chandrashekar Bharathi Kalyan Mantap, at Chamarajpet,
Bengaluru, on 23.04.2008 is not in dispute. The evidence
of these witnesses that accused No.1 was a medical doctor
by profession and at that time was working in United
States of America, is also not in dispute.        Their further
evidence that accused Nos.2 and 3 are the parents of
accused No.1 is also not in dispute. Thus, it is an admitted
fact that the complainant Smt.Veena Maravante (PW-1)
was married to accused No.1 on 23.04.2008.
18. PW-1 (CW-1) Smt.Veena Maravante in her
evidence has stated that the marriage talks were taken in
the house of accused No.1 in November, 2007.             At that
time accused No.1 since was at United States of America
did not attend to it.    The accused Nos.2 and 3 and their
elder brother, sister-in-law, maternal uncle and aunt were
present. From her side, her two brothers with their wives,
her sister, brother-in-law and herself were present.         She
further stated that marriage engagement ceremony was
held in December, 2007.        A sum of `50,000/- towards
marriage expenses, a golden ring, Sherwani for the groom
and silver articles for the bride were asked. The marriage
was held for two days, that was on 22.04.2008 and
23.04.2008. All the expenses of the marriage were borne
by these people only (the family members of this witness).
Even the hotel charges of a sum of `20,000/- for the first
night after the marriage was also borne by her brothers
and herself.
One week after the marriage i.e., on 02.05.2008, she
joined by accused Nos.2 and 3 went to United States of
America.    Immediately after going there, accused No.1
asked her to continue higher education, join a job and bear
some of the household expenses like electricity bill, water
bill and grocery bill. She also stated that, in case if she is
not ready to study further and to work, she would be sent
back to India.     She further stated that all the accused
jointly were telling her that their elder daughter-in-law got
a diamond ear-stud set.         Though accused No.1 has
completed three Degrees, but, he was not given anything
properly.   With this, they were subjecting her to both
physical and mental cruelty.      She also stated that after
accused No.1 going to job, accused No.2 used to tell her
to get a child and it was already late. However, accused
No.1 was not agreeable to have a child for at least three years.
In that regard, there was some exchange of words
between accused No.1 and accused No.2.
She further stated that she was made to take her
in-laws i.e., accused Nos.2 and 3 for daily morning and
evening walk and was required to play cards and shuttle
with them. She was also forced to learn Tamil language.
She stated that, one day when she was not keeping well,
still they insisted her to take for walk. They did not accede
to her request for the day. She also stated that she was
not given an opportunity to make telephone calls to her
maternal home. She further stated that her husband i.e.,
accused No.1 intentionally delayed applying for her VISA,
which resulted in she returning to India in March 2009.
She further stated that even after she coming to
India, her husband i.e., accused No.1 asked her to take
GRE and TOEFL examinations. She further stated that, at
one time she was suffering with urinary infection, still her
husband, though he was a doctor, did not get her medical
treatment and thus she had to suffer for a month with the
pain, it is thereafter he got her the treatment. Thus, she
was put to lot of tension and lost her weight.
She further stated that, even during her pregnancy,
she was forced to attend classes by covering a distance of
30 KM. everyday. She further stated that, after return of
her husband from America on 26.07.2009, the accused
started demanding her to get diamond ear-stud and a sum
of `10 lakhs. They were also used to make unnecessary
comments about her duty. She stated that in December,
2009 when she went to the house of her in-laws (accused
Nos.2 and 3) with her child, they did not allow her inside.
Later on 03.03.2010, accused No.1 filed a divorce petition
and notice about the same was served to her. It is only
after all these ordinals, she was constrained to file a
complaint with the respondent – Police. She has identified
her complaint at Ex.P-1.
Stating that after her complaint, the police drew a
scene of offence panchanama near the house of her
mother-in-law, she identified it as Ex.P-2.           She got
produced and marked Marriage Certificate at Ex.P-3,
Marriage Invitation card at Ex.P-4 and      thirteen E-mails
said to have been sent by her to her sister from Exs.P-5 to
She was subjected to a detailed cross-examination
from the accused side, wherein denial suggestions were
made    to  the  witness   denying  the   contents      of  her
examination-in-chief regarding the alleged cruelty and
demand for dowry, which were not admitted as true by the
In her cross-examination, she admitted a suggestion
as true that in order to secure an employment in America,
one has to complete GRE, TOEFL examinations, otherwise,
they do not get a professional job in America.        She also
admitted that prior to her marriage, both herself and
accused No.1 had discussed about her education and
employment.     Several E-mail correspondences had also
taken place in that regard. She admitted that she was not
forced to marry accused No.1. Few admissions were also
elicited in the cross-examination of PW-1 that some of the
expenses towards marriage, including honorarium payable
to the Pandit (priest) was paid by the accused. She also
admitted that after marriage, in United States of America
her husband has taken her to Disney Land for honeymoon.
Even the travelling ticket from India to America was
booked by accused No.1.
In her further cross-examination, she stated that
after expiry of VISA, for its renewal, when she had
engaged the services of a Lawyer by name Smt.Sheela
Murthy, the expenses towards legal fees was borne by her
husband i.e., accused No.1.        She admitted that her
husband had taken her to different places in America
Chattanooga, Washington, etc.      Though she denied that
during her pregnancy the accused had given her a golden
necklace, but, herself stated that they had given an
ordinary silk saree. She denied a suggestion that she was
subjecting accused Nos.2 and 3 to mental cruelty, due to
which accused No.3 i.e., her father-in-law was admitted in
ICU in Sagar hospital and her mother-in-law (accused
No.2) was stuck with paralysis and is bed-ridden.           She
denied a suggestion that somehow to get a Crore rupee
from the accused, she has filed a false case against him.
She denied a suggestion that in order to help her family in
maternal side and to do business in stocks and shares, she
has filed a false complaint. She denied that she was told in
their first night by her husband that for three years he
does not want a child for them.     Several attempts were
made in further cross-examination of PW-1 to prove lot of
improvements and contradictions in her evidence.
19. PW-2 (CW-2) Sridhar M., and PW-3 (CW-3)
Ramakrishna,       both  are   the elder   brothers     of   the
complainant (PW-1) and PW-4 (CW-4) Asha Venkatesh,
the elder sister of the complainant (PW-1), in their
examination-in-chief have supported the case of their
sister i.e., PW-1 by deposing mainly on the lines of the
evidence of PW-1. These three witnesses have also stated
that at the time of marriage, the accused was given with
golden ring, `50,000/- cash, Sherwani and other articles,
including the silver articles.  PW-1 was given with four
golden bangles, two golden chains, two rings and silver
articles.  They further stated that the hotel expenses for
stay for a night after the marriage of PW-1 and accused
No.1 were also borne by them.
These three witnesses further stated that while their
sister was in America, accused No.1 was pestering her to
pursue higher studies and join a job and to earn. Accused
Nos.2 and 3 were subjecting her to mental cruelty and
demanding that she should give birth to a child at the
earliest and to play cards and shuttle with them and take
them to walk. The witnesses have stated that even after
the return of their sister (PW-1), accused Nos.2 and 3,
were subjecting their sister to mental harassment and was
not allowing her to stay with them.      They have stated
that they were demanding for valuables to be brought by
her from her parental house, which valuables includes
diamond ear-stud and a huge amount of cash, etc.
All these three witnesses were subjected to a detailed
cross-examination from the accused side, wherein apart
from eliciting several other details, denial suggestions were
also made to these witnesses, however, the witnesses did
not admit the denial suggestions made to them.
20. As analysed above, among the seven witnesses
examined by the prosecution, it is PW-1 to PW-4 alone
who have spoken about the alleged allegations against the
accused.      The   remaining   witnesses    are     the   official
witnesses of investigating authority. Even if the evidence
of PW-1 to PW-4 are taken on their face value, the same
would not go to show that for giving a cash of `50,000/-
to the accused No.1 and a golden ring and Sherwani, there
was any demand from the accused side. Even according to
PW-1, the accused No.1 was not present at the time of
marriage negotiations. Though accused Nos.2 and 3 are
said to have present for marriage negotiations held in
November 2007, but, her evidence does not speak whether
there was any demand in the marriage negotiation for
valuables, which can be called as dowry.           Though she
stated that accused Nos.2 and 3 were present in the
marriage negotiation, but, none of the witnesses have
specifically stated that they demanded for any valuables
from the complainant side to be given to them as a part of
dowry or towards the marriage. Though PW-1 has stated
that accused No.1 making a telephone call, requested for a
grand marriage at Bengaluru, by that itself, it cannot be
inferred that it was an unnatural demand or a demand for
a dowry.
21. Though PW-1 to PW-4 have stated that a sum of
`50,000/- was given to the accused in cash, however,
except    their self-serving statement, there is nothing on
record to show that either the said cash or any other
valuables were given to the accused in connection with the
marriage.    Even according to the complainant (PW-1) in
the alleged marriage negotiation, apart from her family
members, including her elder brothers, sister-in-laws,
there were few more relatives from her side, including her
paternal aunt, maternal uncle and uncles. However, for the
reasons best known to them, the prosecution did not
choose to examine any one of them. Thus, even though a
good   number     of  alleged  qualitative   witnesses     were
available with it, the prosecution did not made use of the
same and did not examine them.
22. PW-2 and PW-3 are none else than the elder
brothers of PW-1, who in their cross-examination have
stated that, according to their custom, there will be some
exchange of valuables, including golden ornaments, pooja
materials, clothes and other items between the families of
bride and groom. PW-2 has also stated that those
exchange of valuables would be depending upon the
capacity of each side.     In such circumstances, it makes
further difficult to believe that the alleged delivery of a
cash of `50,000/-, a golden ring and a Sherwani (a dress)
to the accused No.1 from the complainant side was a part
of dowry.
23. Section 2 of D.P.Act defines `dowry' as below :
" Section 2. Definition of 'dowry'.- In this
Act, "dowry" means any property or valuable
security given or agreed to be given either directly
(a)    by one party to a marriage to the other
party to the marriage; or
(b)    by the parents of either party to a marriage
or by any other person, to either party to the
marriage or to any other person.
At or before or any time after the marriage
in connection with the marriage of the said parties
but does not include dower or mahr in the case of
persons    to  whom    the  Muslim   Personal     Law
(Shariat) applies."
A reading of the said Section would go to show that
the definition of `dowry' has been defined as any
property, including       properties of all sorts as it takes
within     its     fold    (any     property       or     valuable
security) given or agreed to be given in connection with
marriage either directly or indirectly.
24. Our Hon'ble Apex Court in Ran Singh and
another –vs- State of Haryana and another,                 reported in
(2008) 4 SCC 70,         was pleased to hold that payments
which are customary, example, given at the time of birth
of a child or other ceremonies as are prevalent in different
societies, are not covered by the expression `dowry'.
–vs- State of Andhra Pradesh, reported in (2009) 12 SCC
331, which judgment was relied upon by the petitioner in
his argument, with respect to the definition of `demand of
dowry', giving or taking dowry under Sections 3 and 4 of
D.P.Act, was pleased to observe in Para-16 of its judgment
" …. …. Dowry as a quid pro quo for marriage is
prohibited and not the giving of traditional presents to
the bride or the bridegroom by friends and relatives.
Thus, voluntary presents given at or before or after
the marriage to the bride or the bridegroom, as the
case may be, of a traditional nature, which are given
not as a consideration for marriage but out of love,
affection or regard, would not fall within the mischief
of the expression 'dowry' made punishable under the
In the instant case, as observed above, none of the
prosecution witnesses have stated in specific and clear
terms that demand for the alleged valuables in the form of
cash, clothes and gold was made by the accused.                  Their
only allegation, which is also their evidence through PW-1
to PW-4, was that accused No.1 was given with a cash of
`50,000/-, a golden ring and a Sherwani.               However, as
observed above, both PW-2 and PW-3, who are the elder
brothers of PW-1/complainant, have stated that it is their
custom for exchanging the valuables, including cash and
golden ornaments between the families of bride and
bridegroom.      In such circumstances, when there is no
specific statement about the alleged demand or proof that
the valuables even if it taken as given to the accused, was
on demand on the other hand, when the statement
of PW-2 and PW-3 itself shows that it is their part of
custom, then, even after taking that alleged valuables
were given to the accused, the same cannot be considered
as a dowry given to the accused from the complainant
26. It is also the case of the prosecution that even
after marriage, the accused continued their demand for
dowry in the form of valuables.      PW-1 has stated that
accused were asked her to get a diamond ear-stud and a
cash of `10 lakhs. PW-2, PW-3 and PW-4 have stated that
PW-1 was telling that the accused were making such a
demand. However, it is not the case of PW-2, PW-3 and
PW-4 that for what purpose the accused had approached
them and demanded for any such valuables subsequent to
marriage of PW-1 with accused No.1 Even the evidence of
PW-1 that accused were demanding her to get those
valuables from her parents house is also a mere statement
made by her without any further corroboration. Her said
statements have been specifically and categorically denied
from the accused side in her cross-examination. Further,
the prosecution has not placed any other evidence, except
the oral evidence of PW-1 to PW-4 to prove the alleged
demand said to have been made by the accused.             When
undisputedly PW-1 was a Master Graduate in Science and
having worldly knowledge and also accessible to Computer
and E-mail, somewhere and in some form she could have
maintained some records with respect to the alleged
demand for additional dowry said to have been made by
the accused.     The prosecution through PW-1 has got
marked some of the E-mails from Exs.P-5 to P-19.            But,
the petitioner in this revision petition has seriously
disputed for taking into consideration those E-mails as
evidence by invoking Section 65 of the Evidence Act. He
contended that the documents does not comply the
requirement of Section 65-B of the Evidence Act.
27. In his support, he also relied upon the judgment
of Hon'ble Apex Court Anvar P.V. –vs- P.K.Basheer and
others, reported in (2014) 10 SCC 473.       In the said case,
with respect to admissibility of electronic record as primary
and secondary evidence, the Hon'ble Apex Court was
pleased to hold that admissibility of secondary evidence
and    electronic  record   depends    upon    satisfaction     of
conditions under Section 65-B of the Evidence Act, which
inter alia requires electronic record or document being
accompanied by a Certificate as specified in Section
65-B(4) of the Evidence Act.        In the absence of such
Certificate as enumerated in Section 65-B (4) of the
Evidence Act, it was held that secondary evidence of
electronic record cannot be admitted in evidence.
28. Admittedly, in the instant case, except production
of  print-outs of    alleged E-mails said to have been
exchanged between PW-1 with her younger sister by name
one Smt.Susheela, no other documents, including the
Certificate under Section 65-B(4) of the Evidence Act has
been produced by the prosecution.         Undisputedly those
E-mails print-outs are secondary in nature, as such, requires
a Certificate under Section 65-B(4) of the Evidence Act.
However, respondent No.2 relied upon a subsequent
judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court, which was in Sonu Alias
Amar's case (supra), wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court with
respect to Section 65-B of the Evidence Act, made
distinctions between objections regarding admissibility of
the document which is inherently inadmissible and mode
or method of proof which was required to be raised at the
time of marking of a document as an exhibit. It observed
that, objection regarding admissibility of the document
which are per se inadmissible can be taken at appellate
stage, because, it is a fundamental issue. However, mode
or method of proof is procedural and objections, if not
taken at the trial, cannot be permitted at the appellate
stage. It is because, if the objections are taken at the trial,
the other side would have an opportunity of rectifying the
deficiencies. If it is taken at an appellate stage, the other
side would not have such an opportunity.
29. In the instant case, it is not the contention of the
petitioners that Exs.P-5 to P-19 were per se inadmissible.
His only contention is that a procedural requirement by
production of Certificate under Section 65-B(4) of the
Evidence Act was not accompanying the document at the
time of its marking. Admittedly, such an objection was not
taken from the accused side at the time of marking of
those documents in the trial Court. Had such an objection
was raised at the trial Court, the party producing those
documents i.e., the prosecution, could have rectified the
deficiencies.  As such, the petitioner cannot take such a
contention at this stage in the matter.
30. A perusal of Exs.P-5 to P-19 also no where
mentions    about   the   alleged demand       for   valuables,
including the diamond ear-stud and a cash of `10 lakhs
said to have been made by the accused with the
complainant (PW-1). Those E-mail correspondences which
mainly includes the E-mails written by PW-1 to her
younger sister by name Susheela, gives the details of
every trivial matters and trivial allegations, including the
one that PW-1 (complainant) was forced to eat with
particular breakfast or lunch which was not tasty to her
irrespective of the fact of she getting any vomitting. The
E-mails also go to show that she was asked to play cards
and sit with her mother-in-law for time-pass in the evening
outside their house.    In such an event, had there really
been a demand for valuables like diamond ear-stud and a
cash of `10 lakhs, any of the E-mails should have definitely
mentioned about the same. However, as observed above,
none of the E-mails whispers anything about the same.
31. In addition to the above, it is also to be noticed
that, according to the accused, the income of accused No.1
while he was staying in United States of America along
with PW-1 and his parents was not less than a sum of
`10 lakhs. Though PW-1 has not admitted the same in her
cross-examination,     but,   PW-2     has      stated      that,
subsequently they came to know that he had such a huge
income.    Thus, a super-specialist medical doctor, with a
huge income, if was demanding for valuables like diamond
ear-stud or cash of `10 lakhs, then, definitely in any of the
E-mails, there should have been a mention with respect to
the same and few corroborating evidence should have
been necessarily available with the complainant or could
have    been   gathered   by   the   prosecution      during   the
investigation.    However, the absence of any of the
corroborative evidence and a very weak and self-serving
oral evidence of PWs.1 to 4, which too have been denied in
their cross-examination, would fail to establish that there
was any demand from the accused for dowry or that they
have accepted or taken any dowry.
32. Regarding the alleged cruelty said to have been
meted by the accused against the complainant, all the four
witnesses i.e., PW-1, PW-2, PW-3 and PW-4 have given
their evidence on the similar lines.      As observed above,
PW-1 has stated that, on the very first night of their
marriage, her husband i.e., accused No.1 told her that he
does not want to have a child for about three years, and that he
would think about the same after completion of M.S.Degree. A
talk between husband and wife as to when they should have a
child or what is the view of a spouse about they having a
child and what would be the right time for them is a
common talk between the spouses to have a good
planning about their family. As such, merely because the
husband    expresses   his  view,  the   same      cannot    be
considered either as harassment or as a cruelty.
33. PW-1 has also stated that after she went to
United States of America with accused Nos.2 and 3 and
joined her husband, the accused No.1 asked her to
continue her further studies and to find out a job, so that,
it helps in maintaining the family and in meeting monthly
expenses. He also suggested her to take GRE and TOEFL
examinations. All the four witnesses i.e., PWs.1 to 4 have
depicted the same also as one of the instance of alleged
34. It cannot be understood as to how come the
husband making a suggestion to his wife to acquire more
knowledge and to pursue higher studies would amount to
cruelty. PW-1 herself in her cross-examination has stated
that prior to the marriage, she had a discussion with her
would-be husband i.e., accused No.1. The said discussion
with   her  would-be   husband   was    about     her   further
education, employment etc.,      When PW-1 herself has
stated that prior to the marriage, they had such a
discussion, it is obvious that she was aware that, after
joining her husband at United States of America, she may
have to pursue higher studies and find some employment
to meet the expenses of the family.     It is not their case
that without any prior discussion, her husband all of a
sudden forced her that she should find out an employment,
otherwise, the consequences would be serious.
Since both the complainant and accused No.1 being
highly educated and had good interaction prior to their
marriage and more particularly, discussed about their
future course of life, including further education of the
complainant and her job opportunities, the accused No.1
either   suggesting   her or   asking   her   to    pursue    her
education further, cannot be considered as cruelty.
35. Further, the allegation of PW-1, which is also
corroborated by the evidence of PWs.2, 3 and 4, is that
PW-1 was asked to learn Tamil and she was also asked to
play shuttle and cards with her in-laws.          She has also
stated that, she had to accompany her mother-in-law for a
walk while they were in United States of America.
It   is not    in  dispute   that   the     language      of
communication among the accused in their family was
Tamil as they were Iyers with Tamil as their language of
communication.      It is not that accused No.1 was not
knowing Kannada, which was the mother-tongue of the
complainant.    However, it cannot be called as unnatural
because, when a new member, though as a daughter-in-
law, enters the family of her husband, the members of the
husband's family expects that the new member mingles
among them even culturally also, for which purpose,
effective communication would be through the language
which all the members in the family would understand in a
proper and uniform manner.     If the new member fails to
understand the language in which the other members of
the family in her matrimonial home     communicate, then,
this new member i.e., daughter-in-law may feel isolated or
singled-out. As such, the suggestion given by the accused
to the complainant to learn Tamil, which even according to
PWs.1 to 4, was not a coercive act of the accused, cannot
be treated as a cruelty meted to complainant.
36. The contention of the complainant (PW-1),
corroborated by PWs. 2 to 4, that PW-1 was asked to take
her mother-in-law for walking while they were in United
States of America and join them in playing shuttle, though
has not been admitted from the accused side, rather, they
denied the same by subjecting PWs.1 to 4 to detailed
cross-examination and making denial suggestions, still,
assuming that such a request was made by the accused,
that would be only in the best interest of all the members
in the family and of their health. Therefore, the allegation
of PW-1 that she was once forced to accompany her
mother-in-law for a walk even if she was not keeping well,
appears to be a trivial matter which cannot be called as a
cruelty leading to attract Section 498-A of IPC.
37. Further the allegation of PW-1 that accused No.1
intentionally delayed in applying for extension of her VISA,
has remained only as a sheer allegation without any
corroborative evidence. On the other hand, PW-1 herself
has admitted in her cross-examination as true that when
the matter regarding application for extension of VISA had
to be contested by using the services of an Attorney by
name Ms.Sheela Murthy, it was the accused No.1 himself
who had borne the professional charges of the Attorney.
Had accused No.1 was not willing and interested in getting
the VISA of his wife extended, then, there was no
necessity for him to engage the services of an Attorney
and to bear the legal expenses by himself.
38. Therefore, all the allegations made by the
complainant against the accused are too trivial in their
nature and which are nothing, but, some minor differences
between the parties in the process of adjustment between
them.   It cannot be ignored of the fact that, admittedly
PW-1 was belonging to Kanva Brahmins Smartha group, as
such, she was brought up in the said custom and was
following the rituals of the said sect, whereas, the accused
were belonging to Sanketi sect of Brahmin community.
PW-1 herself has shown that there would be some
differences in the customs and rituals between these two
sects though both of them belong to Brahmin caste. Under
such circumstances, the minor differences in rituals either
in performance of marriage or in the post-marital life of
the spouses are quite, but, natural and they cannot fall
under the definition of `cruelty' under Section 498-A of
39. It is also the complaint of the complainant and
her siblings that accused were preventing PW-1 from
making telephone calls to her parental home and to talk
with them. The same was denied in the cross-examination
of these witnesses. Still, the very statement of PW-1 that
she was being prevented from talking to her parents
creates a doubt and the same cannot be believed, for the
reason that, the very same PW-1 has stated that she was
in constant touch with her younger sister by name
Susheela and was sending E-mails to her.           Thus, when
PW-1, whether in India or in America, could able to have
an access to a Computer system and send E-mails to her
sister, it is hard to believe that she was being prevented
by the accused from contacting her parental family
40. Lastly, the prosecution through PW-1 has stated
that all the details of the cruelty meted to PW-1 in her
matrimonial home was being revealed by her to her
younger sister by name Susheela, in which regard, several
E-mails were sent to Susheela by her. Those E-mails were
marked at Exs.P-5 to P-19. A perusal of those documents
would go to show that they are the E-mails sent by PW-1
to her younger sister Ms.Susheela, addressing her as
`Sushee'. In Ex.P-5, she has stated that she had been to
Orlando (Disney World) and everything was going smooth.
She has also stated that she could not able to reach her
(Susheela) all through from her mobile.
The said statement itself go to show that everything
was smooth at United States of America in the matrimonial
home of PW-1 and that she was even taken to tourist
places like Orlando (Disney World).     It also shows that
PW-1 had a mobile, but, there was some communication
problem, as such, in the very same E-mail, she had asked
her sister about any chances of activating her cell phone
from there for a year.
41. In subsequent E-mail also, several details of
day-today affairs appears to have been written to her
sister by the complainant.     She has also stated in the
E-mail dated 09.06.2008 that there was big fire between
her mother-in-law and Shashi (accused No.1) regarding
the child issue. He (Shashi) clearly told that he does not
want child for three years and after that, he thinks of it.
This go to show that the issue as to having a child was
more at discussion between mother and son (accused No.2
and accused No.1) than between accused No.1 and the
complainant. Even her mother-in-law was also aware that
her daughter-in-law (PW-1) was not at fault, but, it was
the decision of her son (accused No.1) that he should not
have child until he is established in United States of
America, which according to him, would have taken about
three years. The said E-mail itself would go to show that
the difference of opinion was between accused No.1 and
accused No.2 and accused No.2 (mother-in-law) had all
concern about her daughter-in-law (PW-1).              Thus, the
allegation of the complainant that the said act of alleged
insisting to have a child was a cruelty, is not acceptable.
42.  In   another  E-mail  dated    11.08.2008,       the
complainant has written to her sister Susheela stating that
her mother-in-law is giving too much food which she had
to eat, otherwise, she would be on fasting. After stating it,
the complainant has also stated that her mother-in-law is
fighting every day and she is not able to eat properly and
breathe.    In this way, the complainant (PW-1) has
considered that her mother-in-law asking to eat well and
eat more is also a cruelty meted to her . This is nothing,
but, an instance of too much sensitiveness with a person,
which is unwarranted.    In such an event, every positive
acts and love and affection have been given a different
colour and said that the recipient of love and affection is
being subjected to harassment or put to inconvenience.
43. In one more E-mail, the complainant has written
to her sister that her mother-in-law (accused No.2) has
stopped doing everything and even pooja and she says
that the complainant has to do that. By writing the same
to the other person, may be to her sister, the complainant
herself has shown that what her line of thinking was and
that she was not even ready and prepared to do pooja in a
traditional family and that she expected that doing pooja in
the house was the duty of her mother-in-law, but, not
44. Thus, the entire E-mails in the series from
Exs.P-5 to P-19 are full with these kind of trivial matters
which in a normal and happy family would had to be just
ignored and proceeded to keep intact the good relationship
among the members in the family. On the other hand, the
complainant herein appears to have taken every small
thing in a different angle and      appears to have been
showing that entire family should have been continued and
acted in a manner which she was feeling and liking
personally and individually.
45. Both the complainant and accused No.1 appears
to have given undue importance for their living in abroad.
It also appears that the sole aim in his life of accused No.1, was
living in United States of America and earning money, in which
regard, it appears that he was demanding the complainant to
secure a job and acquire H1 VISA, so that, in case of
expiry/lapse or non renewal of his VISA, he could have still
continued to stay in the United States of America upon his
wife's VISA. However, as analysed above, the same can not be
considered as a cruelty attracting Section 498-A of IPC.
Thus, both the complainant and accused No.1 appears to
have forgotten that the family is a unique unit in a society and
mutual understanding among the members in a family would
not only help in achieving    their goals and purpose, but, also
would help in having happiness       in the family, thus building
a healthy society.    The small and minor likes and dislikes,
differences,   would be common in most             of the families,
which the family members are required to cope-up with,
adjust,   tolerate,  enjoy   and   maintain      good     atmosphere
relationship of love,   affection,  mutual      respect and      good
health in   the family.   However, the complainant appears to
be too sensitive in magnifying several trivial aspects into
big issue which has ultimately resulted in the present case.
46. Both the trial Court and the Sessions Judge's
Court appears to have carried away with the self-serving
testimony of the complainant by ignoring the fact that all
those statements of not only the complainant, but, also of
PW-2, PW-3 and PW-4, remained very bald, vague,
without any clear details of the alleged several incidents.
The trial Court also did not notice the fact that, even
according to PW-1, if she was unable to contact her family
members and could only communicate with her younger
sister Susheela through E-mails, then the competent
witness to speak about those details was said Susheela,
who for the reasons best known to the prosecution, was
not examined. Further, even the E-mails from Exs.P-5 to
P-19 also, as analysed above, could not able to show that
the acts alleged therein would attract cruelty as mentioned
in Section 498-A of IPC.   Thus, the impugned judgments
warrants interference and the prosecution case would not
47. Accordingly, I proceed to pass the following:
No.1612/2016 and Criminal Revision Petition
No.1613/2016 are allowed.
conviction dated 05.09.2013 and order on
sentence dated 07.09.2013, passed by the
learned II Addl.Chief Metropolitan Magistrate,
Bengaluru, in C.C.No.17019/2011, which was
further confirmed by the judgment and order
dated 01.12.2016, passed by the learned LI
Addl.City Civil and Sessions Judge, Bengaluru
City, in Criminal Appeal No.503/2013, are
hereby set aside;
[iii]    The revision petitioner (accused
No.1)        in    Criminal    Revision      Petition
No.1612/2016 – Dr.Shashidhar Subbanna, son
of   late    Subbanna,   residing  at   No.174/5A,
Bengaluru-560028, and the revision petitioner
(accused No.2) in Criminal Revision Petition
No.1613/2016 – Smt.Saraswathi, wife of late
Subbanna, residing at No.174/5A,        10th Cross,
stand acquitted of the offences punishable
under Section 498-A read with Section 34 of
Indian Penal Code, 1860 and Sections 3 and 4
of Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961.
In view of disposal of the main petitions, the pending
I.A.No.1/2020 does not survive for consideration.
Registry to transmit a copy of this order to both the
trial Court and also to the Sessions Judge’s Court along
with their respective records immediately.