This is an application for anticipatory bail filed
under Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, by
the petitioner who is arrayed as accused in Crime No.19 of
2023 of Chalissery Police Station, Palakkad where, he
alleged to have committed offences punishable under
Sections 341, 323 and 294(b) of the Indian Penal Code as
well as under Sections 3 and 4 of the Kerala Healthcare
Service         Persons   and  Healthcare     Service   Institutions
B.A.No.834 of 2023
(Prevention of Violence and Damage to Property) Act,
2.     Heard   the    learned  counsel   for   the
petitioner and also the learned Public Prosecutor.
3.     I have perused the Case Diary materials
produced by the learned Public Prosecutor.
4.     The case of the prosecution is that, at
about 18.50 hours on 08.01.2023, when the petitioner,
who is a doctor by profession, was doing on-call duty, he
had examined the wife of the accused aged 27 years at
casualty           attached   to    Star    Med   Family    Clinic,
Karukaputhoor. While so, the accused herein caught hold
on his collar and slapped on his left cheek on the
allegation that the defacto complainant touched on the
body of the wife of the accused.             On that premise, the
prosecution alleges commission of the above offences.
B.A.No.834 of 2023
5.  While pursuing the relief of pre-arrest bail,
the learned counsel for the petitioner pointed out that the
petitioner is innocent. According to the learned counsel,
the doctor misbehaved towards the wife of the accused
and for which, complaint was lodged by the wife of the
accused         and  crime   alleging      commission  of  offence
punishable under Section 354 of IPC also was registered
and is on investigation.
6.  It is submitted by the learned counsel for
the petitioner that the petitioner is innocent and the
allegations are false. According to the learned counsel for
the petitioner, this case was registered as a counterblast
to avoid legal consequence, which would arise out of the
case lodged by the wife of the accused.
7.  Whereas     the     learned Public  Prosecutor
strongly opposed bail, on the submission that, the
B.A.No.834 of 2023
petitioner herein, who is having criminal antecedents and
involvement in four crimes, manhandled the defacto
complainant and obstructed his duty, while doctor was
examining his wife, on the allegation that, the doctor had
touched on her body, as part of examination.
8. According to the learned Public Prosecutor,
now attack against doctors are on high alarm and
therefore, doctors are under threat and fear, apprehending
their implication in crimes, while they will be doing their
duty by examining the patients by way of clinical
examinations. Therefore, threat against doctors would be
detrimental to the interest of people at large.     Thus it is
submitted that this is not a fit case to grant anticipatory
bail, where prosecution allegations are well made out.
9. I  have  perused    the First  Information
Statement given by the doctor where from this crime was
B.A.No.834 of 2023
registered         along  with   the     statement  given  by   the
Pharmacy Assistant as well as Administrative Assistant of
Star      Med      Family  Clinic  where,      the occurrence  was
reported. That apart, one Rakhi also given statement in
support of the occurrence.
10. In this matter, the FIS was lodged at 11.30
hours         on    09.01.2023     and      crime  was   registered
accordingly alleging commission of the above offences. It
is true that a counter case also was registered after
registration of this crime.
11. On perusal of the case records along with
the scene mahazar and the statements of the witnesses,
the prosecution case is well made out.               Be it so, the
allegation of misbehaviour at the option of the doctor, that
has been pointed out by the learned counsel for the
petitioner, alleged to be committed in the presence of two
B.A.No.834 of 2023
sisters and in an open space at the casualty of the
hospital cannot be believed prima facie. It is relevant to
note further that the allegation of misbehaviour was
raised, after registration of this crime.
12. In   this  matter, it is reported        by the
Investigating Officer that the petitioner is a person having
criminal antecedents and he has involvement in 4 crimes
as listed hereunder:
13. On evaluation of the factual aspects to be
B.A.No.834 of 2023
espoused from the case diary materials, the prosecution
case is well made out and attack against doctors, while
examining the patients, merely because they touched on
the body of the patients could not be encouraged at all.
Doctors, who had turmoiled their energy and time to learn
the method of treating patients, when examining patients
clinically, they cannot do the said exercise without
touching the patients. If a patient, who wants treatment,
is aggrieved in the matter of touch on the body of the
petitioner as part of examination, it is difficult for a doctor
to do his medical profession by resorting to clinical
examination.       The same    would    include     placing  of
Stethoscope on the left chest portion of the patient to
observe and evaluate the heart beat. At the same time,
this Court is conscious of the fact that all allegations on
the ground of misbehaviour by overstepping the limit of
B.A.No.834 of 2023
the doctor while examining patients are false.       Genuine
cases of such nature could not be ruled out in toto. But
generally, it could be held that truth of those allegations
should be evaluated from the materials and attending
circumstances to separate the grain from the chaff.
14. In the case on hand, attack against the
doctor at the instance of the petitioner is well made out
and in such a case, if the petitioner is granted anticipatory
bail, it would lead to a very dangerous situation, thereby,
doctors, who are duty bound to treat patients as part of
their oath, will not get protection and if so, the proper
maintenance of health of the public at large would be in
peril. In such case, arrest and custodial interrogation are
absolutely         necessary   to     accomplish  successful
investigation and eventful prosecution.
15. Therefore,  in   such  cases,  grant   of
B.A.No.834 of 2023
anticipatory bail, when prima facie the offences are made
out, would not only spoil the investigation but would lead
to traumatic situation. Therefore, I am not inclined to
allow this petition.
In the result,  this  bail application stands