The petitioner-accused is before this Court seeking
grant of bail under Section 439 of Cr.P.C. in Crime
No.82/2022 of Arasikere Rural Police Station, Hassan,
pending in Spl.C.No.366/2022 registered for the offences
punishable under Sections 341, 354(D) and 506 of the
Indian Penal Code (for short 'IPC'), on the basis of the first
information lodged by the informant Harshitha.
2.    Heard Sri.Jagadeesh.H.T., learned Counsel for
the petitioner and Sri.K.Rahul Rai, learned High Court
Government Pleader for the respondent -State.          Perused
the materials on record.
3.    Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted
that the petitioner is the sole accused.          He has not
committed any offences as alleged. He has been falsely
implicated in the matter without any basis.            He was
apprehended on 12.06.2022 and since then he is in
judicial custody.    The only allegation made against the
petitioner is that he illegally restrained victim girl, tried to
outrage her modesty and gave life threat to her.            The
offences are not punishable either with death or life
imprisonment.      Investigation is completed and charge
sheet is also filed. Detention of the petitioner in custody
would amount to pre-trial punishment as he is not
required to be detained in custody for any purpose except
to ensure his presence before the trial court.              The
petitioner is the permanent resident of the address
mentioned in the cause title to the petition and is ready
and willing to abide by any of the conditions that would be
imposed by this Court.        Hence, he prays to allow the
4.    Per contra, learned High Court Government
Pleader opposing the petition submitted that serious
allegations are made against the petitioner for having
committed the offences.       The victim has forwarded the
objections for releasing the petitioner on bail as there is
reasonable apprehension of the petitioner committing
offence of throwing acid on the victim, if in case he is
released on bail as he is criminally intimidated. There is
every possibility of the victim leaving village along with
her family to save herself. Under such circumstances, the
petitioner is not entitled to be enlarged on bail. Hence, he
prays for dismissal of the petition.
5.    In view of the rival contentions urged by the
learned counsel for both the parties, the point that would
arise for my consideration is:
“Whether the petitioner is entitled
for grant of bail under Section 439 of
My answer to the above point is in ‘Negative’ for the
6.    The allegations made against the petitioner is
that, he illegally restrained the victim every now while she
was going and coming back from the school and insisted
her to love him. He was also threatening to throw acid on
her if she fails to co-operate with him. After investigation,
charge sheet is filed.    It is noticed that the statement of
the victim under Section 161 of Cr.P.C. was also recorded
before the Magistrate wherein she has stated about the
offence committed by the accused.              The objections
forwarded by the victim for grant of bail to the petitioner
discloses that the accused is the resident of the same
village and victim and her family members are having life
threat as it is the only house of their community situated
in the village. The apprehension expressed by the victim
is very reasonable. If the accused executes his threat of
throwing acid, the same cannot be undone at any cost.
Therefore, I am of the opinion that it is not a fit case for
grant of bail at this stage.
7.    Accordingly, I answer the above point in the
negative and proceed to pass the following:
The petition is dismissed.