the learned Sessions Judge, Amreli
below Exh.40 in Sessions Case no.
(B) Pending admission, hearing and
final disposal of this petition, YOUR
LORDSHIPS       be        pleased     to        stay
operation,                execution               and
implementation of the order dated
27.05.2022 passed by the learned
Sessions Judge, Amreli below Exh.40
in Sessions Case no. 22/2021; and
further be pleased to stay the
proceedings of Sessions Case no.
4.   Brief facts of the case are as under:-
4.1 On 11.11.2019, an FIR bearing CR no. I-94/2019
came to be registered with Amreli City Police
Station being for the offence punishable U/s.
147, 148, 149, 120B and 34 of the Indian Penal
Code,        1860  as   well      as   Section     135       of       the
Gujarat Police Act. It is alleged in the FIR
that        on  10.11.2019,         in  the  morning           hours,
while the complainant as well as one of his
relatives i.e. Ramesh Surabhai Makwana were on
their way back after performing their routine
work,        they  received       a call    from     the Police
Sub-Inspector, Sakariya and requested them to
provide        help   in   arranging       manpower          and        to
provide        shelter   to stray        cows.   It has             been
alleged         that   the        complainant       accordingly
assisted the police. However, the complainant
faced an ire of various members of their caste
and was trolled in a WhatsApp group. It has
been alleged that the complainant and others
thereafter visited the Police Station showing
their inability to assist police as members of
his caste were not happy. It has been alleged
that the police requested the respondent no.2
to arrange          meeting    with      the members            of his
caste and the same was arranged and in the
said        meeting,     scuffle        took    place         between
various persons and one Shri Rameshbhai Trad,
Shri        Amrubhai     Nanubhai        and    Shri        Surabhai
Kadabhai            sustained          injuries;            however,
Govindbhai Trad and Kiranbhai Makwana passed
away.
4.2 Thereafter, the petitioner has been arrested
by the          police  and the        petitioner        has       fully
cooperated          with   the       investigation          and         the
police has filed a charge-sheet against the
petitioner on 07.02.2020 and filing of charge-
sheet          has   resulted        into    registration                 of
Sessions Case no.22 of 2021, which is pending
consideration as on date before the learned
4.3 The petitioner has been enlarged on regular
bail       on    29.10.2020     by     the  learned         Sessions
Judge, Amreli in the proceedings of Criminal
Misc. Application no.501 of 2020.
4.4 It is the case of the petitioner that as no
procedure as contemplated under Sections 225
and 226 of the Cr.P.C. was followed, one of
the        accused    had    preferred          an     application
Exh.34         seeking       directions            against               the
prosecution          to    follow          the     procedure               as
contemplated in the aforesaid provisions. The
learned        Sessions    Judge,         Amreli,       vide        order
dated 07.01.2022, has been pleased to allow
the         said    application           by     directing               the
prosecution to follow the procedure prescribed
under Section 226 and to open the case.
4.5 Pursuant to the directions issued by the Trial
Court in the order passed below Exh.34, it was
expected that the prosecution will follow the
procedure         contemplated         under    Section         226        of
the Cr.P.C., however, as no such procedure was
followed, an application Exh.39 was presented
by some of the accused pointing out the said
glaring lapse on the part of prosecution. The
prosecution         thereafter         filed     a   report            vide
Exh.38,        wherein    it     was      contended        that          the
prosecution relies upon all the documents and
statements         referred     to      in   the    charge-sheet.
Merely stating that they are placing reliance
on all the documents would not be sufficient
for       the    prosecution        to     open     the      case          as
provided         under  Section          226   of    the       Cr.P.C.
However, the Trial Court, by passing an order
dated           19.03.2022,           dismissed          the            said
application by accepting the contention of the
prosecution            that     the       report      of        placing
reliance on all the papers of charge-sheet is
in due compliance of the provisions of Section
226 of Cr.P.C.
4.6 The petitioner, thus, preferred an application
at Exh.40 under Section 227 seeking discharge
of      the      petitioner       from      the   trial         of        the
Sessions Case. However, the learned Sessions
Judge,         by   passing     the      impugned     order          dated
27.05.2022 in Sessions Case no.22 of 2021, has
rejected the application Exh.40.
4.7 Being aggrieved by the said order, the present
Revision Application is filed.
5.   Mr. Pratik Y. Jasani, learned advocate for the
petitioner has contended as under:-
5.1 It       is     contended     that        the  Trial       Court           was
appraised          by   the   petitioner        about       the         fact
that        there     is   no    material       worth       the         name
against the petitioner even if the entire case
of the prosecution is believed to be true. The
petitioner also placed heavy reliance on all
the statements which are relied upon by the
prosecution.             It    is        contended        that            the
petitioner is merely arraigned as an accused
on the ground of his presence at the scene of
the offence. However, there is no allegation
worth        the   name   about        the  petitioner           having
participated in the offence by giving any blow
to either the injured or to the deceased. The
petitioner, by relying upon those statements,
had projected a case that the petitioner is
innocent and there are no evidence to put the
petitioner to trial. The Trial Court was at
least required to apply its mind and to test
the      case     of  the    petitioner       at    least          prima
facie as to whether there is any involvement
of the petitioner considering the case papers
of charge-sheet. However, the merits of the
case have not at all been discussed by the
Trial Court, nor the contentions referred and
relied          upon    by     the       petitioner          in         the
application Exh.45 have been discussed.
5.2 It       is     contended     that       a  plain      reading             of
Section 227 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973       which    allows    any accused         to prefer               an
application for discharge demonstrates that if
an accused is in a position to establish that
upon consideration of the record of the papers
relied         upon   by   the        prosecution       if       it       is
establishes that there is no sufficient ground
for proceeding against the said accused, the
said accused deserves an order of discharge
from        further     being        tried.    It      is      further
contended that the Trial Court has not given
any reason as to how the grounds urged by the
petitioner          are  unwarranted         or   the      documents
submitted by the prosecution is sufficient for
proceeding ahead against the petitioner.
5.3 It is contended that the Trial Court has come
to a conclusion that as applications Exhs.34
and 39 are disposed of and as the said orders
have attained finality, the application Exh.40
also deserves to be dismissed. It is contended
that       the     application        Exh.34   was      allowed            in
favour          of   the    accused        by    directing               the
prosecution to open the case and to follow the
mandate of law and provisions of Section 226
of the Cr.P.C. and as the same procedure was
not        followed,      the     application         Exh.39             was
presented.           It   is      further      contended               that
neither Exh.34, nor Exh.39 are in the nature
of      praying       for    discharge.        It      is      further
contended that thus, the finding of the Trial
Court         that   the   application         Exhs.34          and        39
having         attained      finality,        the      application
Exh.34         also    requires         to  be   dismissed,                is
without application of mind.
5.4 It is contended that the petitioner had also
contended          before    the      Trial    Court       that          the
order passed by the Trial Court below Exh.34
has not been properly complied with and the
prosecution        is  to    open       its  case       by      giving
brief idea as to on what material it proposes
to try a particular accused. However, in the
instant case, by merely filing a report, the
prosecution has adopted the entire papers of
charge-sheet,          which          is,     in       respectful
submission of the petitioner, no compliance of
the provisions of Section 226.
5.5 It is contended that Section 226 empowers any
person who considers himself to be not guilty
and the material so placed by the prosecution
does not support the case of the prosecution,
can move an application under Section 227 of
Cr.P.C.        Moving   an    application         invoking             the
provisions         of    law,         by    no     stretch               of
imagination,        can   be      said    to   be     a    dilatory
tactic. It is right of an accused to present a
discharge application and the Trial Court has
erred in coming to the conclusion that filing
an     application     for     discharge       is     a    dilatory
tactics.
5.6 Mr. Jasani, relying upon the decision in the
case of Manishaben Gajjugiri Goswami Vs. State
of      Gujarat,     decided         in   Criminal         Revision
Application        No.245     of      2021,   contended              that
this Court has discussed the ambit and purport
of the provisions of Sections 226 and 228 of
the       Cr.P.C.     Mr.    Jasani,         therefore,          submits
that for the foregoing reasons, the prayers
prayed         for   in   the     present       petition          may        be
granted.
6.   Per         contra,      Mr.       R.C.       Kodekar,           learned
Additional            Public          Prosecutor            for            the
respondent          –   State      has      contended        that          the
impugned order passed by the Trial Court is
just and proper and no interference is called
for. Learned APP has contended that the entire
material comprising of the charge-sheet along
with the documentary evidence produced would
make         it    clear     that         the    petitioner                has
committed an offence for which he is required
to be tried. Learned APP has further contended
that by filing the discharge application, the
petitioner          has    tried         to   delay      the        trial.
Learned APP has also relied on the decision
rendered by this Court in Manishaben Gajjugiri
Goswami (supra) and therefore, in view of the
above submissions, no error is committed by
the learned Sessions Judge in rejecting the
discharge application of the petitioner.
7.   Having heard learned advocates appearing for
the parties and having perused the material
placed on record, it reveals from the record
that       the charge       and      framing      of    charge           have
been deferred time and again due to several
applications          moved     by       the   petitioner            along
with co-accused which ultimately seems to have
been disposed of and the consequences follows
from         the   order      passed         below     Exh.34             and
therefore,          the    petition          preferred          by        the
petitioner is nothing but an act to prolong
the      trial     by  one     or     another     reason         and        it
amounts to create hurdles in the smooth trial.
8.   It further appears from the record that there
is sufficient piece of evidence on the basis
of which the guilt of the petitioner can be
proved.        Similar    issues          and  contentions              have
been         raised     by     the         petitioner          in         the
application filed by the petitioner along with
the        co-accused      vide          Exh.34,     wherein              the
reference as to the statements and allegations
to      prescribe      procedure           before     framing             the
charge.
9.   It      also     evident     from        the   record       that          the
present        petition     is      nothing      but     a    delaying
tactic as the application seems to have been
deferred on several occasions, whereas the co-
accused seem to have been assassinating and
languishing in the prison wherein the charge
till date has not been framed or followed by
the commencement of the trial due to several
applications          moved      by       the   petitioner.               The
entire material comprising of the charge-sheet
along with the documentary evidence have been
produced          and   the    same        is   sufficient               for
presuming that the petitioner has committed an
offence for which he is required to be tried.
Whatever          submissions         made    by    the        learned
advocate for the petitioner can be raised at
the      time     of   raising       defence     in     the       trial.
Looking to the gravity and nature of offence,
the petitioner is required to be tried for the
charges levelled against him.
10. This Court even while considering the law and
proposition           laid     down        in    the       case            of
Manishaben Gajjugiri Goswami (supra) has gone
through         the   same.   The very         purpose        and the
object of following the provisions of Sections
226 to 228 of the Cr.P.C. is to ensure the
expeditious disposal of the Sessions Case so
that the accused is discharged if there is no
sufficient material against him or he can be
tried quickly by following the due procedure
laid down under Chapter-28 of the Cr.P.C.
11. This Court in the case of State of Bihar Vs.
Ramesh         Singh, reported          in   AIR 1977         SC 2018
observed as under:-
“4. Under section 226 of the Code while
opening the case for the prosecution
the Prosecutor has got to describe the
charge against the accused and state by
what evidence he proposes to prove the
guilt of the accused. Thereafter comes
at the initial stage the duty of the
Court to consider the record of the
case    and  the        documents      submitted
therewith and to hear the submissions
of the accused and the prosecution in
that behalf. 'The Judge has to pass
thereafter   an       order     either          under
section 227 or section 228 of the Code.
If "the Judge consider that there is
not. sufficient ground for proceeding
against the accused, he shall discharge
the accused and record his reasons for
so doing", as enjoined by section 227.
If, on the other hand, "the Judge is of
opinion that there, is ground for
presuming.   that           the  accused             has
committed an offence which-
(b)in exclusively triable by the Court,
he shall frame in writing a charge
against the accused'-', as provided in
section 228. Reading the two provisions
together in juxta position, as they
have got to be, it would be clear that
at the beginning and the initial stage
of the trial the truth, veracity and
effect    of the        evidence     which           the
Prosecutor proposes to adduce are not
to be meticulously judged. Nor is any
weight to be attached to the probable
defence of the accused. It is not
obligatory for the Judge at that stage
of the trial to consider in any detail
and    weigh in       a sensitive           balance
whether the facts, if proved, would be
incompatible with the innocence of the
accused or not. The standard of test
and judgment which is to be finally
applied before recording a finding
regarding the guilt or otherwise of the
accused is not exactly to be applied at
the stage of deciding the matter under
section 227 or section 228 of the Code.
At that stage the Court is not to 'see
whether there is sufficient ground for
conviction of the accused or whether
the trial is sure to end in his
conviction. Strong suspicion against
the accused, if the matter remains in
the region of suspicion, cannot take
the place of proof of his guilt at the
conclusion of the trial. But at the
initial stage if there is a strong
suspicion which leads the Court to
think   that    there        is    ground            for
presuming    that         the    accused             has
committed an offence then it is not
open to the Court to say that there is
no sufficient ground for proceeding
against the accused. The presumption of
the guilt of the accused which is to be
drawn at the, initial stage is not in
the sense of the law governing the
trial of criminal cases in France where
the accused is presumed to be guilty
unless the contrary is proved. But it
is only for the purpose of deciding
prima facie whether the Court should
proceed with the trial or not. if the
evidence which the Prosecutor proposes
to adduce to prove the guilt of the
accused even if fully accepted before
it is challenged in cross-examination
or rebutted by the defence evidence, if
any, cannot show that the accused
committed the offence, then there will
be no sufficient ground for proceeding
with the trial. An exhaustive list of
the circumstances to indicate as to
what will lead to one conclusion or the
other    is    neither          possible             nor
advisable. We may just illustrate the
difference of the law by one more
example. If the scales of pan as to the
guilt or innocence of the accused are
something like even at the conclusion
of the, trial, then, on the theory of
benefit of doubt the case is to end in
his acquittal. But, if, on the other
hand, it is so at the initial stage of
making an order under section 227 or
section 228, then in such a situation
ordinarily and generally the order
which will have to be made will be one
under section 228 and not under section
12. This Court in the case of State of Maharashtra
Vs. Som Nath Thapa, reported in AIR 1977 SC
2018 observed as under:-
“24. The aforesaid decisions, weighty
as they are, lead us to conclude that
to establish a charge of conspiracy
knowledge about indulgence in either
an illegal act or a legal act by
illegal means is necessary. In some
cases, intent of unlawful use being
made of the goods or services in
question may be inferred from the
knowledge     itself. This         apart, the
prosecution has not to establish that
a      particular        unlawful      use           was
intended, so long as the goods or
service in question could not be put
to any lawful use. Finally, when the
ultimate offence consists of a chain
of actions, it would not be necessary
for the prosecution to establish, to
bring home the charge of conspiracy,
that each of the conspirators had the
knowledge of what the collaborator
would do, so long as it is known that
the collaborator would put the goods
or service to an unlawful use. When
can charge be framed ?
30. In Antulay's case, Bhagwati, CJ.,
opined, after noting the difference in
the language of the three pairs of
section, that despite the difference
there is no scope for doubt that at the
stage at which the Court is required to
consider the question of framing of
charge, the test of "prima facie" case
has to be applied. According to Shri
Jethmalani, a prima facie case even be
said to have been made out when the
evidence, unless rebutted, would make
the accused liable to conviction. In
our view, better and clearer statement
of law would be that if there is ground
for presuming that the accused has
committed the offence, a court can
justifiably say that a prima facie case
against him exists, and so, frame
charge against him for committing that
offence".
31. Let us note the meaning of the word
"presume". In Black's Law Dictionary it
has been defined to mean "to believe or
accept    upon        probable      evidence".
(Emphasis ours). In Shorter Oxford
English    Dictionary       it     has          been
mentioned that in law "presume" means
"to take as proved until evidence to
the contrary is forthcoming" , Stroud's
Legal Dictionary has quoted in this
context a certain judgement according
to which "A presumption is a probable
consequence drawn from facts (either
certain or proved by direct testimony)
as to the truth of a fact alleged."
(Emphasis supplied). In Law Lexicon by
P. Ramanath Aiyer the same quotation
finds place at page 1007 of 1987
edition.
32. The aforesaid shows that if on the
basis of materials on record, a court
could come to the conclusion that
commission of the offence is a probable
consequence, a case for framing of
charge exists. To put it differently,
if the Court were to think that the
accused    might       have      committed             the
offence it can frame the charge, though
for    conviction         the    conclusion              is
required to be that the accused has
committed the offence. It is apparent
that at the stage of framing of charge,
probative value of the materials on
record    cannot      be      gone     into;           the
materials brought on record by the
prosecution has to be accepted as true
at that stage.
What is the effect of lapse of TADA ?
33. In the written submissions filed on
behalf of appellant Moolchand, it has
been urged that TADA having lapsed,
section 1(4) which saves, inter alia,
any investigation instituted before the
Act had expired, itself lapsed because
of which it is not open to the
prosecution to place reliance on this
sub-section to continue the proceeding
after expiry of TADA.
57. A perusal of the statement made by
aforesaid two Inspectors shows that they
had made two statements at two points of
time. The first of these has been
described as "original statement' by
Shri Shirodkar in his written note and
the second as "further statement". In
the    original      statement,        these            two
Inspectors are said to have told Thapa,
on being asked which would be crucial
places for laying trap, that the same
were Purar Phata and Behan Phata, at
which places trap was in fact laid. But
then, in the further statement the
Inspectors are said to have opined that
watch should be kept at Sai-Morba-
Goregoan junction, because that was the
main exit point for smuggling done at
Shrivardhan and Shekhadi. Shri Shirodkar
would not like us to rely on what was
stated subsequently by these Inspectors,
as     that was        under  pressure              of
investigation undertaken subsequently by
the C.B.I. We do not think that the law
permits us to find out at this stage as
to which of the two versions given by
two Inspectors is correct. We have said
so because at the stage of framing of
charge probative value of the statement
cannot be gone into, which would come to
be decided at the close of the trial.
There is no doubt that if the subsequent
statement be correct, Nakabandi was done
not at the proper place, as that left
Sai-Morba Road free for the smugglers to
carry the goods upto Bombay.”
13. This Court in the case of State of Maharashtra
Vs. Priya Sharan Maharan, reported in AIR 1997
SC 2041 observed as under:-
“8. The law on the subject is now well-
settled, as pointed out in Niranjan
Singh Punjabi vs. Jitendra Bijjaya
(1990) 4 SCC 76, that at Sections 227
and 228 stage the Court is required to
evaluate the material and documents on
record with a view of finding out if
the facts emerging therefrom taken at
their face value disclose the existence
of all the ingredients constituting the
alleged offence. The Court may, for
this limited purpose, sift the evidence
as it cannot be expected even at that
initial stage to accept all that the
prosecution states as gospel truth even
if it is opposed to common sense or the
broad     probabilities           of    the         case.
Therefore, at the stage of framing of
the charge the Court has to consider
the material with a view to find out if
there is ground for presuming that the
accused has committed the offence or
that there is not sufficient ground for
proceeding against him and not for the
purpose of arriving at the conclusion
that it is not likely to lead to a
conviction.
11. The above quoted paragraphs from
the judgment clearly disclose that the
High Curt was much influenced by the
submission     made        on    behalf        of        the
defence that Kripalu Maharaj is a
saintly old man, who has renounced the
world, who is engrossed in spiritual
activity and who has thousands/millions
of     disciples     all       over    India          and,
therefore, he was not likely to indulge
in the illegal acts alleged against
him. It failed to appreciate that it is
not unusual to come across cases where
the so-called spiritual heads exploit
you girls and women who become their
disciples and come under their spell.
Moreover, the reasoning of the High
Court that it also does not stand to
reason that a saintly man who has
thousand/millions of disciples all over
India would commit sexual intercourse
with the praharak of his cult in
presence     of     his        disciples         stands
vitiated     because          of   the      vice           of
misreading the statements. The three
girls have nowhere stated in their
statements      that          R-2     had        sexual
intercourse with them in presence of
other disciples. The High Court gave
too much importance to the conduct of
the three victims and the delay in
disclosing those illegal acts to their
parent and the police. What the High
Court has failed to appreciate is how a
victim of such an offence will behave
would depend upon the circumstances in
which she is placed. It often happens
that such victims do not complain
against such illegal acts immediately
because of factors like fear or shame
or uncertainties about the reactions of
their parents or husbands in case of
married girls or women and the adverse
consequences    which,      they    apprehend,
would follow because of disclosure of
such acts. What the three girls had
stated in their statements was not
inherently   improbable       or    unnatural.
They have disclosed the reasons why
they could not immediately complain
about those illegal acts for such a
long time. What the High Court has
failed to appreciate is that while
making complaint to the police or
giving their statements they were not
required to give detailed explanations.
As stated earlier, what the Court has
failed to appreciate is that while
making a complaint to the police or
giving their statements they were not
required to give detailed explanations.
As stated earlier, what the Court has
to consider at the stage of framing of
the charge is whether the version of
the person complaining together with
his/her explanation is prima facie
believable or not. It was, therefore,
not proper for the High Court to seek
independent corroboration at that stage
and to quash the charge and discharge
the accused in absence thereof. It was
also improper to describe the version
of Sulakshana as false because no
extensive injuries were noticed on her
person while she was examined by a
doctor        on      the         basis       of         some
observations made in Modi's textbook on
"Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology".
We do not think it proper to say
anything further as, in the view that
we are taking, the accused will have to
face a trial and whatever observations
we make now may cause some prejudice to
them at the trial. We would only say
that the High Court was wholly wrong in
discarding the material placed before
the Court as false and discharging the
accused on the ground.”
14. Thus,          in  view    of    the       above    decisions              and
discussions          made     hereinabove,          the       impugned
order        does   not   suffer         from   any     illegality,
irregularity or impropriety and the Revision
is      liable     to    be     dismissed        and      is       hereby
dismissed. Rule discharged.