1)    The petitioners have challenged the complaint filed by
respondent against them alleging commission of offences under
Section 420, 120-B IPC. Challenge has also been thrown to the
proceedings initiated by the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Anantnag, on the said complaint.
2)    A perusal of the record shows that the respondent herein has
filed a complaint before the Court of learned Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Anantnag, alleging therein that the petitioners have
entered into a criminal conspiracy by forming a company, namely,
Aizen Communications Pvt. Ltd. It is alleged that the respondent was
introduced by petitioner No.2 to other petitioners who were on tour to
Kashmir Valley to promote the business of the aforesaid company. A
meeting was held by the petitioners with the respondent at Anantnag
wherein the respondent was invited to invest money in the company
and the company, in return, assured to pay double the amount within a
span of three years with bonus. It is alleged that in this regard the
petitioners published notices in national as well as local media thereby
making false representations in the name of the company, Aizen
Communications Pvt. Ltd., with an intention to cheat the public in
general and the respondent in particular. It is further alleged that in
one of the advertisement notices, it was provided that if anybody pays
51 installments of Rs.4000/ in one go, the company would return
double the amount within three years and will further pay an amount
of Rs.1836/ per working day for 200 days with a foreign tour of 07
days at their expenses. It is averred that the respondent/complainant,
believing in these representations, was duped of Rs.3.00 crores. It is
further    averred    that    the    money     that    was     paid       by
respondent/complainant was deposited by him in the bank account of
the company, the details whereof have been given in the complaint. It
is alleged that the petitioners, after collecting huge wealth, stopped
communicating and fled away from the Valley thereby committing the
offence of cheating. It is also alleged that the petitioners induced the
respondent/complainant to deliver the property in the name of the
company by making false and deceptive representations. Lastly, it has
been alleged that the offences have been committed by the company
in connivance with the petitioners.
3)     The petitioners have urged two grounds. One that the impugned
complaint as against the petitioners cannot proceed without
impleading the company as an accused. The second ground which has
been urged is that the petitioners/accused are residing beyond the
limits of local jurisdiction of the trial Magistrate, as such, it was not
open to the learned Magistrate to issue process against them without
conducting enquiry/investigation in terms of Section 202 of the
4)     I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
material on record including the trial court record.
5)     Learned counsel for the petitioners has reiterated the aforesaid
two grounds during the course of his arguments and contended that in
view of the legal flaw in impleading the company as an accused in the
complaint, the same deserves to be quashed. In this regard, he has
placed reliance upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
Sharad Kumar Sanghi v. Sangita Rane, (2015) 12 SCC 781.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has further contended that the order
passed by the learned trial Magistrate whereby process has been
issued against the petitioner is also liable to be set aside because the
same has been passed without following the mandatory provisions
contained in Section 202 of the Cr. P. C.
6)     Learned counsel for the respondent, on the other hand, has
contended that there are specific allegations made in the complaint
against the petitioners and, as such, even without impleading the
company as an accused, the complaint against the petitioners can
proceed further. Alternatively, he has submitted that the respondent/
complainant may be permitted to amend the complaint and implead
the company as an accused. Learned counsel for the respondent has
conceded that it was incumbent upon the trial Magistrate to conduct
an enquiry/investigation in terms of Section 202 of the Cr. P. C as the
petitioners/accused are residing beyond the limits of his local
jurisdiction. He has submitted that he has no objection in case order of
issuance of process against the petitioners is set aside and the learned
Magistrate is asked to conduct enquiry/investigation and thereafter
proceed in accordance with the law.
7)      There can be no quarrel with the proposition that vicarious
liability of Managing Director, Director or any other office bearer of a
body corporate would arise only if there exists any provision in that
behalf in the Statute. It is also a settled law that even where vicarious
liability is fastened under certain statutes, without impleading
company as a party, no proceedings can be initiated against its
Directors/office bearers. In Sharad Kumar Sanghi’s case (supra),
which has been relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioners,
it has been held that when the company has not been arrayed as an
accused, the criminal proceedings initiated against the Managing
Director are liable to be quashed.
8)      Coming to the facts of the instant case, it has been pleaded by
the respondent/complainant in the complaint that it was respondent
No.2 who introduced other petitioners/accused to him in the year 2017
at Anantnag. It is further alleged in the complaint that petitioner No.2
along with other petitioners held a meeting at Anantnag, wherein he
introduced himself as Manager of the company, petitioner No.1 as
Managing Director and petitioners No.3 and 4 as Manager and
Secretary of the Company. The respondent/complainant goes on to
allege that in the said meeting, the petitioners deceitfully invited him
and other persons to invest money in the said company with the
promise that the company will, in return, pay double the money within
a span of three years along with bonus. It has been clearly alleged in
the complaint that the representations and offers were made by the
petitioners on behalf of the company and even the money was paid by
respondent/complainant into the account of the company. The
respondent/complainant in his complaint has, in fact, made it clear
that the accused persons made these false representations in the name
of the company and that the offences have been committed by the
company with the connivance of the petitioners who happen to be its
office bearers.
9)     In Sharad Kumar Sanghi’s case (supra), the Supreme Court
has clearly laid down that when the company has not been arrayed as
an accused, no criminal proceedings can be initiated against its
Managing Director. While holding so, the Court relied upon following
observations made by it in Maksud Saiyed v. State of Gujarat,
“13. Where a jurisdiction is exercised on a complaint
petition filed in terms of Section 156(3) or Section
Magistrate is required to apply his mind.
Indian Penal Code does not contain any provision for
attaching vicarious liability on the part of the
Managing Director or the Directors of the Company
Magistrate failed to pose unto himself the correct
question viz. as to whether the complaint petition,
even if given face value and taken to be correct in its
entirety, would lead to the conclusion that the
respondents herein were personally liable for any
offence. The Bank is a body corporate. Vicarious
liability of the Managing Director and Director would
arise provided any provision exists in that behalf in
the statute. Statutes indisputably must contain
provision fixing such vicarious liabilities. Even for the
said purpose, it is obligatory on the part of the
complainant to make requisite allegations which
would attract the provisions constituting vicarious
liability.”
10)   The ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in Sharad Kumar
Sanghi’s case (supra), has been followed by the said Court in the case
of Sushil Sethi and Ors. Vs. The State of Arunachal Pradesh and
Ors., AIR 2020 SC 765. The Supreme Court, after noticing its earlier
“8.2. It is also required to be noted that the main
allegations can be said to be against the company.
allegations are restricted to the Managing Director
and the Director of the company respectively.
There are no specific allegations against the
Managing Director or even the Director. There are
no allegations to constitute the vicarious liability.
Gujarat (2008) 5 SCC 668, it is observed and held
by this Court that the penal code does not contain
any provision for attaching vicarious liability on the
part of the Managing Director or the Directors of
the company when the accused is the company. It
is further observed and held that the vicarious
liability of the Managing Director and Director
would arise provided any provision exists in that
behalf in the statute. It is further observed that
statute indisputably must contain provision fixing
such vicarious liabilities. It is further observed that
even for the said purpose, it is obligatory on the
requisite allegations which would attract the
provisions constituting vicarious liability. In the
present case, there are no such specific allegations
against the appellants being Managing Director or
the Director of the company respectively. Under
the circumstances also, the impugned criminal
proceedings are required to be quashed and set
aside.”
11)     From the analysis of the aforesaid precedents, it is clear that
Penal Code does not contain any provision for attaching vicarious
liability on the office bearers of a company. Unless there are specific
allegations against the office bearers of the company and the company
is made as an accused, the criminal proceedings against its office
bearers cannot be initiated.
12)     In the instant case, as already noted, the complainant has
repeatedly reiterated that the petitioners were representing the
company and in their capacity as office bearers of the company, they
had made false representations. Each and every action of the
petitioners was in their capacity as office bearers of the company and
whatever they did, the same was done on behalf of the company. Even
the money was received from the respondent/complainant in the
account of the company. Thus, without impleading the company as an
accused, the proceedings against the petitioners could not have been
initiated. The learned Chief Judicial Magistrate has, therefore, erred in
issuing process against the petitioners.
13)     Apart from the above, the learned Magistrate before issuing
process against the petitioners, who were residing beyond the limits of
his territorial jurisdiction, did not conduct enquiry/investigation in the
case, which is mandatory in terms of Section 202 of the Cr. P. C. On
this ground also, the order passed by the learned Magistrate, whereby
process has been issued against the petitioners, deserves to be
14)     The contention of the respondent that he should be allowed to
amend the complaint to implead the company as an accused, cannot
be accepted for the reason that it is only a formal amendment which
can be allowed in the criminal proceedings. By way of the
amendment, the respondent/complainant cannot be allowed to amend
the complaint so as to set right a defect which goes to the very root of
the case.
15)     For the foregoing reasons, the petition is allowed and the
impugned complaint and the proceedings emanating therefrom are
16)     A copy of this order be sent to the learned Magistrate for