This file relates to reconsideration of the proposal for appointment
of Shri Saurabh Kirpal, Advocate as Judge of the Delhi High Court.
The recommendation unanimously made by the Collegium of the
Delhi High Court on 13 October 2017 and approved by the Supreme Court
Collegium on 11 November 2021 has been referred back to us on 25
November 2022 for reconsideration in light of the observations made in
the file.
The proposal has been pending for over five years. From the letters
of the Research & Analysis Wing (R&AW) dated 11 April 2019 and 18
March 2021, it appears that there are two objections to the
recommendation which was made by the Collegium of this Court on 11
November 2021 approving the name of Shri Saurabh Kirpal namely: (i)
the partner of Shri Saurabh Kirpal is a Swiss National, and (ii) he is in an
intimate relationship and is open about his sexual orientation.
The letter of the Law Minister dated 01 April 2021 states that
though “homosexuality stands de-criminalised in India, nonetheless
same-sex marriage still remains bereft of recognition either in codified
statutory law or uncodified personal law in India”. Moreover, it has been
stated that the candidate’s “ardent involvement and passionate attachment
to the cause of gay-rights” would not rule out the possibility of bias and
As regards the first objection, the two communications of R&AW
do not reflect any apprehension in regard to the individual conduct or
behaviour of the partner of Shri Saurabh Kirpal having a bearing on
national security. There is no reason to pre-suppose that the partner of the
candidate, who is a Swiss National, would be inimically disposed to our
country, since the country of his origin is a friendly nation. Many persons
in high positions including present and past holders of constitutional
offices have and have had spouses who are foreign Nationals. Hence, as
a matter of principle, there can be no objection to the candidature of Shri
Saurabh Kirpal on the ground that his partner is a foreign National.
As regards the second objection, it needs to be noted that the
decisions of the Constitution Bench of this Court have established the
constitutional position that every individual is entitled to maintain their
own dignity and individuality, based on sexual orientation. The fact that
Mr. Saurabh Kirpal has been open about his orientation is a matter which
goes to his credit. As a prospective candidate for judgeship, he has not
been surreptitious about his orientation. In view of the constitutionally
recognized rights which the candidate espouses, it would be manifestly
contrary to the constitutional principles laid down by the Supreme Court
to reject his candidature on that ground. Shri Saurabh Kirpal possesses
competence, integrity and intellect. His appointment will add value to the
Bench of the Delhi High Court and provide inclusion and diversity. His
conduct and behaviour have been above board. It may have been advisable
for the candidate not to speak to the Press in regard to the reasons which
may have weighed in the recommendations of the Collegium being sent
back for reconsideration. However, this aspect should not be considered
as a negative feature, particularly since the name has remained pending
for over five years. The overwhelmingly positive aspects of the
candidature of Shri Saurabh Kirpal must, therefore, weigh in the balance.
In this backdrop, the Collegium resolves to reiterate its
recommendation dated 11 November, 2021 for appointment of Shri
Saurabh Kirpal as a Judge of the Delhi High Court which needs to be
processed expeditiously.