Represented by:        Mr. Vikram Nankani, Mr. Sidharth
Agarwal, Sr. Advs. with Mr.
Represented by:        Mr. S.V. Raju, ASG with Mr.
Zoheb Hossain, SPP for ED with
Represented by:        Mr. Mahesh Jethmalani, Sr. Adv.
with Mr. Dheeraj Nair, Ms.
Represented by: Mr. S.V. Raju, ASG with Mr.
Zoheb Hossain, SPP for ED with
By:MANISH KUMAR          W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                          Page 1 of 28
Represented by:        Mr. Kapil Sibal, Mr. Rajiv Nayar,
Sr. Advs. with Mr. Rishi
Represented by:        Mr. S.V. Raju, ASG with Mr.
Zoheb Hossain, SPP for ED with
Represented by: Mr. Kapil Sibal, Mr. Rajiv Nayar,
Sr.Advs. with Mr. Rishi Agrawala,
Represented by:        Mr. S.V. Raju, ASG with Mr.
Zoheb Hossain, SPP for ED with
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                           Page 2 of 28
Represented by:        Mr. Kapil Sibal, Mr. Rajiv Nayar,
Sr. Advs. with Mr. Rishi
Represented by:        Mr. Ajay Digpaul, CGSC for UOI
with Mr. Kamal R. Digpaul, Ms.
Represented by:        Mr. Gaurav Mishra, Mr. Jaiyesh
Represented by:        Mr. S.V. Raju, ASG with Mr.
Zoheb Hossain, SPP for ED with
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                          Page 3 of 28
Represented by:        Mr. Kapil Sibal, Mr. Rajiv Nayar,
Sr. Advs. with Mr. Rishi
Represented by:        Mr. S.V. Raju, ASG with Mr.
Zoheb Hossain, SPP for ED with
Represented by:        Mr. Kapil Sibal, Mr. Rajiv Nayar,
Sr. Advs. with Mr. Rishi
Represented by:        Mr. Apoorv Kurup, CGSC with
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                           Page 4 of 28
1.     These writ petitions were heard together and have sought similar
prayers. For ease of reference, various reliefs sought in each of these
writ petitions (and accompanying applications), presented in different
permutations and combinations, could effectively be enumerated as
i.   Issue a Writ of Declaration or any Writ, Order or Direction
of like nature declaring Section 2(1)(u), Section 50 and
Explanation to Section 44 of the Prevention of Money
Laundering Act, 2002 to be unconstitutional as being in
violation of Articles 14, 19(1)(g), 19(6), 20(3) and 21 of the
Constitution of India;
ii.   Quash      and      set    aside   the   impugned    ECIR        no.
ECIR/07/HIU/2021 and stay all proceedings arising therefrom;
iii.   Quash the summons issued in respect of ECIR No.
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                       Page 5 of 28
iv.    Issue a Writ of Certiorari or any Writ, Order or Direction of
like nature directing the calling of records in relation to ECIR
v.    Issue a Writ of Prohibition or any Writ, Order or Direction
of like nature restraining the Respondents from taking any
coercive action in respect of the ECIR No. ECIR/07/HIU/2021
including conducting search and seizures at residences/office or
issuing look out circulars or any other restrictive order;
vi.    Quash and set aside Look out Circulars issued against some
of the petitioners.
2.     While these petitions were pending before this Court, the Hon‟ble
Supreme Court of India delivered its judgement in Vijay Madanlal
Choudhary & Ors Vs. Union of India & Ors., 2022 SCC OnLine SC
929 on 27th July, 2022 deciding on the issue of constitutionality and vires
of various provisions of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002
(“PMLA”) inter alia Section 2(1)(u), Section 50 and Explanation to
Section 44. Considering that the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Vijay
Madanlal Choudhary (supra) has already considered the issue of
constitutionality of various provisions of PMLA, the issue of granting
relief for prayers in the nature of para 1 (i) above does not arise. The
judgement of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court is binding on this Court and all
parties in these petitions before this Court and there is no reason for this
Court to issue any further declaration in that regard. Prayers sought in all
these petitions before this Court in the nature of para 1 (i) above
therefore do not survive and are infructuous, having been dealt with by
the judgement of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the matter of Vijay
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                    Page 6 of 28
3.     The immediate concern of the petitioners relates to prayers in the
nature of para 1 (ii) – (vi), whereby the petitioners are concerned about
the continuation of proceedings in relation to the ECIR No.
ECIR/07/HIU/2021 (“the said ECIR”) issued by the Directorate of
Enforcement (“ED”) despite the predicate offence registered under FIR
No. 129/2021 (“the said FIR”) having been quashed by the judgment
dated 4th May, 2022 of the High Court of Bombay. The petitioners pray
for issue of a writ of certiorari setting aside summons issued by the ED to
various    petitioners     in    respect     of the said ECIR,     the    Look
Out Circular (“LOC”) and any other consequential proceedings
emanating out of the said ECIR, and quash the same in view of the
predicate offence having been quashed by judgment dated 4 th May, 2022
passed by the High Court of Bombay in relation to the said FIR. The
thrust of the petitioners‟ contention is based upon the conclusion of the
Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra) in para
467 (v)(d) which reads as under:
“(v)(d) The offence under Section 3 of the 2002 Act is
dependent on illegal gain of property as a result of criminal
activity relating to a scheduled offence. It is concerning the
process or activity connected with such property, which
constitutes the offence of money-laundering. The Authorities
under the 2002 Act cannot prosecute any person on notional
basis or on the assumption that a scheduled offence has
been committed, unless it is so registered with the
jurisdictional police and/or pending enquiry/trial including
by way of criminal complaint before the competent forum. If
the person is finally discharged/acquitted of the scheduled
offence or the criminal case against him is quashed by the
Court of competent jurisdiction, there can be no offence of
money-laundering against him or any one claiming such
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                     Page 7 of 28
property being the property linked to stated scheduled
offence through him.”
4.     The crux of this conclusion in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra)
by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court, in context of these petitioners, is that if
the    person     accused       of     any    scheduled offence   is    finally
discharged/acquitted or the criminal case against him is quashed by a
court of competent jurisdiction, there can be no case of money-
laundering against him or anyone claiming such property (which is
linked to the stated scheduled offence) through him.
5.     Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioners have thus contended
that the petitioners before this Court are either accused in the said FIR
(now quashed by High Court of Bombay) or are otherwise not accused in
the said FIR and therefore applying the ratio and finding of the Hon‟ble
Supreme Court, the ECIR against these petitioners and consequential
proceedings do not survive.
Submissions on behalf the Respondents
6.     Mr. S.V. Raju, the learned Additional Solicitor General, appearing
for the ED, objected to this plea by the petitioners and contended inter
i) The said FIR still subsists since it has only been quashed qua the
petitioners before the Bombay High Court and not in toto. In support
of this the learned ASG relies upon the concluding para 38 of the
High Court of Bombay in its decision of 4thMay, 2022.
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                    Page 8 of 28
ii) Relying upon the para 311 of Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra)
it was contended that Hon‟ble Supreme Court has stated that before
resorting to an action and provision of attachment, registration of a
scheduled offence or a complaint is not a precondition. The Hon‟ble
Supreme Court has stated that “authorised officer can still invoke
power      of    issuing     order      of provisional attachment       and
contemporaneously send information to the jurisdictional police
about the commission of scheduled offence and generation of
property as a result of criminal activity relating to a scheduled
offence, which is being made subject matter of provisional
attachment.” Therefore, even though there may not be any scheduled
offence registered, the ED can still move for provisional attachment
and therefore the said ECIR may not be quashed.
iii)       Since the prayer in the writ petitions seeking declaration
regarding unconstitutionality of various provisions of the PMLA does
not survive due to Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra), the basis of
these writ petitions being before the Division Bench of this Court
also gets eroded and therefore these writ petitions be transferred to a
single bench of this Court.
iv)        Since the ED has filed a Special Leave Petition vide Diary
No. 26629 of 2022 on 25th August, 2022 before the Hon‟ble Supreme
Court which is yet to be adjudicated by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court,
in light of accepted principles (inter alia per D.K. Trivedi & Sons &
Ors Vs. State of Gujarat & Ors., 1986 Supp SCC 20) and in
consonance with a decision of this Hon‟ble Court in Asst. Director,
Directorate of Enforcement Vs. Kewal Krishna Kumar, CRL. M.C.
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                    Page 9 of 28
1455/2021 order dated 10th November, 2021, this Court should stay
their hand and not pass any order as prayed for by the petitioners.
v) Reliance was also placed upon para 253 of Vijay Madanlal
Choudhary (supra) wherein the Hon‟ble Supreme Court has stated
that “…in the event the person named in the criminal activity relating
to a scheduled offence is finally absolved by a Court of competent
jurisdiction owing to an order of discharge, acquittal or because of
quashing of the criminal case (scheduled offence) against him/her,
there can be no action for money-laundering against such a person
or person claiming through him in relation to the property linked to
the stated scheduled offence”. The respondents have contended that
use of the phrase “finally absolved by a Court of competent
jurisdiction” would therefore include the adjudication by the Hon‟ble
Supreme Court in the SLP filed by the ED as well. The petitioners
rebutted this by contending that a Court of competent jurisdiction for
order of discharge, acquittal or quashing can only be finally the High
Court and the SLP before the Supreme Court is really in the nature of
an extraordinary remedy and therefore mere filing of SLP cannot
provide a handle to the respondents to sustain the said ECIR.
vi)        Reliance was placed on page 14 of the reply in CRL.M.A.
14801/2022 in W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 which shows that there were
complaints of deliberate acts by the petitioner Harish Fabiani of
offshore fraud. The respondents contended in light of these grave
charges, the said ECIR ought not to be quashed.
vii)       Reliance was also placed in Section 66 (2) of the PMLA
which permits the ED or any authority specified by them to notify
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                 Page 10 of 28
any other officer or authority or body of any information received or
obtained by the ED which in the opinion of the ED is necessary for
that authority to perform its functions under law. Thus, as per the
respondents, Section 66 allows the ED to give an opinion on the basis
of information or material in their possession that provisions of any
other law are being contravened and accordingly share the
information with the appropriate authorities for necessary action. The
ED contends that door should remain open for them to trigger action
by appropriate authorities in case of any disclosure by the ED to them
regarding contravention by the petitioners. To rebut this contention,
the petitioners submitted that Section 66 cannot provide an infinite,
open ended opportunity to the respondents to sustain the ECIR
merely on a possibility of finding some information.
viii)      Reliance was also placed on State of Bihar & Anr. Vs. P.P
Sharma, IAS, & Anr., 1992 Supp (1) 222 at para 23 to contend that
even if, as per the petitioners, there were mala fides of the
informant/complainant which led to the registration of the said FIR it
should not impact investigation by the Investigating Officer.
ix)        Reliance was also placed on Municipal Corporation of
Delhi Vs. Ram Kishan Rohtagi & Ors., (1983) 1 SCC 1 where the
FIR was quashed against some of the accused. The Hon‟ble Supreme
Court in para 19 held that if the prosecution can at any stage produce
evidence which satisfies the court that the other accused or those who
have not been arrayed as accused against whom proceedings have
been quashed, have also committed the offence, the court can take
cognizance against them and try them along with the other accused.
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                 Page 11 of 28
Submissions in Rejoinder by the Petitioners
7.     In response to the submissions of the learned ASG, Senior
Counsels appearing for the petitioners advanced submissions in rejoinder
which, for ease of reference, are collectively enumerated as under:
i)      Once the Bombay High Court has quashed the scheduled
offence on the basis of which the said ECIR was registered
alleging offences under PMLA, the question of the said ECIR
being sustained does not arise. This is undeniably clear from a
reading of para 467 (v) (d) of Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra).
ii)     The Hon‟ble Supreme Court in its conclusion articulated in
the aforementioned paragraph clarifies that the authorities under
the PMLA cannot prosecute any person on a notional basis or on
the assumption that a scheduled offence has been committed
unless it is so registered within the jurisdiction of the police and/or
pending inquiry/trial including by way of criminal complaint
before the competent forum.
iii)    The Hon‟ble Supreme Court has further embellished this by
clarifying that in the event a person is finally discharged or
acquitted of the scheduled offence or the criminal case against him
is quashed by a Court of competent jurisdiction, no offence of
money-laundering against him or anyone claiming such property
(being property linked to the scheduled offence).
iv)     Responding to the specific arguments of the learned ASG
that authorities have the liberty to disclose facts under Section
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                    Page 12 of 28
66(2) of the PMLA if any contravention is noticed by a person, it
was contended by the Senior Counsel for the petitioners, that at
any stage if any such facts are indeed found or discovered, the
authorities would have the liberty to exercise their rights under
applicable law and file a fresh FIR if so necessitated.
v)      It was contended that the following parts of the ECIR are
dispositive of the fact that it was solely and exclusively based on
the FIR No. 129 dated 13thApril, 2021 registered by P.S. Wada:
       Column No. 3 of the ECIR under “Source from which
the information/material received” states “FIR No. 0129
dated 13th April, 2021 registered by Police Station: Wada,
       Para 7 (i) of the ECIR prefaces the complaint on the
basis of FIR bearing No. 0129/2021 registered by the
Officer in Charge, Wada Police Station against M/s
Indiabulls Housing Finance Ltd. and other persons which
was in turn based upon criminal complaint filed by Mr.
Ashutosh Vijay Kamble before the Hon‟ble Court of
Judicial Magistrate First Class, Wada, Dist. Palghar and
order dated 7th April, 2021 in Complaint No. 105/2021 under
Section 156(3) of Cr.P.C. for registration of FIR.
       Para 7 (ii), (iii) of the ECIR elaborate on the nature of
the offences which were alleged in the FIR against the
accused inter alia for siphoning of huge amount of public
money and buying shares in an illegal manner at inflated
rates and claiming losses in such companies.
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                      Page 13 of 28
       Para 7 (iv) of the ECIR specifically states that the
Section 120B, 420, 467, 471 of IPC under which the FIR has
been registered falls under paragraph 1 of Part A of the
scheduled offences under the Scheduled to PMLA.
       Para 8 of the ECIR is prefaced as “on the basis of the
above, prime facie case of money laundering u/s 3
punishable u/s 4 of PMLA, 2002 appears to have been made
out.”
vi)     Judgement/order dated 4th May, 2022 of the High Court of
Bombay at para 38 has categorically stated that powers under
Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. were exercised to allow prayer clause
„a‟ in the writ petitions before the court, and a perusal of the prayer
clause „a‟ in the two writ petitions before the High Court of
Bombay would show that that the relief sought was the quashing
of the order of the Judicial Magistrate and the said FIR in toto.
vii)    As per the petitioners, it was therefore quite apparent that
even though prayer in the Writ Petition filed by Indiabulls Housing
Finance Ltd. was seeking relief for quashing of the FIR in relation
to the petitioners therein, the Writ Petition filed by Atul Chordia
had a larger and broader prayer of quashing the FIR per se. These
prayers having been granted the question of the said FIR being
quashed only with respect with certain petitioners before the High
Court of Bombay does not arise.
viii) Notwithstanding the above, the ECIR was premised on
allegations of “connivance”, “criminal conspiracy” and “common
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                    Page 14 of 28
intention”. Therefore the respondents‟ contention that the said FIR
would only stand partially quashed and therefore the said ECIR
should be sustained is untenable.
ix)     Reference was also made to para 32 of the Bombay High
Court order dated 4th May, 2022 in relation to Mr. Harish Fabiani
which reads as under:
“32. There is also merit in the submissions of learned
Counsel appearing for Petitioners that though it was alleged
in the complaint that one Mr. Harish Fabiani had obtained
loan and misutilized the loan amount, the document placed
on record and relied on by Mr. Rohatgi, learned Senior
Counsel demonstrates that the said loan was repaid.”
It was contended on behalf of Mr. Harish Fabiani that in any event
the loan taken by Mr. Harish Fabiani has been totally repaid and
on the contrary quite aside from siphoning money from India, Mr.
Harish Fabiani who was a foreign citizen of Indian origin, had in
fact played a pivotal role to strengthen economic and political ties
between India and Spain and was the pioneer of private equity
financing in India (as stated in his writ petition).
x)      Reference was also made to para 33 of the Bombay High
Court order that recorded submissions of the petitioners before the
Bombay High Court and stated as under:
“33. We also find merit in the submissions of Dr.
Chandrachud appearing for Petitioner in WP/6812/2021
that the Respondent No. 2 failed to provide necessary details
in the complaint and only vague statements were made. Mr.
Chandrachud justified in submitting that if the Petitioner
could have failed in repayment of the loan the financial
institution certainly would have initiated action against the
Petitioner treating him either as defaulter or would have
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                   Page 15 of 28
initiated proceedings by taking recourse to SARFEAST
xi)     Support was also taken of the observations of the Hon‟ble
Supreme Court in para 467 (v) (d) of Vijay Madanlal Choudhary
(supra) that there cannot be mere “notional basis” or “assumption
that scheduled offence has been committed”.               Therefore,
submission by the respondents that there could be an offence still
subsisting would not be correct or acceptable.
xii)    Reference was also drawn to the reply filed by the
respondent No. 1 in W.P. (CRL) No. 440/2022 from para 6 to 9
where the respondent No. 1 has categorically stated that it was on
the basis of the said FIR that the ECIR had been premised. Para 9
of the said reply states that “the sections under which the FIR was
registered are Scheduled Offence under the PMLA and thus the
Subject ECIR was recorded.”
xiii) It was vehemently contended that the PMLA authority
cannot file a predicate offence and at best it could only disclose
any circumstances which came to their knowledge to the
appropriate authority which in its own wisdom and as per
applicable law may proceed to file against the potential accused
alleging a scheduled offence.
xiv) Reliance was placed on State of Punjab Vs. Davinder Pal
Singh Bhullar & Ors., (2011) 14 SCC 770 to contend that once
the preceding proceeding stands quashed all consequential steps
emanating out of the same stand quashed as well.
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                 Page 16 of 28
It is now therefore imperative to examine the factual matrix and
contentions of the parties in relation to the relief sought by the
petitioners.
8.     Consequent to directions in a petition filed under section 156 (3)
Cr. PC by the complainant before the Judicial Magistrate First Class,
Wada, FIR No. 129/2021 was registered in P.S. Wada (Thane) in District
Palghar, Mumbai on 13th April, 2021 against following accused:
1. Indiabulls Housing Finance Ltd. (Petitioner before this Court)
3. Harish Motiram Fabiani (Petitioner before this Court)
4. Jasol Investment and Trading
8. Atul Chordia of Chordia Group (Petitioner before this Court)
9.     Writ Petition Nos. 1805/2021 and 6812/2021 were filed in High
Court of Bombay by various petitioners seeking quashment of the order
of 7th April, 2021 passed by the Judicial Magistrate First Class, Wada
and FIR No. 129/2021 of P.S. Wada.
10.    Para „a‟ of the prayer in Writ Petition No. 1805/2021 filed by
Indiabulls Housing Finance Ltd. & Ors. reads as under:
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                Page 17 of 28
“a. Quash order dated 07.04.2021 passed by
judicial magistrate in O.M.A. No. 105 of 2021
and FIR No. 0129 of 2021 dated 13.04.2021 in
P.S. Wada under Sections 420, 465, 467, 468,
469, 470, 471 read with 120(B) of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 against the Petitioner and set
aside all proceedings arising therefrom; and”
(emphasis supplied)
11.     Para „a‟ of the prayer in the Writ Petition No. 6812/2021 filed by
Shri Atul Chordia reads as under:
“a. This Hon‟ble Court be pleased to issue a Writ
of Certiorari or any other Writ, order or direction
calling for the records and proceedings of the
said FIR bearing No. 129 of 2021 dated
13.04.2021 (Exhibit „A‟ hereto) and upon
examining the legality, correctness and propriety
of the proceedings conducted so far, be pleased to
quash and set aside the said FIR;”
12.    The High Court of Bombay by the judgment and order dated 4 th
May, 2022 recorded in para 38 as under:
"38. We are of the opinion that the lodgment of
the complaint against the Petitioners and
continuity of the proceedings, is an abuse of
process of law. Thus, these are the fit cases for
exercising inherent powers of this Court under
Section 482 of Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 to secure the ends of justice. Accordingly,
both Writ Petitions are allowed in terms of
prayer clause 'a'. Rule made absolute."
(emphasis supplied)
13.     It is therefore incontrovertibly clear from a bare perusal of the
judgement/order of the High Court of Bombay read in conjunction with
prayer clause „a‟ extracted above from both the Writ Petitions before the
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                   Page 18 of 28
Court, that both the order dated 7th April, 2021 passed by Judicial
Magistrate in O.M.A. No. 105 of 2021 and FIR No. 129/2021 dated 13th
April, 2021 in P.S. Wada stood quashed in toto. This Court finds no
merit in the argument by the Respondents that the quashing was qua the
petitioners before the High Court of Bombay and not the other accused in
the said FIR. The quashing of the FIR and order of the Judicial
Magistrate preceding its registration was complete and not conditional,
partial or truncated in any manner. Nothing in the said judgement/order
of the High Court of Bombay suggests otherwise. Once the predicate
order under section 156(3) Cr.P.C. and the FIR stood quashed there
would be no residue left in the matter against the accused as regards the
allegations made in the said complaint and crystallized in the FIR.
14.    Reference in this regard may be made to the judgement of the
Hon‟ble Supreme Court in State of Punjab v. Davinder Pal Singh
Bhullar & Ors., (2011) 14 SCC 770, brought to this Court‟s attention by
Senior Counsel for one of the petitioners, where the Hon‟ble Supreme
Court in paras 105, 107 and 111 has stated as under:
“105. The FIR unquestionably is an inseparable
corollary to the impugned orders which are a nullity.
Therefore, the very birth of the FIR, which is a direct
consequence of the impugned orders cannot have any
lawful existence. The FIR itself is based on a
preliminary enquiry which in turn is based on the
affidavits submitted by the applicants who had filed
the petitions under Section 482 CrPC.
“107. It is a settled legal proposition that if initial
action is not in consonance with law, all subsequent
and consequential proceedings would fall through for
the reason that illegality strikes at the root of the
order. In such a fact situation, the legal maxim sublato
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                   Page 19 of 28
fundamento cadit opus meaning thereby that
foundation being removed, structure/work falls, comes
into play and applies on all scores in the present case.
“111. Thus, in view of the above, we are of the
considered opinion that the orders impugned being a
nullity, cannot be sustained. As a consequence,
subsequent proceedings/orders/FIR/investigation stand
automatically vitiated and are liable to be declared
non est”.
15.    It is further the case of the petitioners before this Court that
various petitioners in the respective writ petitions are not even accused in
the said FIR No. 129/2021 and therefore there is no predicate offence and
therefore the question of the said ECIR being sustained in isolation
against them does not arise. For ease of reference, the list of petitioners
before this Court who are not an accused in the said FIR are tabulated
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                    Page 20 of 28
It is noted that this Court vide order dated 14th March, 2022 had allowed
CRL.M.A. 4803/2022 filed by Sameer Gehlaut, petitioner No. 3 in W.P.
(CRL) 443/2022, deleting his name from the array of parties, on the
ground that he was not an accused in the FIR.
16.    As per the petitioners, the above named persons are various
employees of Indiabulls Housing Finance Limited and related companies
and have been roped in by the respondents in the said ECIR without there
being any underlying predicate offence registered against them. In light
of the conclusion and finding of the Hon‟ble Supreme Court in Vijay
Madanlal Choudhary (supra) this Court finds no reason for the said
ECIR to be sustained against them, without there being any evidence of a
predicate offence or an FIR against them which is in existence or is
legally alive.
17.    In all these cases therefore, both of the employees against whom
no complaint was ever filed for the scheduled offences and those against
whom it was filed and has been quashed subsequently by a Court of
competent jurisdiction, it would only be appropriate that the said ECIR
against them under PMLA be quashed and all proceedings consequent
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                 Page 21 of 28
thereto undertaken or directed by the Respondents or any authority are
set aside.
18.     As regards the contention of the respondents that since an SLP has
been preferred by the ED assailing the judgement/order dated 4th May,
2022 of the High Court of Bombay this Court should stay its hands in the
interim, this Court finds that judgment/order of the High Court of
Bombay quashing the FIR and the preceding order of the Judicial
Magistrate was complete in all respects and it was exactly this kind of
situation that the Hon‟ble Supreme Court contemplated in para 467 (v)
(d) of Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra) as a final discharge/acquittal
of the scheduled offence or the criminal case being quashed by a court of
competent jurisdiction. Therefore, finality has indeed been obtained as
regards the extinguishment of the FIR. The fact that a Special Leave
Petition had been filed by the ED which was not the party in the Writ
Petitions before the High Court of Bombay against the said order of the
High Court of Bombay does not dilute or erode the finality of the order
of the High Court of Bombay.
19.    In this regard reference may also be placed on para 253 of Vijay
Madanlal Choudhary (supra) which reads as under:
“253. Tersely put, it is only such property which is
derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, as a result
of criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence
can be regarded as proceeds of crime. The
authorities under the 2002 Act cannot resort to action
against any person for money-laundering on an
assumption that the property recovered by them must
be proceeds of crime and that a scheduled offence has
been committed, unless the same is registered with
the jurisdictional police or pending inquiry by way of
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                   Page 22 of 28
complaint before the competent forum. For, the
expression “derived or obtained” is indicative of
criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence
already accomplished. Similarly, in the event the
person named in the criminal activity relating to a
scheduled offence is finally absolved by a Court of
competent jurisdiction owing to an order of
discharge, acquittal or because of quashing of the
criminal case (scheduled offence) against him/her,
there can be no action for money-laundering against
such a person or person claiming through him in
relation to the property linked to the stated scheduled
offence. This interpretation alone can be
countenanced on the basis of the provisions of the
2002 Act, in particular Section 2(1)(u) read with
Section 3. Taking any other view would be rewriting
of these provisions and disregarding the express
language of definition clause “proceeds of crime”, as
it obtains as of now.”
20.     The Hon‟ble Supreme Court has been clear and categorical in its
reasoning as evident from the para extracted above. The undeniable
sequitur of the above reasoning is that firstly, authorities under the
PMLA cannot resort to action against any person for money-laundering
on an assumption that the property recovered by them must be proceeds
of crime and that a scheduled offence has been committed; secondly, the
scheduled offence must be registered with the jurisdictional police or
pending inquiry by way of complaint before the competent forum;
thirdly, in the event there is already a registered scheduled offence but
the person named in the criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence
is finally absolved by a Court of competent jurisdiction owing to an order
of discharge, acquittal or quashing of the criminal case of the scheduled
offence, there can be no action for money laundering against not only
such a person but also any person claiming through him in relation to the
property linked to the stated scheduled offence. In other words no action
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                    Page 23 of 28
under PMLA can be resorted to unless there is a substratum of a
scheduled offence for the same, which substratum should legally exist in
the form of a subsisting (not quashed) criminal complaint/inquiry or if it
did exist the accused has since been discharged or acquitted by a Court of
competent jurisdiction.
21.    As regards the contention of the learned ASG for the ED that
Section 66 PMLA permits the Respondents to activate any authority by
disclosure of a scheduled offence, this Court is of the considered view
that an ECIR or a proceeding under the PMLA cannot be triggered
merely on that assumption alone, as noticed by the Hon‟ble Supreme
Court in the para 253 of Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra). Section
66(2) which was being pressed by the Respondents for this purpose
merely encapsulates the power of the Director or any other authority to
disclose/share any information it may have regarding contravention of
any other law by a person/entity “for necessary action”. The provision
itself enables disclosure and sharing of information inter se authorities,
however mere disclosure does not crystallize a scheduled offence. It is
merely an “assumption” till it precipitates as being “registered with the
jurisdictional police or pending inquiry by way of complaint before the
competent forum” (per the Hon‟ble Supreme Court).
22.    Reliance of the learned ASG on State of Bihar & Anr. Vs. P.P
Sharma, IAS & Anr. (supra) and Municipal Corporation of Delhi Vs.
Ram Kishan Rohtagi & Ors., (supra) may not be relevant to the
conspectus of the issue before this Court. In these petitions, this Court is
not required to go into the merits of the original complainant or the
consequent investigation or the potential cognizance of the complaint
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                  Page 24 of 28
regarding those who weren‟t arrayed as accused. The judgment/order of
the Hon‟ble High Court of Bombay in this regard is final at this stage and
any other allegation against the accused in the said FIR or any other
persons not accused in the said FIR is a matter which would be for the
appropriate Court of competent jurisdiction to decide in an appropriate
proceeding before that Court. Suffice it to say, at this stage nothing has
been brought to the attention of this Court of any existing or surviving
complaint/inquiry or an FIR against the petitioners before this Court for
any of the offences as provided in the Schedule of PMLA. In any event it
is clarified that the relief sought in this petition relating to the particular
ECIR no. ECIR/07/HIU/2021 which was specifically predicated upon
FIR no. 129/2021, in light of the conclusions arrived at in Vijay
Madanlal       Choudhary (supra) by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court, cannot
survive.
23.    Mr. Zoheb Hossain, advocate for the ED, towards the end of the
hearing before this Court and just prior to this Court reserving judgment,
made a submission that one of the writ petitions before this Court, the
one filed by Shri Atul Chordia, was part of a Transfer Petition (Criminal)
No. 245/2022 filed before the Hon‟ble Supreme Court and was tagged
along with the batch of matters in which the leading matter was Vijay
Madanlal Choudhary & Ors Vs .Union of India & Ors., SLP (CRL.)
4634 of 2014. According to the counsel for ED, the transfer petition was
disposed of by the Hon‟ble Supreme Court on 9th September, 2022 in
terms of the judgment dated 27th July, 2022 in Vijay Madanlal
Choudhary (supra) and therefore the lis in the issue would not survive
before this Court. Aside from the propriety of raising this contention
during the last moments of the hearing, contending that this Court may
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                     Page 25 of 28
not have jurisdiction, the submission itself is untenable since in the
concluding paras of Vijay Madanlal Choudhary (supra), while dealing
with the Transfer Petitions, the Hon‟ble Supreme Court has noted:
“468. These transfer petitions are disposed of with
liberty to the private parties to pursue the
proceedings pending before the High Court. The
contentions, other than dealt with in this judgment,
are kept open, to be decided in those proceedings on
its own merits. It would be open to the parties to
pursue all (other) contentions in those proceedings,
except the question of validity and interpretation of
the concerned provision(s) already dealt with in this
judgment.”
24.    In light of the above analysis and discussion this Court concludes
a)      The relief sought regarding constitutionality or vires of
various provisions of the Prevention of Money Laundering Act,
2002 is infructuous having been decided by the Hon‟ble Supreme
Court in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary & Ors. Vs. Union of India &
b)      The ECIR no. ECIR/07/HIU/2021 registered by the
Directorate of Enforcement, Department of Revenue, Ministry of
Finance, Government of India, under FIR No. 129/2021dated 13th
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                 Page 26 of 28
April, 2021 registered by P.S. Wada, Dist. Palghar, Maharashtra
stands quashed.
c)      All     proceedings         arising from   the  ECIR        No.
ECIR/07/HIU/2021 are set aside and there would be no further
coercive action or search and seizure or summons arising from the
said ECIR.
d)      The Look out Circulars issued by respondents pursuant to
the ECIR No. ECIR/07/HIU/2021 are also set aside.
,CRL.M.A. 14801/2022, CRL.M.A. 17030/2022 in W.P.(CRL)
CRL.M.A. 3811/2022, CRL.M.A. 14894/2022 in W.P. (CRL)
CRL.M.A. 14896/2022, CRL.M.A. 14897/2022 in W.P.(CRL)
in W.P.(CRL) 919/2022
in W.P. (CRL) 1299/2022
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters                  Page 27 of 28
in W.P.(CRL) 1350/2022
CRL.M.A. 14723/2022 in W.P.(CRL) 1691/2022
All pending applications are disposed of as infructuous.
By:MANISH KUMAR         W.P. (CRL) 408/2022 & other connected matters              Page 28 of 28