1. This is a petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
filed by one Aijaz Ahmad Sofi, [“the detenue”], through his
mother     seeking      quashment of  his   detention   order     no.
DMS/PSA/139/2021 dated 28.02.2022 issued by District
Magistrate, Srinagar, whereby the detenue has been put under
preventive detention with a view to prevent him from acting in
any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of security of state.
2. The impugned order is assailed by the detenue on the ground that
the representation submitted by the detenue through his mother to
the respondent no. 2, through registered post on 26.4.2022 has
not been considered, and, therefore, a valuable fundamental right
guaranteed to the detenue under Article 22 of the Constitution of
India has been violated.
3. The detenue has also challenged the impugned order on the
ground that the detaining authority has not shown its awareness
with regard to the grant of bail to the detenue in FIR 26/2014
which speaks volumes about the non-application of mind on the
part of the detaining authority. It is lastly urged that the relevant
material relied upon in the grounds of detention was never served
on the detenue, which disabled him to make effective
representation against his detention.
4. The detenue has raised several other grounds to challenge the
detention order. The counsel for the detenue, however, only
presses aforesaid grounds of challenge.
5. Respondents have filed their reply affidavit stating therein that
having regard to the nature of activities that the detenue had been
indulging in over a period of time, the detaining authority was of
the opinion that remaining of the detenue at large was detrimental
to the security of the state. There is no averment in the reply
affidavit as to whether the representation made by the detenue
through his mother, was ever considered, though the detenue has
placed on record postal receipt evidencing the moving of the
representation dated 26.4.2022 by the detenue.
6. Having heard learned counsel for the for the detenue and perused
the material on record, I am of the considered view that the
impugned order of detention does not sustain in the eye of law, in
that, the representation made on his behalf by his mother has not
been considered by the respondents. Right of the detenue to make
a representation and to have the same considered by the
competent authority is a fundamental right guaranteed to a person
under detention under Article 22 of the Constitution and the
infraction of such a right renders the detention illegal and
unconstitutional.
7. The detenue has not only specifically averred but has also placed
on record copy of the representation submitted by the detenue
through his mother. Although the respondents are silent about the
representation made by the detenue through his mother, but the
detenue has placed on record the postal receipt testifying the
submission of the representation by him through his mother.
There is no denial or rebuttal of the same by the respondents in
their reply affidavit. In these circumstances, this Court has no
option but to presume that the representation has been made by
the detenue through his mother to the competent authority but the
same has not been adverted to and considered. That being the
admitted position, it is foregone conclusion that the order of
detention impugned in this petition cannot survive on the
touchstone of settled legal position and the express right
guaranteed to the detenue under Article 22 of the Constitution of
India. [See Pankaj Kumar Chakrabarty & others Vs. State of
West Bengal, AIR 1970 SC 97, a Constitution Bench Judgment].
8. From the perusal of the objections filed by the respondents, it is
abundantly clear that the detenue has been served with a copy of
the detention order and the grounds of detention, but has not been
supplied other material relied upon in the grounds of detention
viz. FIR, reference of which is made by the detaining authority in
the grounds of detention. It is thus clear that the detenue has also
been deprived of relevant material which was required to be
supplied to him along with the grounds of detention so as to
enable him to make an effective representation.
9. Even though the detenue was not provided the requisite material,
and he was only informed that he can make a representation to
the government without specifying the authority to whom he can
make the representation, the detenue through his mother moved a
representation to respondent no. 2. Although, the respondents
have denied to have received any representation from the
detenue, the postal receipt on record of the file testifies that the
detenue has moved the representation through his mother to the
respondent no. 2, which representation was not considered by the
competent authority.
10.For the foregoing reasons, I find merit in this petition and the
same is accordingly allowed. The detention order impugned in
this petition bearing no. DMS/PSA/139/2021 dated 28.2.2022 is
set aside and the respondents are directed to release the detenue
forthwith from the detention, if not required in any other case.