for the petitioners.
All advancement in science has so far not been successful
to generate human organ. Mankind still relies on humans to donate
human organs for saving human lives. Government has been
promoting awareness in society to voluntary donate bodies and organs
after death so that life goes on for others. This society led to people
profiteer and indulge in organ trade which went alarming when organs
of gullible people were removed without their knowledge or consent
or by taking advantage of huge socio-economic disparity and
exploiting people and their circumstances to indulge in trade keeping
largest part for themselves and minuscule remittances for the donor.
Such scandals and practices necessitated legislation to regulate organ
transplantations and to prohibit commercial organ transplantation.
The object of the Transplantation of Human Organs and
Tissues Act, 1994 is not to prohibit an organ transplant but to regulate
transplant and to rule out a commercial monetary transaction. The Act
intends to mitigate the hardships and to prohibit commercial
exploitation of the organ market while recognizing transplant and
donation out of love and affection or care and concern. It also permits
swapping of organs where different sets of willing donors but
mismatching blood profile intend to swap their organs for mutual
good and for saving the lives of their near and dear ones, instead of
having to pay for costly medical treatments and yet a slow but definite
end. The gap, however, arose from the use of word ‘near relation’
used in the statute, where even though an undisputed relationship does
not fall in the definition. The statute recognizes only the blood
relatives or the relation by matrimony but not the extended family
from the blood relations or the matrimony who may share the same
love, affection, concern and care, yet, law regards them as distant and
suspects such donors. This gap between socio-reality and legislation is
the cause of present case.
The present petition seeks issuance of writ in the nature
of mandamus to grant approval to the petitioners to engage in ‘Swap
Transplantation’ and donation of kidneys as per the Transplantation of
Human Organs and Tissues Act, 1994 read with the Transplantation
of Human Organs and Tissues Rules, 2014.
Briefly summarized, the facts and circumstances of the
present case are that petitioner No.1-Ajay Mittal and petitioner No.2
Saiyaduzzama are suffering from various ailments of the kidneys.
They approached respondent No.2 i.e. Post Graduate Institute of
Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh (hereinafter referred to
as PGIMER, Chandigarh) for medical assistance and treatment. They
have been advised to undergo the kidney transplantation as their own
kidneys     were     damaged,       beyond   repair   and    were   rendered
dysfunctional. Petitioner No.3 is Irfana Khatoon, the wife of petitioner
No.2 while petitioner No.4 is Aruna Rani, mother-in-law of petitioner
No.1. They have voluntarily and out of natural love and affection
agreed to donate their kidneys to petitioner Nos.1 and 2. The table
showing the blood groups and relationships between the petitioners is
extracted as under:-
It is, thus, apparent that the blood group of petitioner
No.2 matches the blood group of petitioner No.4 while blood group of
petitioner No.1 matches the blood group of petitioner No.3.
Considering the medical condition of the petitioners and
their emergent need for a kidney transplantation coupled with an
absence of matching blood groups within family of petitioner Nos.1
and 2, the petitioner(s) submitted an application for “Swap
Transplantation” under the Transplantation of Human Organs and
Tissues Act, 1994 read with Transplantation of Human Organs and
Tissues Rules, 2014. The Authorization Committee of respondent
No.2 i.e. PGIMER, Chandigarh, however, disapproved the case of the
petitioners by citing the following reasons:-
The members of the Committee interviewed the recipient
and donor in detail and deliberated.
The recipient is Ajay Mittal. The donor is Mrs. Irfana
Khatoon (wife of Saiyaduzzama). Aruna Rani (w/o
Pawan Kumar Bansal) who is mother-in-law of Ajay
Mittal and prospective donor for Saiyaduzzama. The
Committee members were of the unanimous opinion that
according to “The Transplanation of Human Organs
and Tissues Rules, 2014” Rule 7 (4) which states that
“Cases of swap donation referred to under sub section
(3A) of Section 9 of the Act shall be approved by
Authorization Committee of Hospital or District or state
in which transplantation is proposed to be done and
donation of organs shall be permissible only from near
relatives of the swap recipients” and Rule 18(1) states
“Where the proposed transplant of organs is between
near relatives related genetically, namely, grandmother,
grandfather,    mother,   father,   brother, sister,  son,
daughter, grandson and granddaughter above age of 18
years, the competent authority as defined at Rule 2(C)”,
hence the case was disapproved collectively by the
Authorization Committee members.
The members of the committee interviewed the recipient
and donor in the detail and deliberated.
The recipient is Saiyaduzzama. The donor is Mrs. Aruna
Rani (wife of Pawan Kumar Bansal). Aruna Rani who is
mother-in-law of Ajay Mittal and prospective donor for
Saiyaduzzama. The Committee members were of the
unanimous      opnion     that    according    to    “The
Transplantation of Human Organs and Tissues Rules,
2014” Rule 7(4) which states that “Case of swap
donation referred to under Sub Section (3A) of Section 9
of the Act shall be approved by Authorization committee
of Hospital or District or State in which transplantation
is proposed to be done and donation of organs shall be
permissible only from near relatives of the swap
relative” and Rule 18(1) states “Where the proposed
transplant of organs is between near relative related
genetically, namely, grandmother, grandfather, mother,
father, brother, sister, son, daughter, grandson and
granddaughter above age of 18 years, the competent
authority as defined at Rule (2)”, hence the case was
disapproved collectively by the Authorisation Committee
members.”
It is evident that the members of the Committee have
placed reliance upon the provisions of the Act as well as Rules and
contend that “Swap Transplantation” is permissible only from near
relatives and that in case where the transplant of organs between
unrelated persons is concerned, the same cannot be allowed.
Aggrieved thereof, the present petition has been filed.
Written statement on behalf of respondent Nos.1 and 2
has been filed wherein they have reiterated the stand incorporated in
the decision of the Committee and contended that the same is
impermissible by the Authorisation Committee as per the provisions
of the Act of 1994 and the Rules of 2014.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioners
argued that the decision taken by the Authorisation Committee has not
taken into consideration the authoritative pronouncement of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Kuldeep Singh and Others Vs.
State of Tamil Nadu reported as (2005) 11 SCC 122 wherein the
Hon'ble Supreme Court noted that the object of the Act is to provide
for the regulation of removal, storage and transplantation of human
organs for therapeutic purposes and for the prevention of commercial
dealings in human organs and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto. She further contends that the Authorisation
Committee has nowhere suggested or alleged that the swap between
the petitioners herein is a commercial transaction. In the absence of
any commercial element and the arrangement being purely humane as
well as for the betterment of the patients alongwith which such
arrangement subseries larger good to both the parties, there was no
reason why the Authorization Committee should not have taken a
practical approach especially when there is no provision in law against
such consideration.
She further places reliance on the judgment in the
Parveen Begum Vs. Appellate Authority 189 (2012) DLT 427 and in
the matter of Ratnakar Peddada and Another Vs. State of Telangana
reported as 2018 SCC OnLine Hyd 538. The relevant extract of the
above-said judgment is reproduced hereinafter:-
“49. From the above statutory provisions and the scheme
of the Act, it becomes clear that the Act and the Rules do
not seek to prohibit, but to only regulate the transplant of
organs and tissues from cadavers and living human
beings. What is prohibited is the commercial transaction
in the giving and taking of organs and tissues. However,
donations offered out of love and affection - even
amongst those who are not near relatives, is permitted.
The aforesaid scheme under the Act recognizes two of the
greatest human virtues of love and sacrifice, and also the
fact that such intense love and affection need not
necessarily be felt only for one’s own blood or spouse,
but could also extend to those not so closely related, or
for those not related at all.
50. From the scheme of the Act and the Rules it appears
that organ/tissue donation by a person before his death
can be made not only for the therapeutic purposes of a
recipient who is a near relative, i.e., son, daughter,
father, mother, brother, sister, grandfather, grandmother,
grandson or granddaughter, but also for therapeutic
purposes of persons/recipients who do not fall within the
definition of the expression "near relative".
Section 9(1) of the Act, while generally providing that no
human organ or tissue, or both, removed from the body
of a donor before his death shall be transplanted into a
recipient, unless the donor is a near relative of the
recipient, saves from application of this general rule,
cases which fall under sub-section (3) of section 9.
Therefore, a donor, who is not a near relative of the
recipient may by reason of "affection, or attachment
towards the recipient or for any other special reasons"
authorize the removal of his human organ or tissue or
both for transplantation in a recipient for therapeutic
reasons. The caveat is that in such circumstances prior
approval, before removal and transplantation, would be
required of the Authorization Committee.
51. It also needs to be emphasized that an approval of the
Authorization Committee is necessary and required to be
obtained only in such cases, where the donor and
recipient are not near relatives, or in cases where the
donor or the recipient, being near relatives, is a foreign
national    (see     Section 9(1A)).   The    role of  the
Authorization Committee comes into play primarily in
cases where the donor and the recipient are not near
relatives, and it is the function of the Authorization
Committee to ascertain and evaluate, by applying the
guidelines/yardsticks and tests provided in Rule 4A(4)
and 6F(d) of the Rules, whether there is a commercial
transaction between the recipient and the donor, and to
ensure that no payment of money or monies worth has
been made to the donor, or promised to be made to the
donor or any other person on account of the fact that the
donor has agreed to donate an organ or tissue to the
recipient. The Authorization Committee is required to
enquire whether the donor is offering his organ/tissue by
reason of affection or attachment towards the recipient
or for any other special reasons. The law also mandates
that the approach of the Authorization Committee in such
matters has to be pragmatic and its discretion has to
be used judiciously, particularly in cases which require
immediate transplantation.”
Further, reliance is placed on the judgment of Kerala
High Court in Writ Petition (Civil) No.23509 of 2021 decided on
11.11.2021 titled as Moideen Kutty and others Vs. The District Level
Authorization Committee for Transplantation of Human Organs,
North Zone, wherein the Kerala High Court has held as under:-
“(1) Sub-section (3A) (a) and (b) of Section 9 fo the
Transplantation of Human Organs and Tissues
Act, 1994 to the extent it permits Swap Transplants
only in cases of near relatives and curtails the
powers of Authorization Committees to approve
such non-near relative transplants even for special
reasons as contemplated in Section 9(3), have to
be read down, to be in consonance with Section
(2)     It is therefore held that Swap Transplants will be
permissible even if each pair of donor-recipients
are not near relatives, provided there exists special
reason for the donor to donate his/her organ as
contemplated in Section 9(3) and the Authorization
Committee gives prior approval for the swap
transplants after scrutinizing the applications on
the parameters provided in Rule 7(3) of the
Transplantation of Human Organs and Tissues
(3)   The provision under the head ‘Swap Donation’
contained in the Guidelines for Altruistic and
Exchange Donation framed by the Government of
Kerala, health and Family Welfare Department, as
per    G.O.(MS)      No.26/2018/H&FWD         dated
15.02.2018, to the extent it permits Swap
Donations only between near relatives, will be
inoperative, as it goes against the provisions of
Section     9(3)  of  the   Act,  1994   as   stated
hereinabove.”
While placing reliance on the aforesaid authoritative
pronouncements, it is argued that Sub Section (3A)(a) and (3A)(b) of
Section 9 permits ‘Swap Transplantation’ in cases of near relatives
and curtails the powers of the Authorization Committee to approve
such transplants in only those cases which are against the provisions
of Section 9(3A) of the Act, 1994. She contends that a rigid and
dogmatic approach in matters related to transplantation of human
organs and tissues cannot be adopted or promoted and that the larger
public cause and concern is to be taken into consideration.
Refuting the arguments advanced by the counsel for the
petitioners, it has been averred by the counsel for the respondents that
there is no illegality, perversity or impropriety in the order passed by
the Authorization Committee and that the Committee has acted within
the strict compliance of the statute.
I have heard the learned counsel appearing for the
respective parties and have gone through the documents along with
the pleadings as also the provisions relied upon by the respective
parties. The relevant provisions are reproduced for the facility of
“Section 9 :-Restriction on removal and transplantation
of Human Organs or Tissues or both.
(3)   If any donor authorizes the removal of any
of his human organs or tissues or both]
before his death under sub-section (1) of
section 3 for transplantation into the body of
such recipient, not being a near relative, as
is specified by the donor by reason of
affection        or   attachment       towards   the
recipient or for any other special reasons,
such [human organ or tissue or both] shall
not be removed and transplanted without the
prior         approval    of    the    Authorization
[(3A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-
section (3), where-
(a)   any donor has agreed to make a donation of
his human organ or tissue or both before his
death to a recipient, who is his near relative,
but        such    donor     is   not     compatible
biologically as a donor for the recipient;
(b)   the second donor has agreed to make a
donation of his human organ or tissue or
both before his death to such recipient, who
is his near relative, but such donor is not
compatible biologically as a donor for such
(c)   the        first  donor     who     is    compatible
biologically as a donor for the second
recipient        and    the    second     donor    is
compatible biologically as a donor of a
human organ or tissue or both for the first
recipient        and   both     donors    and   both
recipients in the aforesaid group of donor
and recipient have entered into a single
agreement to donate and receive such
human organ or tissue or both according to
such biological compatibility in the group,
the removal and transplantation of the
human organ or tissue or both, as per the
agreement referred to above, shall not be
done       without  prior   approval   of   the
5)    On an application jointly made, in such form
and in such manner as may be prescribed,
by the donor and the recipient, the
Authorization Committee shall, after holding
an inquiry and after satisfying itself that the
applicants have complied with all the
requirements of this Act and the rules made
thereunder, grant to the applicants approval
for the removal and transplantation of the
human organ.
(6)   If, after the inquiry and after giving an
opportunity to the applicants of being heard,
the Authorization Committee is satisfied that
the applicants have not complied with the
requirements of this Act and the rules made
thereunder, it shall, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, reject the application
for approval.
medical practitioner who will be part of the organ
transplantation       team    for    carrying     out
transplantation operation shall not be a member
of the Authorization Committee constituted under
the provisions of Clauses (a) and (b) of Sub
Section (4) of Section 9 of the Act.
(2)   When the proposed donor or recipient or both are
not Indian nationals or citizens whether near
relatives       or otherwise,     the   Authorization
Committee shall consider all such requests and the
transplantation shall not be permitted if the
recipient is a foreign national and donor is an
Indian national unless they are near relatives.
(3)   When the proposed donor and the recipient are not
near relatives, the Authorization Committee shall –
(i)    evaluate that there is no commercial
transaction between the recipient and the
donor and that no payment has been made
to the donor or promised to be made to the
donor or any other person;
(ii)   prepare an explanation of the link between
them and the circumstances which led to the
offer being made;
(iii)  examine the reason why the donor wishes to
(iv)   examine the documentary evidence of the
link, e.g. proof that they have lived together,
etc.;
(v)    examine old photographs showing the donor
and the recipient together;
(vi)   evaluate that there is no middleman or tout
(vii) evaluate that financial status of the donor
and the recipient by asking them to given
appropriate evidence of their vocation and
income for the previous three financial years
and any gross disparity between the status
of the two must be evaluated in the backdrop
of the objective of preventing commercial
(viii) ensure that the donor is not a drug addict;
(ix)   ensure that the near relative or if near
relative is not available, any adult person
related to donor by blood or marriage of the
proposed unrelated donor is interviewed
regarding awareness about his or her
intention to donate an organ or tissue, the
authenticity of the link between the donor
and the recipient, and the reasons for
donation,    and   any    strong   views    or
disagreement or objection of such kin shall
also be recorded and taken note of.
(4)   Cases of swap donation referred to under the sub
section (3A) of section 9 of the Act shall be
approved by Authorization committee of hospital
or district or State in which transplantation is
proposed to be done and the donation of organs
shall be permissible only from near relatives of the
swap recipients.
(5)  When the recipient is in a critical condition in
need of life saving organ transplantation within a
week, the donor or recipient may approach
hospital in-charge to expedite evaluation by the
A perusal of the Act of 1994 clearly shows that the
objective of the Act is to provide for the regulation of the human
organs or tissues for therapeutic purposes and prevention of
commercial dealings. The long object and reasons of the Act show
that the underlying legislative intent was to curb commercial dealings
in human organs.
Section 9 of the Act and Rule 7 of the Rules of 2014
contemplate the procedure as well as restrictions on removal and
transplantation of human organs or tissues or both. Sub Section 3A
stipulates a situation where the biological compatibility of two donors,
who had originally agreed to make donation of their organ in favour
of near relative is not matching and that such donated organ is
compatible inter se, the same can be permitted by the Authorization
Committee. The language of the aforesaid statutory provision clearly
shows that swapping is permissible with the approval of the
Authorization Committee where the donors had agreed to make
donation of their organs to the recipient, who is their ‘near relative’
but the same cannot be effected on account of biological
incompatibility, in case they can enter into a single agreement to
donate and receive such human organ or tissue or both according to
such biological compatibility. Hence, the act of swapping is not a
prohibited act under the Transplantation of Human Organs and
Tissues Act, 1994        and the Rules of 2014           notified  by the
Government of India.
The   provision       which   has  led   the   Authorisation
Committee to decline the request of swapping submitted by the
petitioners herein, is the definition of ‘near relative’ as prescribed
under Section 2(i) which reads thus:-
“As per Section 2(i) of the act, ‘near relative’
means spouse, son, daughter, father, mother,
brother,        sister,  grandfather,    grandmother,
grandson or granddaughter.”
A perusal of the aforesaid definition shows that the ‘near
relative’     has    been     defined    as   an      immediate,   lineal,
ascendant/descendant; a blood collateral or a spouse. Such definition
although comprehensive, however, is not aimed to defeat the object of
the Act. Once the spouse is recognized as a relative within the
definition under Section 2(i), the object of Section 9 (3)(A) should not
be permitted to be defeated merely by adopting such rigid, dogmatic
and stigmatic interpretation and not to include people who get related
by matrimony and would have same love and affection.
Loss of human life should not be permitted merely at the
alter of technicalities and more so when the possibility of commercial
transaction in such swapping has been completely ruled out. The
Donor for petitioner No.1 is his mother-in-law and as such, it cannot
be construed that the said donor has agreed to donate her kidney for
commercial reasons. The social family bonds; the social fabric and
family structure in the Indian Sub Continent is also required to be kept
in consideration and such relatives from the family of the spouse
cannot be isolated as completely distant or wholly unrelated.
The power of writ Court extends to do substantial justice.
Even though the definition of ‘near relative’ is provided in the Act,
such definition should not be interpreted to restrict any other donor
out of love and affection. The law recognized relation mentioned
therein as ‘near relative’ and did not intend to impose any condition
that no person other than a near relative can be a donor, if all other
parameters prescribed in Rule 7 of the Rules of 2014 are satisfied. A
pragmatic approach is required to be taken by the Court which
advances the object of the statute without promoting the mischief
required to be curtailed.
Loss of human life is irreparable and where legislative
intent is not prohibitory, Article 21 would step in and come to the aid
of justice. A gap in law can be examined under the equitable
jurisdiction, which is not confined by legislative letter.
Equity is a phrase that is not legally defined. As per the
meaning shown in the Black’s Law Dictionary, 10th Edition, the
word ‘equity’ has been explained thus:-
“Equity, - Fairness; impartiality; evenhanded dealing.
2. The body of principles constituting what is fair and
right.”
As per the meaning shown in the Oxford Advanced
Learner’s Dictionary, New 7th Edition, the word ‘equity’ has been
explained thus:-
“Equity - a system of natural justice allowing a fair
judgement in a situation which is not covered by the
existing laws.”
As per the meaning shown in the Chambers 21st
Century Dictionary, the word ‘equity’ has been explained thus:-
“Equity - “fair or just conditions or treatment. 2 law the
concept of natural justice, as opposed to common law or
statute law, often invoked to support an interpretation,
or the complete waiving, of a law.
While adverting to the doctrine of equity, it may in a
technical sense be defined as a portion of natural justice, however,
while exercising equity, the Courts have exercised a latitude in
stretching it to cover cases not expressly dealt with by law. ‘Equity’ is
loosly used to denote a system of justice which is administered by a
particular Court in a particular case. Equity thus empowers a Court to
exercise its judicial discretion in furtherance to interests of justice and
to do substantial justice amongst the contesting parties by taking stock
of the totality of circumstances. Equity does not suffer a wrong merely
for want of a remedy but is to be exercised where a person comes to
the Court/Authority with clean hands. It aims to do what ought to be
done with an object to fulfilling obligations. Thus, the aforesaid
principle cannot be summarized and has to be exercised, only as it
cannot remain confined to the strict confines of statutory or
proclaimed limitations. The principle answers are accountable to
sound judicial conscience and fine judicial discretion.
The test for the Court is to rule out the possibility of a
Commercial Transaction and satisfying the regulatory requirements.
It is apparent from perusal of the response filed by the
respondent(s) as well as the stands taken by the Authorisation
Committee that the denial of permission/approval was only for a
technical reason i.e. from petitioner No.4 does not fall under the
definition of ‘near relative’ of petitioner No.1 as stipulated in Sub
Section 2(i). There is no suggestion or reference that such a
transaction is being executed between the willing donors or the
willing recipients due to commercial transaction or for an object
which runs contrary to Scheme of the Act and the Rules framed
Thus, in exercise of the inherent and equitable
jurisdiction of this Court, the present petition is allowed and the order
passed by the Authorisation Committee denying approval is set aside.
Permission is, accordingly granted to the petitioners herein to swap
their kidneys as reflected in the table extracted above, subject to
satisfaction of other regulatory requirements.
Petition is accordingly allowed in terms of aforesaid.
Whether speaking/reasoned:         Yes/No
Whether reportable:                Yes/No