1.    Heard Ms. Abida Syed, learned Amicus Curiae for the
appellant and learned A.G.A. for the State.
2.    The present jail appeal is filed by appellant through
Senior Jail Superintendent, Agra against the judgment dated 5
December, 2007 and sentence dated 6 December, 2007 passed
by IInd Additional Sessions Judge, Gautambudh Nagar in
Sessions Trial No. 497 of 2006 (State Vs. Manvir) arising out of
Case Crime No. 136 of 2006 under Sections 376 and 302 of the
- Manvir has been convicted under Sections 376 and 302 of the
Indian Penal Code. Appellant is sentenced to 10 years rigorous
imprisonment under Section 376 I.P.C. and a fine of Rs. 5,000/-
and under Section 302 I.P.C., life imprisonment has been
awarded to appellant - Manvir and a fine of Rs. 5,000/- is
3.    As per the legal proviso to Section 228A I.P.C., it is not
expedient to disclose the name of the victim in this case; she is
being referred as victim in the judgment.
4.     On 2 July, 2006 at 6:15 a.m., a First Information Report
was lodged by Sunil Singh, son of late Kailash Singh at Police
Station, Sector 49, Gautambudh Nagar against appellant –
Manvir under Sections 376 and 302 of Indian Penal Code.
5.     The prosecution case as per First Information Report is
that the informant – Sunil Singh is tenant of Sri Rajendra Singh
and was residing along with her wife and mother; mother of the
informant is aged about 80 years; in the intervening night of 1 /
2 July, 2006, mother of the informant as usual was sleeping in
the open space, adjacent to the room of the informant;
informant along with his other family members was sleeping at
the terrace; at about 12:00 in the night his neighbour Manvir,
son of Ram Prasad (who was living in the same house), was
walking near the place where the mother of the informant was
sleeping; informant and his family members went to sleep at
terrace; at about 5:00 a.m. when the informant and his family
members (wife Renu Devi and son Deepak) came down, they
saw Manvir was washing the blood stains with water and the
door could not be opened. Thereafter, the son of the informant,
namely, Deepak crossed the boundary wall and opened the
door. Manvir on seeing the informant and his family members
ran away from the house; informant and his family members
found that his 80 years old mother was blood stained and her
petticoat was up to the knee level; wife of the informant also
informed that blood was coming out from the private part of his
mother; Manvir committed rape and killed his mother.
6.     On the basis of above mentioned First Information
Report dated 2 July, 2006, a case was registered being Case
Crime No. 136 of 2006 under Sections 376 and 302 of the
Indian Penal Code against appellant – Manvir.
7.     In     pursuance         of    the    First    Information         Report,
investigation was carried out. Investigating Officer prepared
recovery memo dated 2 July, 2006 (Ex. Ka-7) for recovery of
the pillow, three bedsheets and broom (Jharu). The aforesaid
recovery was witnessed by Naresh Mahto, son of Ram Chandra
and Sushil Kumar Singh, son of Thakur Maheshwar Singh.
Recovery memo was prepared by Investigating Officer –
8.     Investigating Officer on 2 July, 2006 recovered the
underwear of accused Manvir in presence of Naresh Mahto, son
of Ram Chandra and Sushil Kumar Singh. Recovery memo was
prepared by Investigating Officer – Matadeen Verma (P.W. - 5).
Recovery memo also recorded that the aforesaid undergarment
was having blood stains. The recovery memo was marked as
Ex. Ka-8 before the trial court.
9.     Inquest of the deceased was conducted on 2 July, 2006 by
Investigating Officer – Matadeen Verma (P.W. - 5) on the
direction of S.H.O – Vishwajeet Singh. The inquest report was
marked as Ex. Ka-2 before the trial court. The inquest report
noted following injuries on the deceased :-
10.    Thereafter, S.H.O – Vishwajeet Singh (P.W. - 8) on 2
July, 2006 prepared a site plan of the place of occurrence.
11.    The postmortem of the deceased was conducted on 2
July, 2006 at 4:30 p.m. by Dr. Madan Lal (P.W.-7). The
following injuries were recorded in the postmortem report dated
1.    Blackening over an area of 7 x 7 cm on right side eye and
face.
2.    Bleeding and laceration present all around vagina over an
area of 20 x 20 cm.
3.    Bite marks present on front of neck on left side over an area
of 6 x 2 cm.
12.    After investigation, charge sheet was submitted against
accused-Manvir. The charge under Sections 376 and 302 I.P.C.
was framed by the IInd Additional Sessions Judge, Gautambudh
Nagar on 6 November, 2006.
13.    Prosecution in support of its case examined nine
witnesses, namely, (PW-1) Sunil Singh (Informant), (PW-2)
Madan Lal, (PW-8) Vishwajeet Singh and (PW-9) Head
14.    The prosecution also produced documentary evidence in
support of the prosecution case i.e. Written Report (Ex. Ka-1),
Panchayatnama (Ex. Ka-2), Medical Form (Ex. Ka-3 and Ka-4),
Specimen Seal (Ex. Ka-5), Letter to C.M.O (Ex. Ka-6),
Recovery Memo (Ex. Ka-7 and Ka-8), Charge Sheet (Ex. Ka-
9), Postmortem Report (Ex. Ka-10), Site Plan (Ex. Ka-11) and
15.    Prosecution Witness-1 : Sunil Singh, who is the
informant of the First Information Report dated 2 July, 2006 has
proved the First Information Report as Ex. Ka-1. He has stated
that the occurrence is of 9 months earlier; he was living in a
tenanted accommodation in the house of Rajendra Singh along
with his family; along with Sunil Singh his wife Renu Devi and
mother, the victim, was also residing; on the date of occurrence
as usual his mother (the victim) was sleeping in the Veranda
outside his room; the informant and his wife were sleeping on
the terrace; at 12:00 in the night his neighbour Manvir was seen
walking near the place where the mother of the informant was
sleeping; informant and his wife went to sleep; when the
informant and Renu Devi and his son Deepak woke up at 5:00
in the morning and came down to room, his neighbour accused
- Manvir was washing all the blood stains from the floor of his
room; when he tried to look into the room of Manvir, he closed
the door and did not allow him to see the blood stains; when the
informant, his wife and his son saw the victim, she was dead
and her petticoat was torned and blood was coming out from
the private part of the deceased; Manvir tried to run away from
the house however he was caught by the informant; mother of
the informant was subjected to rape and murdered by the
accused Manvir; mother was murdered between 12:00 in the
night and 5:00 in the morning. He has also stated that the
informant has lodged First Information Report at Police Station,
Sector 49, NOIDA and the scribe of the First Information
Report was his son Tinku who has written the First Information
Report on his verbal instructions. The said witness has lodged
First Information Report at the Police Station on 2 July, 2006.
16.    Prosecution has further produced Smt. Renu Devi, wife
of Sunil Singh, as Prosecution Witness-2. She has stated that
she was residing at Village Agdhapur at a tenanted
accommodation of Rajendra Singh along with his husband and
family; her mother-in-law was resident of Bihar; about one
month prior to the incident her husband brought the deceased to
Agdhapur; since then she is residing with them; in the night of
1 / 2 July, 2006, she and her husband Sunil and children were
sleeping on the terrace and her mother-in-law was sleeping in
the Veranda on the ground floor; at 12:00 in the night neighbour
Manvir was walking around the place where her mother-in-law
was sleeping; at about 12:00 in the night she and the family
members had gone to sleep and woke up at 5:00 in the morning;
when she came down in the morning she found blood on the
floor at the place where her mother-in-law was sleeping and
Manvir was washing the blood stains from the floor; Manvir on
seeing her and other family members coming down left the
cleaning of the floor and went into his room; her mother-in-law
was lying dead with blood; blood was oozing out from the
private part; there was bite injury on the cheeks of the deceased;
on seeing deceased she was under impression that she was
subjected to rape; she has also stated that at that time Manvir
was in his room and he had locked his room from inside; when
his son Deepak knocked the door of the room of Manvir, he
opened and tried to run away but was caught and was handed
over to the police.
17.    Prosecution examined Master Deepak, son of Sunil
Singh, as Prosecution Witness-3. He has testified that deceased
is his grandmother and she was murdered on 2 July, 2006;
body of the deceased was sealed before him; inquest report was
also filled before him; the inquest report was also signed by
him. The witness has identified his signature on the inquest
18.     Prosecution examined Anil, son of Rajendra Singh, as
Prosecution Witness-4. He has stated that the incident is of 2
July, 2006 and he has seen the body of the deceased; police had
sealed the body of the victim in his presence; the inquest report
was filled in his presence and he has signed the inquest report.
The said witness has identified his signature on the inquest
19.     Prosecution has examined S.I. Matadeen Verma, as
Prosecution Witness-5. He has stated that on 2 July, 2006 he
was posted at Police Station, Sector 49, NOIDA as Sub
Inspector; on the relevant date on the direction of the Station
House Officer Sri Vishwajeet Singh, he had filled the
Panchayatnama of deceased; he had prepared the inquest report
at the tenanted accommodation of the informant; he has
identified his signature and handwriting on the Panchayatnama
and the signature of the Panch witnesses on the inquest report.
The inquest report was marked as Ex. Ka-2. He has also
testified that the Police Form No.13 Photo Laash, Namuna
Mohar and Chitthi C.M.O. was prepared by him and the same
was marked as Exhibits Ka-3 to Ka-6. The said witness has also
recovered pillow on which there were blood stains from the
place of occurrence and three pieces of Bedsheet (Chaddar)
which was also blood stained and one broom (Jharu) which was
also blood stained; Naresh Mahto and Sunil Kumar Singh are
witnesses to the aforesaid recovery; recovered articles were
sealed and the recovery memo was prepared; he has identified
his handwriting and signature on the recovery memo and the
same was marked as Ex. Ka-7 before the trial court; on 2 July,
2006 after arrest of accused Manvir, recovered the underwear of
the accused in the presence of witnesses Naresh Mahto and
Sushil Kumar Singh and the same was sealed by him; he had
prepared the recovery memo and has identified his handwriting
and signature on the recovery memo and signature of the
Naresh Mahto and Sushil Kumar Singh. The recovery memo of
the underwear is marked as Ex. Ka-8 before the trial court. The
material exhibits of the recovery were identified by the
aforesaid witness. He has also stated that on the place of
occurrence he sealed the dead body of the deceased and sent the
same for postmortem through Constable Manjeet Singh.
20.    The next prosecution witness produced is Sri R.B. Kaul,
Sub Inspector, Thana Dadri, District Gautambudh Nagar, as
Prosecution Witness-6. He had stated that on 2 July, 2006, he
was posted as Station House Officer, Police Station Sector 49,
NOIDA; on 3 July, 2006 he had received the pathology report
of deceased; on 8 August, 2006 he had recorded the statements
of Sub Inspector Matadeen Verma, Constable Manik Chand and
Constable Manjeet Singh in the Case Diary; on 8 August, 2006,
he had submitted charge sheet against the accused Manvir. The
aforesaid witness has identified the handwriting and his
signature on the charge sheet and the charge sheet was marked
21.    Prosecution examined Dr. Madan Lal, as Prosecution
Witness-7. He has stated that on 2 July, 2006, he was posted at
District Hospital, NOIDA, Gautambudh Nagar as Eye Surgeon;
conducted the postmortem of deceased, aged about 80 years;
postmortem was held on 2 July, 2006 at about 4:30 p.m.; the
dead body of the deceased was brought by Sipahi C.P. No. 777
Manik Chandra and C.P. No. 917 Manjeet Singh, Police
Station, Sector 49, NOIDA. He has also testified the following
22.    He has stated that the injuries were one day old and the
death was as a result of shock due to ante mortem injuries. The
said witness has identified his handwriting and signature on the
postmortem report and the postmortem report was marked as
23.    Prosecution examined Vishwajeet Singh, as Prosecution
Witness-8. He has deposed that on 2 July, 2006 he has taken
statements of F.I.R. Lekhak H.C. Intazar Ahmad, informant
Sunil Singh and recorded the same in the case diary; on his
direction the inquest report was prepared by S.I. Sri Matadeen
and the body was sealed for sending the same for postmortem;
he has identified the inquest report and has stated that the
inquest report was prepared on his direction and the inquest
report contains his signature; inquest report was exhibited as
Ex. Ka-2; he had visited the place of occurrence and prepared
the site plan of the place of occurrence; identified his
handwriting on the site plan and the same was marked as Ex.
Ka-11; on 2 July, 2006 he arrested Manvir and recorded his
statement in the case diary; the underwear of the accused
Manvir was also recovered and the recovery memo was
prepared; the underwear of the accused Manvir was having
blood stains; recorded statements of Smt. Renu Devi and
Deepak and witness Tinku in the case diary; on 6 July, 2006
recorded the statements of Anil Kumar, Satveer Singh, Rajvir,
Deepak, Naresh Mahto and Sushil Kumar in the case diary; on
10 July, 2007 sent the slide for examination and the articles
recovered from place of occurrence was sent for forensic
24.    Prosecution has examined H.C. 49 Intazar Ahmad, Police
Station Sector 49, District Gautambudh Nagar, as Prosecution
Witness-9 who has stated that on 2 July, 2006 on the
information of Sunil Kumar, son of Kailash Singh, he has
prepared the Chik No. F.I.R. No. 105/06 in Case Crime No.
136/06 under Sections 376 and 302 I.P.C,. and had registered
the same; he has also identified the GD entry and stated that the
same is in his handwriting and under his signature and same
was marked as Ex. Ka-12.
25.    In the present case, there are no eye witness of the
occurrence and the incident is of night, outside the room of the
informant. The occurrence is based on the circumstantial
evidence. The PW-1 (Sunil Singh) and PW-2 (Smt. Renu Devi)
had testified before the trial court that the deceased on the night
of occurrence was sleeping outside the room of the informant
and the room of the accused Manvir was nearby; when the
informant and his family members (who were sleeping on the
terrace) came down in the morning they saw that accused
Manvir was cleaning the blood stains on the floor with the
broom. Aforesaid witnesses further stated that on seeing the
said witnesses, the accused Manvir went inside the room and
locked his room.
26.    It is to be noted that under Section 8 of the Indian
Evidence Act, 1872 the conduct of the accused is relevant if
such conduct is influenced by any fact in issue or relevant fact
and whether it was previous or subsequent thereto. Section 8 of
the Evidence Act is reproduced hereinbelow :-
“8. Motive, preparation and previous or subsequent
conduct.—Any fact is relevant which shows or
constitutes a motive or preparation for any fact in issue or
relevant fact.
The conduct of any party, or of any agent to any
party, to any suit or proceeding, in reference to such suit
or proceeding, or in reference to any fact in issue therein
or relevant thereto, and the conduct of any person an
offence against whom is the subject of any proceeding, is
relevant, if such conduct influences or is influenced by
any fact in issue or relevant fact, and whether it was
previous or subsequent thereto.”
27.    This section embodies the rule that the testimony of
resgestae is allowable when it goes to the root of the matter
concerning the commission of the crime. The conduct of a
person involved in crime becomes relevant if his conduct is
related to the incident that happened. Where a crime has been
committed, the court has to take into account both the previous
and subsequent conduct of the accused pertaining to the
commission of the crime. In certain cases, the previous conduct
of the accused throws light on whether the accused is innocent
or guilty whereas in some cases it is the subsequent conduct
that becomes very important in determining the innocence or
guilt of the accused. The Apex Court in the case of Anant
Chintaman Lagu Vs. State of Bombay, AIR 1960 SC 500
“(15)… A criminal trial, of course, is not an enquiry into
the conduct of an accused for any purpose other than to
determine whether he is guilty of the offence charged. In
this connection, that piece of conduct can be held to be
incriminatory which has no reasonable explanation
except on the hypothesis that he is guilty. Conduct which
destroys the presumption of innocence can alone be
considered as material...”
28.    In the present case, deceased was found in the morning
near the room of the accused. Deceased had gone to sleep at
night in front of the room of the informant who is his son and
the informant and his family members were sleeping on the
terrace of the room. When the informant and his family
members came down in the morning they found that the
accused was cleaning the blood stains with the broom and on
seeing the informant and family members, the accused went
into his room and locked his room. The said facts have been
duly testified by the witnesses produced by the prosecution. The
said facts are relevant under Section 8 of the Evidence Act and
indicates towards the fact that the accused is guilty of the
29.    It is to be noted that the broom used by the accused has
been recovered by the Investigating Officer and the recovery
memo dated 2 July, 2006 was prepared. The recovery memo is
marked as Ex. Ka-7. A perusal of the said recovery memo
would further indicate that the broom was stained with blood.
P.W. 5 – S.I. Matadeen Verma has proved the recovery memo
dated 2 July, 2006 and has stated that the broom was recovered
by him from the place of occurrence and the broom was having
blood stains.
30.    Investigating Officer S.I. Matadeen Verma (P.W. 5) has
further recovered pillow from the place of occurrence. The
pillow was blood stained. The recovery memo dated 2 July,
2006 was prepared by the Investigating Officer in respect of
recovery of the pillow from the place of occurrence and the
same was marked as Ex. Ka – 7. The said witness in his
testimony proved the recovery memo and stated that the pillow
was blood stained. He has further stated that the blood stained
pillow was recovered from the place where the body of the
deceased was lying.
has further recovered three bedsheets from the place of
occurrence. Bedsheets were blood stained. Recovery memo
dated 2 July, 2006 was prepared by the Investigating Officer in
respect of recovery of three bedsheets from the place of
occurrence and the same was marked as Ex. Ka–7. The said
witness in his testimony proved the recovery memo and has
stated that the bedsheets were blood stained. He further stated
that the blood stained bedsheets were recovered from the place
where the body of the deceased was lying.
32.    The body of the deceased was sent by the Investigating
Officer for post-mortem examination. The post-mortem
examination of the deceased was held on 2 July, 2006 at 4:30
p.m. by Dr. Madan Lal (P.W.-7) who was posted at District
Government Hospital, Noida, Gautam Budh Nagar. The said
witness has identified the post mortem report and the same was
marked as Ex. Ka-10.
33.    The nature of the injuries suffered by the deceased
indicates that the death of the deceased was not natural. In the
opinion of the doctor who conducted the post-mortem
examination, the deceased died as a result of shock due to anti-
mortem injury.
34.    The Investigating Officer also prepared an inquest report
of the deceased on 2 July, 2006. The inquest was held on 2 July,
2006 at 7:15 a.m. The inquest report is marked as Ex. Ka-2.
Inquest report was prepared by S.I. Matadeen Verma (P.W. 5).
The said witness has proved the inquest report dated 2 July,
2006. He has stated that the inquest report was prepared by him
and was in his handwriting. He also stated that the inquest
report has been signed by him. The object of inquest
proceedings is to ascertain whether a person has died under
unnatural circumstances or unnatural death and if so, what is
the cause of the death.
35.    As per the opinion of the Panch witnesses, the death of
the deceased was unnatural and was a result of injury sustained
after rape. The Investigating Officer conquered with the opinion
of the Panch witnesses. In view thereof, the death of the
deceased was unnatural and injuries were sustained by the
deceased and blood was seen in the private part of the deceased.
The witnesses P.W.-1 and P.W.-2 had also described the injury
sustained by the deceased in their statements.
36.    P.W.-1 (Sunil Singh) in his statement before the trial
court has stated as follows:-
37.    P.W.-2 (Smt. Renu Devi) in her statement before the trial
court has stated as follows:-
38.    The prosecution has brought on record the circumstantial
evidence and medical evidence including the conduct of the
accused immediately after the alleged occurrence which points
towards the guilt of the accused and as such, the prosecution
has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt.
39.    Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that
there are no independent witness of the alleged crime and the
witnesses P.W.-1 and P.W.-2 are relative of the deceased and as
such, the testimony of P.W.-1 and P.W.-2 cannot be relied upon.
40.    A witness is normally to be considered independent
unless he or she springs from sources which are likely to be
tainted and that usually means unless the witness has cause,
such as enmity against the accused, to wish to implicate him
falsely. Ordinarily a close relative would be the last to screen
the real culprit and falsely implicate an innocent person. It is
often the case that the offence is witnessed by a close relative of
the victim, whose presence on the scene of the offence would
be natural. The evidence of such a witness cannot automatically
be discarded by labelling the witness as interested. It is worthy
to note that there is a distinction between a witness who is
related and an interested witness. A relative is a natural witness.
The Apex Court in Kartik Malhar Vs. State of Bihar, (1996)
1 SCC 614 has opined that a close relative who is a natural
witness cannot be regarded as an interested witness, for the
term “interested” postulates that the witness must have some
interest in having the accused, somehow or the other, convicted
for some animus or for some other reason.
41.    Merely because the witnesses are family members their
evidence cannot per se be discarded. When there is allegation
of interestedness, the same has to be established. Mere
statement that being relatives of the deceased they are likely to
falsely implicate the accused cannot be a ground to discard the
evidence which is otherwise cogent and credible. Relationship
is not a factor to affect credibility of a witness. It is more often
than not that a relation would not conceal actual culprit and
make allegations against an innocent person. Foundation has to
be laid if plea of false implication is made. There is no bar in
law on examining family members as witness. Evidence of a
related witness can be relied upon provided it is trustworthy.
42.    The Supreme Court in State of Uttar Pradesh Vs.
Samman Dass, (1972) 3 SCC 201 observed as under:-
“23...It is well known that the close relatives of a
murdered person are most reluctant to spare the real
assailant and falsely involve another person in place of
the assailant...”
43.    In Khurshid Ahmed Vs. State of Jammu and Kashmir
(2018) 7 SCC 429, the Supreme Court on the issue of evidence
of a related witness observed as under :-
“31. There is no proposition in law that relatives are to be
treated as untruthful witnesses. On the contrary, reason
has to be shown when a plea of partiality is raised to
show that the witnesses had reason to shield actual culprit
and falsely implicate the accused.”
44.    The prosecution case is that the incident is of night and of
a place where the informant along with his family members and
the accused were residing as tenants and as such, the incident
has occurred inside the house and at night. The incident has
occurred at a place which is not ordinarily accessible by the
public at large or the incident is of the private house, under
normal circumstances an independent witness may not be
available and the related witnesses may be natural witness.
Further circumstantial evidence plays a vital role in finding the
truth of the occurrence.
45.    In the instant matter, we find the testimony of the
witnesses to be consistent and reliable, and therefore reject the
contention of the appellant that the testimony of the witnesses
must be disbelieved because they are close relatives of the
deceased and hence interested witnesses.
46.    Counsel for the appellant has urged that there is
difference in the injuries stated by the prosecution witness and
the medical evidence. In the present case, there is no eyewitness
to the alleged occurrence and the prosecution case rests on the
circumstantial evidence. The injuries noted by the Prosecution
Witness No. 1 and Prosecution Witness No. 2 are based on the
observation made by them when they reached the place of
occurrence. The inquest report was prepared in the presence of
Prosecution Witness No. 3 and Prosecution Witness No. 4. The
observations made by the witnesses (who are related to the
deceased or who are independent witnesses) having no medical
expertise their observation may not be as accurate as the
observation of a doctor who is conducting the post-mortem
examination. The injuries which are common in the witness
account and the medical examination are that the deceased
suffered bite injury on her cheeks; injury in the private part of
the deceased. The argument of the learned counsel for the
appellant has no force as the injuries indicate that the deceased
was subjected to rape prior to her death. It is further to be noted
that although the medical evidence of the doctor has not
indicated in his post-mortem report with regard to the
allegations of rape however the nature of injury sustained by
the deceased itself indicate that the deceased was subjected to
rape prior to her death. It is also to be noted that the defence has
not given any suggestion to the doctor who conducted the post-
mortem that the deceased was not subjected to rape.
47.    It is argued by the learned counsel for the appellant that
the First Information Report has been lodged on the dictation of
the Station House Officer and the time for scribe of the First
Information Report has been stated as 6:15 a.m. whereas the
witness has stated that the First Information Report was scribed
at 9:00 a.m. As per the First Information Report dated 2 July,
2006 (Ex. Ka-12), information was received at 6:15 a.m. First
Information Report has been lodged by Sunil Singh (P.W.-1).
Said witness in his cross-examination has stated that the report
was scribed by Tinku on the questioning of the Station House
Officer; Station House Officer on the narration of the incident
by Sunil Singh has got the report scribed by Tinku; report was
taken by the Station House Officer at 9:00 a.m. It is on the
aforesaid basis that the learned counsel for the appellant states
that there is a contradiction in the time of lodging of the First
Information Report and the manner in which the First
Information Report was lodged. The statement of the
Prosecution Witness No. 1 – Sunil Singh confirms the fact that
the First Information Report was lodged on the basis of the
information provided by the informant–Sunil Singh. The
statement also indicates that information stated in the report
dated 2 July, 2006 is based on the facts provided by the
informant which was described on the directions of the Station
House Officer. An ordinary citizen who has suffered grief in
family member or who is not well educated may not be in a
position to provide information in a proper manner and in such
a situation if the police officer has assisted the informant in
lodging the First Information Report in proper manner, the
same would not in any manner dislodge the prosecution case. It
is to be noted that the officer concerned was not having the
knowledge of the facts stated in the First Information Report
and as such, he could not have in any manner changed the
circumstances stated in the First Information Report. Insofar as
the time when the First Information Report was lodged is
concerned, as per the First Information Report, it was lodged at
6:15 a.m. whereas as per the statement of Prosecution Witness
No. 1, the information was lodged at 9:00 a.m. The Prosecution
Witness No. 1 has proved the First Information Report. It is to
be noted that the witness was examined on 4 April, 2007 and
the cross-examination was extended to 23 July, 2007. A person
who is subjected to long cross-examination may not be able to
describe the incident and the time as accurately by lapse of time
and the same will not in any manner dislodge the prosecution
48.    It is submitted by counsel for the appellant that at the
time of preparation of the inquest report, the first information
report was not in existence. The inquest of the deceased was
conducted on 2 July, 2006 at 7:15 a.m. The inquest report was
marked as Ex. Ka-2 before the trial court. The inquest report
specifies the case crime number of the first information report
and the date and time when the information was received at the
police station. The object of the inquest proceedings under
Section 174 Cr.P.C is to ascertain whether a person had died
under unnatural circumstances or unnatural death and if so what
is the cause of death. The question regarding the details as to
how the deceased was assaulted or who assaulted her or under
what circumstances she was assaulted is foreign to the ambit
and scope of the proceedings under Section 174 Cr.P.C.
Mention of the name of accused and the eyewitness in the
inquest report is not necessary. Due to non mentioning of the
name of the accused in the inquest report, it cannot be inferred
that First Information Report was not in existence at the time of
inquest proceedings.
49.    It is urged on behalf of the appellant that in the
pathological report no spermatozoa was found and as such the
prosecution story is not reliable. In the present case the
circumstantial evidence as stated hereinabove points towards
the guilt of the accused. It is further to be seen that in all cases
the spermatozoa may not be traced. At times it happens that the
accused is not able to commit the crime completely and in such
a situation the spermatozoa may not be found. In a case where
the slide is sent for examination with delay there are chances
that the spermatozoa may not be found. In the present case
Prosecution Witness No. 8 has stated that he had sent the slide
for examination on 10 July, 2007 to the Forensic Science
Laboratory. Under the circumstances, if the spermatozoa is not
found the same would not affect the prosecution case.
50.    It is further submitted on behalf of the appellant that the
blood stained soil was not recovered by the Investigating
Officer and as such the prosecution case is not trustworthy.
Bloodstained soil is recovered from the place of occurrence in
order to establish/prove the place of occurrence. Accused has
not stated that the place of occurrence is somewhere else. The
accused has not given suggestion to any of the witnesses that
the occurrence took place at some other place. It is further to be
seen that the Investigating Officer has prepared the site plan of
the place of occurrence and the same was marked as Ex. Ka-11
before the trial court. The site plan was duly proved by the
P.W.-8. Site plan was prepared on 2 July, 2006. Further, the
witnesses of fact have also given detailed account of the place
of occurrence and the circumstances which prove towards the
guilt of the accused.
51.    It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that the
informant and other witnesses of fact have stated that the
accused was caught on the place of occurrence and was handed
to the police whereas the Investigating Officer has arrested the
accused from petrol pump. The contradiction pointed out by
counsel for the appellant with regard to the place and manner of
arrest of the accused is without any force. In this respect, it is to
be seen that the police tries to show the arrest of the accused in
order to enhance their service record. The contradiction pointed
out will not demolish the prosecution case when there is other
cogent and trustworthy evidence pointing towards the guilt of
the accused.
52.    On the basis of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, the
prosecution has proved its case beyond reasonable doubt. The
allegations against the accused – appellant under Sections 376
and 302 of the Indian Penal Code stands proved by the
prosecution.
53.    We do not find any infirmity in the impugned judgement
dated 5 December, 2007 and sentence dated 6 December, 2007
passed by the trial court convicting the accused – appellant for
offence under Sections 376 and 302 of the Indian Penal Code.
The sentence awarded by the trial court is in accordance with
law and needs no interference.
54.    As a result, the present appeal lacks merit and is
dismissed.
55.    Registrar General of this Court is directed to pay an
honorarium of Rs. 20,000/- to Ms. Abida Syed, learned Amicus
Curiae for rendering effective assistance in the matter.
56.    Let the lower court record be transmitted back to court
below along with a copy of this order.
Digitally signed by VISHWA MOHAN