section 3(2) of the Gujarat Prevention of Anti Social Activities
Act, 1985 (for short “the Act”) by detaining the petitioner –
detenue as defined under section 2(b) of the Act.
3.     Learned advocate for the detenue submits that the order
of detention impugned in this petition deserves to be quashed
and set aside on the ground of registration of the solitary
offence/s under Sections 65-AE, 116-B 98(2) and 81 of the
Prohibition Act by itself cannot bring the case of the detenue
within the purview of definition under section 2(b) of the Act.
Further, learned advocate for the detenue submits that illegal
activity likely to be carried out or alleged to have been carried
out, as alleged, cannot have any nexus or bearing with the
maintenance of public order and at the most, it can be said to
be breach of law and order.          Further, except statement of
witnesses, registration of above FIR/s and Panchnama drawn
in pursuance of the investigation, no other relevant and
cogent material is on record connecting alleged anti-social
activity of the detenue with breach of public order. Learned
advocate for the petitioner further submits that it is not
possible to hold on the basis of the facts of the present case
that activity of the detenue with respect to the criminal cases
had affected even tempo of the society causing threat to the
very existence of normal and routine life of people at large or
that on the basis of criminal cases, the detenue had put the
entire social apparatus in disorder, making it difficult for
whole system to exist as a system governed by rule of law by
disturbing public order.
4.     Learned AGP for the respondent State supported the
detention order passed by the authority and submitted that
sufficient material and evidence was found during the course
of investigation, which was also supplied to the detenue
indicate that detenue is in habit of indulging into the activity
as defined under section 2(b) of the Act and considering the
facts of the case, the detaining authority has rightly passed
the order of detention and detention order deserves to be
upheld by this Court.
5.     Having heard learned advocates for the parties and
considering the facts and circumstances of the case, it
appears that the subjective satisfaction arrived at by the
detaining authority cannot be said to be legal, valid and in
accordance with law, inasmuch as the offences alleged in the
FIR/s cannot have any baring on the public order as required
under the Act and other relevant penal laws are sufficient
enough to take care of the situation and that the allegations
as have been levelled against the detenue cannot be said to be
germane for the purpose of bringing the detenue within the
meaning of section 2(b) of the Act.       Unless and until, the
material is there to make out a case that the person has
become a threat and menace to the Society so as to disturb
the whole tempo of the society and that all social apparatus is
in peril disturbing public order at the instance of such person,
it cannot be said that the detenue is a person within the
meaning of section 2(b)        of the Act.       Except general
statements, there is no material on record which shows that
the detenue is acting in such a manner, which is dangerous to
the public order. In this connection, it will be fruitful to refer
to a decision of the Supreme Court in Pushker Mukherjee v/
s. State of West Bengal [AIR 1970 SC 852], where the
distinction between 'law and order' and 'public order' has
been clearly laid down. The Court observed as follows :
“Does the expression "public order" take in every kind of
infraction of order or only some categories thereof ? It is
manifest that every act of assault or injury to specific
persons does not lead to public disorder. When two people
quarrel and fight and assault each other inside a house or in
a street, it may be said that there is disorder but not public
disorder. Such cases are dealt with under the powers vested
in the executive authorities under the provisions of ordinary
criminal law but the culprits cannot be detained on the
ground that they were disturbing public order. The
contravention of any law always affects order but before it
can be said to affect public order, it must affect the
community or the public at large. In this connection we must
draw a line of demarcation between serious and aggravated
forms of disorder which directly affect the community or
injure the public interest and the relatively minor breaches
of peace of a purely local significance which primarily injure
specific individuals and only in a secondary sense public
interest. A mere disturbance of law and order leading to
disorder is thus not necessarily sufficient for action under
the Preventive Detention Act but a disturbance which will
affect public order comes within the scope of the Act.”
6.     In view of above, I am inclined to allow this petition,
because simplicitor registration of FIR/s by itself cannot have
any nexus with the breach of maintenance of public order and
the authority cannot have recourse under the Act and no other
relevant and cogent material exists for invoking power under
section 3(2) of the Act. In the result, the present petition is
hereby allowed and the impugned order of detention No. PCB/
DTN/PASA/769/2021              dated     16.12.2021      passed         by     the
respondent – detaining authority is hereby quashed and set
aside. The detenue is ordered to be set at liberty forthwith if
not required in any other case.
7.     Rule is made absolute accordingly.                Direct service is