1.              Confirmation Case No. 4 of 2019 arises out of the Reference
made by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Palghar for confirmation of
the death sentence awarded to Guddu Krish Yadav, respondent (“accused”)
by Judgment & Order dated 09.05.2019 passed in Sessions Case No. 3 of
2016 for the offence punishable under Section 302 of the Indian Penal Code,
1860 (for short, "IPC"). The operative part of the judgment reads as under:-
"1.      The accused Guddu Krish Yadav is hereby convicted Under
section 235(2) of Cr.P.C. for the offence punishable Unde Section
302 of Indian Penal Code for murder of Rajkumar Baliram Rohidas
and sentenced to death and be hanged by the neck till he is dead,
subject to confirmation by the Hon'ble High Court, Bombay.
2.       The accused is hereby convicted Under section 235(2) of Cr.P.C.
for the offence punishable Under section 302 of Indian Penal Code
for murder of Geetadevi Rajkumar Rohidas and sentenced to death
and be hanged by the neck till he is dead, subject to confirmation by
the Hon'ble High Court, Bombay.
3.       The muddemal articles, the samples of acid and sample of burnt
cloths pieces articles A, B & C, the shawl and saree articles D & E
be destroyed after the period of one year from the date of order of
Hon'ble High Court, Bombay in confirmation proceeding and in
case of appeal if any by the parties as per order in appeal.
4.       Both the sentences shall run concurrently.
5.       Both the sentences awarded to the accused shall remain suspended
till the confirmation by the Hon'ble High Court, Bombay.
6.       Death sentences against accused shall not be executed unless it is
confirmed by the Hon'ble Bombay High Court.
7.       In view of provision of Section 28(2) of Cr.P.C. entire proceeding
of this case along with muddemal property be sent to the Hon'ble
High Court, Bombay for confirmation of the sentences against
accused at the earliest.
8.       The District Legal Services Authority, Thane is hereby
recommended to determine and pay the compensation to the
victims who are dependents of Rajkumar and Geetadevi i.e. their
sons Rajan Rajkumar Rohidas, Dipesh Rajkumar Rohidas and
Shashi Rajkumar Rohidas. The amount of compensation shall be as
the D.L.S.A. Thane deems fit.
9.       The jail authority is hereby directed to take the note of this order.
10.      The accused is hereby informed that he is entitled to prefer an
appeal against this judgment and order within the statutory period
of appeal i.e. within 30 days.
11.      Issuance of certified copy of judgment is expedited.
12.      Copy of judgment be provided free of costs to the accused."
2.              A Crime bearing Crime No. I-240/2015 came to be registered
under Section 302 IPC with the Boisar Police Station on 06.11.2015 at 2:30
3.                According to the prosecution, the case is based on ocular
evidence, circumstantial evidence, medical evidence, forensic evidence and
above all on multiple dying declarations of both the deceased.                            After
considering the evidence of the prosecution witnesses and hearing the
prosecution and defence on merits of the case as well as on the point of
sentence, the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Palghar by the impugned
judgment dated 09.05.2019 arrived at the conclusion that the present case of
acid attack leading to the double murder of Rajkumar and Geetadevi is a
unique case beyond imagination and a crime of such a nature which is
undeserving of any sympathy or mercy. The Trial court concluded that the
present case fell in the category of the rarest of rare case and the accused
deserved to be awarded death penalty for committing the double murder.
The Trial court held the accused to be guilty of the offence of committing
murder of Rajkumar and Geetadevi and convicted the accused under Section
235(2) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short, "Cr.P.C.") for the
offence punishable under Section 302 IPC and sentenced him to death and he
be hanged by the neck till he is dead, subject to confirmation by this Court.
4.              The accused faced trial for the offence punishable under
Section 302 IPC for committing the murder of Rajkumar Ravidas @ Rohidas
and his wife Geetadevi by pouring acid on them with the intention and
knowledge to cause their death in the intervening night of 5/6.11.2015.
conducted investigation into the crime. He drew the Spot Panchanama,
Inquest Panchanama and sent their bodies for postmortem. The IO received
information that the accused had gone to Bihar after committing the crime
which is his native place. After obtaining permission from the Court the IO
proceeded to Bihar on 02.12.2015 alongwith a police team to apprehend the
accused. The accused was taken into custody with the help of local police of
Chero Opi Police Station in Bihar and arrested from village Ukhada and
brought to Palghar.
6.              After investigation the chargesheet was filed. Since the offence
committed by the accused was exclusively triable by the Sessions Court, the
learned Magistrate committed the case to the Sessions Court, Palghar.
7.              The learned Additional Sessions Judge, Palghar framed the
charge against the accused under Section 302 IPC. The charge was read over
and explained to the accused. The accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to
be tried. The defence of the accused was of total denial and false implication
in the alleged offence.
8.              To substantiate its case, the prosecution examined 12 witnesses
and tendered documentary evidence in the form of the dying declarations,
inquest panchanama, spot panchanama, letters of intimation, chemical
analyzer’s report, etc. The prosecution examined 12 witnesses in all as
S. No.                 Name                          Description of Witness
PW 1 Priti Devanand Karankale           Nurse present in hospital where deceased
were admitted after incident.
PW 2 Prakash Shivram Raut                Pancha witness - Inquest Panchanama.
PW 3 Pradeep Ramesevak Singh             Pancha witness - Spot Panchanama.
PW 4 Ramkumar @ Rampyare                 Co-worker alongwith deceased and prime
Deepchand Koiri                  witness.
PW 5 Kedarnath Babunandan Jaiswal        Co-worker alongwith deceased and prime
witness.
PW 6 Dr. Manoj Balkrishna Shinde         Medical Doctor who conducted the post
mortem.
PW 7 Dr. Atul Ramesh Pimple              Medical Doctor who treated both deceased on
their admission to the hospital until they died.
PW 8 Deepak Hari Jogdand                 Police Officer who recorded the dying
declaration of Rajkumar and on that basis
PW 9 Ramesh Lahu Thakre                  Pancha witness who carried the seized
muddemal articles to the Forensic Lab,
PW 10 Ravindra Kashinath Raut            Pancha witness who was called by the Police
to identify the seized clothes.
PW 11 Meena Sanjay Ambhire               Social worker in whose presence dying
declaration of Geetadevi was recorded in the
hospital.
9.               The Trial court framed the following points for determination
and recorded the findings thereon for the reasons stated in the impugned
1.      Whether prosecution proves that on 6th                         Yes
2.      Whether prosecution proves that on 7th                         Yes
3.      Whether the prosecution proves that on 6th                     Yes
November 2015 at about 00.30 hours in the
room situate above the office in Paradyes Acid
and Chemicals Trading Company at Boisar
4       Whether the prosecution proves that on the                     Yes
same date and on the same time and place
10.              As stated the reference has been made to this court by the
learned Additional Sessions Judge, Palghar for confirmation of the death
sentence awarded to the accused under the provisions of Section 366(1) of
11.              Before we proceed to consider the submissions made by the
respective Advocates, it will be apposite to refer to the facts of the case and
the incident which are as under:
11.1.            Rajkumar (‘deceased’) and Guddu (‘accused’) were employed
as workers in Paradyes Acid and Chemicals Trading Company (the
'company') situated at Plot No. N/74 in M.I.D.C. Boisar, Kolvade Naka,
Taluka Palghar. The owner of the company is Shashikant Kushwaha. The
deceased i.e. Rajkumar and his wife Geetadevi resided and slept in the
premises of the company in a room admeasuring 12 feet x 9 feet (the 'said
room') situated on the top of the office of the company alongwith their three
sons namely Rajan, Dipesh and Shashi. Two other employees namely
Ramkumar @ Rampyare Deepchand Koiri (PW-4) and Kedarnath Jaiswal
(PW-5) also resided in the premises of the company and used to sleep in the
office at night which was situated below the said room. The access to the said
room was by an iron ladder resting on the ground.
11.2.           On the date of the incident i.e. 05.11.2015, Rajkumar after
completing his daily work routine in the company premises ate his dinner and
went to sleep at about 9.30 p.m. along with wife Geetadevi and one son in the
said room. Ramkumar (PW-4) and Kedarnath (PW-5) alongwith the two
other sons of Rajkumar went to sleep in the office below the said room.
11.3.           According to the prosecution at about 12.30 a.m. in the
intervening night between 05.11.2015 and 06.11.2015, the accused doused
Rajkumar and Geetadevi with acid while they were asleep and ran away.
Both Rajkumar and Geetadevi upon being doused by acid raised a commotion
and climbed down the iron ladder screaming “bachaieye, bachaieye,
Guddu Yadav ne hamara upar acid dal diya, bachao bachao”. Ramkumar
(PW-4) and Kedarnath (PW-5) were woken up on hearing the screams; but
were unable to come out of the office as the office door was bolted from the
outside. Hence Ramkumar made a phone call to his employer Shashikant
Kushwaha and informed him that he heard Rajkumar and Geetadevi's
screams that Guddu had poured sulphuric acid on them but was unable to do
anything as the office door was bolted from the outside.           At that time
Rajkumar and Geetadevi climbed down from the iron ladder and opened the
latch of the office door which was bolted. Ramkumar (PW-4) and Kedarnath
(PW-5) saw that Rajkumar and Geetadevi had sustained burn injuries on
their entire bodies to the extent that there were no clothes on their person.
Hence they poured water on their bodies and put clothes on their person. In
the meanwhile, wife of Shashikant Kushwaha, brother Omprakash Kushwaha
and son Rahul Kushwaha arrived in the company premises and instructed
Ramkumar (PW-4) and Kedarnath (PW-5) to take Rajkumar and Geetadevi
to TIMA Hospital situated at Saravali, Boisar for treatment. They were then
taken to the hospital in the company’s Bolero pick-up jeep which was driven
11.4.           It is the prosecution’s case that Rajkumar died four hours after
admission whereas Geetadevi died on the next day in the hospital.
11.5.           According to the prosecution, conviction of the Appellant (i)
the oral dying declaration of Rajkumar and Geetadevi when they both
climbed down from the said room screaming as heard by Ramkumar (PW-4)
and Kedarnath (PW-5); and the written dying declaration of the deceased;
viz the dying declaration of Rajkumar recorded in the hospital by Deepak
Jogdand A.P.I. (PW-8) in the presence of Dr. Atul Pimple (PW-7); and the
dying declaration of Geetadevi recorded in question and answer form by lady
police Naik Shubhangi Naukudkar in the presence of social worker Meena
11.6.           It is seen that the entire case revolves around the evidentiary
value of the purported dying declaration dated 06.11.2015 of Rajkumar
recorded at 2:30 a.m. (Exhibit ‘33’) by PW-8. The Trial court has heavily
relied upon it alongwith the dying declaration of Geetadevi and the oral
testimony of PW-4, PW-5 and PW-8. According to the prosecution, PW-4
and PW-5 are prime eye witnesses to the crime.
12.             We shall now deal with and analyse the evidence given by each
of the prosecution’s witnesses as the Trial Court judgment is based entirely
on the testimony of the witnesses so as to indict and convict the accused.
12.1.           Priti Devanand Karankale, PW-1 was the on duty nurse in
TIMA Hospital when Rajkumar and Geetadevi were admitted after the
incident. She has deposed that on 07.11.2015 one patient was admitted to the
hospital of acid attack and thereafter the said patient died; that the police
were called and they summoned her and another staff member Dipesh. She
has further deposed that the lady had burn injuries over her whole body. On
reading her deposition, it appears that her evidence is in reference to
Geetadevi only. However in her cross examination she has stated that one
male patient was also brought in the hospital and was under the observation
of Dr. Sachin Ramteke and he was unconscious; that both the palms and
fingers of the said patient ‘were burnt’ and bandage was applied on the
hands. PW-1 was the first person to have encountered and seen both the
deceased in the hospital on admission. Hence the evidence of this witness is
relevant for the following evidence:
(i)      that Geetadevi had burn injuries over her whole body;
and on admission she died;
(ii)     the male patient (Rajkumar) was unconscious; both his
palms and fingers were completely burnt.
12.2.           Prakash Shivram Raut, PW-2, a pancha witness summoned by
the Police to TIMA Hospital was shown the dead body of Rajkumar; his
signature was obtained on the inquest panchanama prepared by the police.
This witness has deposed that the dead body was burnt.
12.3.           Pradeep Ramsevak Singh, PW-3, another pancha witness was
called by the Police to identify the scene of crime in the company’s premises.
He has deposed that after entering the said room by climbing the iron ladder,
he saw that the mosquito net and clothes were burnt because of acid; the
police collected the burnt clothes and mosquito net.
12.4.           Ramkumar @ Rampyare Deepchand Koiri, PW-4 is the prime
eye witness on behalf of the prosecution in the present case. It is the
prosecution’s case that the entire circumstantial evidence is proven on the
basis of PW-4 and PW-5's deposition and hence it would be of utmost
importance to consider the evidence of these two witnesses scrupulously. It
is the prosecution’s case that PW-4 and PW-5 are eye-witnesses and hence
their testimony is believable.
12.4.1.         PW-4 in his evidence has deposed as under:-
(i)      that he was working as a driver in the company since the last 8
to 10 years and used to transport acid;
(ii)     that he used to reside and sleep in the company’s office and
Rajkumar used to reside and sleep in the said room situated
above the office alongwith his wife and three sons;
(iii)    that in 2015 the accused had stolen Rajkumar's mobile phone
due to which there was an altercation between the two and
Rajkumar had threatened the accused that he would intimate
the theft of his mobile phone to their employer;
(iv)     that on the next day after the altercation, after having dinner
Rajkumar, Geetadevi and one son went to sleep in the said
room while he, Kedarnath (PW-5) and two sons of Rajkumar
want to sleep in the office; that at about 12:30 a.m., they were
woken up with the screams of Geetadevi;
(v)      that they attempted to come out of the office to check what had
happened but could not as the office room was bolted from the
outside; hence he made a phone call to his employer
(Shashikant Khushwaha) and informed him that they heard
Rajkumar and Geetadevi screaming that the accused had
poured sulfuric acid on them;
(vi)     that immediately thereafter Rajkumar and Geetadevi climbed
down the iron ladder and opened the latch of the office door;
they saw that Rajkumar and Geetadevi were completely burnt
and had no clothes on them; he then poured water on them and
put clothes on their bodies to cover them;
(vii)    in the meantime, wife of their employer, his brother Omprakash
Kushwaha and son Rahul Kushwaha arrived at the scene of
crime and Rajkumar and Geetadevi were put in a tempo and
taken to TIMA Hospital for treatment;
(viii)   that about 4 hours after admission Rajkumar died whereas
Geetadevi died on the next day.
12.4.2.        In his cross examination PW-4 has stated as follows:-
(i)      that the accused had joined the company and was working in
the company for the past one year;
(ii)     that 10 to 15 days prior to the incident the accused was removed
from work; he thereafter did not come into the company
premises in his presence; that when the incident occurred there
were 5 to 6 persons working in the company;
(iii)    that both Rajkumar and Geetadevi resided in the said room
wherein they used to prepare food and also sleep alongwith
(iv)     that Rajkumar had three children and when the incident
occurred one child i.e. the youngest child was sleeping with
Rajkumar in the said room;
(vi)     that after 5 to 10 minutes of hearing the screams, Rajkumar and
Geetadevi climbed down the iron ladder from the said room
and unbolted the office door;
(vii)    that he was not in a position to tell the exact time at which the
police came to the scene of crime; that              Rajkumar and
Geetadevi were taken to the hospital at about 1:00 a.m.;
(viii)     that when both were taken to the hospital they were not
unconscious but their whole body was burnt;
(ix)     that when they were taken to the hospital in the tempo they
were in a burnt condition, however there were no blood stains
(x)      that at the hospital the police enquired with him about what had
transpired and he informed all details to the police and while
doing so the police were writing down the said details;
(xi)     that it did not happen that the accused ran away from the spot
of incident in his presence and;
(xii)    that the residence of the owner of the company was at a
distance of 6 k.m. from the company premises.
12.5.           Kedarnath Babunandan Jaiswal PW-5, the second prime
witness on whose testimony the prosecution has heavily relied upon, in his
evidence has deposed as under:-
(i)      that at the time of the incident, he was sleeping in the office
alongwith PW-4 and Rajkumar was sleeping in the said room
above the office with his wife;
(ii)     that at about 12.30 a.m. in the night, he and PW-4 heard the
screams that Guddu had thrown acid, however, since the office
door was bolted from the outside, they could not come out of
the office, therefore they made a phone call to their employer
and informed him about what they heard;
(iii)    that after Rajkumar opened the latch to the office door, they
came out and saw that the entire body of Rajkumar had been
burnt due to acid and there were no clothes; that they also saw
Geetadevi at the same time and she was also burnt;
(iv)     that their employer arrived and then they put Rajkumar and
Geetadevi in the tempo and took them to TIMA Hospital;
(v)      that after admitting Rajkumar and Geetadevi in the hospital
both he and PW-4 returned back to the company premises as
their employer was present in the hospital; and
(vii)    that Rajkumar died on the same day whereas Geetadevi died on
the next day.
12.5.1.         In his cross-examination, PW 5 has stated as follows:-
(i)      that Sulphuric Acid, Hydrochloric Acid and Nitric Acid were
brought in the company but no acid was manufactured in the
company, it was only brought and resold by the company;
(ii)     that at the time of the incident, 3 to 4 persons were working in
the company and were also residing in the company premises;
(iii)    that there is a compound wall around the company premises
upto a height of 8 feet; that gate-pass was issued while going
out of the company premises; that attendance of the persons
residing in the company was marked by their employer in the
(iv)     that they took the injured Rajkumar and Geetadevi to the
hospital in the Bolero pick up jeep; that he and Ramkumar both
lifted them and kept them in the jeep; that they wrapped them
in clothes and took them to the hospital; that at the time of
keeping them in the Bolero jeep there were no clothes on the
person of both of them; they wrapped them in chadar and bed
sheet while taking them to the hospital;
(v)      that the burnt clothes were lying in the said room where they
were sleeping; that when Rajkumar screamed only he had
come downstair and Geetadevi was upstair in the said room;
(vi)     that they reached the hospital at about 1.30 a.m.; that prior to
leaving for the hospital, PW-4 made a phone call to their
employer at about 1.00 a.m. and within 5 minutes their
employer arrived at the company premises;
(vii)    when their employer came to the company, he did not make
inquiry with the injured; that PW-4 informed Rajkumar that
their employer had come;
(viii)   that after admission in the hospital till their death, he visited
the hospital alongwith PW-4;
(ix)     that the police reached the hospital at the same time when they
reached there; that he or PW-4 had not made any phone call to
(x)        that after reaching the hospital the police made inquiry with
them and reduced it into writing what was inquired with them;
that the Police had made inquiry with them even thereafter i.e.
on one occasion at the police station and once in the company
(xi)     that after admitting Rajkumar and Geetadevi in the hospital, he
returned to the company after half an hour alongwith PW-4;
(xii)    that their employer did not return with them;
(xiii)   that his statement was not read over to him by the police after
recording the same and that he does not know Marathi
(xiv)    that the dispute regarding theft of the mobile phone did not
take place in his presence; that he did not know when and
where the dispute regarding theft of the mobile phone took
place; that after 2 to 4 days of the said incident, he came to
know about the dispute regarding theft of the mobile phone;
(xv)     that before 4 to 5 days of the incident, the accused Guddu was
removed from work by their employer;
(xvi)    that on the night of the incident, he had not gone out of the
company for giving delivery of goods and since 6.00 p.m. he
was present in the company premises on the              date of the
incident alongwith PW-4;
(xvii) that they had dinner in the company premises at about 11.00
p.m. to 11.30 p.m.;
(xviii) that he cannot assign any reason as to why it is mentioned in his
statement that he and PW-4 went to sleep at about 10.30 p.m.
and he had not stated to the police that he was sleeping and
PW-4 was watching the T.V.; that PW-4 made a phone call to
their employer before the office door latch was opened by
(xix)    that they did not know what incident had taken place; that
Rajkumar had 3 children; that after opening the door, he and
PW-4 went upstairs to the said room and at that time Rajkumar
was standing near their office room; that they saw Rajkumar
and Geetadevi to have sustained burn injuries on their whole
body and at that time there were no clothes on their person as
their clothes were burnt;
(xx)     that on the next date i.e. on 06.11.2015 their employer and
Omprakash Kushwaha had taken him and PW-4 to the police
station; that it was not true that when he was taken to the
Court, the police told him what to depose before the Court
while recording his statement;
(xxi)    that he did not see whether there were any stains on his clothes
when he lifted the injured while keeping them in the vehicle
and whilst getting down at the hospital; that there was no acid
on his clothes; that the Police did not inquire with him as to
which clothes were worn by him at the time of removing the
injured to the hospital; that the police had inquired with him
about the pick up jeep and he told the police that they brought
the injured to the hospital in the pick up vehicle driven by
(xxii) that he did not know that 4-5 days before the incident, there
was a quarrel between Rajkumar and Omprakash (brother of
the employer) on account of the amount of 'bhishi' (savings);
and that he did not know whether Rajkumar demanded the
amount of savings from Omprakash who refused to give and
was threatened by Omprakash.
12.6.           Dr. Manoj Balkrishna Shinde PW-6, the Medical Officer in
Rural Hospital, Boisar, conducted the postmortem on the deceased and in his
evidence has deposed as under:-
(i)      that on 06.11.2015 the dead body of Rajkumar was brought by
the Police at about 3.25 p.m. and on the same day he started the
postmortem at 4.36 p.m. and completed the same at about 5.30
p.m.;
(ii)     that the dead body was in a burnt condition, the skin showed
deep burn marks all over the body, deep burn injuries were
noticed all over the body with blackish discolouration of the
skin to the extent of 96% burns involving scalp, face, neck
anterior aspect of chest and abdomen, posterior aspect of chest
and back, upper and lower extremities; that the injuries were
ante-mortem in nature and scalp showed burn injury, skull
vault was intact, brain showed signs of congestion, thorax
showed burn marks over chest wall with rib and cartilages
intact, larynx, trachea and bronchi were oedematous with signs
of congestion with black mucous and right and left lung both
were oedematous and congested with black mucous;
(iii)    that the abdomen walls showed burn injuries with subcutaneous
and soft tissue congested; the peritoneum showed congestion;
the abdominal cavity was intact, the mouth was open with black
mucous in oral cavity, the oesophagus showed sign of
congestion, the stomach and its contents were intact with rice
and black semi solid; the small intestine and large intestine
showed signs of congestion; the liver, pancreas and both
kidneys were intact; the spleen showed splenomegaly; the
bladder was intact and empty; that the skin was preserved for
chemical analysis to know the type of acid;
(iv)     that as per his examination the probable cause of death was
asphyxia with hypovolumic shock due to 96% deep chemical
burns (acid); that accordingly he prepared the post-mortem
report and issued the death certificate;
(v)      that on 07.11.2015 the dead body of Geetadevi was received
along with police panchanama at around 2.30 p.m. for
postmortem; the postmortem commenced at 4.23 p.m. and was
completed by 5.15 p.m.;
(vi)     that the dead body was in burnt condition; the skin showed
deep burn marks all over the body and on external examination
of the naked body, 75% deep burn injuries involving the scalp,
neck anterior aspect of chest and upper abdomen, upper
posterior aspect of back, both buttocks, both upper extremities
and multiple discrete burn marks were observed over both
(vii)    that on internal examination, he found that there were deep
burn marks over the scalp and the skull, the brain showed sign
of congestion, the thorax-walls, ribs and cartilages showed deep
burn marks, the larynx, trachea, bronchi and both lungs were
oedematous and congested with black mucous;                         the
pericardium, heart and large vessels were intact; the abdominal
walls showed burn injuries with soft tissues and showed signs of
congestion; the mouth was open with black mucous in oral
cavity; the oesophagus showed signs of congestion; the
stomach was intact with black colour semi solid; the small and
large intestines showed signs of congestion;
(viii)   that on his examination, the probable cause of death was
ascribed to hypovolumic shock due to 75% deep chemical burns
by acid and accordingly he issued the death certificate; that as
per the Chemical Analyser's report, sulphuric acid was
detected in the skin samples sent for chemical analysis;
12.6.1.        In his cross-examination, PW 6 has stated as follows:
(i)      that fingers of both the hands of Rajkumar were in burnt
condition; there were deep burns on the fingers of both hands;
the time between death and post-mortem was less than 12
hours; death of Rajkumar was caused within two hours of his
(ii)     that in Geetadevi’s case there were deep burns on the fingers of
both her hands on the interior aspect;
(iii)    that in the case of Rajkumar and Geetadevi the skin of their
fingers on the interior aspect was entirely burnt; there were no
bandages on the fingers of Rajkumar; but there were bandages
on the fingers of Geetadevi;
(iv)     that if the burns are more than 50% there is heavy loss of fluid
and in such cases the person becomes unconscious
immediately; there is also heavy pain in the body and therefore
painkillers are used; however it was not true that after
administration of the painkiller the patient becomes drowsy.
12.6.2.          PW 6 has submitted the post mortem report of Rajkumar which
is exhibited in evidence as Exhibit '24'. Certain observations made therein
pertaining to the injuries sustained are relevant to arrive at a precise
conclusion.       The observations noted in column Nos. 17 to 21 of the
postmortem report being relevant are reproduced hereunder:
“Observations in the postmortem report of Rajkumar.
17.      Surface wounds and injuries                 deep burn injuries generalised all over
Their nature, position, dimensions          body and blackish discilour of skin about
(measured) and directions to be         ... 96% burns involving scalp, face.
accurately stated their probable age        neck, anterior aspect of chest and cibed,
and causes to be noted.                     posterious aspect of chest and back,
upper and lower extrimites
18.      Other injuries discovered by external       no other injuries on external
examination of palpation as fractures   ... examination or palpable fracture
(a) Can you say definitely that the injuries     Yes
shown against serial Nos. 17 and 18 are
(i) Injuries under the scalp their nature ... Burn injuries over scalp
(ii) Skull - Valult and base-describe          Intact
fractures, their sites, dimensions,
(iii) Brain - appearance of its coverings,      signs of congestion
size, weight and general condition of
(a) Walls, ribs, cartilages                    Burn mark over chest wall lib and
(c) Larynx, Trachea and Bronchi                Oedematous signs of angestion black
(d) Right Lung                                 Both lungs oedematous and ungested
(e) Left lung                              ... mucous on section
Walls                                     Burn injuries subautanous 50 ft tissue
Peritoneum                                Intact peritoneum congested
Bucal Cavity, teeth, tongue and       ... Mouth open black mucous oral cavity
pharynx Desophagus                        signs of congestion
Stomach and its content               ... Intact rice and black semisolid”
12.6.3.           Similarly in the postmortem report of Geetadevi the following
observations are found relevant as noted in clause Nos. 17 and 19 to 21 and
are reproduced hereunder :
“Observations in the postmortem report of Geetadevi.
17.       Surface wounds and injuries               75% deep burn injuries involving face
Their nature, position, dimensions        scalp, neck, anterior aspect of chest
(measured) and directions to be           upper abdomen, upper posteriour
accurately stated their probable age  ... aspect of back, both buttocks, both
and causes to be noted.                   upper extrimites, multiple discreat burn
marks both lower limbs
(i) Injuries under the scalp their nature ... Deep burn mark over scalp
(ii) Skull - Valult and base-describe          Intact
fractures, their sites, dimensions,
(iii) Brain - appearance of its coverings,      Signs of congestion
size, weight and general condition of
(a) Walls, ribs, cartilages                    deep burn marks, oedematous
(c) Larynx, Trachea and Bronchi               Oedematous and signs of congested
(d) Right Lung                            ... Both lungs oedematous and congested
(e) Left lung                                 black mucous on section
21.      Abdomen -                                Burn injuries soft tissue oedematous
Bucal Cavity, teeth, tongue and      ... Mouth open black mucous oral cavity
Desophagus                           ... signs of congestion
Large intestine and its contents         signs of congestion”
12.7.             Dr. Atul Ramesh Pimple PW-7, Medical Officer attached to
TIMA Hospital was on duty on the date of the incident and treated Rajkumar
and Geetadevi on admission to the hospital. The evidence of PW-7 is all
important and crucial. In his evidence PW-7 has deposed as under:-
(i)       that deceased Rajkumar and Geetadevi were admitted in the
hospital as patients of acid attack;
(ii)      that since it was a medico legal case, he issued two letters of
intimation (Exhibits ‘28’ and ‘29’)            to the Police Officer,
MIDC Police Station, Boisar at 3:05 a.m. stating that Rajkumar
had sustained 95% burns and Geetadevi had sustained 98%
(iii)    that on receipt of the letters, Police Inspector Jogdand - (PW-8)
visited the hospital for recording the statements; that on
examination he found that Rajkumar was conscious and
therefore put his endorsement that Rajkumar was conscious
during recording his statement; that Rajkumar's statement was
recorded after 1.30 a.m. and after recording the statement, his
thumb impression was put on the statement and was
countersigned in his presence and thereafter he put his
signature and stamp of the hospital on the statement;
(iv)     that after recording his statement, Rajkumar died and therefore
he informed the same to the Police Station by addressing a
letter at 3.25 a.m.
12.7.1.         In his cross-examination, PW-7 has stated as follows:-
(i)      that he attended to both the patients when they were brought to
the hospital at about 1.30 a.m.; that he attended to Rajkumar
first; however at about 1.40 a.m. he attended to Geetadevi when
brought it, but she was brought in dead; that she had burn
injuries all over her body; her hands and palms had deep burn
injuries and her skin was burnt;
(ii)     that it is true that in a burn case, due to loss of fluid the patient
suffers from heavy pains;
(iii)    that the staff of the hospital carried the letters (Exhibits ‘28’
and ‘29’) by hand which were addressed to the police station;
(iv)     that he did not put the timing of his endorsement on the
statement given by Rajkumar;
(v)      that he put his endorsement after completion of Rajkumar’s
statement; however the time was not mentioned in the
endorsement as to when the recording of the statement started
and when it was completed;
(vi)     that at that time nurse Ms. Priti Karankale, PW-1 was present
in the ward; that there were clothes on the persons of both the
patients, however they were in burnt condition, that he had no
talk with the patients; the messenger was sent to the police
station at about 1.40 a.m.; the acknowledgment was not brought
as after the letter was delivered to the police station within 20
minutes the police came to the hospital;
(vii)    that the patient was talking in third language; PW-8 was
questioning the patient in third language and the patient was
accordingly answering in Hindi language; that the police were
present in the hospital for about two hours; that the
handwriting on Exhibit '30' (letter of intimation of death of
Rajkumar) is of his staff member;
(viii)   that it was not true that the number 2 has been changed to
number 3 to manipulate the time of death from 2:25 a.m. to 3:25
a.m. as seen and stated in Exhibit '30';
(ix)     that along with pain killer antacid, antibiotic was also given to
the patient, except that he did nothing with the patient;
(x)      that it was true that it was necessary to hand over all relevant
case papers to the police in this case which had recorded the
entire treatment given to the patient, his medical status, etc.
but he has not handed over the case papers to the police;
(xi)     that it was true that if the case papers were placed before the
court, it would have revealed the details as to whether the
patient was conscious or not; whether the pulse rate and blood
pressure of the patient was normal; however if the blood
pressure exceeded 220 or 250 or fell below 40 or if the pulse
rate plunged down there is a possibility of the patient becoming
(xii)    that in case of more than 90% burn injury, there is heavy fluid
loss and it is possible that the patient would become
(xiii)   that the number 3 appearing in the age of the patient is different
than in the time of death in Exhibit ‘30’; that it is necessary to
mention the time of arrival of the patient in the intimation letter
to the police in medico legal cases and on Exhibits ‘28’ and
‘29’ the time when both patients were brought in the hospital is
(xiv)    that no date and time was mentioned near the signature and
stamp at the bottom of the statement;            that there is no
endorsement regarding the signature and seal at the bottom of
(xv)     that he does not remember whether bandage was applied on the
(xvi)    that it was not true that intimation letters at Exhibits ‘28’ and
‘29’ were sent by him to the police station after 3.00 a.m.;
(xvii) that it is true in medico legal cases that if the patient is in a
condition to talk then it is necessary to mention the history in
the MLC register and in the case papers;
(xviii) that police did not ask for the any injury certificate describing
the treatment and injuries of Rajkumar and MLC register was
not maintained by the hospital;
(xix)    that when the patient was brought to the hospital PW-1 was the
nurse present; that both were admitted in the same ward and
there were no other patients at that time in the ward;
(xx)     that another patient was brought in dead, hence no treatment
was given, that it did not happen in his presence that police
obtained the thumb impression of Geetadevi; that the Police
had requested him to examine whether Geetadevi was
conscious or unconscious and at that time he told police that
(xxi)    that the dead body of Geetadevi was removed from the hospital
on 6th November 2015.
Boisar Police Station recorded the dying declaration of Rajkumar and handed
over charge of investigation to PW-12 – Investigating Officer (IO). PW-8 in
his evidence has deposed as under:-
(i)      that he was attached to Boisar Police station as Assistant Police
Inspector from 2015 to May 2017; on 5.11.2015, he was on night
patrolling duty and he received a phone call from the police
station intimating that two persons have been burnt in an acid
company and admitted to TIMA hospital and he should go
there; accordingly he proceeded to the hospital and met Dr.
Pimple, PW-7 who was on duty; he told the doctor that he had
to record the statement of the burnt person; at that time the
doctor asked him to wait for five minutes as check up of the
patient was going on; thereafter, when he went inside, the
doctor told him that the patient was in a fit condition to give his
statement; accordingly the doctor put his signature and
endorsement that the patient was conscious and in a fit
condition to give his statement and thereafter he asked the
name and address of the patient and recorded his statement;
(ii)     that Rajkumar gave his statement that a day prior to the
incident i.e. on 4th he had seen Guddu stealing his mobile phone
instrument, hence, he informed about the theft to his employer;
thereafter the employer had spoken to Guddu because of which
Guddu was annoyed and when he and his wife were sleeping
Guddu came there with a can filled with Sulphuric acid
manufactured in the company and doused them with Sulphuric
Acid; that he saw Guddu pouring the acid; that thereafter he
climbed down the stairs screaming; unlatched the door of the
office where his children were sleeping alongwith PW-4 and
PW-5; then they were both removed to TIMA hospital in the
vehicle; that the statement was read over to him in hindi
language and thereafter he put his thumb impression and
obtained the signature of the concerned doctor and the
statement bears his signature;
(iii)    thereafter he went to the police station and registered the F.I.R.
for the offence punishable under Section 326-(A) IPC and as
per the direction of his superior the investigation of the case
was handed over to P.S.I. Jaysing Shriram Nale, PW-12.
12.8.1.        In this cross-examination, PW-8 has stated as follows:-
(i)      that he could not remember the name of the police officer from
whom he received the phone call while on patrolling duty near
Boisar Railway Station area; that the P.S.O. of the police station
made a phone call to him at about 12.30 a.m. in the night and
informed him that acid was poured on two persons and they are
taken to TIMA hospital and he should go there immediately
and record their statement;
(ii)     that he knew where TIMA hospital was situated and he
proceeded to TIMA hospital, however after receiving the
phone call he first went to the Police station, collected some
papers and took along with him the scribe police Naik Mr.
(iii)    that no entry was made in the station diary when he proceeded
to the hospital alongwith the scribe Mr. Lagad from the police
station; that he could not tell the time when he reached the
police station; that before reaching the hospital he was not
knowing the names of the injured; that within 10 to 15 minutes
he reached the hospital; when he obtained the signature of the
doctor on the statement he did not ask the doctor the ward
number and cot number; that there were two cots in the ward
when he visited the hospital; the P.S.O. had not told him which
out of the two patient’s statement was to be recorded; he
himself took the statement of the male patient; he did not
record the statement of the female patient; that there were no
instructions to him not to record the statement of the female
(iv)     that he did not ask the doctor about the woman patient and
whether she was in a state to give her statement; that he saw
the woman patient as she was by the side of the cot of the man
patient; that he did not inquire with her; at the time of
recording Rajkumar’s statement he was in naked condition and
ointment was applied all over his body; the patient was not in
bandaged condition; that the fingers of the patient’s hands were
not burnt; that at about 1.00 a.m. at night he started recording
the statement and continued it for about 45 minutes; that no
saline was administered to the patient when he reached the
(v)      that the patient was shouting as well as talking at the same time;
that before beginning recording of the statement he introduced
himself to the patient; that he had obtained the signature of the
doctor on blank paper before beginning recording of the
statement; that the doctor put his signature in his presence; he
did not remember as to whether the doctor put the timing at the
time of signing on the blank paper; that he did not tell police
Naik Mr. Lagad to mention the time at which the recording of
the statement started and was completed; that he asked
questions to the patient while recording the statement and the
patient answered those questions; that there was no difficulty in
recording the statement in question and answer form; that the
patient was talking properly, hence the statement was not
recorded in question and answer form; that the doctor did not
tell him to record the statement hurriedly because the patient
(vi)     that he could not tell whether the police staff used to go to the
house of the Special Executive Magistrate to call him when the
need arose; that prior to joining Boisar Police station he served
for four years as P.S.I.; during that period he took help of the
Special Executive Magistrate for recording statement; that he
had intimated to his senior officer when he received the
information about the incident however since it was late in the
night, he did not feel it necessary to call any Special Executive
Officer for recording the statement of Rajkumar; that he could
not tell at what time Rajkumar had died;
(vii)    that when he reached the police station he did not inquire as to
how the said information was received in the first instance at
the police station; that he could not identify the endorsement
and handwriting on Exhibits ‘28’ and ‘29’ pertaining to the
mention of the station diary entry No. 4 and time;
(viii)   that he did not remember whether any other patient except
Rajkumar and Geetadevi were there in the ward; that sisters
were present in the room apart from Dr. Pimple, PW-7;
(ix)     that it is true that if thumb impression of any person is
obtained, then it is necessary to mention whether it is of the
right hand or left hand; similarly it is necessary to mention
whether the impression is of the thumb or of the toe; that it is
also necessary to mention the name of the person whose thumb
impression is obtained; that it is necessary to obtain the
signature of the attesting person who attests the thumb
(x)      that in respect of thumb impression on Exhibit ‘33’ there is no
mention as to whether the thumb impression was of the thumb
or toe or the name of the person putting the impression and
there is no endorsement in whose presence the thumb
impression was obtained;
(xi)     that it is not mentioned in Exhibit ‘33’ that the patient was in a
fit condition to record the statement;
(xii)    that he has not put the endorsement on the statement that it
was recorded in the presence of the doctor;
(xiii)   that there is no mention in the statement that Rajkumar saw the
accused while stealing the mobile handset;
(xiv)    that the statement was read over to the patient in marathi
language and subsequently he was made to understand it in
hindi language; that there is no endorsement on Exhibit ‘33’
that the statement was in the handwriting of police Naik Mr.
Lagad; that he could not tell the time at which he reached the
police station after recording the statement; that the complaint
was registered at about 2.30 a.m. at night; that he does not
remember whether entry was made in the station diary after
reaching the police station;
(xv)     that he could not tell whether the person who brought the
injured to the hospital were present at the hospital; that he
could not tell whether any relatives of the injured were present
at the hospital though six to seven persons were present at the
(xvi)    that he did not tell the doctor to record the statement of the
injured.
12.9.           PW-9 - Ramesh Lahu Thakre is a pancha witness attached to
Boisar Police Station; he was on general duty at Boisar Police Station on the
date of the incident. He carried the articles and has stated that the said
articles were not seized or sealed in his presence, hence, his evidence is not
12.10.          PW-10 - Ravindra Kashinath Raut another pancha witness was
called by the Boisar Police to the Police Station on 07.11.2015; he has
deposed that some clothes were shown to him which were packed by the
Police and labelled and his signatures were obtained on the label and the
panchanama. In his cross-examination, PW-10 has stated that the Police had
told him that the clothes were of the deceased; that he did not know from
where the clothes were got; that the clothes seen by him were burnt to some
extent; the clothes were a shawl and saree which were sealed as Article ‘D’
and Article ‘E’ and the label on these Articles were marked as Exhibits ‘37’
and Exh. ‘39’. This evidence is of significance because it states that the
clothes were burnt to some extent.
12.11.          PW-11 - Meena Sanjay Ambhire, a social worker working with
the Mahila Dakshata Committee was called by the police to TIMA Hospital
on 06.11.2015. It is the prosecution case that when PW-11 reached the
hospital, lady police Naik Shubhangi Navkudkar took her to Geetadevi and
after taking permission from the doctor present on duty recorded the
statement of Geetadevi in her presence. PW-11 has deposed that Geetadevi
gave statement that the incident was related to the theft of the mobile phone
and stated that accused - Guddu poured acid on her and her husband; this
statement of Geetadevi was thereafter reduced to writing and countersigned
by the Doctor and PW-11 and thumb impression of Geetadevi was obtained
on the statement.
12.11.1.        In her cross-examination, PW-11 has stated as follows:-
(i)      that she is residing at Boisar; the distance between her house
and the police station is about 2 to 3 kilometers; the police
called her to the hospital on 06.11.2015; at about 10.00 a. m. she
reached TIMA hospital; there she met lady police Naik
Shubhangi Navkudkar; the patient was in the general ward; she
did not remember whether other patients were there apart from
Geetadevi; though other cots were there she did not remember
the number of cots; she did not remember the cot number of
(ii)     that saline was administered to Geetadevi and she                  was
screaming to some extent, she did not speak with the patient;
she did not know Dr. Pawade who was present there; she did
not remember whether the start time and completion time of
recording of the statement was mentioned in the statement; she
did not remember whether bandage was applied on the face and
hands of the patient; there were no injuries on the hands and
palms of the patient; the statement recorded was not in her
handwriting; the right hand thumb impression of the patient
was obtained; she could not tell that the name of person who
recorded Geetadevi’s statement into writing was stated in the
statement; she did not find any relative of the victim present at
the time of recording her statement; she was at the hospital for
about 2 hours and it might have taken about two hours for
recording the statement; signature of attesting witness was not
obtained to attest the thumb impression of the patient; she did
not go to the police station in respect of this case; that on
06.11.2015 Police Officer Nale (PW-13) had called her; the
patient recorded her statement that the accused had come to
steal the mobile phone and acid was poured by him.
12.12.          PW-12 - Jaisingh Shivram Nale, the Investigating Officer was
attached to Boisar Police Station as Police Sub-Inspector from 2009 to 2017.
In his evidence he has stated as follows:-
(i)      that on 06.11.2015, at about 2.00 a.m. Deepak Jogdand (PW-8)
made a phone call to him informing that he had registered
Crime No. 240/2015 for the offence punishable under Section
326-(A) IPC and handed over the investigation to him; he
verified the report and along with the police team proceeded to
TIMA hospital at Boisar;
(ii)     that at the hospital, medical treatment was given to Rajkumar
(iii)    he started search for the accused along with the police team;
they searched for the accused at village Kolavade and also in
the area of Shivajinagar and Railway station area;
(iv)     that at about 3.15 a.m. a memo was received in the police
station intimating the death of Rajkumar; at that time A.S.I.
Gaikwad took the entry in the station diary and added Section
302 IPC and sent a letter to the Magistrate intimating about
addition of Section 302 IPC;
(v)      that Shashikant Laxman Kushwaha employer of Rajkumar and
owner of the company identified the dead body of Rajkumar in
the ICU on cot no. 1 and it was in supine position; the dead
body had become blackish and some skin on the dead body was
(vi)     that he prepared the inquest panchanama and obtained the
signature of the pancha witnesses and directed head constable
Lanke to send the body to the Rural Hospital, Tarapur for post-
(vii)    he sent a report to the Executive Magistrate requesting him to
record the dying declaration of Geetadevi; however since
condition of Geetadevi was serious, he called Meena Ambhire
(PW-11) to witness the recording of her statement;
(viii)   that Dr. Pawade informed that the patient was in a condition to
give her statement; accordingly lady police Naik Shubhangi
Navkudkar recorded the statement of Geetadevi in question
and answer form in the presence of PW-11, which was endorsed
by the doctor; the thumb impression of Geetadevi was obtained
(ix)     he then proceeded to the scene of crime in the company
premises at MIDC Boisar and on examination of the scene
found that the said room admeasuring 12 feet x 20 feet was
having no door; small burnt pieces of bed (bichana) were found
nearby and there was one white colour plastic bucket with red
colour liquid in it; he collected the pieces of burnt bed in a jar
and the liquid from the bucket in a bottle as sample; he noted
that there was an iron ladder to go upstairs to the room, there
were drums of Sulphuric acid / acid lying in the company
premises; accordingly samples of acid were collected in the
presence of pancha witnesses;
(x)      that on the south-west side of the office there was a tank of
30,000 liters capacity of Sulphuric acid, it was labelled as “98%
Sulphuric Acid”; the tank was having valve, rubber pipe and
cock; that sample was drawn in a bottle from the said tank,
sealed and labelled; photographs of the scene of crime were
taken and map was drawn by the circle officer, Tarapur;
(xi)     thereafter he deposited the muddemal articles with the
muddemal clerk along with receipt;
(xii)    that on 7th November 2015 injured Geetadevi died at about
5.30 a.m. in the morning; that Shashikant Kushwaha identified
the dead body of Geetadevi on cot no. 2 in the ICU; the skin
had turned blackish and some skin was peeled due to acid;
inquest panchanama was done and police constable Mhaske
was directed to send the dead body to Rural Hospital, Tarapur
(xiii)   that PW-5 produced the seized clothes of deceased Rajkumar
and Geetadevi duly sealed and labelled with signatures of the
panchas and his signature; the seized clothes were one shawl of
yellow-green colour and one saree; the seized clothes were
deposited with the muddemal clerk along with muddemal
receipt; the muddemal articles were sent to the Forensic
Laboratory alongwith police Naik Thakre;
(xiv)    thereafter he recorded the statements of PW-4 and PW-5;
(xv)     he issued letter to the company and obtained the attendance
muster roll of deceased Rajkumar and accused – Guddu;
(xvi)    that he came to know from a secret informer that the accused
had fled to Bihar; hence call details were obtained from the
Superintendent of Police, Palghar;
(xvii) thereafter he obtained permission from the Superintendent of
Police to proceed to Bihar to apprehend the accused; on 2nd
December 2015 he along with a police team went to Bihar
accompanied by the informant; he went to Chero Opi Police
station and with the help of the police took the accused in
custody from village Ukhada and after completing the legal
procedure returned on 10th December 2015;
(xviii) that the accused and deceased Rajkumar were working in
Paradyes company and there was a dispute between them about
the theft of Rajkumar’s mobile phone; that the accused had
stolen the mobile phone and Rajkumar had complained about
the theft to the owner of the company (Shashikant Kushwaha),
which annoyed the accused and out of that grudge the accused
took Sulphuric acid in a bottle and went to the room where the
deceased and his family were sleeping and doused them with
acid and shouted that “mera naam sheth ko batata hai kya,
ab lo mobile”, causing grievous injury to the deceased leading
to their death.
12.12.1.        PW-12 in his cross-examination has given the following answers
which need a detail scrutiny as they are pertinent for deciding the present
(i)      that on 6th November 2015 police Naik Phadtare was the police
station officer on duty; that he received a phone call from the
police station at about 2.00 a.m. at midnight on 6th November
2015 to reach there and he came to the police station within 15
(ii)     that there was no complaint filed by deceased Rajkumar or
Shashikant Kushwaha for theft of the mobile phone by the
accused and the mobile phone was never seized during
investigation from the accused;
(iii)    that intimation was first received from TIMA Hospital and only
thereafter the police station received information about the
crime; that station diary entry was made about receipt of
intimation from TIMA Hospital in respect of injury to
Rajkumar and Geetadevi; but he did not remember at what time
the entry was made in the station diary regarding receipt of the
letters from TIMA Hospital; that he has not produced the
station diary in evidence along with the charge sheet; that
Exhibits ‘28’ and ‘29’ state the time of receiving the letters by
the police at 3.05 a.m. and endorsement of station diary entry
No. 4; that the letter at Exhibit ‘30’ was received at 9.00 a.m.
on 06.11.2015 and is entered at entry No. 13; that he was unable
to comment about the change in time of death of Rajkumar
from 2.25 a.m. to 3.25 a.m.;
(iv)     that he did not collect the documents regarding medical
treatment of both the deceased from the hospital; that the
documents were important and could have disclosed the
medical treatment given to both the deceased, their medical
condition at the time of admission, etc; that there was no
difficulty in securing the documents from the hospital but he
could not assign any reason for not collecting the medical
documents from the hospital pertaining to both deceased;
(v)      that he visited the scene of crime at about 2.00 p.m. on
(vi)     that in the spot panchanama he forgot to mention the
compound wall; that the office had one room on ground floor
and another on the mezzanine floor; that an iron ladder was
used to access the said room and that no clothes in burnt
condition were found on the incident spot; the area of the office
and the said room was not stated in the spot panchanama; that
he did not find any clothes in burnt condition on the ground
floor near the office; and that he did not find acid on other
articles including utensils in the said room;
(vii)    that at the time of the incident deceased were having three
children but he did not make any inquiry with or about the
three children as they were young; that he recorded the
statement of the grandfather of the children to show that the
children were young; the name of the grandfather was Balram
Bhutai Ravidas and his statement was recorded on 9th
November 2015 but he did not state in the statement that the
(viii)   that he did not find any acid or stains of acid on the clothes of
PW-4 and PW-5 or of the three children; that there were no
acid stains on the ladder and up to the gate of the company;
that he did not check or see the vehicle by which the injured
were taken to TIMA hospital;
(ix)     that he obtained the attendance register of the employees of the
company for the month of November wherein the accused was
shown absent on 03.11.2015 and from 05.11.2015 to 09.11.2015;
apart from recording the statement of PW-4 and PW-5 he did
not record the statements of other workers who were present in
the company by the name of Ravi Raut, Prakash Raut and Yuga
(x)      that during spot panchanama he did not find any water traces
on the floor near the office where Rajkumar and Geetadevi had
climbed down and PW-4 and PW-5 had put water on them;
(xi)     that in the station diary of 06.11.2015, against entry No. 4 there
is no mention of the letters received from the hospital vide
Exhibits ‘28’ & ‘29’ intimating admission of two patients i.e.
Rajkumar and Geetadevi in TIMA hospital; however P.S.I.
Phadtare on duty had forgotten to make the entry in the station
diary about the two letters; that he was unable to explain if
entry at Serial No.13 in the station diary indicating the time of
death was changed from 2.25 a.m. to 3.25 a.m. and that there
was no entry in the station diary at Serial No. 3 instructing PW-
8 and constable Lanke (scribe) to proceed to TIMA hospital for
(xii)    that against entry no. 4 there is no mention that PW-8 visited
TIMA hospital and recorded the statement of Rajkumar and on
that basis crime was registered by him.; that there is no mention
in the station diary that statement of Rajkumar was recorded in
(xiii)   that on 06.11.2015 he visited the hospital between 9.00 and 9.30
a.m. to record the statement of Geetadevi and the statement
was recorded by police Naik Shubhangi Naukudkar between
9.30 and 9.40 a.m.; however in this respect also there is no
entry in the station diary; that there is no mention / entry in
the station diary about instructing police Naik Naukudkar to
visit the hospital and record the statement of Geetadevi and
return to the police station; that the time of leaving and
returning to the police station of these personnel to carry out
investigation is not recorded in the station diary; he admitted
that there is no entry in the station diary that on 06.11.2015, he
along with the investigation team went outside the police
station for investigation of the same crime; that the station
diary ought to bear the names of the members of the
investigation team, which were not mentioned;
(xiv)    that it was true that from 1.00 a.m. of 6.11.2015 up to 1.00 a.m.
of 7.11.2015 there was no mention in the station diary that he
carried out investigation of the same crime during the said
(xv)     that he did not record statement of PW-8, Deepak Jogdand and
did not inquire as to why the name of the deceased was not
mentioned near his thumb impression on his statement; that he
did not inquire as to who reported the incident to the Police
Station at 1.05 a.m. on 06.11.2015; that there was no mention in
the station diary that on 6.11.2011 he visited village Kolavade,
Shivajinagar and railway station area in search of the accused;
(xvi)    that it was true that Rajkumar died prior to the issuance of
letter at Exhibit ‘39’ by him to the Executive Magistrate, the
letter was issued at 8.30 a.m. on 06.11.2015 and the letter
wrongly mentions that both Rajkumar and Geetadevi were
under-treatment and in serious condition;
(xvii) that during investigation it was revealed that PW-4 and PW-5
did not witness the actual quarrel between Rajkumar and
accused regarding theft of the mobile phone nor there were
other disputes between Rajkumar and accused and he did not
get any evidence regarding        theft of mobile phone from
Shashikant Kushwaha, the company owner / employer and he
did not investigate about the same;
(xviii) that after receiving the crime information, he did not call the
Special Executive Officer or Magistrate to record the statement
of the deceased; that he did not call PW-11 to the hospital or
authorise her or lady constable Navkudkar to record
Geetadevi’s statement; that he did not give any letter to the
doctor seeking his opinion as to whether Geetadevi was in a fit
condition to give her statement; though it was true that it did
not reveal in the investigation that PW-8 – Deepak Jogdand had
given the letter to the doctor to inform the condition of the
patient as to whether the patient was in a fit condition to record
her statement and that doctors of TIMA hospital did not give
any letter to the     police station requesting     to record the
statements of Rajkumar and Geetadevi;
(xix)    that there was no endorsement on the statement recorded by
Geetadevi that while recording her statement he was present;
(xx)     that he could not tell that the pancha witness (PW-1-Priti
Karankale) of the inquest panchanama was the nurse of the
hospital, that he did not record any supplementary statement of
the owner of the company after receiving the attendance roll of
(xxi)    that he did not prepare the spot panchanama of the office room
where PW-4, PW-5 and the other two children of the deceased
were sleeping.
13.             As seen, perusal of the above evidence of the key prosecution
witnesses shows that the conviction of the accused depends entirely on the
reliability of the dying declarations of Rajkumar and Geetadevi. The learned
Trial court has after consideration concluded that the dying declaration of
Rajkumar cannot be doubted, that the dying declaration of Geetadevi cannot
be disbelieved and the oral dying declaration heard by PW-4 and PW-5
corroborates to the written dying declaration. Thus, on this hypothesis the
Trial court concludes that the murders of Rajkumar and Geetadevi were
preplanned murders by the accused with intention and knowledge to cause
their death.
14.             Dr. Yug Mohit Chaudhry, learned counsel alongwith Ms.
Payoshi Roy, Advocate appearing on behalf of the Respondent - accused has
painstakingly taken us through the gamut of the proceedings and the Exhibits
marked in evidence by the Trial court.             He has submitted that the
prosecution's case is principaly based on:-
(i)      the two dying declarations of Rajkumar and Geetadevi (the
(ii)     the oral dying declaration of the deceased when they are heard
shouting "bachaieye, bachaieye, Guddu Yadav ne hamara upar
acid dal diya, bachao bachao; and
(iii)    the evidence of PW-4 and PW-5 being purportedly considered
as eye witnesses to the incident by the Trial court.
14.1.           Dr. Chaudhry has drawn our attention to the dying declaration
(Exhibit ‘33’) of Rajkumar and has contended that the same is a fabricated
statement and intrinsically unreliable on account of the following reasons:-
(i)      the prosecution's case is that PW 8 recorded Rajkumar's dying
declaration naming the accused as his assailant at TIMA
Hospital and registered the FIR on the basis of the same at 2:30
a.m. on 06.11.2015, however the said dying declaration does not
mention the time when its recording had started and
completed; therefore the statement becomes highly suspicious;
that the time of 2.30 a.m. is mentioned alongwith the crime
number in Exhibit '33', however five contemporaneous
documents exhibited in evidence by the prosecution record the
time of Rajkumar's death at 2.25 a.m. viz, (i) memo sent by
TIMA Hospital, (ii) letter to the Magistrate, (iii) station diary
entries, (iv) Inquest Panchanama, and (v) spot panchanama;
these documents falsify the prosecution's case that Rajkumar's
dying declaration (Ex '33') was recorded at 2:30 a.m.;
(ii)     the prosecution's case is that the treating doctor PW-7
informed the police station of Rajkumar's death vide memo
Exhibit '30', the time of death on this document is tampered
and altered by hand from 2:25 a.m. to 3:25 a.m.; however the
letter dated 06.11.2015 sent to the Magistrate informing the
court of Rajkumar's death for addition of the offence under
Section 302 IPC clearly records the time of death of Rajkumar
at 2:25 a.m.;
(iii)    the fact the Rajkumar died at 2:25 a.m. is corroborated by the
evidence of PW-12 - IO when he states that on 06.11.2015 at
3:15 a.m. a memo was received at the police station informing
about Rajkumar’s death, hence it is only if Rajkumar had died
at 2:25 a.m, that the IO could have received the information of
his death at 3:15 a.m., but if Rajkumar had died at 3:25 a.m.,
then the intimation could never have been received at 3:15 a.m.,
this fact clearly proves fabrication and tampering of the time of
Rajkumar's death on the documents exhibited by the
(iv)     the entries regarding Rajkumar's time of death found in the
Station Diary at entry No. 13 (Exhibit '49'), the Inquest
Panchanama (Exhibit ‘12’) and the Spot Panchanama (Exhibit
‘15’) consistently mention the time of death as 2:25 a.m. but
the same have been altered to show and read as 3:25 a.m. which
can be seen and deciphered by the naked eye;
(v)      that the time of Rajkumar's death stated in all documents is
2:25 a.m. and therefore it would have been impossible for the
dying declaration to have been recorded at 2:30 a.m.; the fact
that the time of Rajkumar's death has been altered from 2:25
a.m. to 3:25 a.m. across various documents clearly show that
the prosecution has deliberately attempted to suppress the
actual time of death and fabricated the same and the dying
declaration to suit the prosecution's case;
(vi)     the IO has stated that information regarding Rajkumar's death
was received and entered into the station diary at 3:15 a.m.;
however the station diary for 06.11.2015 which is exhibited as
evidence (Exhibit '49') does not reflect any entry being entered
or noted at 3:15 a.m. which proves suppression of the original
station diary and the actual time of Rajkumar's death;
(vii)    PW-5 (Kedarnath) and PW-7 (treating doctor) have stated that
the two victims / deceased were brought to the hospital at 1:30
a.m.; thereafter PW-7 has stated that after their admission he
personally sent two letters (Exhibits '28' and '29') at 1:40 p.m.
intimating the police station that two acid attack victims were
admitted and only pursuant to receiving these letters the police
came to the hospital after about 20 minutes, however the
evidence given by PW-8 (Deepak Jogdand, A.P.I.) is to the
contrary. According to PW-8 the police had already arrived at
the hospital at 1:00 a.m., hence in that case there would have
been no need and necessity for PW-7 (treating doctor) to send
the letters of intimation i.e. Exhibits '28' and '29' to the police
(viii)   the IO has admitted in his evidence that Exhibits '28' and '29'
was the first information received by the police station
regarding commission of the offence and the assault on the two
victims; Exhibits '28' and '29' itself mention that these letters
were received at the police station at 3:05 a.m. and entered at
serial No. 4 in the station diary. The IO has confirmed in his
evidence that Exhibits '28' and '29' were received at the police
station at 3:05 a.m. Hence if the first information was received
by the police station only at 3:05 a.m., it was impossible for the
dying declaration of Rajkumar to have been recorded at 2:30
a.m.      It is therefore clear that the police station received
information regarding the offence and admission of the patients
only at 3:05 a.m. which is after the death of Rajkumar;
(ix)     the IO has admitted that Exhibits '28' and '29' were received at
3:05 a.m. at the police station and entered in the station diary at
entry No. 4, however the same is not reflected in the station
diary which is exhibited as Exhibit '49' and taken in evidence.
It is therefore clear that the original station diary has been
deliberately suppressed and Exhibit '49' has been fabricated to
support the prosecution's case;
(x)      the post mortem report shows that there was semi-solid food in
Rajkumar's stomach and the autopsy surgeon has opined that
the deceased had died within two hours of his last meal. As per
the dying declaration the deceased had eaten his dinner and
gone to sleep at about 9:30 p.m. However if the offence took
place at about 12:30 a.m. as stated by PW-4 and PW-5 then
Rajkumar would have died immediately after the offence.
Hence it could not be possible for Rajkumar to have been alive
at 2:30 a.m. for recording his detailed dying declaration after
suffering 96% burn injuries;
(xi)     PW-5 (Kedarnath) has admitted in his statement recorded
under Section 164 that he had stated before the Court that
Rajkumar had died within half an hour of his admission in the
hospital. This statement further corroborates the fact that
Rajkumar had died immediately on admission;
(xii)    that in the present case, the prosecution has deliberately
suppressed the MLC and the deceased's medical papers and
hospital records; despite being asked, PW-12 - IO has failed to
give any explanation for not having collected or produced the
medical papers, that admittedly, the medical papers of the
deceased having contemporaneous record would have been the
best evidence to show the exact time of his admission to the
hospital, the time of death and most importantly the time of
recording of his dying declaration and medical condition at that
time; and therefore the reluctance and negligence on the part of
the prosecution to produce the medical papers is highly
suspicious and gives rise to an adverse inference under Section
114(g) of the Indian Evidence Act, 1961;
(xiii)   PW-1, Priti Karankale the nurse present at the time of
admission of the deceased has stated in her evidence that the
deceased were unconscious at the time of their admission. PW-
1 is therefore the best eye witness and the first person to have
seen both the patients on admission and well placed to know
their condition. Her evidence is therefore critical; hence if PW-
1 has stated that Rajkumar was unconscious at the time of
admission and died by 2:25 a.m., he could not have recorded
the purported detailed dying declaration relied upon by the
(xiv)    PW-6 - the autopsy surgeon has stated Rajkumar died due to
96% deep chemical burns. The autopsy surgeon has further
opined that in cases of burn injuries over 50%, the injured
suffers from heavy fluid loss which leads to immediate
unconsciousness. PW-7, the treating doctor has also stated that
if the burn injuries are more than 90%, there is heavy fluid loss
which may lead the patient to become unconscious. This
evidence corroborates PW-1's statement that Rajkumar was
indeed unconscious on his admission and therefore the
question of recording his dying declaration immediately on his
admission could never arise;
(xv)     the dying declaration did not carry endorsement of PW-7 - the
treating doctor that the deceased was in a fit state of mind to
give the dying declaration;
(xvi)    the first Investigating Officer - (PW-8) Mr. Jogdand who has
recorded the dying declaration has admitted that he had taken
PW-7's signature and endorsement on a blank sheet of paper,
thus PW-7's endorsement does not in any way establish that
Rajkumar was conscious and in a fit state of mind to give his
dying declaration. PW-8 has stated that while recording the
dying declaration, the deceased was talking and shouting at the
same time; this clearly showed that the deceased was not in a
stable condition to record an extensively detailed dying
declaration; further according to the prosecution Rajkumar
died within a few minutes after recording of the dying
declaration, hence in these circumstances it was crucial for the
prosecution to establish that the deceased was indeed in a fit
state of mind to record the detailed dying declaration;
(xvii) the dying declaration is also contradicted in material
particulars, in as much as according to the dying declaration all
three children of the deceased were sleeping in the office below
the said room with PW-4 and PW-5, whereas PW-4 in his
evidence has stated that one child was sleeping with the
deceased in the said room;
(xviii) the dying declaration states that the deceased were assaulted
and doused with acid that was manufactured in the company
but PW-5's evidence categorically records that the company did
not manufacture any acid; that as per Rajkumar's dying
declaration the incident of the mobile theft took place on
04.11.2015, however PW-4 has stated that the incident took
place much earlier and the accused was removed from
employment 10-15 days prior to the date of the incident;
whereas PW-5 has stated that the accused was removed 4 days
prior to the date of incident; this inconsistency in evidence is
(xix)    that the dying declaration states that the accused was holding a
can of acid, however no can has been recovered from the scene
of crime; and as per prosecution a bucket containing red liquid
was found at the spot, but this particular piece of evidence i.e.
the bucket was not seized and produced by the prosecution;
that if the bucket was used by the accused to pour acid on the
deceased, it would have been seized by the IO and examined for
finger prints of the accused;
(xx)     that the written dying declaration is recorded in extreme detail
and reads like a statement recorded under Section 161 of the
Cr.P.C. The declaration gives the following details as given by
the deceased Rajkumar:
(a)       The full name, father's name, and entire address of the
deceased including details of his village and district in
(b)       the full name including middle name of PW-4;
(c)       the fact that both deceased were brought to the hospital
(d)       the fact that the deceased were admitted to TIMA
(e)       the fact that Sulphuric acid was thrown on both the
(f)       and above all it summarises the contents of the dying
declaration in the end;
(xxi)    that it defies common sense and logic that Rajkumar who had
admittedly suffered 96% deep chemical burns and died shortly
after giving the dying declaration from asphyxia and
hypovolemic shock could have given such a lengthy and
detailed dying declaration including his middle name and that
(xxii) that it is unbelievable that while informing the police about his
assailants, Rajkumar who died of asphyxia and would have been
gasping for breath would spell out vivid details such as his
original address in Bihar, that he was brought to the hospital in
the company jeep and summarise the contents of his statement
(xxiii) that it is the admitted case of the prosecution that the deceased
suffered 96% burns all over his body including his face, eyes and
neck and that the post mortem report showed that the
deceased's larynx, trachea and bronchi were congested with
black mucous; that there was black mucous even in the mouth;
the dying declaration itself records that acid fell on the
deceased's face and eyes; hence in the background of such
overwhelming evidence when the deceased's entire face, mouth
and neck were completely burnt, it would be impossible for the
deceased to have recorded the purported detailed dying
(xxiv) that it is unbelievable that the deceased would have known the
fact of having been admitted to TIMA Hospital, Boisar or that
the accused had thrown 'sulphuric acid' on him. PW-5 admits
that the company where the deceased worked, sold sulphuric
acid, hydrochloric acid and nitric acid and that the deceased
were doused with acid while they were sleeping in the middle of
the night; it is therefore unbelievable that the deceased knew
that it was 'sulphuric acid' specifically that was poured by the
(xxv) that the form, manner and content of the dying declaration is
synonymous with a complaint being recorded under Section
154 of the Cr.P.C; that the template and structure of the dying
declaration, the details mentioned therein, the use of words
such as "samaksh" i.e. (in person) the fact that the contents of
the statement being summarised at the end, all indicate that this
is a statement doctored by the police and cannot be the last
(xxvi) that curiously the dying declaration mentions the age of the
deceased, but it does not mention the ages of the deceased's
children; the IO has admitted in his evidence that the age of the
deceased's children was not brought on record; nor their
whereabouts or well being investigated; this clearly shows that
the dying declaration was prepared either by PW-8 or PW-12 of
(xxvii) PW-1 has stated that all of the deceased's fingers were burnt
from the inside; the autopsy surgeon PW-6 has also stated that
there were deep burns on the inside of all the fingers of the
deceased, therefore the deceased's full thumb impression as it
appears could not have been taken on the dying declaration at
2:30 a.m.;
(xxvii) that the deceased's thumb impression could not have been
taken is further corroborated by the fact that the dying
declaration does not mention whether it was his left hand or
right hand thumb impression; the evidence given by PW-8
admits that while recording a dying declaration it is essential to
mention the particulars of the hand and thumb which is used to
take the thumb impression.
14.2.          Dr. Chaudhry has next submitted that the written dying
declaration of Geetadevi as recorded by PW-11 on the next day is intrinsically
unreliable because the treating doctor has given evidence that she was
brought in dead at the time of admission to the hospital on the previous night.
14.3.           In so far the oral dying declaration as heard by PW-4 and PW-5
is concerned, Dr. Chaudhary has submitted that the same cannot be
considered due to material inconsistencies in the evidence that is recorded on
the following grounds:-
(i)      PW-4 has stated that he heard the deceased shouting that
Guddu Yadav had thrown sulphuric acid on them whereas PW-
5 has stated that he heard the deceased (without specifying any
name) shouting that Guddu had thrown acid;
(ii)     both PW-4 and PW-5 have admitted that since the office door
was bolted from the outside, they did not witness the incident
(iii)    the station diary entry No. 3 at 1:05 states that the police station
received a phone call from Paradyes Chemical Company that
one 'Guddu Singh' had thrown acid on two persons who were
being taken to TIMA Hospital for treatment; thus the station
diary entry No.3 at 1:05 a.m. could then have been made only
on the basis of information given by PW-4 and PW-5, as
according to the IO, the name of the accused was never
informed by the deceased till they reached the hospital and
recorded their statement;
(iv)     the deceased Rajkumar suffered 96% and Geetadevi suffered
75% burns all over their body including burns on their face, eyes
and neck; this has been confirmed by the two postmortem
reports which state that their larynx, trachea and bronchi were
congested with black mucous along with presence of black
mucous in mouth; the alleged dying declaration of Rajkumar
itself states that acid fell on his face and eyes, thus the entire
face, mouth and neck was burnt; in such a situation it would be
virtually impossible for Rajkumar or Geetadevi to have
screamed in the manner that PW-4 and PW-5 could have
accurately heard their oral dying declaration;
(v)      the oral dying declaration is entirely without any corroboration,
the prosecution has not produced any evidence to establish the
presence of the accused at the scene of crime; if that would
have been the case, the accused's fingerprints would have been
present all over the scene of crime, including on the bucket
having acid, the ladder leading up to the said room and the latch
on the office door; however the police in their wisdom have not
collected any fingerprints while investigating the crime; hence
the veracity of the oral dying declaration is highly questionable.
14.4.           Dr. Chaudhry has next argued that the prosecution has not
placed on record such material which can be admissible in evidence and
made the following submissions:-
(i)      The treating doctor PW-7 has stated that on admission of the
two patients / deceased, he personally sent two letters (Exhibits
'28' and '29') to the police station that two acid attack victims
had been admitted; PW-12 - IO has admitted that Exhibits '28'
and '29' is the first instance when the police station received
information of the commission of the offence and the acid
assault on the two victims; Exhibits '28' and '29' when read,
itself mention the endorsement that these letters were received
at the police station at 3:05 a.m. and entered at serial No. 4 in
the station diary and the IO has confirmed that these letters
were received at the police station at 3:05 a.m.               In this
background, even though the IO has admitted that Exhibits '28'
and '29' were received at 3:05 a.m. and entered in the station
diary at entry No. 4, the said entry No. 4 is not reflected in the
station diary which is exhibited in evidence as Exhibit ‘49’; and
on being questioned in cross-examination the IO is unable to
give any satisfactory explanation for the same and has stated
that the P.S.I. may have forgotten to enter the same in the
station diary; this explanation on the face of record is patently
false and unreliable as the two letters themselves carry the
endorsement that they were entered at serial No. 4 in the
station diary; hence this leads to the inevitable conclusion that
the original station diary has been destroyed / suppressed and
a fabricated station diary is produced in evidence by fudging the
entries, time of death, time of receipt of letters from the
hospital etc.;
(ii)     that PW-12 - IO has stated that on 06.11.2015, at 3:15 a.m., a
memo was received at the police station with information
regarding the deceased's death and this information was
entered in the station diary by A.S.I. Gaikwad; however at 3:15
a.m. there is no such entry made in the station diary; the only
entry regarding Rajkumar's death is at serial No. 13 at 9:00 a.m.
(iii)    PW-8 has stated that on receiving information that Rajkumar
and Geetadevi were admitted in the hospital, he first went to
the police station, collected the writing material and alongwith
the scribe-Police Naik Mr. Lagad went to the hospital.
However, there is no mention of this fact in the station diary,
though when confronted with this fact in cross-examination,
the IO is unable to give any satisfactory answer for this
(iv)     the IO has admitted that there are no entries in the station diary
regarding police Naik Shubhangi Naukudkar having left the
police station to investigate and record the dying declaration of
Geetadevi; nor are there any station diary entries regarding
search investigation carried out by the IO himself;
(v)      the IO has admitted that it is absolutely necessary to mention in
the station diary the fact if any police personnel has left or
returned to the police station on account of any investigation
but admittedly he was unable to explain the missing station
diary entries in the present case;
(vi)     that as per entry No. 3 made at 1:05 a.m. in the station diary
exhibited in evidence, the police station received a phone call
from Paradyes Chemical Company informing them that
accused - 'Guddu Singh' had poured acid on the deceased and
they were being taken to TIMA Hospital, but contrary to this
PW-12 - IO has in evidence admitted that the first intimation to
the police station of the commission of offence was received
vide letters (Exhibits '28' and '29') sent by PW-7 (the treating
doctor) at 3:05 a.m.; this major contradiction itself falsifies the
fact that the first intimation of the offence was through the
phone call received by the police station; further despite being
questioned the IO is unable to state as to who / which officer in
the police station received the phone call at 1:05 a.m.; however
in contrast to this entry while recording other entries pertaining
to other offences, the station diary clearly mentions the name of
the caller and the phone number from which the intimation is
received while noting the same in the station diary.
14.5.           Dr. Chaudhry has submitted that it needs to be borne in mind
that a dying declaration is an exception to the hearsay rule and cannot be the
subject matter of the test of cross-examination.            As such the dying
declaration can therefore only be admitted in evidence if there is absolutely
no doubt whatsoever about its genuineness. He submitted that in view of his
aforestated submissions there arises a major discrepancy and inherent
contradiction over the time of death of Geetadevi, the evidence given by PW-
4 and PW-5 with respect to the oral dying declaration of having heard the
deceased and therefore the dying declarations in the present case cannot be
admitted in evidence.
14.6.           Dr. Chaudhry, in support of the proposition that for a dying
declaration to be relied upon there must be objective evidence to show that
the deceased was in a fit mental state and in the absence of same no reliance
can be placed on the same has referred to and relied upon the following
decisions of the Supreme Court:
(ii)     K. Ramchandra Reddy and Anr. Vs. Public Prosecutor2;
(iii)    The State of Orissa Vs. Parasuram Naik3;
(iv)     Kantilal Vs. State of Rajasthan4;
(v)      Waikhom Yaima Singh Vs. State of Manipur 5.
14.7.           He has referred to and relied upon the decision of the Supreme
Court in the case of Jayamma Vs. State of Karnataka 6 wherein the Supreme
Court has held that in case where the deceased has suffered 98% burns, the
Court must adopt a cautious approach as there are serious doubts whether
the victim could be in a fit state of mind to make a dying declaration.
14.8.            He has referred to and relied upon the decision of the Supreme
Court in the case of Balbir Vs. Vazir and Ors7. wherein the Supreme Court
while examining a similar detailed dying declaration held that it is entirely
unnatural for a person on his deathbed with excruciating pain to state minute
details in his dying declaration and that in such a case no reliance may be
placed on the same.
14.9.            He has therefore referred to and relied upon the decision of the
Supreme Court in the case of Bhajju Vs. State of MP8 to argue that the
admissibility of a dying declaration is founded on the principle of necessity
and court as a rule of prudence must look for corroboration and should a
dying declaration suffer from any infirmity the same cannot form the basis of
conviction. He has to be judged and appreciated in light of the surrounding
circumstances and its weight determined by reference to the principle
governing the weighing of evidence. He submitted that in the present case
the two written dying declarations and the oral dying declaration suffer from
material infirmities and without corroboration no conviction can be based on
such a oral dying declaration.
14.10.           Dr. Chaudhry, has on the basis of the aforestated submissions
therefore stated that the dying declarations and the evidence given by PW-4
and PW-5 read alongwith the evidence given by the PW-7, PW-1 and PW-12
completely belie the prosecution’s case and the evidence given by PW-4,
PW-5 and PW-8 is wholly unreliable and cannot be relied upon to indict the
accused. Hence he has prayed for quashing of the impugned judgment.
15.              Ms. M.M. Deshmukh, learned APP appearing on behalf the
Appellant – State in support of the judgment dated 09.05.2019 made
submissions as follows:-
(i)      that PW-4 and PW-5 are the eye witnesses to the actual
(ii)     that there was acrimony between Rajkumar and the accused
due to the theft of Rajkumar's mobile phone by the accused;
(iii)    that PW-4 and PW-5 who are the first persons who heard the
oral dying declaration of the deceased;
(iv)     the fact that the office door was bolted from the outside clearly
showed the intention of the accused to commit the crime;
(v)      that the dying declaration of Rajkumar has been proved in
evidence since it bears the endorsement of PW-7 - Dr. Atul
(vi)     that the dying declaration of Geetadevi is also proved as it has
been recorded by police Naik Shubhangi Navkudkar in the
presence of PW-11 who has deposed to the same;
(vii)    the dying declaration of Geetadevi was not recorded by the
Special Executive Magistrate despite being informed by the
letter of the IO as Geetadevi's condition was serious; therefore
PW-11, Member of the Mahila Dakshta Committee was
summoned to witness the recording of the dying declaration of
(viii)   that after the incident the accused ran away to Bihar which
clearly showed the conduct of the accused;
(ix)     that the prosecution case is entirely based upon the dying
declarations of Rajkumar and Geetadevi and the evidence of
PW-4 and PW-5 being eye witnesses to the incident.
15.1. Ms. Deshmukh has referred to the Exhibits placed on record in
evidence to emphasize that the dying declarations are duly proved and hence
offence under Section 302 IPC has been proved against the accused.
15.2.            Ms. Deshmukh, in support of her submissions and the
prosecution's case has referred to and relied upon the decision of Shama Vs.
State of Haryana and Ors.9 to submit that the law does not prescribe any
particular format for recording the dying declaration; that the law also does
not prescribe any specific authority to record the dying declaration; that
some times a perfect and neatly structured dying declaration at times brings
about an adverse impression and creates suspicion in the mind of the court if
it is drawn with mathematical precision and formulated structurally with
precise words. She submitted that once the dying declaration is recorded
immediately after the incident and bears the endorsement of the treating
doctor alongwith the endorsement by the deponent as required, then the
same is admissible under the provisions of 32(1) of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872. She submitted that in the absence of any kind of infirmity and / or
suspicious circumstances surrounding the execution of the dying declaration,
once it is proved in evidence in accordance with law, it has to be relied upon
for convicting the accused even in the absence of corroborative evidence. She
has finally submitted that in the present case there are two dying declarations
recorded of Rajkumar and Geetadevi which stand corroborated by the oral
dying declaration of both of them as evidenced by PW-4 and PW-5 and hence
the impugned judgment and order is sustainable.
16.              We have heard Ms. Deshmukh, learned APP and Dr. Yug
Mohit Chaudhry, learned counsel appearing for the accused at length,
perused the material on record with their assistance, considered the case laws
relied upon by them and the submissions advanced across the bar.
17.             According to the prosecution present offence took place as the
accused was provoked because of the incident of theft of Rajkumar's mobile
phone and the threat given by Rajkumar to the accused that his name would
be divulged to the employer / owner of the company. This is the charge
which leads to the motive for the accused to commit the offence. It is
pertinent to note that the prosecution has not examined the employer
Shashikant Khushwaha, his brother Omprakash Khushwaha, his wife Smt.
Shashikant Khushwaha and his son Rahul Khushwaha who were all present
at the scene of crime.           Mr. Omprakash, Rahul and Smt. Shashikant
Khushwaha were the first persons to have arrived at the scene of crime on
being informed on phone by PW-4. They were the first persons to have seen
Rajkumar and Geetadevi's state apart from PW-4 and PW-5 and recording
their evidence was extremely vital not only from the point of view of what
they saw but also to throw light upon the preclude to the incident pertaining
to the theft of the mobile phone and the altercation between the deceased and
the accused.
18.             Hence for the following reasons the alleged motive espoused by
the prosecution does not stand established:
(i)      It is the prosecution's case that the accused assaulted the
deceased on account of a grudge as deceased Rajkumar had
informed their employer Shashikant Khushwaha about the
accused having stolen his mobile phone and therefore the
accused was removed from service. However, the prosecution
has failed to prove any aspect of the theft of the mobile or that
there was any grudge or that the accused was removed from
work on account of the said incident;
(ii)     PW-12 - IO has admitted that on investigation no mobile phone
was recovered from the accused and he found no evidence of
theft of any mobile phone by the accused, therefore this
evidence by the IO completely falsifies the 'motive' theory
espoused by the prosecution;
(iii)    the prosecution did not examine the employer Shashikant
Khushwaha even through he was available and had actively
participated in the investigation. Mr. Khushwaha was best
placed to depose about the quarrel between the deceased and
the accused and any grudge borne by the accused or confirm
the date on which the accused was removed from employment,
the incident which had triggered the commission of the alleged
offence according to the prosecution;
(iv)       the evidence of PW-4 and PW-5 about the 'motive' theory
clearly admits that both had neither personally witnessed the
theft nor the quarrel between the deceased and the accused;
thus their testimony regarding motive is entirely hearsay and
therefore unreliable.
19. Before we proceed to evaluate the admissibility of the dying declarations,
at this juncture we find it necessary to assert that after thoroughly
considering the evidence of PW-4 and PW-5, it cannot be concluded that the
said prosecution witnesses are eye witnesses to the incident. We have
scrutinized the evidence of these two witnesses. It is clear from their
evidence that both these witnesses have denied seeing the presence of the
accused at the scene of crime; both these witnesses have stated that until the
office door latch was opened by Rajkumar, save and except hearing the
shouting of Rajkumar and / or Geetadevi they did not see the accused at the
scene of crime; further the theory of motive propagated by the prosecution
has also been clearly denied by these two witnesses when they state that they
did not have any knowledge or were not privy to the dispute regarding the
theft of Rajkumar’s mobile phone by the accused before the incident. We
also find that the evidence given by both these witnesses with respect to the
date of removal of the accused from the company is at variance; PW-4 has
stated that the accused was removed from work 10 to 15 days before the
incident whereas PW-5 has stated that the accused was removed from work 4
to 5 days before the incident. However the prosecution case about the theft
of Rajkumar’s mobile phone is that the theft had taken place on the previous
day before the date of the incident. PW-12 - IO has collected evidence in the
form of muster roll of the company which however showed that the accused
did not attend work on 03.11.2015 and 05.11.2015 to 09.11.2015. There is
another glaring omission and contradiction in the evidence given by PW-4
and PW-5 while describing the incident as then saw after the office door latch
was opened by Rajkumar. PW-4 has stated that he saw Rajkumar and
Geetadevi in a completely burnt condition whereas PW-5 has stated that after
the office door was open by Rajkumar, he was standing near the office and
both PW-4 and PW-5 went upstairs to the said room to check on Geetadevi.
Further PW-4 in his evidence has stated that Rajkumar and Geetadevi were
taken in a tempo to the hospital, which statement has been reiterated more
than once, whereas PW-5 has stated that Rajkumar and Geetadevi were taken
to the hospital in the Bolero pickup jeep of the company which was driven by
Omprakash Kushwaha. In view of the aforesaid glaring inconsistencies no
case whatsoever has been made out on the basis of any circumstantial
evidence and / or the chain of circumstances have been proved by the
prosecution through PW-4 and PW-5 as eye witnesses. We may therefore
state that in the present case what we have before us is a case founded on
circumstantial evidence with no eye witnesses to the incident. Both PW-4
and PW-5 have admitted that they have not seen the accused at the scene of
crime; hence on a proper and careful evaluation of the chain of circumstances
narrated by the prosecution on the basis of the evidence of the aforesaid
witnesses, we are afraid to state that the said circumstances do not lead to the
unequivocal inference of the guilt of the accused.                      The circumstantial
evidence referred to and relied upon by the prosecution is clearly
inconsistent with the sole hypothesis of the guilt of the accused.
20.             Next we come to the dying declarations, which are principally
relied upon by the prosecution to indict the accused. Before we advert to the
actual admissibility and credibility of the dying declarations, it will be
apposite to consider the case law on the evidentiary value of a dying
declaration and the sentence of conviction solely based thereupon. For this,
we may usefully refer to and rely upon the contents of paragraph Nos. 14 to
17 in the case of Jayamma Vs. State of Karnataka (supra) cited by Dr.
Chaudhry which has referred to a few decisions of the Supreme Court which
according to us are closer to the facts of the present case. Paragraph Nos. 14
to 17 of the said judgment read thus:-
“14. Before we advert to the actual admissibility and credibility of the
dying declaration (Ex.P-5), it will be beneficial to brace ourselves of the case
law on the evidentiary value of a dying declaration and the sustenance of
conviction solely based thereupon. We may hasten to add that while there
is huge wealth of case law, and incredible jurisprudential contribution by
this Court on this subject, we are consciously referring to only a few
decisions which are closer to the facts of the case in hand. We may briefly
notice these judgments.
14.1. In P.V. Radhakrishna. v. State of Karnataka 12, this Court considered
the residuary question whether the percentage of burns suffered is a
determinative factor to affect the credibility of a dying declaration and the
probability of its recording. It was held that there is no hard-and-fast rule of
universal application in this regard and much would depend upon the
nature of the burn, part of the body affected, impact of burn on the faculties
to think and other relevant factor.
14.2. In Chacko v. State of Kerala13, this Court declined to accept the
prosecution case based on the dying declaration where the deceased was
about 70 years old and had suffered 80 per cent burns. It was held that it
would be difficult to accept that the injured could make a detailed dying
declaration after a lapse of about 8 to 9 hours of the burning, giving minute
details as to the motive and the manner in which he had suffered the
injuries. That was of course a case where there was no certification by the
doctor regarding the mental and physical condition of the deceased to make
dying declaration. Nevertheless, this Court opined that the manner in
which the incident was recorded in the dying declaration created grave
doubts to the genuineness of the document. The Court went on to opine
that even though the doctor therein had recorded “patient conscious,
talking” in the wound certificate, that fact by itself would not further the
case of the prosecution as to the condition of the patient making the dying
declaration, nor would the oral evidence of the doctor or the investigating
officer, made before the court for the first time, in any manner improve the
prosecution case.
14.3. In Sham Shankar Kankaria v. State of Maharashtra 14, it was
restated that the dying declaration is only a piece of untested evidence and
must like any other evidence satisfy the Court that what is stated therein is
the unalloyed truth and that it is absolutely safe to act upon it. Further,
relying upon the decision in Paniben v. State of Gujarat 15 wherein this Court
summed up several previous judgments governing dying declaration, the
Court in Sham Shankar Kankaria14 (Supra) reiterated: (Sham Shankar
Kankaria, SCC pp. 172-73, para 11)
“11.     .... (i) There is neither rule of law nor of prudence that
dying declaration cannot be acted upon without corroboration. (See
Munnu Raja v. State of M.P.[(1976) 3 SCC 104]);
(ii)     If the Court is satisfied that the dying declaration is true
and voluntary it can base conviction on it, without corroboration.
(See State of U.P. v. Ram Sagar Yadav [(1985) 1 SCC 552 and
Ramawati Devi v. State of Bihar [(1983)1 SCC 211]);
(iii)    The Court has to scrutinise the dying declaration carefully
and must ensure that the declaration is not the result of tutoring,
prompting or imagination. The deceased had an opportunity to
observe and identify the assailants and was in a fit state to make the
declaration. (See K. Ramachandra Reddy v. Public Prosecutor [(1976)
(iv)     Where dying declaration is suspicious, it should not be
acted upon without corroborative evidence. (See Rasheed Beg v.
State of M.P. [(1974) 4 SCC 264]);
(v)      Where the deceased was unconscious and could never
make any dying declaration the evidence with regard to it is to be
rejected. (See Kake Singh v. State of M.P. [1981 Supp SCC 25]);
(vi)     A dying declaration which suffers from infirmity cannot
form the basis of conviction. (See Ram Manorath v. State of U.P.
(vii)    Merely because a dying declaration does not contain the
details as to the occurrence, it is not to be rejected. (See State of
Maharashtra v. Krishnamurti Laxmipati Naidu [1980 Supp SCC
(viii) Equally, merely because it is a brief statement, it is not to
be discarded. On the contrary, the shortness of the statement itself
guarantees truth. (See Surajdeo Ojha v. State of Bihar [1980 Supp
(ix)     Normally the court in order to satisfy whether the deceased
was in a fit mental condition to make the dying declaration look up
to the medical opinion. But where the eyewitness has said that the
deceased was in a fit and conscious state to make the dying
declaration, the medical opinion cannot prevail. (See Nanhau Ram
v. State of M.P. [1988 Supp SCC 152]);
(x)      Where the prosecution version differs from the version as
given in the dying declaration, the said declaration cannot be acted
upon. (See State of U.P. v. Madan Mohan [(1989) 3 SCC 390]);
(xi)     Where there are more than one statement in the nature of
dying declaration, one first in point of time must be preferred. Of
course, if the plurality of dying declaration could be held to be
trustworthy and reliable, it has to be accepted. (See Mohanlal
Gangaram Gehani v. State of Maharashtra [(1982) 1 SCC 700])”
15.      It goes without saying that when the dying declaration has been
recorded in accordance with law, and it gives a cogent and plausible
explanation of the occurrence, the Court can rely upon it as the solitary
piece of evidence to convict the accused. It is for this reason that Section 32
of the Evidence Act, 1872 is an exception to the general rule against the
admissibility of hearsay evidence and its Clause (1) makes the statement of
the decease admissible. Such statement, classified as a “dying declaration”
is made by a person as to the cause of his death or as to the injuries which
culminated to his death or the circumstances under which injuries were
inflicted. A dying declaration is thus admitted in evidence on the premise
that the anticipation of brewing death breeds the same human feelings as
that of a conscientious and guiltless person under oath. It is a statement
comprising of last words of a person before his death which are presumed
to be truthful, and not infected by any motive or malice. The dying
declaration is therefore admissible in evidence on the principle of necessity
as there is very little hope of survival of the maker, and if found reliable, it
can certainly form the basis for conviction.
16.      We may also take note of the decision of this Court in the case of
Surinder Kumar (Supra). In the said case, the victim was admitted in
hospital with burn injuries and her dying declaration was recorded by an
Executive Magistrate. This Court, first doubted whether the victim could
put a thumb impression on the purported dying declaration when she had
suffered 95-97% burn injuries. Thereafter, it was noted that “at the time of
recording the statement of the deceased.......no endorsement of the doctor was
made about her position to make such statement”, and only after the recording
of the statement did the doctor state that the patient was conscious while
answering the questions, and was “fit to give statement”. This Court lastly
noticed that before the alleged dying declaration was recorded, the victim
in the course of her treatment had been administered Fortwin and
Pethidine injections, and therefore she could not have possessed normal
alertness. It was hence held that although there is neither a rule of law nor
of prudence that the dying declaration cannot be acted upon without
corroboration, the Court must nonetheless be satisfied that the dying
declaration is true and voluntary, and only then could it be the sole basis for
conviction without corroboration.
17.      Consistent with the cited principles, this Court refused to uphold
the conviction in the case of Sampat Babso Kale and Another v. State of
Maharashtra. The dying declaration in that case was made by a victim who
had suffered 98% burn injuries, and the statement was recorded after the
victim was injected with painkillers. This Court adopted a cautious
approach, and opined that there were serious doubts as to whether the
victim was in a fit state of mind to make the statement. Given the extent of
burn injuries, it was observed that the victim must have been in great
agony, and once a sedative had been injected, the possibility of her being in
a state of delusion could not be completely ruled out. Further, it was
specifically noted that: (SCC p. 744, para 41)
“14. .... the endorsement made by the doctor that the victim was in a
fit state of mind to make the statement has been made not before the
statement but after the statement was recorded. Normally it should be
the other way around.”
20.1.           As seen above, it is pertinent to consider whether the
percentage of burns suffered by the victim is a determinative factor to affect
the credibility of a dying declaration and the probability of its recording. In
the present case considering the facts and circumstances surrounding
recording of the alleged dying declaration of Rajkumar, it is highly
improbable that Rajkumar could have given the dying declaration as the
evidence scrutinized by us on the face of record is highly unreliable and does
not inspire any belief or confidence. Secondly, we may have to determine
whether a person with 96% deep burn injuries suffered due to acid would be
in a position to record his dying declaration effortlessly and in great detail as
has been done in the present case. The dying declaration of Rajkumar
referred to and relied upon by the prosecution is therefore highly suspicious
and suffers from infirmity and thus cannot form the basis of conviction. We
may also state that we are not satisfied whether Rajkumar was conscious and
in a fit mental condition to make the dying declaration after looking into the
medical evidence alluded to hereinabove in the present case.
21.             We have perused the dying declaration of Rajkumar (Exhibit
‘33’).    The same is also reproduced verbatim in paragraph No. 10.6
hereinabove for the sake of convenience. A person with 96% burn injuries
due to deep chemical burns (acid) in the first place would not be in any
position to talk and / or give a detailed dying declaration as in the present
case. Though there is a serious ambiguity in respect of the time of recording
of the dying declaration what is important to assess is whether Rajkumar was
alive and conscious to give the dying declaration in the hospital. The medical
evidence on record given by PW-6, the autopsy surgeon shows that Rajkumar
had died within two hours of having his last meal. It has come in evidence
that Rajkumar ate his dinner at 9.30 p.m. and went to sleep.                    The
postmortem report clearly states that undigested rice was found in the
stomach of Rajkumar. Hence it can be easily concluded that Rajkumar’s
death had occurred between 11.30 p.m. to 12 a.m. and therefore by no stretch
of imagination it could be possible for Rajkumar to have remained alive up to
2.30 a.m. for recording his detailed dying declaration. One of the glaring
omission in the case of prosecution is the non availability of the medical
treatment papers of Rajkumar and the hospital record of his treatment.
There is no cogent explanation coming from the IO, in fact the IO has
admitted that the medical papers would have revealed all details pertaining to
the medical treatment administered to Rajkumar, his status at the time of
admission to the hospital, the time of recording of his dying declaration and
the time of his death. Further the medical evidence given by PW-6, the
autopsy surgeon and PW-7, the treating doctor has stated that in the case of
burn injuries over 50%, the injured suffers from heavy fluid loss which may
lead to unconsciousness needs to be ascribed due weightage. In the present
case admittedly Rajkumar sustained 96% and Geetadevi sustained 75% deep
chemical burns. The hospital nurse – Ms. Priti Karankale, PW-1, in her
evidence stated that Rajkumar was unconscious at the time of admission.
She was the first person to have seen Rajkumar and attended to him. Her
evidence is corroborated by the above evidence given by PW-6 and PW-7, is
uncontroverted and therefore deserves to be accepted. It is therefore clear
that Rajkumar on his admission in the hospital was unconscious and could
not have recorded the detailed dying declaration. In so far as the dying
declaration of Geetadevi is concerned, we are shocked to find that the
evidence given by PW-7 – treating doctor has been completely ignored by the
Trial court in its entirety. The most glaring omission that we find in the
prosecution's case is that PW-7 has deposed that Geetadevi when admitted to
the hospital was brought in dead with burn injuries all over her body, hands
and palms. Therefore in the face of such evidence available on record, it is
impossible to have recorded Geetadevi’s dying declaration on the next day by
police Naik Shubhangi Navkudkar without any authority from the IO and in
the presence of PW-11. It is pertinent to note that police Naik Shubhangi
Navkudkar has not been examined by the prosecution.
22.             From the evidence available on record, we find that according
to the evidence given by PW-4 and PW-5, police personnel were present in
the hospital when they reached the hospital alongwith Rajkumar and
Geetadevi and they gave the entire information to the police which was
recorded into writing; however no FIR was recorded on the basis of the
statements given by PW-4 and PW-5. We may state that PW-4 and PW-5's
statements should have been recorded as FIR as it was the first information
of the crime received by the police. However the fact that no FIR was
recorded on the basis of the information given by PW-4 and PW-5 and the
police having waited for the dying declaration to be recorded before
recording the FIR clearly shows that the identity of the assailant was
23.             It is the prosecution's case that the accused with his own bare
hands had flung a can of acid on the deceased, which splattered all over the
deceased and his wife who were sleeping, however the evidence given and
photographs of the spot panchanama clearly depict that there was a pink
coloured mosquito net which was intact and tied at the spot of crime; it is
therefore unbelievable that the accused could have first lifted the mosquito
net and then doused the victims with acid; this unburnt mosquito net at the
scene of crime casts a cloud of suspicion on the prosecution's case.
Moreover, if the accused had indeed flung acid on the victims from a bucket,
the accused would have had some injuries on his own hands, but that is not
the case and there is no investigation on that aspect.
24.             We may now refer to the contradictions in the case of the
prosecution. It is the case of the prosecution that after the incident the
accused was absconding and was eventually arrested in Bihar on 05.12.2015;
however, the accused was a native resident of Bihar and was working in
Mumbai as a migrant labourer. PW-4 in his evidence has stated that the
incident of theft of mobile phone took place much earlier and the accused
was removed from his job about 10-15 days prior to the date of the incident;
however PW-5 has stated that the accused was removed 4-5 days prior to the
incident. Both prime witnesses who are considered to be eye witnesses have
deposed incorrectly about the date of removal of the accused; however after
removal it is only natural for the accused to go to his native place in Bihar; it
cannot be inferred that the accused was absconding or that there was
anything suspicious about the accused being in Bihar; the prosecution has
failed to produce the accused's CDR or any other incriminating material to
show that he had left for Bihar after the offence; that the attendance registers
produced by the prosecution have not been proved by the author of the
25.             That apart we may also highlight the fact that there is
admittedly suppression of material evidence on the part of the prosecution in
the present case. We say this with all authority at our command. As it is well
established in law that the best evidence available to prove any fact must be
adduced.      Suppression of material evidence not only violates the best
evidence rule but also raises an adverse inference under the provisions of
Section 114(g) of the Indian Evidence Act, 1961, the benefit of which must go
to the accused. In the present case what is needed to be asserted is the fact
that whether Rajkumar was alive and in a fit condition to give the detailed
dying declaration which is sought to be relied upon by the prosecution. The
factual evidence discussed hereinabove if closely looked at will clearly convey
one and only one message, that Rajkumar could never have been in a position
to record the detailed dying declaration. It is stated that in such a case the
only contemporaneous record / evidence that would be the best evidence to
prove the prosecution's case would be the medical treatment papers which
would have ascertained the time of admission, the medical condition and
status of the patient on admission, the treatment given to the patient, the
time of recording the dying declaration and the time of his death. In the
present case the medical papers have not been produced or referred to or
relied upon by the prosecution. What is significant is that the IO in his cross-
examination clearly admits that the medical papers are a vital piece of
evidence in the present case but in the same breath has failed to give any
cogent answer for not collecting the medical papers from the hospital and
producing the same in evidence.
26.             Another glaring omission in the prosecution's investigation and
case is about the non-examination of the children who were sleeping in the
said room and the office at the time of the incident. As seen, the deceased
had three sons. It has come in the evidence of PW-4 that the youngest son
was sleeping with the deceased in the said room above the office whereas the
other two sons were sleeping with PW-4 and PW-5 in the office below the
said room. Considering the alleged acid attack the three children would
definitely be important witnesses to the incident and would have been the
best persons to give evidence as to what transpired on that fateful night. The
silence of the prosecution on this aspect, having not examined or recorded
the statement of any of the three children and when asked in cross-
examination, the IO being unable to give any valid explanation for not
examining the child witnesses goes to show that the investigation lacks force
and bonafides.
27.              There is no dispute that the deceased Rajkumar and Geetadevi
have been burnt with acid leading to their death. However the moot question
is whether the prosecution has brought forth and proven material and
believable evidence to indict the nexus of the accused to the act of causing
the death of Rajkumar and Geetadevi. On marshaling of the entire evidence
of the prosecution witnessses, we are afraid to state that we have not been
able to unearth the precise answers to the following questions which emanate
from the evidence which is placed on record:-
(i)      At what time the Police Authorities come to know for the first
time about the happening of the incident? Was it at 1.00 a.m. or
1.30 a.m. or 2.35 a.m.?
(ii)     What is the precise time of death of Rajkumar according to the
(iii)    Admittedly when PW-4 and PW-5 disclosed the entire incident
as they saw to the Police in the hospital and it was reduced to
writing, why did the Police not take action on the said
statements as it was a cognizable offence and register the report
/ complaint / F.I.R.?
(iv)     Why is the Magistrate not examined by the prosecution who
has recorded the statement under Section 164 of the Cr. P.C.?
(v)      According to the post-mortem report, Rajkumar’s death
occurred two hours after having meals since undigested rice
was found in his stomach, which means that the death had
occurred at night between 11.30 p.m. to 12.00 a.m.
(vi)     Why was there no investigation about the child sleeping with
the deceased Rajkumar and Geetadevi in the said room when
the incident occurred? Similarly there is no investigation of the
two children sleeping with PW-4 and PW-5 in the office by the
prosecution.
(vii)    What is the answer / explanation to the tampering of evidence
with respect to the changing and altering the time of death of
Rajkumar from 2.25 a.m. to 3.25 a.m. which is clear to the
naked eye in 4 specific Exhibits viz.:
(ii)   Exh. 12  Page 25   Inquest Panchanama of Rajkumar
(iii) Exh. 30   Page 66   Letter of Intimation of death of Police
(viii)   What is the explanation in respect of the letter written to the
Magistrate which shows the time of death as 2.25 a.m. whereas
in the other documentary evidence, the said time is altered to
3.25 a.m.?
(ix)     Where is the evidence to show investigation and seizure of the
traces of acid / burnt clothes or articles in the room and at the
scene of crime which is evident from the photographs taken
during spot panchnama?
(x)      Why was the employer "Shashikant Kushwaha" not examined
by the prosecution to prove the 'motive' for committing the
crime? If the employer was examined, the alleged motive of the
theft of the mobile phone and sacking of the accused could have
(a) since the accused was fired from        employment on the
purported allegation of theft of Rajkumar’s mobile phone;
(b) to prove the date of removal of the accused from work /
(c) to confirm that the owner recommended the deceased to be
taken to TIMA hospital after the incident;
(d) to question the presence of the wife of the employer,
brother "Omprakash" and nephew "Rahul" of the owner of the
company at the scene of crime.
(xi)     Why do the specific incidents and investigation carried out do
not find a mention in the station house diary exhibited in
evidence at Exhibit ‘49’?
(xii)    When the evidence on record is clear that the fingers and hands
of the deceased were completely burnt from the inside, then
how could the deceased give their full thumb impression on the
(xiii)   Considering the evidence of PW-7 – treating doctor that wife
Geetadevi was already dead when brought to the hospital, what
is the veracity of the dying declaration given by Geetadevi?
(xiv     Why was the lady police Naik Naukudkar not examined to
corroborate the dying declaration given by Geetadevi as the IO
has given specific evidence that he had never instructed
Navkudkar to visit the hospital and record Geetadevi’s dying
(xv)     How is that PW 8 - Deepak Hari Jogdand recorded the dying
declaration of deceased Rajkumar at 1.00 a.m. when he was
admitted to the hospital only after 1.30 a.m.?
28.             The answers to the above questions are found wanting when
seen through the prism of the evidence placed on record by the prosecution.
No evidence has been produced by the prosecution to justify the precise time
of death of Rajkumar. Perusal of Exhibit – 12, (Inquest Panchanama of
Rajkumar), Exhibit -15 (Spot Panchanama) of the incident site, Exhibit -30
(letter of intimation of death of Rajkumar to the police) and Exhibit-49
(Station House Diary) clearly reveal to the naked eye that the time of death
of Rajkumar has been altered by hand from 2.25 a.m. to 3.25 a.m. Another
glaring fact which deserves to be mentioned is the evidence of PW 7- Dr.
Atul Pimpale, the treating doctor who has clearly stated that Geetadevi was
already dead when she was brought to the hospital.
29.             Taking into consideration the totality of the circumstances in
the present case it cannot be said to be a fair trial, especially when capital
punishment is sought to be inflicted upon the accused.
30.             In the case of Ashish Batham Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh 10 in
paragraph 8 of the judgment, the Supreme Court has said that till the charges
are proved beyond reasonable doubt on the basis of clear, cogent, credible or
unimpeachable evidence, the question of indictment of the accused does not
arise. Paragraph No. 8 of the said judgment reads thus ;
"8.      Realities or Truth apart, the fundamental and basic presumption in
the administration of criminal law and justice delivery system is the
innocence of the alleged accused and till the charges are proved beyond
reasonable doubt on the basis of clear, cogent, credible or unimpeachable
evidence, the question of indicting or punishing an accused does not arise,
merely carried away by heinous nature of the crime or the gruesome
manner in which it was found to have been committed. Mere suspicion,
however, strong or probable it may be is not effective substitute for the legal
proof required to substantiate the charge of commission of a crime and
grave the charge is greater should be the standard of proof required. Courts
dealing with criminal cases at least should constantly remember that there
is a long mental distance between 'may be true' and 'must be true' and this
basic and golden rule only helps to maintain the vital distinction between
conjectures and sure conclusions to be arrived at on the touch stone of a
dispassionate judicial scrutiny based upon a complete and comprehensive
appreciation of all features of the case as well as quality and credibility of
the evidence brought on record".
30.1.           The aforesaid ratio is squarely applicable to the case in hand,
after having appreciated the entire evidence on record, the material
discrepancies, lacunae and blatant illegalities as alluded to herein above, we
would definitely indicate that the prosecution has utterly failed in connecting
the dots and bringing home the guilt of the accused. Merely because the
crime is heinous and brutal, it would not be just to get carried away sans any
legal proof required to substantiate the charge of murder on the accused. The
standard of proof applied by the learned Trial Court is not in consonance
with the evidence placed on record. There can, at the most, be a case of
strong suspicion and no more suspicion however grave cannot take the place
of proof. The evidence to indict and convict the accused is neither clear,
cogent nor credible. There is absolutely no question of awarding death
sentence to the accused, rather, it is the case wherein the accused must be
given the benefit of doubt, nay, it would be a travesty of justice.
31.              We state that the trial was conducted in the most casual
manner and whether the trial was just and fair in a capital punishment case is
a question remaining unanswered. The quality and credibility of the evidence
adduced is not even upto the mark as observed by us. The evidence led by
the prosecution is fraught with major inconsistencies.               As seen, the
contradiction in the evidence given by PW-4 and PW-5 is apparent on the
face of record. The medical evidence given by PW-6 clearly states that
Rajkumar had sustained 96% deep chemical burns and had deep burnt injuries
all over the body. It further states that fingers of both his hands were burnt.
Similarly in the case of Geetadevi, the medical evidence states that she
sustained 75% deep chemical burn injuries and had deep burns on fingers of
both her hands and the skin of her fingers was entirely burnt. The medical
evidence is required to be accepted and if it is so, it cannot be comprehended
that Rajkumar and Geetadevi were in a conscious state of mind to record
their dying declarations. That apart the evidence given by PW-7 i.e. the
treating doctor is relevant. PW-7 has stated that Geetadevi was brought to
the hospital at 01.40 a.m. with burn injuries all over her body, hands, palms
and skin which had deep burns. He has further stated that though police
personnel present informed him to examine Geetadevi, he had categorically
told them that she was already dead, hence no treatment was given to
Geetadevi. He has further stated that the dead body of Geetadevi was
removed from the hospital on 06.11.2015. In the backdrop of this evidence
which is corroborated by the evidence of PW-1, the nurse who was the first
person to have treated Rajkumar and Geetadevi on their admission to the
hospital, it can be safely concluded that both Rajkumar and Geetadevi would
not have been conscious to record their respective dying declarations. We
have dealt with the major discrepancies namely non-recording of the various
events and incidents pertaining to the case at hand in the station diary which
are glaring and cannot be ignored. Further the evidence given by PW-8 who
has recorded the statement of Rajkumar is also relevant as PW-8 has stated
that the thumb impression was not identified, the signature of the attesting
witness was not taken, the endorsement that the patient was in a fit condition
to record his statement (dying declaration) was not made, the starting time of
recording of the statement and ending time after completion of recording was
not stated, the scribe who recorded the statement i.e. police Naik Mr. Lagad
was not examined and PW-8 did not tell the doctor on duty to record the
statement of Rajkumar, are major and glaring omissions which cannot be lost
sight of.
32.              In view of the above discussion and findings, we have come to
the unequivocal conclusion that the prosecution in the present case has not
only suppressed vital evidence but has deliberately fabricated the dying
declaration of the deceased Rajkumar which forms the basis of the
prosecution's case. Once we come to the conclusion that the very foundation
of the prosecution's case is false and fabricated, the case of the prosecution
cannot be believed and deserves to be rejected. The prosecution and/or the
investigating machinery has a responsibility to investigate in a fair and neutral
manner without having regard to the ultimate result. What we find in the
facts of the present case is that there is active suppression and fabrication of
material facts which cannot be ignored or overlooked. For all the above
reasons, we hold that the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Palghar is not at
all justified in convicting the accused of the offence of murder and therefore
the reference made by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Palghar stands
rejected. As a consequence, the conviction and sentence passed against the
accused is set aside and the accused stands acquitted of the charge framed
against him. The Appellant is directed to set the accused at liberty forthwith
unless he is required to remain in custody in any other case.
33.             In view of the above, the reference made by the learned
Additional Sessions Judge, Palghar seeking confirmation is rejected and the
Appellant is acquitted.