Counsel for Applicant :- Sarfraz Ahmad,Amit Kumar
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Alok Kumar Singh,Sanjay
Heard learned counsel for the applicant as well as learned
A.G.A. for the State of U.P. and perused the record.
The present bail application has been filed on behalf of the
applicant in Case Crime No. 636 of 2019, under Sections 376-
D, 377, 506 I.P.C. and Section 3/4, 5 G of the POCSO Act,
Police Station- Khiri, District- Khiri, with the prayer to enlarge
him on bail.
Learned counsel for the applicant submitted that due to
panchayat election the applicant was falsely implicated on
behest of Ambrish and father of the prosecutrix. He further
submitted that father of the prosecutrix is habitual of using the
prosecutrix and her sister as a tool and earlier F.I.R. as case
crime no. C-292 of 2013 under Sections 363, 366, 368, 376
I.P.C., Police Station-Khiri District- Khiri was lodged by the
sister of the prosecutrix against the other villagers and
thereafter she entered into compromise and the final report was
submitted by the Investigating Officer. He further submitted
that as per prosecution version the prosecutrix is aged about
20years and on 28.10.2019 at about 10:00 a.m. she went to
fileld of paddy crop and then applicant and other co-accused
persons came there and caught her hand and started dragging
the prosecutrix and at the same time brother of prosecutrix
reached on the spot and all the accused persons ran away.
Learned counsel for the applicant submitted that this F.I.R. was
lodged on 28.10.2019 at 18:51 hours after eight hours about the
incident. Prosecutrix was medically examined and her
statements under Sections 161 Cr.P.C. and 164 Cr.P.C. were
also recorded in which she developed a case of rape against the
accused persons and the applicant. The statement of the brother
of the prosecutrix was also recorded in which he stated that he
went to take sugar cane leaves and after hearing the crying of
her sister he reached on the spot and saw that accused persons
including the applicant were committing rape with the
prosecutrix and after seeing him they ran away by giving life
threat but medico legal report of the prosecutrix does not
support the oral testimony of the prosecutrix, as she stated that
gang rape was committed with her.
Learned counsel for the applicant has further submitted that in
the counter affidavit criminal history of five cases has been
shown against the applicant and out of five cases the applicant
has been acquitted in three cases and this fact has been
mentioned in the paragraph no. 12 of the rejoinder affidavit.
The applicant is in jail since 2.12.2019 and till today trial has
not been concluded while as per Section 35 of the POCSO Act
the trial court shall record the statement of the victim within
one month and trial shall be concluded within one year.
Therefore, the applicant is entitled for bail. In case of being
enlarged on bail, he will not misuse the liberty of bail.
Learned A.G.A. has opposed the prayer for grant of bail to the
applicant but he has not disputed the fact that there is
contradiction in the contents of the F.I.R. and the statement of
the victim recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and 164 Cr.P.C.
He also submitted that F.I.R. is in encyclopedia, as allegation of
rape has been made against the applicant and other co-accused
Considering the rival submissions of learned counsel for
parties, considering the contents of the F.I.R. and the statement
of the brother of the informant as well as medico legal report of
the prosecutrix and without expressing any opinion on the
merits of the case, I am of the view that the applicant is entitled
to be released on bail.
Let applicant - Ram Audhi @ Sudhir Kumar be released on
bail in aforesaid Case Crime, on his furnishing personal bond
and two reliable sureties each of the like amount to the
satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following
(1) Applicant will not try to influence the witnesses or tamper
with the evidence of the case or otherwise misuse the liberty of
(2) Applicant will fully cooperate in expeditious disposal of the
case and shall not seek any adjournment on the dates fixed for
evidence when witnesses are present in the Court.
(3) Applicant shall remain present, in person, before the trial
court on the dates fixed for (a) opening of the case, (b) framing
of charge; and (c) recording of statement under Section 313
Any violation of above conditions will be treated misuse of bail
and learned Court below will be at liberty to pass appropriate
order in the matter regarding cancellation of bail.
On perusal of the case diary provided by the learned A.G.A. it
appears that site plan is prepared by the Investigating Officer in
a most cursory manner, as it is duty of the Investigating Officer
to take all precautions to prepare true site plan with dimensions
during the course of the investigation and it is obligatory to
show distance from one point to other..
Director General of Police, U.P., is directed to issue necessary
direction in relation to the preparation of true site plan/map with
dimensions by the Investigating Officer in the correct manner
and also ensure for taking photograph of the spot and annexed
with site plan, as nowadays every Investigating Officer is
having smart phone.
Office is directed to communicate this order to D.G.P. Police.