By a judgment and order dated dated 29.07.1999, the Additional
Sessions Judge, Gohad, District Bhind, Madhya Pradesh, convicted
the petitioner inter alia for offence under Section 302 of the
Indian Penal Code and sentenced him inter alia to life imprisonment
in Sessions Trial No. 260 of 1997.      In the cause title of the said
judgment and order, the petitioner has been described as Ashok, S/o
Balram Jatab age 16 yrs 9 months and 19 days, R/o Village Anjani
The petitioner filed an appeal being Criminal Appeal No. 455
of 1999 challenging his conviction and sentence.      The said criminal
appeal has been dismissed by the High Court by an order dated
14.11.2017, which is impugned in the Special Leave Petition(Crl.)
No. 643 of 2020, filed by the petitioner.
The incident which led to the conviction of the petitioner,
took   place    on  26.07.1997.     The   petitioner  claims  that  the
petitioner was born on 05.01.1981.      The petitioner was, therefore,
approximately   16  years  and  7  months   old  on  the  date  of  the
In this Court, the petitioner has for the first time contended
that he was a juvenile on the date of the incident.      His conviction
and sentence are, therefore, liable to be set-aside.       The claim of
juvenility was not raised in the High Court.
The learned Additional Advocate General, appearing on behalf
of the State argued that the claim of juvenility has been raised
for the first time in this special leave petition.
The Juvenile Justice Act, 1986, which was in force on the date
of commission of the offence as also the date of the judgment and
order of conviction and sentence by the Sessions Court was repealed
by the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act,
2000.    The Act of 2000 received the assent of the President of
India on 30.12.2000 and came into force on 01.04.2001.       The Act of
2000 defined juvenile in conflict with the law to mean a juvenile,
who was alleged to have committed an offence and had not completed
18th year of age as on the date of commission of such an offence.
Under the 1986 Act, the age of juvenility was upto the 16th
Section 7A of the 2000 Act as inserted by Act 33 of 2006 with
effect from 22.08.2006 provided as follows:-
“7A. Procedure to be followed when claim of juvenility is raised
before any Court.-(1) Whenever a claim of juvenility is raised
before any court or a court is of the opinion that an accused
person was a juvenile on the date of commission of the offence,
the court shall make an inquiry, take such evidence as may be
necessary (but not an affidavit) so as to determine the age of
such person, and shall record a finding whether the person is a
juvenile or a child or not, stating his age as nearly as may be:
Provided that a claim of juvenility may be raised before any
Court and it shall be recognised at any stage, even after final
disposal of the case, and such claim shall be determined in
terms of the provisions contained in this Act and the rules made
thereunder, even if the juvenile has ceased to be so on or
before the date of commencement of this Act.
(2)   If the court finds a person to be a juvenile on the date
of commission of the offence under sub-section(1), it shall
forward the juvenile to the Board for passing appropriate orders
and the sentence, if any, passed by a court shall be deemed to
have no effect.
The claim of juvenility can thus be raised before any Court,
at any stage, even after final disposal of the case and if the
Court finds a person to be a juvenile on the date of commission of
the offence, it is to forward the juvenile to the Board for passing
appropriate orders, and the sentence, if any, passed by a Court,
shall be deemed to have no effect.
Even though the offence in this case may have been committed
before the enactment of the Act of 2000, the petitioner is entitled
to the benefit of juvenility under Section 7A of the Act of 2000,
if on inquiry it is found that he was less than 18 years of age on
the date of the alleged offence.
It is true as pointed out by the learned Additional Advocate
General appearing on behalf of the State that the certificate of
Pradesh relied upon by the petitioner is stated to have been issued
on 17.07.2021.     The said certificate does not specifically mention
that the date of birth 01.01.1982 had been entered at the time of
first admission of the petitioner at the primary school level.
Furthermore, there is a birth certificate issued by the Gram
Panchayat, Endouri, District Bhind, Madhya Pradesh which indicates
the   date   of  birth    of   the  petitioner  as  05.01.1982   and  not
01.01.1982 as recorded in the school certificate referred to above.
The   entry   in   the  records   of the  Gram Panchayat,   Endouri,
District    Bhind,    Madhya    Pradesh,  also  do  not   appear   to  be
contemporaneous and the certificate has been issued in the year
However, as pointed out by Mr. M.P. Parthiban, learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the petitioner that the Sessions Court has
recorded the age of the petitioner as 16 years, 9 months and 19
days.    The petitioner has been in actual custody for over three
The 2000 Act has been repealed and replaced by the Juvenile
Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.       Section 21 of
“21. Order that may not be passed against a child in conflict
with law. – No child in conflict with law shall be sentenced to
death or for life imprisonment without the possibility of
release, for any such offence, either under the provisions of
this Act or under the provisions of the Indian Penal Code or
any other law for the time being in force.”
Considering that the Trial Court has recorded the age of the
petitioner as 16 years and odd, and has been in actual custody in
excess of three years, which is the maximum for a juvenile, we deem
it appropriate to grant the petitioner interim bail on such terms
and conditions as may be imposed by the Sessions Court. We further
direct the Sessions Court to examine the claim of the petitioner to
juvenility in accordance with law, and submit a report to this
Court within one month from the date of communication of this
The concerned Sessions Court shall be entitled to examine the
authenticity and genuineness of the documents sought to be relied
upon  by  the  petitioner,   considering   that   the  documents  do  not
appear to be contemporaneous.
In    the    event     the    documents     are     found   to    be
questionable/unreliable, it will be open to the Sessions Court to
have the petitioner medically examined by taking an ossification
test or any other modern recognized method of age determination.
List after the ensuing winter holidays.