Engineer, in the interest of justice and equity.
(D)    Pending admission, hearing, and final disposal of
the present application, this HON’BLE COURT
regularization of the construction of the premises
of the Petitioner-Waqf.”
2.             It is a case where notice under Section 260(1)(a) of the
Gujarat Provincial Municipal Corporations Act, 1949 (for short,
“the GMPC Act”) dated 29.12.2021 and order dated 28.03.2022
under Section 260(2) of the the GPMC Act by respondent No.2 is
the subject matter of challenge.
2.1            It is the case of the petitioner that land bearing survey
Nos.3936 and 2937 situated in the area of Sangrampura, Dist.
Surat was originally owned by one Asiqhussain Abdulhusen and his
five brothers and by way of oral gift deed, transferred right, title
and share of all six brothers in favour of a registered Waqf
represented by the petitioner as its “Muttwali”. It is the case of the
petitioner that since such transfer, the petitioner-Waqf is running
“Madrassa” providing education to Muslim students.                       Learned
Advocate for the petitioner submitted that as the rights given to the
Waqf was by way of oral gift, the same could not be entered into
the revenue record.
2.2            It is the case of the petitioner that the activity was
continuing for running educational institution (Madrassa), the
petitioner-Waqf came to be registered on 11.11.2021 and under the
registered-Waqf, educational activity has continued.
2.3            It is the case of the petitioner that City Survey
Superintendent had issued notice dated 01.10.2021 under Section
61 of the Land Revenue Code for removal of construction on the
ground that the petitioner-Waqf is unauthorized occupant of the
Government land and has put up illegal construction. Against such
notice, the petitioner filed a detailed reply dated 27.10.2021. By
order dated 28.10.2021, City Survey Superintendent had declared
the petitioner to be in unauthorized occupation and directed to
vacate the premises on or before 03.11.2021.             It appears that
thereafter,      by   order   dated    28.10.2021,   the    City       Survey
Superintendent       also   imposed   penalty  on   the    petitioner      for
unauthorized occupation.        The petitioner was also issued notice
dated 29.12.2021 on the ground of having illegal construction
without any prior permission for development and had constructed
ground and first floor.
2.4            Learned Advocate for the petitioner submitted that the
petitioner had challenged notices issued by the authorities before
the Waqf Tribunal by filing Waqf Suit No.23 of 2022 and prayed for
interim injunction.       The Waqf Tribunal ordered carrying out of
Court Commissioner of the suit property and panchnama was also
carried out.        The Waqf Tribunal on 25.01.2022 passed order of
granting status quo, which came to be extended from time to time.
However, after filing of the reply by the respondent-authorities
before the Waqf Tribunal, the order of status quo was not extended
by the Waqf Tribunal.         However, the Waqf Tribunal directed the
petitioner     to    submit   an application     for  fresh    development
permission or regularization along with necessary plans before
25.03.2022 and directed respondent Nos.1 and 2 to decide such
application in accordance with law. Interim relief of status quo was
extended       till   31.03.2022  and      accordingly,   on    14.03.2022,
application along with plan was filed before respondent No.3.
However, by order 28.03.2022, respondent-Executive Engineer
directed removal of construction within 7 days on the ground that
the construction of the school (Madrassa) was without prior
permission of the competent authority.
2.5            Considering the conduct of the respondent authorities,
attention was drawn of the Waqf Tribunal of the order of the
respondent-Executive Engineer dated 28.03.2022 requesting for
extending of the interim relief. However, such extension was not
granted and the hearing was fixed on 05.04.2022. Apprehending
demolition on account of non-extension of the interim order, the
petitioner filed Civil Revision Application No.213 of 2022, which,
today stands disposed of as withdrawn.
2.6            It is submitted that on 07.04.2022, the petitioner had
requested the Waqf Tribunal to extend the order of status quo.
However, considering the fact that the status quo order was
granted (25.01.2022) till filing of the reply by the respondents and
that the respondents had filed their reply before the Waqf Tribunal,
status quo could not be granted.            It is submitted that as the
petitioner could not get interim order in Civil Revision Application
nor before the Waqf Tribunal, the petitioner was constrained to file
the present petition to protect its construction, especially where
educational activity for the surrounding area is going on.
2.7            Learned Advocate for the petitioner drawn attention of
the Court to several photographs placed on record today to indicate
that the construction was existing since long and certain portion of
the old construction is existing before 1980s. It is submitted that
as the construction shown in these photographs placed on record
today was in dilapidated condition, the petitioner had renovated
the existing construction of the school (Madrassa) and therefore,
there was no need for the Corporation to prevent renovation of the
premises by treating the same to be the new construction without
permission and cause demolition of the same.
2.8            Learned Advocate for the petitioner submitted that the
land on which the school (Madrassa) exists was originally having
hutments, which is already demolished and qua the occupants,
under the policy of the Corporation, they have been rehabilitated
somewhere else and the open plot, even as per the town planning
scheme is kept open for the purpose of public parking. Therefore,
no construction is going to come up and that the existing structure
will not come in way and therefore, it will protect interest of the
children, who are being educated.
2.9            Learned Advocate for the petitioner submitted that in
the entire plot of land, only two structures are existing, one is a
temple and another is the present structure utilized for the purpose
of education /school (Madrassa) and there is no action taken for
removal of another structure, i.e. temple which is located also on
the same plot.
2.10           Learned Advocate for the petitioner also drew attention
of this Court to the latest photographs which are placed at page
No.122 as a part of rejoinder.
3.             Learned   Advocate     for     the  respondent-Corporation
submitted      that  the  action   of   the     respondent-Corporation       is
perfectly justified as land in question on which the petitioner claims
to have educational institution (Madrassa) has been acquired way
back in the year 1967 and the original owners have already
received compensation in that regard. It is submitted that in the
revenue record, after the compensation was paid, the land is
running in the name of the State authorities and therefore, there is
no legal right for the petitioner to continue in occupation on a
feeble ground of oral gift by the erstwhile owners of the land.
It is submitted that the acquisition proceedings had long concluded
and the acquisition was for the specific purpose of public interest
and now the petitioner is coming in way of development and in
public interest.
3.1             It is submitted that the open plot as per the town
planning scheme was required to be utilized.         However, in and
around the present structure, which the petitioner claims to be
using for educational activity, was surrounded by thickly populated
hutments, with no legitimate right to continue to occupy the land
and with great difficulty, local authorities were able to remove the
hutments from the valuable plot of the State /Corporation for the
purpose of public interest.         It is submitted that neither the
petitioner has any legal right regarding his right, title or interest to
occupy the structure nor the petitioner is having any building
permission to put up the construction. It is submitted that on site
visit, it was found that the construction claimed by the petitioner
was recent one and in fact, it is incorrect to say that the said
construction was utilized for the purpose of imparting education.
It is submitted that for the purpose of running educational
institution, including ‘Madrassa’, permission is required for specific
nature of construction considering safety of children, which is not
obtained by the petitioner. Moreover, site visit also indicated that
structure was being put to commercial use under the garb of
running educational institution and there were several commercial
activities going on such as garage, shops, etc.              In view of the
aforesaid, action on the part of the respondent-Corporation is
3.2             It is submitted that the respondent-Corporation had
also filed detailed reply before the Waqf Tribunal and as the Waqf
Tribunal was updated about state of affairs prevailing, had refused
to extend interim relief granted ex parte. It is submitted that Civil
Revision Application before this Court filed by the petitioner also
now stands dismissed as withdrawn.
3.3             Learned   Advocate      for     the respondent-Corporation
submitted that the petitioner is trying to take advantage of the fact
that the property in question was reflected in the revenue record
later in point of time, also the petitioner has failed to establish that
educational institution is being run for past 60 years whereas in the
petition itself, it is stated that Waqf has been registered only on
11.11.2021 and therefore, demand of the petitioner is to encroach
upon the Government land under the garb of running educational
4.              In rejoinder,   learned Advocate for the petitioner
submitted that even if it is the case of the petitioner being in
unauthorized occupation, still the petitioner has a scope of
regularizing        the portion   as    well     as the  construction         and
accordingly, the petitioner was directed by the Waqf Tribunal to do
so and the petitioner had already made application before the
Corporation to take into consideration the same sympathetically.
5.             Having considered the rival submissions of learned
Advocates for the parties and having considered documents on
record, it appears that the dispute pertains to two floor structure
existing on plot of land identified as “Nondh No.4936, 4937 of
Ward No.2, Sangrampura, Gopi Talav, Surat, over which the
petitioner claims to run educational institution (Madrassa), but
nothing is brought on record of this Court with regard running of
educational institution on the very premises.      The photographs
which are placed on record by both the sides also do not indicate
running of school (Madrassa), but it only indicate two floor
structure and on the ground floor, there are shutters apparently
being used for commercial purpose (garage). These photographs
are placed on record by the respondent-Corporation.                    The
photographs are also placed by the learned Advocate for the
petitioner in two sets, which appear to be the photographs of
existing structure of one floor, where also such structure does not
appear to be in dilapidated condition, but there appears to be
commercial activity going on. There is nothing to indicate of any
ongoing educational activity.    The photographs shown which are
annexed with the affidavit in rejoinder (page No.122, 123) would go
on to indicate to be a newly constructed structure with two floors.
Therefore, in absence of any evidence with regard to running of
educational institution (Madrassa), the Court is not inclined to
accept the argument of learned Advocate for the petitioner that the
petitioner is running an educational institution there.                     In the
opinion of the Court, wherever the issue of running educational
institution is concerned, the same is governed by separate set of
laws where necessary formalities are required to be undertaken
and the construction which is meant for the purpose of school is
regulated by GDCR and with the permission of the authorities, such
construction is permissible. In the instant case, there is nothing on
record to indicate that the construction has been carried out
pursuant      to     any   development      permission      granted       by    the
6.             Though learned Advocate for the petitioner claims that
350 students are studying there, no evidence has been placed on
record in this regard nor the Court is able to accept such
contention looking to the structure constructed, which can hardly
house 350 students.
7.             Insofar     as land,   as     identified   in   the     preceding
paragraphs is concerned and where structure exists, award under
Section 11 of the acquisition proceedings being No.LAQ.IV.CR
490/67 would go on to indicate that the land in question was
originally     of    joint  ownership    of     Ashikhussain     Abdulhussain,
Safakathussain,         Jamunhussain,    Saffuddin,      Ahesanhussain          and
Jakirhussain, who were having equal shares and had participated in
the acquisition proceedings and had received compensation under
award dated 31.08.1967.       The name of the original owner is
reflected in the award placed on record. Pursuant to the award,
“Kabja Rasid” dated 19.12.1967 was executed, which is signed by
the original owners and their family members and which is placed
on record at page No.89. The purpose for acquiring such plot of
land was clearly mentioned in the award itself and therefore,
pursuant to the acquisition award, the land has to be reflected in
the revenue record to be the ownership of the respondent
authorities. It seems not only the petitioner but also other
occupants of the same final plot reserved under town planning
scheme have taken advantage of the fact that in the revenue
records nothing was shown regarding the acquistion proceedings.
Wether such omission is bonafide or mischief is a matter of inquiry.
however such lapse has resulted in occupation of Government Land
by unauthorised occupants. The State needs to look in such
situtation closely to the state of affarirs and take corrective
measures including holding concerned Govt. servant or public
servant as personally responsible.
8.             From the record, it appears that the land bearing
Nondh No.4936 & 4937 alongwith land of other nondh nos. has
been 4 acquired on behalf of Barough Municipality , Surat for
“Garden and Gopitalao Development Scheme purpose” in the year
1967. It is submitted that the notification u/s 4 of the Land
Acquisition      act 1894   had   been      published   on    22.01.1965       ,
notification u/ s. 6 had been published on 18.10.1965 and the
award u/s.11 declared by the acquisition officer on 31.08.1967 not
only that the owners/occupiers had also handed over the possession
to acquisition officer on 19.12.1967 and possession receipt also
issued by the owners/occupiers of respective land. The petitioner
has made incorrect statement on oath in para 3.2 of the petition
that Shri Asiqhussain Abdulhusen and his five brothers executed
oral gift and transferred all rights ‚interest and share of said lands
in favour of the petitioner-Waqf, in fact, said land after acquisition
proceedings, on 19.12.1967 handed over to acquisition officer and
possession receipt has been issued to that effect by Shri
Asiqhussain Abdulhusen and others.
9.             Around November 2021 respondent came to know
about construction activity upon acquired land therefore, officers of
the SMC had visited the site and asked the petitioner to produce
development permission for ongoing construction and documents
regarding ownership of land however, petitioner failed to produce
it  and    therefore,   petitioner   was      informed   to   stop       further
construction. That despite the instruction of respondent, the
petitioner had continued construction and therefore, notice dated
29.12.2021 under Section 260(1)(a) of the Act has been issued to
show cause as to why the construction should not be removed as it
is made without development permission. That, in response to
show-cause notice, the petitioner had submitted “construction
completion”        Certificate and    not     produced  any    evidence       of
ownership or development permission regarding construction made
upon acquired land. It is pertinent to point out that after
completing the construction, the petitioner has started use of
property without getting building use permission as required under
Section 263 of the BPMC Act, 1949.
10.            In the opinion of the Court, in absence of any evidence
on record regarding actual running of educational institution and
there is nothing on record to indicate any permission to running
educational       institution  or   building     permission    to     put    up
construction of educational institution and the factual assertion not
being controverted that the premises were being used for
commercial purpose, the Court is not inclined to interfere with the
ongoing process, which according to the Court is in accordance
with the provisions of GDCR.
11.            There is one more reason why the petitioner could not
get necessary development permission as the petitioner has not
placed any document regarding the lawful occupation of the part of
the final plot. had the petitioner at anypoint of time applied for any
developement permission the scrutiny of the revenue record would
have led the officers of the concern authority be it revenue, city
survey, town planning or the municipal corporation to realize the
fact of the acquisition of the very land by the state which has
successfully avoided the attention of the authorities for such a long
time considering the same to be of private ownership. in any case
the petitioner who even if wants to regularise the existing structure
will firs t have to establish his legal ownership or legal occupation
onthe part of the final plot in absence of the very basic requirement
the court is unable to support the claim of the petitioner for
Regularisation of the Construction.
12.            With regards to the submission of the ld. Advocate
about the temple standing on the final plot the court is not inclined
to examine the same in absence of any material particular about
the same and that too in absence of the necessary party against
which such contention is sought to be raised. in any case such
contention would not take the case of the petitioner any further as
the court is satisfied that in the structure in question there is a
commercial activity which is definately going on and on the other
hand nothing is produced on record about the alleged on going
relegious education activity on the very premises.
13.            The Court has taken into consideration order dated
28.03.2022, which was passed pursuant to the application made as
per the direction of the Waqf Tribunal under order dated
03.03.2022, wherein the petitioner was called upon to give
supporting documents. It appears that even after the directions of
the Tribunal, the application made by the petitioner was for the
purpose of rearing of the existing construction, which application
was contrary to the facts which were found by the respondent-
Corporation during visit.       After finding that the application thus
made by the petitioner was not as per the direction of the Tribunal,
the authorities proceeded to find that the petitioner has failed to
comply with almost 15 points which were raised by the authorities
as per the requirement of law and therefore, in absence of such
material particulars supporting the application of the petitioner,
order dated 28.03.2022 came to be passed.            The Court sees no
reason to interfere with the order.
14.             In view of the aforesaid facts, the petition deserves to
be and is hereby dismissed. Notice is discharged. No order as to