The State of Maharashtra                      ..    Respondent
Dr.Samarth S. Karmarkar with Mr.Haresh R. B. i/b Karmarkar
& Associates for the Applicant.
Ms.Anamika Malhotra, A.P.P. for the State/Respondent.
Mr.Anil L. Nanaware, PSI attached to M.H.B. Colony Police
Station, present.
1.       The applicant is apprehending his arrest in C.R.No.462 of
2022 lodged with M.H.B. Colony Police Station for the offences
punishable under Sections 376(2)(n), 376(2)(h) and 417 of
the IPC. The complainant is a girl aged 22 years, who was
briefly acquainted with the present applicant. Somewhere in
the year 2019, when she alongwith her friend had visited a
residential premises of a third friend, the applicant is alleged
to have committed forcible sexual intercourse with her. When
she opposed, he expressed that he likes her and in any case, he
is going to marry her. Thereafter, on multiple occasions, the
act was repeated.
The complainant herself has narrated the repeated
incidents when they indulged into sex, on an assurance by the
applicant that he is going to marry her.           The complainant
conceived and was found to be carrying six weeks’ pregnancy.
She immediately contacted the applicant, but he refused to
take up any responsibility and on the other hand, attributed
her a bad character and alleged that she is in relationship with
some other person.             Repeatedly she kept requesting the
applicant to marry her, but he refused.
2.       Upon such a complaint, referring to the incidents
occurring between 17/05/2019 to 27/04/2022, the complaint
has been lodged. As far as the last incident is concerned, even
on 27/04/2022, the complainant states that he had forcibly
committed sexual intercourse with her.
3.       Reading of the complaint would reveal that the girl, who
is major, developed a liking for the applicant, but her version
as far as the sexual relationship is concerned, is that she
permitted it, since the applicant gave a promise of marriage.
The sexual relationship was established on multiple occasions
on the promise of marriage. However, when the girl conceived,
the applicant attributed infdelity, but once again committed
forcible sexual intercourse with her on the last date as
mentioned in the complaint.
4.       Merely sharing friendly relationship with a girl do not
permit a boy to take her for granted and construe it as her
consent to establish physical relationship. In today’s society
when a man and woman are working together, it is quite
possible that proximity may develop between them, being
either mentally compatible or confding in each other as
friends, ignoring the gender, since friendship is not gender
based. However, this friendship with the person of fairer sex,
does not confer a licence upon a man to force himself upon her,
when she specifcally refuse copulation. Every woman expects
‘Respect’ in a relationship, be it in the nature of friendship
based on mutual affection. Here is the applicant, who is
accused of maintaining sexual relationship on the pretext of
marriage, but when the complainant conceived, he walked out
alleging that pregnancy carried by her is on account of her
relationship with other persons.
The accusations faced by the applicant defnitely require
a thorough investigation to ascertain the version of the
prosecutrix that she was forced to give her consent for sex.
The application is rejected.