Date of Decision: 18th January, 2023
(Civil) with Mr. Arun Panwar, Mr.
1.      This hearing has been done through hybrid mode.
2.      The Petitioner is employed as a Lecturer- History in the Government
Girls Senior Secondary School, New Usmanpur, Gautam Puri, Delhi which
runs under the Respondent No. 2- Director, Directorate of Education,
GNCTD. She teaches students of classes 11 & 12. She had filed the present
petition seeking a declaration that she should be allowed to attend the
school, conduct teaching and undertake other responsibilities without being
forced to take the COVID-19 vaccine. The relief sought by the Petitioner is
i. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction for
calling of records pertaining to representations dated
11.10.2021 and 30.10.2021 made by the Petitioner to
the Respondents; and
ii. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction for
quashing of impugned Orders dated 29.09.2021,
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 12985/2021                                                       Page 1 of 8
08.10.2021 and 28.10.2021 passed by the
Respondents; and
iii. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction
allowing the Petitioner to attend school, mark
attendance, conduct teaching and other responsibilities
designated upon her without forcing her to take Covid-
iv. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction such
that the Petitioner’s service benefits be reinstated for
days when she was forcefully marked absent
16.10.2021 onwards and leaves thrust upon her may
not be debited from her Leave Account; and
v. Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction
directing the Respondents to pay costs to the Petitioner
incurred owing to the illegal impugned Orders
including costs of the present litigation; and
vi. Pass any such other or further Orders as this
Hon’ble Court may deem fit in the facts and
circumstances of this case and in the interest of justice.
3.      The issue related to non-vaccination has already been considered by
the Supreme Court in Jacob Puliyel vs Union of India & Ors., [2022 SCC
OnLine 748] and by the Delhi High Court in W.P. (C) 4741/2022 titled
‘Narendar Kumar vs. Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi.
4.      The summary of finding on the issues considered by the Supreme
Court in Jacob Puliyel (Supra) are extracted as under:
(i) Given the issues urged by the Petitioner have a
bearing on public health and concern the fundamental
rights of individuals in this country, we are not
inclined to entertain any challenge to the
maintainability of the Writ Petition.
(ii) As far as judicial review of policy decisions based
on expert opinion is concerned, there is no doubt that
wide latitude is provided to the executive in such
matters and the Court does not have the expertise to
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 12985/2021                                                     Page 2 of 8
appreciate and decide on merits of scientific issues on
the basis of divergent medical opinion. However, this
does not bar the Court from scrutinising whether the
policy in question can be held to be beyond the pale of
unreasonableness and manifest arbitrariness and to be
in furtherance of the right to life of all persons, bearing
in mind the material on record.
(iii) With respect to the infringement of bodily integrity
and personal autonomy of an individual considered in
the light of vaccines and other public health measures
introduced to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic, we
are of the opinion that bodily integrity is protected
Under Article 21 of the Constitution and no individual
can be forced to be vaccinated. Further, personal
autonomy of an individual, which is a recognised facet
of the protections guaranteed Under Article 21,
encompasses the right to refuse to undergo any
medical treatment in the sphere of individual health.
However, in the interest of protection of
communitarian health, the Government is entitled to
regulate issues of public health concern by imposing
certain limitations on individual rights, which are open
to scrutiny by constitutional courts to assess whether
such invasion into an individual's right to personal
autonomy and right to access means of livelihood
meets the threefold requirement as laid down in K.S.
Puttaswamy (supra), i.e., (i) legality, which
presupposes the existence of law; (ii) need, defined in
terms of a legitimate State aim; and (iii)
proportionality, which ensures a rational nexus
between the objects and the means adopted to achieve
them.
(iv) On the basis of substantial material filed before
this Court reflecting the near-unanimous views of
experts on the benefits of vaccination in addressing
severe disease from the infection, reduction in oxygen
requirement, hospital and ICU admissions, mortality
and stopping new variants from emerging, this Court is
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 12985/2021                                                       Page 3 of 8
satisfied that the current vaccination policy of the
Union of India is informed by relevant considerations
and cannot be said to be unreasonable or manifestly
arbitrary. Contrasting scientific opinion coming forth
from certain quarters to the effect that natural
immunity offers better protection against COVID-19 is
not pertinent for determination of the issue before us.
(v) However, no data has been placed by the Union of
India or the States appearing before us, controverting
the material placed by the Petitioner in the form of
emerging scientific opinion which appears to indicate
that the risk of transmission of the virus from
unvaccinated individuals is almost on par with that
from vaccinated persons. In light of this, restrictions
on unvaccinated individuals imposed through various
vaccine mandates by State Governments/Union
Territories cannot be said to be proportionate. Till the
infection rate remains low and any new development or
research finding emerges which provides due
justification to impose reasonable and proportionate
restrictions on the rights of unvaccinated individuals,
we suggest that all authorities in this country,
including private organisations and educational
institutions, review the relevant orders and instructions
imposing restrictions on unvaccinated individuals in
terms of access to public places, services and
resources, if not already recalled. It is clarified that in
the context of the rapidly-evolving situation presented
by the COVID-19 pandemic, our suggestion to review
the vaccine mandates imposed by States/Union
Territories, is limited to the present situation alone and
is not to be construed as interfering with the lawful
exercise of power by the executive to take suitable
measures for prevention of infection and transmission
of the virus. Our suggestion also does not extend to any
other directions requiring maintenance of COVID-
appropriate behaviour issued by the Union or the State
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 12985/2021                                                       Page 4 of 8
(vi) As regards non-disclosure of segregated clinical
data, we find that the results of Phase III clinical trials
of the vaccines in question have been published, in line
with the requirement under the statutory regime in
place, the GCP guidelines and the WHO Statement on
Clinical Trials. The material provided by the Union of
India, comprising of minutes of the meetings of the
SEC, do not warrant the conclusion that restricted
emergency use approvals had been granted to
COVISHIELD and COVAXIN in haste, without
thorough review of the relevant data. Relevant
information relating to the meetings of the SEC and the
NTAGI are available in public domain and therefore,
challenge to the procedures adopted by the expert
bodies while granting regulatory approval to the
vaccines on the ground of lack of transparency cannot
be entertained. However, we reiterate that subject to
the protection of privacy of individual subjects, with
respect to ongoing clinical trials and trials that may be
conducted subsequently for COVID-19 vaccines, all
relevant data required to be published under the extant
statutory regime must be made available to the public
without undue delay.
(vii) We do not accept the sweeping challenge to the
monitoring system of AEFIs being faulty and not
reflecting accurate figures of those with severe
reactions or deaths from vaccines. We note that the
role of the Pharmacovigilance Programme of India
and the CDSCO, as elaborated upon by the Union of
India, collates and studies previously unknown
reactions seen during monitoring of AEFIs at the time
of vaccine administration and we trust the Union of
India to ensure that this leg of the AEFI surveillance
system is not compromised with, while meeting the
requirements of the rapid review and assessment
system followed at the national level for AEFIs.
(viii) We are also of the opinion that information
relating to adverse effects following immunisation is
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 12985/2021                                                      Page 5 of 8
crucial for creating awareness around vaccines and
their efficacy, apart from being instrumental in further
scientific studies around the pandemic. Recognising
the imperative need for collection of requisite data of
adverse events and wider participation in terms of
reporting, the Union of India is directed to facilitate
reporting of suspected adverse events by individuals
and private doctors on an accessible virtual platform.
These reports shall be made publicly accessible,
without compromising on protecting the confidentiality
of the persons reporting, with all necessary steps to
create awareness of the existence of such a platform
and of the information required to navigate the
platform to be undertaken by the Union of India at the
earliest.
(ix) On paediatric vaccination, we recognise that the
decision taken by the Union of India to vaccinate
children in this country is in tune with global scientific
consensus and expert bodies like the WHO, the
UNICEF and the CDC and it is beyond the scope of
review for this Court to second-guess expert opinion,
on the basis of which the Government has drawn up its
policy. Keeping in line with the WHO Statement on
Clinical Trials and the extant statutory regime, we
direct the Union of India to ensure that key findings
and results of the relevant phases of clinical trials of
vaccines already approved by the regulatory
authorities for administration to children, be made
public at the earliest, if not already done.
5.      Further, in connected writ petitions being W.P.(C) 11694/2021, titled
Dr Ravinder Partap v. Government Of National Capital Territory of Delhi
W.P.(C) 14705/2021 titled Deepak Kumar and Anr. v. Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi and W.P.(C) 11845/2021 titled Dr.
Neetu Chaudhary and Anr. v. Government of National Capital Territory
of Delhi, where the Petitioners who were similarly placed, were also given
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 12985/2021                                                     Page 6 of 8
“1. This batch of writ petitions had assailed the
directives framed by the Delhi Disaster Management
Authority [“DDMA”] for compulsory vaccination
during the pandemic. The Court notes that, dealing
with an identical issue, it had disposed of a writ
petition, namely, Narendar Kumar vs. Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi [W.P. (C)
4741/2022] by its order of 15 July 2022 in the
following terms:-
“The petitioner had approached this Court aggrieved
by the insistence on the part of the respondents for him
to be vaccinated against Covid-19. The grievance was
raised in the backdrop of a medical opinion in terms of
which it was pointed out that the pre-existing medical
condition faced by the petitioner would warrant him
being exempted from compulsory vaccination. Mr.
Satyakam, learned ASC appearing for respondent Nos.
1 to 3, has fairly stated that in light of the judgment
rendered by the Supreme Court in Jacob Puliyel vs.
Union of India & Ors. [W.P.(C) 607/2021], the
respondents do not propose to insist on the petitioner
being vaccinated against Covid-19. In view of the
aforesaid and since nothing further would survive in
the writ petition, it shall stand disposed of. The Court
further observes that any salaries and other dues that
may have been held back by the respondents
consequent to a failure on the part of the petitioner to
attend to her duties on account of the impugned
directives shall be released with expedition and in any
case within a period of four weeks from today.
2. Presently, the Court is apprised that no employer
under the respondents is insisting upon compulsory
vaccination bearing in mind the principles which were
laid down by the Supreme Court in Jacob Puliyel vs.
Union of India [2022 SCC OnLine 748] and that all
employees have been permitted to re-join their posts
without the stipulation of vaccination being mandated.
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 12985/2021                                                    Page 7 of 8
3. In view of the aforesaid stand as taken by the
respondents in the aforesaid matter and which is
reiterated in the present proceedings, these writ
petitions shall stand disposed of on identical terms.
4. The petitioners shall be permitted to rejoin their
posts. Any issues with respect to unpaid salaries may
be decided by the respective employers bearing in mind
the order passed by the Court in Narendar Kumar as
well as the principles laid down by the Supreme Court
in Jacob Puliyel. ”
6.      In view of the above-mentioned orders relating to similar fact
situations, the present petition, along with all pending applications, is
disposed of with the direction that Covid-19 vaccination cannot be insisted
upon by the employer, in terms of the various orders passed above.
Moreover, the Petitioner, in any case, has now got vaccinated as well.
Therefore, the only issues that remain in the petition are related to service
benefits.
7.      Insofar as the question on service benefits are concerned, the
Petitioner is permitted to make representation to the concerned authority and
the decision on the same shall be taken within 30 days.
8.      Ld. Counsel for the Petitioner submits that the representation has been
made on 14th June, 2022.          Let the copy of the said representation be
forwarded with a fresh covering letter to ld. Counsel for the Respondents
within 1 week. A decision on the same shall be taken within four weeks by
the Respondents. All remedies are left open.
9.      No further orders are called for.
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 12985/2021                                                     Page 8 of 8