Through:    Mr. M. Y. Bhat, Sr. Adv. Mr. Anees ul Islam, Advocate
Through:    Mr. Jahangir Iqbal Ganai, Sr. Adv. with Ms. Maha Majeed, Adv.
Mr. Azhar ul Amin, Advocate
1. The focal point in these bunch of clubbed petitions is Clause-1 of
Government order no. 76-SW of 2019 dated 28.2.2019 (hereinafter
referred to as “impugned Clause”) issued by respondent 1 relating
to the selection of Anganwari Workers as Supervisors which reads
(1). “The seniority of the Anganwari Workers, who have acquired
higher qualification (Graduation) during service shall be taken from
the date of acquiring the higher qualification instead of the date of
their initial appointment.”
In some of the petitions the validity of the impugned
Clause is questioned and it is being claimed that the seniority
of the Graduate Anganwari Workers is to be reckoned from
the date of their initial appointment as provided under Rule
24 of the J&K Civil Service (Classification, Control and
Appeal) Rules of 1956 [hereinafter referred to as CCA
Rules] irrespective of the date of acquiring qualification of
In some of the petitions the prayer made by the
petitioners is that the respondents be directed to fix the
seniority of Graduate Anganwari Workers who did not
possess the said Graduation qualification at the time of their
engagement but acquired subsequently, from the date they
acquired said qualification in conformity with the impugned
Clause on the premises that Rule 24 of the CCA Rules has
no application in the matter as the “Anganwari Worker” is
not a civil post.
In some cases, it is the case set up by the petitioners
that the Government order dated 28.2.2019 supra shall have
only prospective effect and shall not be applied for changing
already fixed seniority having been relied upon for their
selection/promotion to the post of Supervisors though on ad
hoc basis which should not be affected.
2. The moot question and the core issue that is required to be
determined in these petitions thus is as to whether the seniority of a
Graduate Anganwari Worker who acquires qualification of
Graduation after engagement as Anganwari Worker is required to
be fixed according to the date of initial engagement/appointment as
Anganwari Worker as envisaged under Rule 24 of CCA Rules or
from the date such Anganwari Worker acquires qualification of
Graduation as is provided by the impugned Clause.
3. It is significant to note that the seniority of Graduate Anganwari
Workers assumed importance as 50% posts of the Supervisors are
required to be filled up from Anganwari Workers. It is further
significant to note that “J&K Social Welfare Subordinate
Recruitment Rules, 2009 (for short Rules of 2009)” provide that
25% of the posts of Supervisors shall be filled up from amongst the
Graduate Anganwari Workers having rendered 5 years of service,
and 25% of the posts of Supervisors are to be filled up from
amongst the Matriculate Anganwari Workers having 10 years of
service.
4. What is revealed is that the Anganwari Workers who did not
possess the Graduate qualification at the time of their initial
engagement have subsequently improved their qualification and
acquired the qualification of Graduation in order to become
eligible for promotion to the post of Supervisors after 5 years of
service only instead of 10 years of service as is required for
Matriculate Anganwari Workers. Such Anganwari Workers claim
that their seniority is to be counted from the date of their initial
engagement irrespective of their having acquired Graduate
qualification subsequently. Those Anganwari Workers who were
possessed of the Graduate qualification at the time of engagement
as Anganwari Workers or have acquired Graduate qualification
much earlier than most of others, claim that their seniority should
be fixed on the basis of their engagement or the date of acquisition
of Graduate qualification whichever is later.
5. It is pertinent to note here that previously the service conditions of
the Non-Gazetted employees of the Social Welfare Department
were regulated by “J&K Social Welfare (Non-gazetted) Service
Recruitment Rules of 1991.” The said Rules provide for the
constitution of J&K Social Welfare (Non-gazetted) Service besides
providing for other conditions of service of its members including
the method of recruitment, promotion, fixation of seniority and
other allied matters. In the said Rules, the Supervisors as well as
Anganwari Workers were provided in Schedule-VI and identified
as Clause 2nd and Clause 3rd posts respectively. The said Rules of
1991 insofar as and so long they occupy the field, the service
conditions of Supervisors and Anganwari Workers were required
to be regulated under and in terms thereof in particular made in
Rule 9 of the Rules of 1991 supra, which provide that the seniority
of members of service shall be regulated under CCA Rules of
1956 meaning thereby that the seniority of Anganwari Workers is
to be determined in accordance with the said CCA Rules of 1956.
A reference hereunder to Rule 24 of CCA Rules also
becomes imperative which reads as under:
Rule 24: “The seniority of a person who is subject to these rules has
reference to the service, class, category or grade with reference to
which the question has arisen. Such seniority shall be determined by
the date of his first appointment to such service, class, category or
grade as the case may be.”
This issue even stands adjudicated upon by a Division Bench
of this court in case titled as Ridwana Parveen vs. State of J&K
reported in 2014 (3) JKJ(HC) 330 wherein at Para 14 following
“It follows that while determining seniority of an Anganwari Worker
to consider her promotion as Supervisor, reference is to be made to
Jammu and Kashmir Social Welfare (Non-Gazetted) Service
Recruitment Rules 1991, as also Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services
(Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1956.”
6. Presently, conditions of service including the seniority of Non-
Gazetted employees of Social Welfare Department are being
regulated by Rules of 2009 supra which Rules provide for
constitution of service known to be J&K Social Welfare
(Subordinate Service) besides providing for conditions of service
of its members including method of recruitment, promotion,
fixation of seniority and allied matters. Interestingly, however, it is
seen that while the post of Supervisor is included in Schedule-1
appended to the Rules of 2009 which concerns the initial
constitution of the service, there is no mention of Anganwari
Workers in the said Schedule. Thus the only inference that can be
drawn by necessary implication is that the service conditions of
Anganwari Anganwari will continue to be governed and regulated
by the Rules of 1991 and the Rules of 1991 shall be deemed to
have repealed vis-à-vis those posts only for which corresponding
Rules of 2009 have been made and not for such post or posts for
which no corresponding Rule has been framed in 2009, as such the
necessary corollary and the fallout would be that the seniority of an
Anganwari Worker has to be determined according to the Rules of
1991 read with CCA Rules of 1956 as held by the Division Bench
in Ridwana Parveen case supra.
7. Furthermore, in terms of Rules of 1991, the post of Anganwari
Workers is identified as one class under Clause-III and do not
make any distinction on the basis of educational qualification as
such. It being so, a common seniority list of all Anganwari
Workers, notwithstanding any disparity of qualification, is required
to be maintained on the basis of the initial engagement and
irrespective of the date on which any Anganwari Worker acquires
Graduate qualification, and therefore undertaking any process of
maintaining a separate seniority for both Graduates and
Matriculate Anganwari Workers on the basis of acquiring higher
qualification would be contrary to the Rules as otherwise also the
law is well settled that formulation of principles for fixation of
seniority, promotion and determination of seniority are
matters of policy which may find expression either in statutory
rules or administrative orders including executive instructions.
It is also equally settled that when a particular field is occupied
by statutory rules then the administrative orders/executive
instructions cannot be issued to nullify the effect or impact of the
statutory rules. Similarly, it is also well settled that if there is a
conflict between a statutory rule and an administrator order, the rule
has to prevail and the administrative order/executive instruction has
to give way to the statutory rule if both occupy the same field.
8. Reverting back to the case/s in hand it is evident as has been
noticed in the preceding paras that the statutory rules of 1991
occupy the field insofar as determination and fixation of seniority
of Anganwari Workers is concerned and in presence of said rules,
the impugned Clause under challenge pales into insignificance and
the same cannot therefore sustain as being contrary to the mandate
of said rules.    It is pertinent and significant to note here that the
respondents while issuing the order dated 28.2.2019 incorporated
with the impugned Clause have laid basis for its issuance upon a
judgment/order of a Single Bench of this court passed on 6.8.2015
in SWPs 164/2014, 269/2014, 249/2014, 396/2014 and 390/2014
titled as “Kounsar Jabeen and others vs. State and others, Naima
Qureshi and others vs. State and others, Rubina Gul and another
vs. State and others, Jyoti Kumari and another vs. State and others
and Hafiza Bano and others vs. State and others”. Relevant portion
of the judgment supra is extracted and reproduced hereunder being
relevant and germane herein:
“In terms of notification SRO 16 dated 28.1.2004, the post of Supervisor
in Social Welfare Department is to be filled up 50% by direct
recruitment through Service Selection Recruitment Board, 25% selection
through Departmental Selection Committee from amongst Graduate
Anganwari Workers, who have rendered 5 years of service and 25% by
way of selection through Departmental Selection Committee from
amongst Matriculate Anganwari Workers with 10 years of service.”
In terms of aforesaid SRO 16 supra, the Graduate
Anganwari       Workers       and     Matriculate     Anganwari         Workers
constituted two feeding categories for the post of Supervisor. The
Matriculate Anganwari Workers who during the service had
secured qualification of Graduation yet figured in the seniority of
Graduate Anganwari Workers from that date and their seniority to
be reckoned as Graduate Anganwari Workers only from the date
such candidates obtained Graduation degree, thus having created
two classes of Anganwari Workers viz. Graduate Anganwari
Workers and Matriculate Anganwari Workers having ruled that the
seniority of a Matriculate Anganwari Worker will not revert back to the
date of engagement as Matriculate Anganwari Workers after obtaining
the degree of Graduation.
The order/judgment dated 6.8.2015 supra on a plain reading
would demonstrate that the same is per incuriam, in that, it has
been passed oblivious to the judgment passed by the Division
Bench in “Ridwana Parveen case” supra, inasmuch as without
taking note of the Statutory rules of 1991 as also Rule 24 of CCA
Rules, which according to the Division Bench occupied the field.
Thus reliance placed on the said judgment/order of the learned
Single Bench in order dated 28.2.2019 supra is misconceived.
9. It is not out of place to mention here that strong reliance came to
be placed by the appearing counsel for the respondents while
defending the impugned Clause on the judgment of the Apex court
passed in case titled as K. K. Dixit and others Vs. Rasjasthan
Housing Board and another reported in 2015 (1) SCC 474 to
contend     that since separate quotas are fixed for Graduate
Anganwari Workers and Matriculate Anganwari Workers for the
selection/promotion to the post of Supervisor, therefore, separate
seniority is required to be maintained for such Graduate and
Matriculate Anganwari Workers and that such Matriculate
Anganwari Workers who acquired Graduation qualification after
the engagement as Anganwari Workers is to be reckoned against
the Graduate Anganwari Workers from the date they acquired such
Graduate qualification and not from the date of the initial
appointment. The said contention coupled with an initial reading of
the judgment though appeared to be attractive and to be the ratio of
the judgment supra but a careful and deeper perusal and
examination of the judgment would reveal otherwise and contrary.
In the judgment supra distinction has been made between an
eligibility list and a seniority list and the principle of law that can
be said to have been laid down in the judgment is that whereas
separate eligibility list can be framed for persons holding different
qualification for whom separate quotas have been provided for the
purpose of computing the period of experience with that particular
qualification, but insofar as seniority is concerned, the same has to
be common on the basis of entry in that particular category. It has
been also emphatically ruled in the judgment that simply because
separate quotas on the basis of qualification have been prescribed
for the persons holding same posts does not warrant bifurcation of
cadre and maintenance of separate seniority for respective quotas.
Reference hereunder in this regard to para 19 of the judgment
supra becomes necessary:
“19. The High Court has rightly held that the cadre of Project Engineer
(Junior) cannot be bifurcated for the purpose of seniority alone, only on
the ground that for promotion to the cadre of Project Engineer (Senior)
there is provision for 20% quota for degree holders and 30% quota for
diploma holders. The practical view of the High Court cannot be faulted
that the Board can legitimately prepare separate eligibility lists of
Project Engineer (Junior) holding degree and those holding diploma.
Such eligibility list could not be mistaken for seniority list which must
remain common based upon merit assessed at the time of selection for
recruitment. Only if the selection process had been different, there could
have been any scope to argue for separate seniority lists. In absence of
any legal stipulation for altering the initial seniority, pre-determined on
the basis of merit at the time of initial selection and date of regular
appointment, the seniority list cannot be altered only because some
diploma holder Project Engineers (Junior) acquired the qualification of
AMIE equivalent to a degree. The three years’ or seven years’
experience of service will entitle the degree holders and the diploma
holders respectively only for inclusion of their names in the eligibility
lists for promotion so as to work out satisfactorily the provision for
different quota for the degree holders and the diploma holders.”
A similar principle though under a different factual
background has also been laid down by the Apex Court earlier in
case titled Viman Vaman Awale Vs. Gangadhar Makhriya
Charitable Trust and others, 2014 (13) SCC 219, wherein it has
been observed that acquisition of higher qualification at a later
date, even when such a higher qualification is the requisite
qualification for the higher post, will not be determinative for
fixing the seniority.
10. In the aforesaid backdrop it is evident that impugned Clause
incorporated in Government order no. 76-SW of 2019 dated
28.2.2019 is contrary to the Rules of 1991 read with Rule 24 of
CCA Rules of 1956, thus not in conformity with law on the
principle laid down by the Apex Court in the judgment supra that
the seniority to a particular class, category or cadre cannot be
counted and fixated on the basis of acquiring a higher qualification
which may be relevant or beneficial for speedy promotion, but has
to be on the basis of date of initial appointment. However for the
purpose    of    computing        the    experience       with    a   particular
qualification, the relevant date would be when relevant
qualification has been acquired. Previous experience without
particular qualification will have to be ignored.
11. Viewed what has been observed, considered and analyzed
hereinabove, the impugned Clause-1 incorporated in Government
order no. 76-SW of 2019 dated 28.2.2019 issued by respondent 1 is
quashed, as a consequence whereof the respondents are
commanded to fix the seniority of Anganwari Workers on the basis
of their initial engagement as Anganwari Workers in tune with
Rules of 1991 read with Rule 24 of the J&K CCA Rules.
12. Before parting with this judgment, it is worthwhile to mention that
valuable assistance in the matter came to be rendered by appearing
counsel for the parties in general, and in particular by Mr. M. Y.
Advocate, Anis ul Islam, Advocate, Mr. Azhar ul Amin, Advocate
and also Mr. Jahangir Iqbal Ganai, Sr. Advocate.
13. Disposed of.
14. Registry to delink SWP 322/2017, CCP(S) 355/2019, SWP
834/2019 and SWP 2242/2018, and list the same separately on