Ms.Ashwini Achari with Taraq Sayed i/b Advait Tamhankar for
the applicant.
Mrs.A.A. Takalkar, APP for the State.
PSI Ajale V.M from ATS, Thane unit.
Mr.Vaibhav Deshpande from Regional Forensic Science
Laboratory, Aurangabad as Asstt. Director.
1                 The applicant came to be arrested on 23/10/2020,
and on investigation, the charges against him came to be
crystallized in NDPS Case No. 312/2021.
2                 The applicant is a Nigerian National and on specific
information received, that a Nigerian National would be coming
on the given spot at the given time to sell cocaine, a team was
formed by the ATS and raid was conducted. The action of the
applicant was alleged to be suspicious, and on conducting his
personal search, the alleged contraband purported to be cocaine
concealed in blue coloured plastic bag weighing around 116.19
gms and a transparent plastic pouch containing Saffron coloured
heart shape pills weighing around 40.73 gms and some pink
coloured Ecstasy tablets weighing around 4.41 gms were
recovered. He was shown to be arrested on 23/10/2020 and FIR
No.7/2020 was lodged.
3                 An examination report was received from the
Directorate of Forensic Science Laboratory, State of Maharashtra,
Home Department, Kalina dated 8/2/2021 when the seized
material alleged to be contraband, was forwarded for analysis.
Exhibit-1, a white powder in a press-closed polythene bag was
reported to have contained Lidocaine and Tapentadol and pink
colour tablets were found to be Caffeine.                  The aforesaid
documents in form of “Examination Report” dated 8/2/2021 was
held to be sufficient to charge the applicant u/s.8C, 20, 22 of
The report was issued under the signature of Assistant
Chemical Analyser to Government, Forensic Science Laboratory,
4                 After the expiry of more than one year, the Assistant
Director realized the mistake committed by him while issuing his
report dated 8/2/2021 and he addressed a communication to the
Sr. PI, ATS, Thane, where he informed that while issuing the
report, he had committed a mistake in submitting, that Exhibit-1
falls under NDPS Act, 1985. It is clarified that this was a typing
mistake and he expressed his apology. He issued a corrigendum
dated 04/08/2022 along with the report which reads as under :-
वाक्य ‘Exhibit no.1 falls under NDPS Act 1985' हे माझ््याकडू न अहवाल
Lidocaine and Tapentadol are detected in exhibit no. (1).
Tapentadol and Caffeine are detected in exhibit no. (2).
Caffeine is detected in exhibit no. (3).
The above report placed on record by the learned APP is marked
“X” for identification.
5                 In the wake of the aforesaid corrigendum, it is clear
that the substance which was alleged to be contraband and
recovered from the applicant at the time when the raid was
conducted, do not fall within the purview of The Narcotic Drugs
6                 Needless to state that the applicant deserve his release
on bail.
7                 The error, which is sought to be explained and
projected as a typing error, is a blatant mistake, which is admitted
by the Assistant Director after more than a year, of incarceration
of the applicant. It deserve to be looked at seriously, but for the
said report, the applicant could not have been detained.
8                 Liberty of an individual is of paramount importance
and it is the fulcrum of the Indian democracy. Recognized as a
fundamental right, enshrined in Article 2, it is available to every
person, citizens and foreigners alike.
The incarceration of the applicant, with the above
clarification, has therefore, become unlawful, as, but for this
report, no offence could have been made out against him.
9                 The State Authorities, though supreme and in-charge
of the law and order situation, which includes implementation of
various statutes intended to achieve specific purpose and
particularly a special statute like NDPS are expected to behave in
a responsible manner.
Though the learned APP attempt to justify by stating
that the present applicant is a Nigerian citizen, and he has
antecedents to his credit and one of which, is under the NDPS
Act, merely because of the same, he cannot be incarcerated as the
State is expected to follow due procedure while depriving even a
foreign national of his liberty.
In the aforesaid circumstances, let the State
Government through the Home Department come up with a
proposal as to how it wants to compensate the applicant for
realizing that his incarceration was unnecessary as the raid did not
lead to recovery of any contraband/psycotropic substance covered
under the NDPS Act.
Let this order be brought to the notice of the Addl.
Secretary of the Home Department so as to outlay the manner in
which it proposes to compensate the applicant or else, this Court
would determine the quantum of compensation, as it deems fit.
Let the learned APP communicate this order to the
List on 12/8/2022 on Supplementary Board.