2.    Petitioners are arrayed as accused Nos.1 and 2 in Crime
No.511 of 2022 of Valiyathura Police Station alleging commission of
offences punishable under Sections under Sections 120B, 332, 307, 34
of the Indian Penal Code, Section 11A of the Aircraft Act 1934, Rule 22 of
the Aircraft Rules, 2012 and Section 3(1)(a) of the Suppression of
Unlawful Acts against Safety of Civil Aviation Act, 1982.
3.    The prosecution allegation is that on 13.06.2022 at 5.00 p.m.
aboard the flight No.6E-7407 Indigo, the petitioners by defying the
directions of the aircraft crew, shouted threats and rushed toward
Mr.Pinarayi Vijayan, the Hon'ble Chief Minister of Kerala, who was
occupying seat No.20A of the same flight, posed threat to his safety and
security and attempted to commit murder.                     It is also alleged that the
petitioners and their companion, the 3rd accused in the case, caused hurt
to the informant, the security staff of the Chief Minister and deterred him
from discharging his public duty and thus committed the offences alleged.
4.    The petitioners were arrested on 14.06.2022 and were
produced     before   the    Judicial        First      Class        magistrate Court-XI,
Thiruvananthapuram and they were remanded to judicial custody for a
period of 14 days. Though an application for bail was filed the same was
dismissed by Annexure-A2 holding that the Magistrate Court has no
jurisdiction to entertain the same, as the offence punishable under the
provision of the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against Safety of Civil
Aviation Act, 1982 is also invoked.
5.     Adv. T. Asaf Ali, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners
contended that the allegations made against them are false and that they
are only activists of the Indian Youth Congress who raised slogans as
part of peaceful protest urging the resignation of the Hon'ble Chief
Minister against whom serious allegations of gold smuggling have been
made by one Swapna Suresh, an accused in gold smuggling case and
onetime close associate of Chief Minister's office. Learned counsel for the
petitioners submits that the petitioners were travelling from Kannur to
Thiruvananthapuram on 13.06.2022 by flight No.6E-7407 Indigo. Both of
them were going to visit a patient undergoing treatment at Regional
Cancer Centre, Thiruvananthapuram. The petitioners were allowed to
board the aircraft after a thorough security check from Kannur Airport and
the journey was very peaceful. The petitioners were seated at the
extreme front seat and the Hon'ble Chief Minister was seated in extreme
rear side seat No.20A near the door and his companion E.P.Jayarajan
and two security personnel were also seated near him in extreme rear
seats. When the aircraft landed at Thiruvananthapuram Airport, and when
the doors of the flight were opened for disembarkation by the appearance
of red light, the petitioners raised slogans in a peaceful manner from their
seats against the Hon'ble Chief Minister seeking his resignation, and then
his companion Mr.E.P.Jayarajan, suddenly came in front towards
petitioners and turned against them, forcefully pushed them away and
manhandled them and then the informant, the security officer of Hon'ble
Chief Minister also came in front and manhandled the petitioners, as a
result of which both petitioners sustained serious injuries, which has been
duly reported by the Airport Medical Officer, and made mention of in the
remand report also. Thereafter the petitioners were taken to Govt.
Medical College, Thiruvananthapuram for treatment following the injuries
sustained by them. It is further submitted that no manner of violence or
other untoward incident occurred on board as alleged by the prosecution.
There is no allegation that petitioners disobeyed any of the directions of
the aircraft authorities as alleged so as to attract any of the offences
punishable under the Indian Aircraft Act. A perusal of the contents in the
FIR, as well as the remand report, would reveal that there is no chance of
use of force by the petitioners on board against the Hon'ble Chief Minister
and that by no stretch of imagination, mere raising of slogans can be
portrayed as an attempt to kill the Hon'ble Chief Minister, so as to attract
the offences alleged especially Section 307 IPC. There was no act of
violence against any person on board the aircraft, in flight that
endangered the safety of the aircraft and therefore Section 3(a) of the
Suppression of Unlawful Acts against Safety of Civil Aviation Act, 1982 is
not applicable. The counsel for the petitioners relying on Annexure-A3
communication issued by the airport manager submitted that the only
information intimated to the police authorities by the airport manager is
about an altercation that took place on the board of the flight between
three passengers who were seated on seat Nos.8A, 8C and 7D.
Petitioners further rely on Annexure-A8 communication issued by the
airport manager to the police in which also there is mention about an
altercation that took place on board the aircraft and further an intimation
that three passengers on board the flight stood up from their respective
seats and ran towards the Hon'ble Chief Minister shouting slogans in
their vernacular language and upon seeing this one of the passengers
travelling with the Hon'ble Chief Minister intervened.              Based on
Annexures A3 and A8, learned counsel for the petitioners would submit
that these are the information conveyed by the authorities at the first point
of time which does not convey the commission of any offences as alleged
against the petitioners.   It is further submitted by the counsel for the
petitioners that the contents of Annexure-A7 FI statement also do not
attract any of the offences alleged against the petitioners. It is the case of
the petitioners that when the gist of Annexure-A7 FI statement was
entered in the FIR, the investigating officer has given an improved
version, which itself will prove the falsity of the allegations. Learned
counsel for the petitioners relying on Annexures-A4 to A7 medical records
submitted that the petitioners were brutally manhandled and the fact that
the petitioners were injured is also revealed from Annexure-A1 remand
6.     The learned Director General of Prosecution Sri.T.A.Shaji
submitted that the acts alleged to be committed by the petitioners are part
of a conspiracy to attack and murder the Hon'ble Chief Minister and to
fulfill their common object.     On 13.06.2022, while the Hon'ble Chief
Minister of Kerala was travelling from Kannur to Thiruvananthapuram in
Indigo flight No. 6E 7407, the petitioners along with the 3rd accused
intentionally travelled in the same flight and when the flight was about to
land, the petitioners and 3rd accused walked inside the flight raising
political slogans and rushed to seat No. 20A where the Hon'ble Chief
Minister was sitting and shouted at him that they will not allow him to
survive and by the time personal security officer tried to restrain their act,
the petitioners along with the 3rd accused manhandled him and
voluntarily caused hurt to deter the public servant from doing his duty and
also attempted to murder the Hon’ble Chief Minister. It is further
contended that after getting out of the flight the petitioners tried to
abscond from the scene and they were restrained and when the duty
doctor of the airport consulted them he intimated that the petitioners need
medical aid and hence they were shifted to Medical College Hospital,
Thiruvananthapuram and treated as inpatient and they were arrested on
14.06.2022. It is submitted that all the accused were named in the FIR
and the call data showed that the petitioners were in constant touch on
12th and 13th of June, 2022 and that the tickets were purchased at the
same time and the same was booked using the phone of the 1 st accused
and the tickets were collected by the 2 nd accused. It is further submitted
that the CCTV footage of the Kannur Airport will reveal that all the
accused persons came together from Kannur. It is further submitted that
the 1st accused is involved in 13 criminal cases and the 3rd accused is
involved in 2 other cases and that all the three accused were jointly
involved in a crime. It is further submitted that the custody application
was allowed by the Sessions Court, Thiruvananthapuram on 21.06.2022
and the custody was granted upto to 23.06.2022 till 5.00 p.m. It is also
submitted that the behaviour of the petitioners from the time they entered
the aircraft was suspicious and the same was noticed by the personal
security officers of the Hon'ble Chief Minister. Learned Director General
of Prosecution further submitted that the investigation is in progress and
the custodial interrogation of the petitioners is absolutely necessary to
unearth the criminal conspiracy.
7.     It is the futher case of the petitioners that provisions of
Section 11A of the Aircraft Act are not applicable in the facts of this case
in as much as Section 11A of the said Act is about punishment for willful
non-compliance with the directions issued under Section 5A of the Act.
Section 5A specifically mandates that the Director General of Civil
Aviation or any other officer specifically empowered on this behalf by the
Central Government in this regard may issue order or direction in respect
of matters specified in Clauses (aa), (b) (c) (e) (f) (g) (ga) (gb) (gc) (h) (i)
(m) and (qq) of Sub-section (2) of Section 5 of the Act to any person or
persons using any aerodrome or engaging in the aircraft operations, air
traffic control, maintenance and operation of aerodrome, communication,
navigation, surveillance and air traffic management facilities and
safeguarding civil aviation against acts of unlawful interference, in case
where the Director General of Civil Aviation or such other officer is
satisfied that in the interest of the security of India or for securing the
safety of aircraft operation and such direction shall be complied with by
the person or persons to whom such direction is issued and it is
submiited that a perusal of the same will show that these are essentially
directions issued to operators or other persons for securing the safety of
aircraft operations. Rule 22 of the Aircraft (Investigation of Accidents and
Incidents) Rules, 2017 is also incorporated in the FIR. It is contended that
the FIS or the FIR is silent regarding any violation of the said rule
whereby the petitioners are liable for penalty mentioned in Rule 22. As
regards the alleged violation of Section 3(1) of the Suppression of
unlawful Acts against Safety of Civil Aviation Act, 1982 contention of the
petitioners is that the said section is not applicable in the facts of the
present case in as much as the same is regarding punishment for
unlawfully and intentionally committing an act of violence against a
person on board of an aircraft, in flight, which is likely to endanger the
safety of such aircraft and contended that the act of violence if any should
be likely to endanger the safety of aircraft and that none of the
ingredients of the said Section is attracted in the present case. The
specific contention of the petitioners is that they are members of a
particular political party and they have raised slogans in protest of certain
allegations against the Hon'ble Chief Minister and that they have not
committed any offence alleged. It is the contention of the counsel for the
petitioners that it was they who were physically assaulted and that it is
clear from Annexure A1 remand application that they were undergoing
treatment at Medical College, Hospital, Thiruvanathapuram and therefore
the allegation that the petitioner attempted to attack the security officers
and obstructed the performance of their public duty is without any basis
and therefore the provisions of Section 332 IPC is also not attracted. It is
further contended that since the petitioners are inside an aircraft which is
a high-security zone there is no chance for them to carry any weapons for
the commission of the offence alleged and that the allegation that they
attempted to commit murder is without any basis and therefore the
provisions of Section 307 IPC is not attracted. Even though it is stated by
the prosecution that the 1st petitioner is involved in 13 cases and that the
2nd petitioner is also involved in crimes, it is the specific case of the
counsel for the petitioners that most of these cases are charged when
they were involved in political agitations. They have also raised a
contention that further custodial interrogation is not required since
Sessions Court has already granted custody of the petitioners.
8. It will be relevant to note the parameters laid down by this court
as well as the Apex Court in the matter of granting bail. This court in
Gopinathan pillai & others v. State of kerala, 1969 KLT 841 held thus.
''6. .............................. Pre-trial detention has a purpose and
policy and, therefore, the issue of bail or jail must be decided
on relevant criteria and not on emotionally appealing but legally
impertinent circumstances. While deprivation of liberty is a
sequel to conviction, antecedent incarceration amounts to
punishment without trial, unless justified on some civilized
principles bearing on the administration of justice. The infliction
of humiliation, the cruelty of jail life and the prejudice suffered
by a party in the conduct of his defence do irreparable damage
to a man and it is poor comfort to be told that he would be
acquitted ultimately if he were really innocent. That is why
Courts have to take conscientious care not to be deflected by
sentiment or scared by ghastliness but to be guided by the high
principle that public justice shall not be thwarted and the
course of the trial defeated or delayed by the accused person,
be he high or low. This being the perspective, purpose and
policy regarding bail, I must agree with counsel for the
petitioners that the high death roll, very regrettable though,
cannot stampede a Court into refusal of bail and the longer
casualty list on the other side cannot weigh against the
The Apex Court in State of Rajasthan v. Balchand, (1977) 4 SCC 308,
held thus.
''2.The basic rule may perhaps be tersely put as bail, not
jail, except where there are circumstances suggestive of
fleeing from justice or thwarting the course of justice or
creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like, by the petitioner who
seeks enlargement on bail from the Court. We do not intend to
be exhaustive but only illustrative.''
The Apex Court has reiterated the said position in P. Chidambaram vs
Directorate of Enforcement, (2020) 13 SCC 791 which held that the
basic jurisprudence relating to bail remains the same inasmuch as the
grant of bail is the rule and refusal is the exception so as to ensure that
the accused has the opportunity of securing fair trial.
9.    There is no case for the prosecution that the petitioners were
carrying any weapon and admittedly petitioners being inside an aircraft,
which is a high security zone, there is no possibility for any of the
petitioners to carry any weapon also. The investigating agency has no
case that the motive for the alleged incident is of any personal enmity and
it is the specific contention of the petitioners that the same was part of a
political agitation. The petitioners are already arrested on 14.06.2022 and
the Sessions Court has also granted custody of the petitioners to the
investigating agency. There is no case that any further recovery is to be
effected at their instance. If at all any recovery is to be made it is always
open for the investigating officer to do that even when the petitioners are
on bail. [See paragraph 84 Clause (g) of the decision of the Apex Court in
Sushila Aggarwal v. State (NCT of Delhi) reported in 2020 (1) KHC 663
(SC). Annexure 3 report of the Airport Manager to the Station House
Officer, Valiyathura Police Station, which is first in point of time, only says
that they were informed that an alleged altercation took place on board
the flight between three passengers who were seated on Seat No. 8A, 8C
and 7D. A subsequent report by the Airport Manager dated 14.06.2022
also revealed that after landing as soon as seat belt sign went off, the
said passengers immediately stood up from their respective seats and
rushed toward the Hon’ble Chief Minister, shouting slogans in the
vernacular language and upon seeing this one of the passengers
travelling with the Hon’ble Chief Minister intervened.
Considering the nature of the allegations I feel that further
custodial interrogation of the petitioners is not necessary, but taking into
consideration the contentions raised by the prosecution that the
investigation is only in the initial stage and further investigation is to be
done to unearth any conspiracy involving other persons, I feel that there
should be a direction that the petitioners should co-operate with the
investigation. Therefore, I am inclined to grant bail to the petitioner on
stringent conditions.
(i)   Petitioners shall be released on bail on 24.06.2022 on
executing a bond of Rs.50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand only) each with
two solvent sureties each for the like sum to the satisfaction of the
jurisdictional court.
(ii)  Petitioners shall appear before the investigating officer as
and when required and shall co-operate with the investigation.
(iii) Petitioners shall surrender their passport. If they do not have
a passport, they shall file an affidavit to that effect before the jurisdictional
court, within a period of one week from the date of release.
(iv)     The petitioners shall not attempt to interfere with the
investigation or to influence or intimidate any witness in Crime No. 511 of
2022 of Valiyathura Police Station.
(v)    Petitioners shall not enter Thiruvanthapuram District till the
filing of the charge sheet except to comply with condition No.(ii) or to
attend any court proceedings.
(vi) The petitioners shall not involve in any other crime while on
If any of the aforesaid conditions are violated, the investigating
officer in Crime No.511 of 2022 of Valiyathura Police Station, may file an
application before the jurisdictional court, for cancellation of bail.
It is made clear that it is within the power of the police to
investigate the matter and if necessary, effect recoveries on the
information if any given by the petitioners, even when the petitioners are
on bail. [See paragraph 84 Clause (g) of the decision of the Apex Court in
Sushila Aggarwal v. State (NCT of Delhi) reported in 2020 (1) KHC