Colony, Jodhpur (resident of Italy) presently in Indonesia.
The present Criminal Misc. Petition has been preferred
against the order dated 05.08.2021 passed by learned ADJ
(Women Atrocities Cases), Jodhpur Metropolitan in Criminal Appeal
No.11/2021 filed against the order dated 11.02.2021 passed by
Civil Judge and Jodhpur Metro Magistrate No.6, Jodhpur.
The petitioner preferred an application for rejection of
complaint undertaken by the respondent- complainant under
section 12 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act,
2005 (hereinafter referred to as the ‘Act of 2005’). The application
preferred by the petitioner on the ground of maintainability of the
complaint as being non maintainable was dismissed by the learned
trial  court   vide  order     dated       11.02.2021.          The   order   dated
11.02.2021 was assailed by the petitioner by way of filing an
appeal before the appellate court and the same was also rejected
by the appellate court vide order dated 05.08.2021. Aggrieved
against the orders dated 11.02.2021 and 05.08.2021, the present
petition has been filed.
Learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently submits that
the application preferred by the respondent No.2 i.e. complainant
before the trial court under section 12 of the Act of 2005 is not
maintainable as the petitioner and the respondent No.2 are not
Indian citizens and thus, are not amenable to the jurisdiction of the
Act of 2005.    He further submits that since the petitioner was only
resident of India at that relevant point of time will not confer
jurisdiction in the present case.
Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent No.2 submits
that by virtue of definition of section 2 (a) and section 12 of the
Act of 2005, the present application is very much maintainable.
I have considered the submissions made at the bar and gone
through the orders dated 11.02.2021 and 05.08.2021 passed by
the courts below.
The facts which are noted for decision in the present case are
that on 23.10.2019, an application under section 12 of the Act of
2005 was preferred by the respondent No.2.                       The notices were
issued to the petitioner. On 05.12.2019, time was sought by the
present petitioner through counsel to file reply to the application.
Thereafter, on 12.01.2021, an application was preferred regarding
maintainability of the petition before the trial court.                     To this
application,   a  reply   was      filed     by     the     respondent    No.2   on
22.01.2021 and finally after the arguments were heard, the
application preferred by the petitioner was rejected by the trial
court vide order dated 11.02.2021. Against the order dated
11.02.2021, the petitioner preferred an appeal before the appellate
court and the same was rejected by the appellate court vide order
It is noted that as per section 2(a) of the Act of 2005, the
definition of ‘aggrieved person’ is given and as per the definition
itself, any woman including a foreign citizen who is subjected to
domestic violence can maintain an application before the trial court
under the Act of 2005. Section 2 (a) of the Act of 2005 reads as
“2(a) “aggrieved person” means any woman who is,
or has been, in a domestic relationship with the
respondent and who alleges to have been subjected
to any act of domestic violence by the respondent”.
Not only this, section 12 of the Act of 2005 provides that
even an aggrieved person can prefer an application through
protection officer seeking the relief under the Act of 2005. For
brevity, section 12 of the Act of 2005 is reproduced as under:-
“12. Application to Magistrate:- (1) An aggrieved
person or a Protection Officer or any other person on
behalf of the aggrieved person may present an
application to the Magistrate seeking one or more reliefs
under this Act.
Provided that before passing any order on such
application, the Magistrate shall take into consideration
any domestic incident report received by him from the
Protection Officer or the service provider”.
The fact that the respondent No.2 is resident of Jodhpur for
last about 25 years and after having solemnized marriage with the
petitioner, the incident which is reported in the complaint also took
place at Jodhpur and therefore, in view of definitions enumerated
under sections 2 (a) and 12 of the Act of 2005, it is held that the
application preferred by the respondent No.2 before the trial court
is maintainable. The observations of the Supreme Court in the case
of Shyamlal Devda & Ors. V/s Parimala reported in AIR
2020 SC 762 also fortifies the fact of maintainability of the
application under section 12 of the Act of 2005 in the present case.
Para 10 of the judgment rendered in the case of Shyamlal Devda
“10. Insofar as the jurisdiction of the Bengaluru Court,
as pointed out by the High Court, Section 27of the
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act,
2005 covers the situation. Section 27of the Act reads
(1) The court of Judicial Magistrate of the first class or
the Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be,
(a) the person aggrieved permanently or temporarily
resides or carries on business or is employed; or
(b) the respondent resides or carries on business or is
(c) the cause of action has arisen, shall be the
competent court to grant a protection order and other
orders under this Act and to try offences under this
(2) Any order made under this Act shall be enforceable
throughout India.
A plain reading of the above provision makes it
clear that the petition under the Domestic Violence
Act can be filed in a court where the “person
aggrieved” permanently or temporarily resides or
carries on business or is employed. In the present
case, the respondent is residing with her parents
within the territorial limits of Metropolitan Magistrate
Court, Bengaluru. In view of Section 27(1) (a) of the Act,
the Metropolitan Magistrate court, Bengaluru has the
jurisdiction to entertain the complaint and take
cognizance of the offence. There is no merit in the
the Metropolitan Magistrate Court at Bengaluru”.
A plain reading of Act of 2005 also reveals that protection
under this Act is also extended to the persons who are temporarily
resident of India being covered under the definition of aggrieved
person as per section 2 (a) of the Act of 2005.
Even Article 21 of the Constitution of India extends the
benefit of protection not only to every citizen of this country, but
also to a “person” who may not be a citizen of the Country. Article
21 states that no person shall be deprived of his life or personal
liberty except according to a procedure established by law.
Therefore, looked at from that angle, a person aggrieved i.e.
respondent No.2 is very much entitled to get protection of section
12 of the Act of 2005.
The above observation is also supported by the judgment of
the Supreme Court in the case of Chairman, Railway Board and
Others Versus Chandrima Das (Mrs.) and Others reported in
(2000) 2 SCC 465. The relevant paras of said judgment read as
“19. It was next contended by the learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellants, that Smt. Hanuffa
Khatoon was a foreign national and, therefore, no relief
under Public Law could be granted to her as there was
no violation of the Fundamental Rights available under
the Constitution. It was contended that the Fundamental
Rights in Part III of the Constitution are available only to
citizens of this country and since Smt. Hanuffa Khatoon
was a Bangladeshi national, she cannot complain of the
violation of Fundamental Rights and on that basis she
cannot be granted any relief. This argument must also
fail for two reasons; first, on the ground of Domestic
Jurisprudence based on Constitutional provisions and
secondly, on the ground of Human Rights Jurisprudence
based on the Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
1948, which has the international recognition as the
"Moral Code of Conduct" having been adopted by the
General Assembly of the United Nations.
27. Our Constitution guarantees all the basic and
fundamental human rights set out in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, 1948, to its citizens and
other persons. The chapter dealing with the
Fundamental Rights is contained in Part III of the
Constitution. The purpose of this Part is to safeguard
the basic human rights from the vicissitudes of political
controversy and to place them beyond the reach of the
political parties who, by virtue of their majority, may
come to form the Govt. at the Centre or in the State.
28. The Fundamental Rights are available to all the
"citizens" of the country but a few of them are also
available to "persons". While Article 14, which
guarantees equality before law or the equal protection
of laws within the territory of India, is applicable to
"person" which would also include the "citizen" of the
country and "non- citizen" both, Article 15 speaks only of
"citizen" and it is specifically provided therein that there
shall be no discrimination against any "citizen" on the
ground only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth
or any of them nor shall any citizen be subjected to any
disability, liability, restriction or condition with regard to
access to shops, public restaurants, hotels and places of
public entertainment, or the use of wells, tanks, bathing
ghats, roads and places of public resort on the aforesaid
grounds. Fundamental Right guaranteed under Article
15 is, therefore, restricted to "citizens". So also, Article
16 which guarantees equality of opportunity in matters
of public employment is applicable only to "citizens".
The Fundamental Rights contained in Article 19, which
contains the right to "Basic Freedoms", namely, freedom
of speech and expression; freedom to assemble
peaceably and without arms; freedom to form
associations or unions; freedom to move freely
throughout the territory of India; freedom to reside and
settle in any part of the territory of India and freedom
to practise any profession, or to carry on any
occupation, trade or business, are available only to
"citizens" of the country.
29. The word "citizen" in Article 19 has not been used
in a sense different from that in which it has been used
in Part II of the Constitution dealing with "citizenship".
[See: STC of India Ltd. v. CTO]. It has also been held in
this case that the words "all citizens" have been
deliberately used to keep out all "non-citizens" which
would include "aliens". It was laid down in Hans Muller
of Nurenburg vs. Superintendent Presidency Jail, AIR at
P.374that this Article applies only to "citizens". In
another decision in Anwar vs. State of J & K, it was
held that non-citizen could not claim Fundamental
Rights under Article 19. In Naziranbai vs. State, and
Lakshmi Prasad v. Shiv Pal, it was held that Article 19
does not apply to a "foreigner". The Calcutta High Court
in Sk. Md. Soleman v. State of WB held that Article 19
does not apply to a Commonwealth citizen.”
In view of the discussions made above, the orders dated
11.02.2021 passed by the learned Civil Judge & Metropolitan
Magistrate No.6, Jodhpur Metropolitan in Misc. Case No.341/2019
and order dated 05.08.2021 passed by learned ADJ (Women
Atrocities    Cases),   Jodhpur       Metropolitan            Jodhpur   in  Appeal
No.11/2021 do not suffer from any infirmity. The present petition,
therefore, is dismissed being bereft of merit.
In view of dismissal of the present petition, all the pending
interlocutory applications also stand dismissed.