1.     This judgment shall govern the disposal of W.P.(Crl.) Nos.
2236/2022 and 2237/2022 arising out of common set of facts,
contentions and prayer.
2.     The petitioner before this Court is a Station House Officer
(SHO) who is currently posted at Police Station Greater Kailash-I. By
way of the present writ petition, filed under Article 226/227 of
Constitution of India read with Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, the petitioner seeks deletion of remarks made
against him and setting aside the directions issued to the
Commissioner of Police to get an inquiry conducted against him, in a
common order dated 06.09.2022 passed in Criminal Appeal No.
573/2019 and 574/2019, both titled as “Amitabh Sanyal v. Siddharth
Sharma” by learned Additional Sessions Judge (South-East), Saket
3.      The brief facts of the case of criminal appeals, in the trial of
which directions have been passed against the petitioner, are as
i. Criminal Appeal Nos. 573/2019 and 574/2019 arising out of
complaint case under Section 138 Negotiable Instruments
Act, 1881 were pending before the concerned court of learned
ASJ, Saket Courts, New Delhi. The appellant therein who had
been convicted, was sought to be served through court
process, for which Non-Bailable Warrants (NBW) and Notice
to the surety were ordered to be issued, vide order dated
13.5.2022 returnable for 08.07.2022.
ii. These processes were received in P.S. Greater Kailash-I on
09.06.2022 and the Petitioner got sent these processes to In-
charge Summon Pool, South District on the same day i.e.,
09.06.2022 against their receipt.
iii. Copies of report of Non-Bailable Warrants against appellant
and notice to his surety were received through WhatsApp by
In-charge Summons Pool and the same were forwarded to the
learned Trial Court.
iv. Vide order dated 08.07.2022, learned Trial Court issued a
notice to the present Petitioner to appear in person along with
original reports of Non-Bailable Warrants and notice to surety
of appellant, along with a separate notice seeking explanation
as to why action be not recommended against him for
violation of Standing Order No. 200 and Circular No.
64/2012. The relevant portion of order dated 08.07.2022 is
reproduced as under:
“...Reports of Warrant and notice to surety of
appellant have been forwarded by I/C Summons Pool,
South District. Case pertains to PS GK.
Issue notice to SHO PS GK to appear in person with
original reports of NBW and notice to surety of
appellant on NDOH.
Issue separate notice to SHO PS GK to explain as to
why action be not recommended against him for
violation of Standing Order No. 200 and Circular No.
64/2012 for NDOH...”
v. On 06.09.2022, the petitioner had appeared and submitted his
report/reply before the learned Trial Court wherein it was
contended that Non-Bailable Warrants and notice to surety
were got served through Summon Pool of South District,
against proper receipt on 09.06.2022 for further necessary
action, and that the said Non-Bailable Warrants/notice were
got executed by staff of Summon Pool, South District.
4.     The entire controversy in the present petition arises from the
observations made and directions issued by the learned Trial Court in
Criminal Appeal Nos. 573/2019 and 574/2019, in the impugned order
dated 06.09.2022 with regard to the petitioner.
5.     The learned Trial Court, after taking into account the reply
dated 06.09.2022 filed by the petitioner in response to the notice
issued against him, had observed that Non-Bailable Warrants against
appellant and notice to his surety were ordered to be issued through
SHO, P.S. Greater Kailash-I for 08.07.2022, by virtue of order dated
13.05.2022, but the SHO assigned process issued by Court to
6.     Further, the Trial Court observed that although the original
Non-Bailable Warrants and notice to surety issued by the Court was
filed in the court by In-charge, Summon Pool, South District,
however, there was no original report of service of Non-Bailable
Warrants against appellant and notice to surety of appellant. In-
charge, Summon Pool, South District had submitted before learned
Trial Court that he had received report from concerned Process
Servers on WhatsApp and that he will make efforts to find original
reports of the said Non-Bailable Warrants and notice. It was also
observed that SHO P.S. Greater Kailash-I has also not placed on
record the original reports of service of Non-Bailable Warrants and
notice.
7.     The learned Trial Court in such a situation observed that the
petitioner herein was merely trying to pass on his responsibility to the
Summons Pool, South District and the same was also in violation of
Standing Order No. 200 and Circular No. 64/2012. The observation
of the Court in this regard is as under:
“SHO PS GK-I can not shrug off his responsibility by
saying that as process issued by the Court were handed
over by him to Summon Pool, South District, the
responsibility lies with I/C, Summon Pool, South District.
The responsibility of returning process issued by the
Court remains to be that of SHO PS GK when noting to
this effect was made on process issued by the Court and
order dated 13.05.2022 says so.
It is surprising that original reports of NBW against
appellant and notice to surety of appellant despite issuing
notice to SHO PS GK have not been produced before this
Court. SHO PS GK does not appear to have bothered
even to get traced original report of NBW against
appellant and notice to surety of appellant.
Earlier also, highly irresponsible conduct of SHO PS GK-
I has been noted by this Court in FIR No. 201/2018, PS
GK-I vide order dated 30.07.2022, in FIR No. 195/2019,
PS GK-I vide order dated 31.03.2022 and in CR No.
271/2018 vide order dated 09.03.2022.”
8.     In the light of aforesaid facts and circumstances, learned Trial
Court passed certain remarks impeaching the credibility of the
petitioner as a police officer, and even directed the Commissioner of
Delhi Police to take corrective measures against him and place the
report before the learned Trial Court. The observations made and the
strictures passed in the impugned order dated 06.09.2022, the legality
of which has been challenged before this court, are reproduced
“...From conduct of SHO PS GK-I, it appears that he has
no sense of responsibility and devotion towards duty and
he remains in different to directions of Court. Let copy of
this order and orders as mentioned in last para be sent to
CP, Delhi with direction to take corrective measures and
take action against SHO PS GK-I for consistent default in
performing his duties for 30.09.2022.Whether or not an
officer like SHO PS GK-I is fit for performing duties as
SHO is left on wisdom of CP, Delhi to take a call...”
(emphasis supplied)
9.     Mr. Vikas Pahwa, learned senior counsel for the petitioner
submits that the petitioner who is presently serving as SHO at Police
Station GK-I has an impeccable service record since his joining the
services in 1997. It is argued that the learned Trial Court erred in
holding that the act of petitioner was in violation of Standing Order
No. 200 of 1988 and Circular No. 64/2012 because both these
orders/circulars had already been superseded by Standing Order No.
200 of 2015, and this standing order also now stands superseded by
the new „Standing Order No Lic. & Legal/16/2022‟ dated
18.02.2022, and the process adopted by the petitioner was in
accordance with the new standing order. Since the process issued by
the Court were of outstation, there is no requirement in the outstation
processes, that the report is required to be mandatorily signed by the
SHO. Learned senior counsel further submits that since the District
Summons Pool has been created under the new standing order, the
incharge thereof is not under the control /supervision of the SHO, and
as such they are required to submit their reports directly to the court
without first submitting it to the concerned police station.
10.    Mr. Pahwa also argued that though the learned Trial Court has
also laid emphasis on highly irresponsible conduct of the petitioner
on past three occasions, the said observation is misplaced since there
were only minor errors or delays in past which are bound to happen
in due course and the same had duly been rectified on time.
11.    Learned senior counsel, while placing reliance upon several
judgments of Hon‟ble Supreme Court and this Court, argued that
directing the administrative authorities /superior police authorities to
take legal /departmental action against the petitioner was neither
mandated in law nor in practice, and same shall seriously affect the
service career of the petitioner.
12.    Ms. Rupali Bandhopadhya, learned Additional Standing
Counsel for the State submits that state is also aggrieved by the
aforesaid observations, remarks and directions of the Trial Court and
seeks deletion of the same in view of the law laid down in this regard
in catena of judgments.
13.    Mr. Sanjeev Bhandari, learned ASC for the State, who was
present in the Court during the hearing of present matter also assisted
the Court. This Court appreciates the able assistance rendered by Mr.
14.    There are two aspects in the present case. Firstly, as to whether
there was any lapse on part of the petitioner in forwarding the
processes issued by the court to the In-charge, District Summons
Pool, and secondly, as to whether the remarks and directions passed
against the petitioner by learned Trial Court are valid in the eyes of
law or mandated in consonance with the alleged lapses on the part of
the petitioner.
15.    As the controversy in the impugned order relates to service of
warrants and notice by police officers, it would be appropriate to first
refer to the relevant orders and circulars issued in this regard by the
16.    The impugned order mentions the conduct of petitioner to be in
violation of Standing Order No. 200 and Circular No. 64/2012. The
observation of Trial Court in this respect is as under:
“As per circular No. 64/2012 issued by DCP, Legal Cell,
PHQ, all summons and warrants are to be executed
expeditiously and returned to concerned Court with
appropriate endorsement and signatures of SHO with
date, at least one day before the date when the case is
affixed.
As per Standing Order No. 200 issued by CP, Delhi,
SHOs / IOs in those cases the service of summons /
warrants remain poor shall be considered as lacking in
control and serious notice of this defect shall be taken
against them at the time of assessment of their work.”
17.     However, Standing Order No. 200 and Circular No. 64/2012
had already been superseded in the year 2015 vide Standing order
No. 200/2015, relevant portion of which is as under:
“Speedy disposal of cases in the courts depend, to a great
extent, on the effective service of summons and warrants.
The SHOs/ TIs/Units Incharge have a pivotal role in
supervising the V-B (PPR Register No.V-B) staff of their
respective Police Stations. The following instructions
shall be meticulously followed by the process server while
serving summons and warrants:
This Standing Order supersedes previous Standing Order
issued vide No.29393-600/C&T/AC-IV dated 21.10.1988
and all other circulars/instructions on the subject.”
18.    The latest standing order, i.e., „Standing Order No Lic. &
Legal/16/2022‟ dated 18.02.2022, specifically supersedes the
Standing Order No. 200/15. The relevant portion of the new standing
order, dealing with the execution of summons and warrants is
reproduced as under:
“Speedy disposal of cases in the courts depend, to a great
extent, on the effective service of summons and warrants.
The SHOs/ TIs/Units Incharge have a pivotal role in
supervising the V-B (PPR Register No.V-B) staff of their
respective Police Stations/Units/Sections. The following
instructions shall be meticulously followed by the process
server while serving summons and warrants: ...
Server Pool shall be created in each District with
sufficient staff. Incharge/District Process Server Pool
shall be tasked to serve process issued from various
courts outside Delhi. On receipt of processes related to
outside Delhi, SHO will send the processes to I/C Distt.
Process Server Pool for service in all such cases where
time is beyond 15 days. When summon is to be served at
any place outside the local jurisdiction of a police
station/Traffic Circle/Unit in Delhi. Such summon shall
be got served through the V-B Staff of the Police
Station/Traffic Circle/Unit, who will be responsible for
ensuring service of summon well before due date and
submit the report through the concerned SHO/TI/Unit.
However, for summon to be served outside Delhi where
the time is short i.e. less than 15 days or when the last
opportunity notice has been received from the court, the
concerned SHO/TI/Unit Incharge shall get such summon
served even out-side Delhi through a special process
server and in addition also send it by Fax or/and E-mail
to the concerned SP/SSP through Distt./Unit DCP.
Summons received from outstations shall also be served
in the manner mentioned above. The SHO/TI/Unit
Incharge/ Incharge V-B shall not send the
summons/bailable warrants through post to out stations
on their own...
This Standing Order supersedes previous Standing
OrderNo.200/2015 issued vide No.1918-2280/Record
It is made clear that this Standing Order is exclusively for
internal smooth functioning of Police Department.”
(emphasis supplied)
19.    As regards the observation of learned Trial Court that the
petitioner was in violation of Standing Order No. 200 and Circular
No. 64/2012, it was argued before this Court that the Standing Order
No. 200 as mentioned in the impugned order is of the year 1988 and
the same had already been superseded by Standing Order No. 200 of
2015, which also now stands superseded by Standing Order No Lic.
& Legal/16/2022. A perusal of this new standing order reveals that a
District Process Server Pool has been created for effective service of
summons and warrants, and it specifically mentions that on receipt of
processes related to outside Delhi, SHO will send the processes to In-
charge, District Process Server Pool for service in all such cases
where time is beyond 15 days. Thus, in the present case, there
appears to be no irregularity on the part of petitioner in getting the
processes issued through the In-charge, Summons Pool, South
20.    It was further argued that no specific course has been
mentioned in the new standing order with regard to forwarding the
service reports of summons and warrants to the concerned courts, in
view of which, it should be presumed that the said process is also to
be carried out by the District Process Server Pool and the in-charge
thereof. After perusing the latest standing order in this regard, and
there being nothing on record which is contrary to the stand of
petitioner, this Court is in agreement with the argument that the
petitioner was not bound to forward the service reports of Non-
Bailable Warrants and notice to surety to the learned Trial Court.
21.    It will also be pertinent to note that Circular no. 64/2012 was
issued in view of the directions contained in standing order no. 200 of
1988, and since the said standing order as well circulars/instructions
issued on the subject had already been superseded by Standing Order
No. 200/2015, the reference and reliance upon Circular no. 64/2012
by the learned Trial Court is also invalid and incorrect.
22.    However, a perusal of reply dated 06.09.2022 filed by the
petitioner before the learned Trial Court reveals that the new standing
order i.e., Standing Order No Lic. & Legal/16/2022 was not placed
before the learned Trial Court for its consideration. Rather, the
petitioner in his reply had stated that he had instructed his staff to
follow the guidelines laid down in Standing Order No. 200 and
Circular No. 64/2012, therefore, the learned Trial Court could not
have been in knowledge of the internal circular of the Delhi Police.
The petitioner himself does not seem to be aware of it and has not
brought it to notice of the learned Trial Court, in his reply. The
Disclaimer in this regard in the standing order made it clear “that this
Standing Order is exclusively for internal functioning of Police
Department”, it was not in public domain, it was not brought
therefore, to knowledge of Court by the petitioner himself. In case the
same would have been brought to Court‟s notice, it might have been
a different situation.
(ii) Remarks/Action against police officers
23.    The second issue before this Court is that whether the learned
Trial Court could have passed the remarks and directions against the
petitioner in the impugned order. The law in this regard is discussed
in the succeeding paras.
24.     Section 6 of Chapter 1, Part H („The Judgment‟) of the Delhi
High Court Rules for “Practice in the Trial of Criminal Cases”
pertains to criticism on the conduct of Police and other officers. The
same is reproduced as under:
“6. Criticism on the conduct of Police and other
officers—It is undesirable for Courts to make remarks
censuring the action of police officers unless such
remarks are strictly relevant of the case. It is to be
observed that the Police have great difficulties to contend
with in this country, chiefly because they receive little
sympathy or assistance from the people in their efforts to
detect crime. Nothing can be more disheartening to them
than to find that, when they have worked up a case, they
are regarded with distrust by the Courts; that the smallest
irregularity is magnified into a grave misconduct and that
every allegation of ill-usage is readily accepted as true.
That such allegations may sometimes be true it is
impossible to deny but on a closer scrutiny they are
generally found to be far more often false. There should
not be an over-alacrity on the part of Judicial Officers to
believe anything and everything against the police; but if
it be proved that the police have manufactured evidence
by extorting confessions or tutoring witnesses they can
hardly be too severely punished. Whenever a Magistrate
finds it necessary to make any criticism on the work and
conduct of any Government servant, he should send a
copy of his judgment to the District Magistrate who will
forward a copy of it to the Registrar, High Court,
accompanied by a covering letter giving reference to the
Home Secretary‟s circular Letter No. 920-J-36/14753,
dated the 15th April, 1936.”
25.    In Dr. Dilip Kumar Deka and Anr. v. State of Assam and
Anr., (1996) 6 SCC 234, the Hon‟ble Apex Court while dealing with
the tests to be applied when dealing with question of deletion of
disparaging remarks against authorities, held as under:
“6. The tests to be applied while dealing with the question
of expunction of disparaging remarks against a person or
authorities whose conduct comes in for consideration
before a court of law in cases to be decided by it were
succinctly laid down by this Court in State of U.P. v.
(1964) 2 SCR 363] . Those tests are:
(a) Whether the party whose conduct is in question is
before the court or has an opportunity of explaining or
defending himself;
(b) Whether there is evidence on record bearing on that
conduct justifying the remarks; and
(c) Whether it is necessary for the decision of the case, as
an integral part thereof, to animadvert on that conduct.
7. We are surprised to find that in spite of the above
catena of decisions of this Court, the learned Judge did
not, before making the remarks, give any opportunity to
the appellants, who were admittedly not parties to the
revision petition, to defend themselves. It cannot be
gainsaid that the nature of remarks the learned Judge has
made, has cast a serious aspersion on the appellants
affecting their character and reputation and may,
ultimately affect their career also. Condemnation of the
appellants without giving them an opportunity of being
heard was a complete negation of the fundamental
principle of natural justice.”
26.    The Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the State of West Bengal v.
Mir Mohammad Omar & Ors (2000) 8 SCC 382, has directed the
courts to ordinarily desist from castigating the investigation even
while ordering acquittal. The observation is as under:
“41. Learned Judges of the Division Bench did not make
any reference to any particular omission or lacuna in the
investigation. Castigation of investigation unfortunately
seems to be a regular practice when the trial courts
acquit accused in criminal cases. In our perception it is
almost impossible to come across a single case wherein
the investigation was conducted completely flawless or
absolutely fool proof. The function of the criminal courts
should not be wasted in picking out the lapses in
investigation and by expressing unsavory criticism
against investigating officers. If offenders are acquitted
only on account of flaws or defects in investigation, the
cause of criminal justice becomes the victim. Effort
should be made by courts to see that criminal justice is
salvaged despite such defects in investigation. Courts
should bear in mind the time constraints of the police
officers in the present system, the ill-equipped machinery
they have to cope with, and the traditional apathy of
respectable persons to come forward for giving evidence
in criminal cases which are realities the police force have
to confront with while conducting investigation in almost
every case. Before an investigating officer is imputed with
castigating remarks the courts should not overlook the
fact that usually such an officer is not heard in respect of
such remarks made against them. In our view the court
need make such deprecatory remarks only when it is
absolutely necessary in a particular case, and that too by
keeping in mind the broad realities indicated above.”
27.    In Pramod Kumar Jha v. State of Bihar, Crl. Appeal
1092/2002, the Hon‟ble Apex Court had ordered the deletion of the
directions given for initiation of departmental proceedings against the
investigating officer of the case while holding that directing
proceedings against an officer virtually amounts to finding a person
guilty, which is not a permissible course.
28.    A Co-ordinate bench of this Court in Rakesh Chand v. State
2015 SCC OnLine Del 14193 while dealing with similar facts at
hand, after considering law laid down by Hon'ble Supreme Court of
India held as under:
''23. Even if there was a lapse on the part of the
petitioners as police officers, what the Trial Court was
required to do was to record such lapse and indicate that
in future such lapses should not occur. Straightway
directing the administrative authorities/ superior police
authorities to take legal/departmental action against the
petitioners only meant that the petitioners were also
convicted along with the accused persons in the present
case and for proper sentencing, their cases were sent to
the superior police authorities. This procedure is not
mandated either by law or practice.”
29.    In an another similar case titled State v. Yogender Singh 2015
SCC OnLine Del 14203, Co-ordinate bench of this Court while
expunging the direction passed by trial court to the Commissioner of
Police to take action against the concerned investigating officer,
observed as under:
"15. While administering justice, a judge is expected to be
acting judicially without being deterred by any
consideration. While doing so he has the liberty of
expressing his views about the conduct of the
investigating agency or other organs of government but
has to be careful about not overstepping its jurisdiction.
An order or a judgement is a privileged document and a
judge has always to remind himself that the immunity
which he enjoys in writing an order or a judgement
carries with it the duty of circumspection.
16. If the learned Addl. Sessions Judge was not happy
with the way in which the investigation was being carried
out, it was enough to record his displeasure. That has
been aptly done by the learned addl. Sessions Judge.
What is not approved is his direction to send his order to
commissioner of police for taking action against the
erring police officials and submission of action taken
report to him. This cannot be taken kindly to on two
scores. By saying so, the learned Judge has prejudged the
action/inaction of the investigating agency and other
police officers without affording any opportunity to
explain the circumstances for 'delayed lodging of the first
information report; and the Court, by seeking action
taken report has in a way, encroached upon the
administrative functions of the police administration and
thereby has begun monitoring not the investigation of the
case but the process of taking disciplinary action against
the police officials. The Commissioner of Police, is left
with no choice, once a Court of law holds that law has
been flouted and, therefore, action be taken against the
concerned persons. The disciplinary enquiry, therefore,
would only be on paper when the offence is held by the
court to have been committed.
17. The observations of the Court with regard to the
failure of the investigating agency in taking prompt action
is justified and is not being interfered with. What is
unnecessary and unwarranted is the direction to the
Commissioner of Police for taking action against erring
police officials and submission of ATR in that regard.
Such directions cannot be countenanced in the eyes of
law."
30.    As observed by Hon‟ble Supreme Court as well by this Court
in catena of judgments, it is impermissible in law to pass such
sweeping remarks against police officers, and direct higher
authorities to take action against them. In case of any lapse or
irregularity, the concerned court can record such lapse and indicate
future course of action, but passing disparaging remarks affecting the
career of a public servant must not be the course to be adopted.
31.    It is pertinent to note that even clause 21 of the Standing Order
No Lic. & Legal/16/2022 makes it clear that the same is meant
exclusively for internal smooth functioning of Police Department.
Standing Order No. 200 of 1988, which stands superseded, also
mentions that serious notice of defects shall be taken against the
officers, in cases where the service of summons/warrants remain
poor, at the time of assessment of work. This, however, cannot be
relied upon so as to direct the Commissioner of Police to take action
against the petitioner and also submit the report on a specified date. It
was purely an internal administrative prerogative of the concerned
department to do so.
32.    As observed, the facts in the present case point out that the
petitioner had acted as per process laid down in Standing Order No
Lic. & Legal/16/2022 for the service of summons and warrants issued
by the Trial Court. However, learned Trial Court observed that the
petitioner lacked sense of responsibility and devotion towards his
duty, thus, unworthy of being an SHO, and direction was issued to
Commissioner of Police Delhi to take action against the petitioner.
This, in the opinion of this Court, was unwarranted as well as
impermissible in law. The observations and directions in the
impugned order were, in no way, relevant for deciding the matter
which was before the learned Trial Court, especially in light of the
fact that the learned Trial Court had issued proclamation under
Section 82 Cr.P.C. against the appellant therein on the basis of copies
of service reports produced before it. Further, the fact that instead of
original reports of service, copies of the same were submitted before
the court, not by petitioner himself but by In-charge, Summons Pool,
cannot be the ground to hold the present petitioner guilty of
irregularities to the extent of passing directions to Commissioner of
Police to initiate action against the petitioner.
33.    In such cases, the Courts have time and again come to the
rescue of officers and public servants by ordering the deletion of such
remarks and directions which are glaring examples of overstepping of
jurisdiction by the Trial Courts.
34.    In the light of given facts and circumstances, it is worthwhile
to refer to the observations of Hon‟ble Supreme Court in A.M.
Mathur v. Pramod Kumar Gupta (1990) 2 SCC 533, which is as
“12. It is true that the judges are flesh and blood mortals
with individual personalities and with normal human
traits. Still what remains essential in judging, Justice
Felix Frankfurter said:
"First and foremost, humility and an understanding of the
range of the problems and (one's) own inadequacy in
dealing with them, disinterestedness ... and allegiance to
nothing except the effort to find (that) pass through
precedent, through policy, through history, through
(one's) own gifts of insights to the best judgment that a
poor fallible creature can arrive at in that most difficult
of all tasks, the adjudication between man and man,
between man and state, through reason called law.”
13. Judicial restraint and discipline are as necessary to
the orderly administration of justice as they are to the
effectiveness of the army. The duty of restraint, this
humility of function should be constant theme of our
judges. This quality in decision making is as much
necessary for judges to command respect as to protect the
independence of the judiciary. Judicial restraint in this
regard might better be called judicial respect, that is,
respect by the judiciary. Respect to those who come
before the court as well to other co-ordinate branches of
the State, the executive and the legislature. There must be
mutual respect. When these qualities fail or when litigants
and public believe that the judge has failed in these
qualities, it will be neither good for the judge nor for the
judicial process.”
35.    This Court also, in Rakesh Chand (supra), had expressed
similar views regarding restraint to be observed by the judges while
passing comments on the conduct of officers/authorities. The
observation is as under:
“2. While dealing with the task of administering justice, a
Judge, no doubt has to be acting judicially and giving
expression to his views but he ought to be circumspect
while commenting on the conduct of some. The line of
discretion is not to be overstepped. The calm and
sangfroid of a Judge should be reflected in every
judgment, every order; rather every part of any judgment
or order. The immunity which is enjoyed by a judicial
officer carries with it the duty of circumspection. A Judge
ought to know that any statement against any authority of
the Government or any organ of the Government or any
person incharge of investigation or discharging executive
functions can lacerate, slash and mutilate his reputation
into tatters and cause irreparable harm. It may
prejudicially affect the career of such persons. What is
required to be taken care of is that nobody ought to be
condemned without being heard. The prejudicial effect on
somebody against whom a stricture is passed cannot be
assessed only in terms of the immediate damage to him. It
has the potential of eroding the confidence of public on
such person or institution. A judge must be wary of such
cascading effect of any statement/stricture made by him
while delivering judgment.”
36.    The Hon‟ble Supreme Court in K.H. Siraj v. High Court of
Kerala (2006) 6 SCC 395 had pointed the following qualities of a
good judicial officer:
“57. ...A Judicial Officer must, apart from academic
knowledge, have the capacity to communicate his
thoughts, he must be tactful, he must be diplomatic, he
must have a sense of humour, he must have the ability to
defuse situations…”
37.    Every word forming part of a judicial order forms permanent
record. Use of denigrating remarks against anyone, especially against
police officials impeaching their credibility and questioning their
sense of dedication towards duty, is not the best course adopted by a
judicial officer, that too when the same is not required for the
adjudication of the case before the Court. Such criticism may have a
devastating effect on the professional career of an officer. It is also
bound to have everlasting affect on the reputation of a person. This
Court is conscious of the fact that police officers are expected to be at
the desired place and desired time with utmost efficiency, both by the
general public as well by the Courts. Though the police officers are
duty bound to discharge their responsibilities with utmost conviction,
the practical difficulties which are faced by them cannot be
overlooked and disregarded by the Courts. At the same time, such
regard by the courts can not by any stretch of imagination or
interpretation be take to be lack of power of the court to pass order
regarding the power to point out any irregularity omission or
commission of any act as directed by the Court, or any disobedience
to obey the directions of the Court. This Court rather vide this order
wants to convey that judicial strictures against anyone need to be
passed with utmost circumspection. The judicial power comes with
utmost responsibility to exercise adjudicatory liberty to express
oneself. Judicial strictures against a police officer to the extent as
expressed in the present case are problematic though every
disapproval expressed by exercise of adjudicatory liberty of
expression may not fall in the realm of lack of judicial restraint.
38.    The strictures as passed in the present case to the extent of
observing that the officer in question has no sense of responsibility
and devotion towards duty and further directing the Commissioner of
Police to take corrective measures and take action against the police
official and further observing that the Commissioner of Police, Delhi
may take a call as to whether the petitioner is fit for performing
duties as SHO or not goes beyond the mandate of law, judicial
precedents and discipline of judicial restraint. This does amount to
over stepping adjudicatory liberty of expression exercised by a judge.
Such observations have the effect of stigmatizing without conviction,
sentencing without inquiry and affect career in future of an officer
which had to be left to the internal administrative vigilance and
disciplinary proceedings to be conducted by the parent department of
the officer in question.
39.    This Court makes it clear once again that this order in no way
undermines the majesty of the Court or the fact that the judicial
directions need to be obeyed by the police officials concerned and the
power of the courts to pass orders pointing out their disobedience or
point out any fault in investigation, etc, cannot be questioned,
however, in this regard, Section 6 of Chapter 1, Part H („The
Judgment‟) of the Delhi High Court Rules for “Practice in the Trial
of Criminal Cases” needs to be kept in mind and also the judicial
precedents of the Hon‟ble Apex Court and the High Court have to be
kept in mind as guiding force while passing such remarks which
amount to strictures.
40.    The learned Trial Court could have forwarded the proceedings
and the issue faced by the Court as well as the act of disobedience to
the concerned Commissioner of Police Delhi to take action as per
their departmental Standing Orders and the rules applicable to them.
In the relevant cases, recourse could have been taken to the Delhi
Police Act and the relevant Sections under law under which the Court
can issue notice and initiate appropriate action if so warranted in a
particular case. However, to direct the authority concerned to initiate
action as mentioned in the impugned order and thereafter, ask for
compliance to be filed and pass remarks as in the impugned order
was unwarranted in the facts and circumstances of the case.
41.    Judgments and orders passed by the courts are often permanent
in nature, so is at times the stigma attached to a person suffered by
virtue of an uncalled for remark unwarranted in the facts and
circumstances of a particular case. As adjudicatory force of the
country, judicial restraint as warranted by law and judicial
proceedings is one of the qualities of a judicial officer.
42.    Undoubtedly and there can be no two views about this that
judicial orders and directions passed to ensure rule of law in society
have to be obeyed and respected to achieve cherished goal of
independence of judiciary, however, undesirable judicial strictures
that   penalize    without     enquiry,  stigmatize    without   relevant
proceedings with remedy of only being expunged as we have
hierarchical system of judiciary have to be avoided. Social memories
that stigmatize a person in society or in one‟s department or social
circles are often as permanent as the judgments and orders.
43.    For the reasons stated hereinabove, the remarks passed and
directions issued against the petitioner in the impugned order dated
06.09.2022, as reproduced in Para 8 of this judgment, do not appear
to be in line with the facts of the present case and the position of law
in that regard. Thus, the same are hereby expunged/deleted from the
impugned order dated 06.09.2022.
44.    The petition stands allowed in above terms.
45.    This Court itself being bound by the Hon‟ble Apex Court‟s
decisions and jurisprudence of strictures; while setting aside this
order exercises that judicial discipline and restraint and only directs,
circulation of this order for benefit of all the learned Judicial Officers
and learned Director (Academics) Delhi Judicial Academy for taking
note of its contents.