1.  Impugned in this Appeal is Award dated 28th November 2015, passed by
Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Pulwama (for short “Tribunal”) in a
Claim Petition titled as Khazir Mohammad Bhat and another Vs.
Showkat Ahmad Bhat and others, thereby directing appellants to pay an
amount of Rs.4,91,000/- along with 6% interest per annum from the date
of institution of claim till realization to the claimants/respondents, on the
grounds made mention of therein.
2.  A claim petition, as perusal of the file would bring to the surface, was
filed by claimants/respondents 1&2, before the Tribunal on 19th
December 2007, averring therein that deceased, Mudasir Ahmad Bhat S/o
Khazir Mohammad Bhat R/o Batapora Dadsarah Tehsil Tral, aged
nearly 19 years, died in an accident, which took place on 19th November
2007, near Peer Mohalla Khalil situated on Kangalura-Tral road, due to
rash and negligent driving of driver of offending vehicle, bearing
Registration no.JK13-5657, which was insured with respondent-
Insurance Company. Claimants/Respondents 1&2 prayed for grant of
compensation of Rs.13,30000/-, along with interest.
3. Respondent-Insurance Company resisted the claim petition before the
Tribunal, amongst others, on the grounds that deceased, who was shown
travelling in offending tractor at time of accident, was not covered under
the insurance policy and only driver can travel in the tractor as an insured
person, as such, respondent no.4 had no contractual obligation to
indemnify owner on account of death of deceased as he was not covered
under insurance contract; and that respondent no.1, driver of offending
tractor, was not having valid driving licence at the time of accident.
4. The Tribunal, taking into consideration pleadings of parties, settled five
issues for determining claim petition, which for facility of reference are
reproduced hereunder:
1. Whether ton 19.11.2007 respondent No. 1 was driving the
tractor bearing registration number JK13-5654 from Kangalura
towards Tral rashly, negligently an carelessly, due to which it
turned turtle and the deceased Mudasir Ahmad fell down it and
2. Whether the petitioners are entitled to any compensation, if so,
to what extent and from whom? OPP
3. Whether the respondent insurance company is not liable to pay
any compensation as because the deceased is not covered by
the policy of insurance? OPR4
4. Whether the owner of the offending vehicle has violated the
terms and conditions of the policy by allowing the respondent
no. 1 to drive the tractor who was not having a valid and
effective license on the material date? OPR4
5. Claimants, in support of their claim petition, produced and examined four
witnesses before the Tribunal; besides claimant/respondent no.1 himself.
Respondent Insurance Company produced one witness in support of its
stand. Appellants/respondents, however, as perusal of record divulges,
did not opt to cause appearance and put up their stand before the Tribunal.
In terms of impugned Award, the Tribunal found claimants/ respondents
entitled to receive compensation of Rs. 4,91,000/- along with 6% interest
per annum to be paid by appellants.
7. Learned counsel for appellant Insurance Company, after reiteration of
facts of the case as ingeminated in instant Appeal, has stated that
appellant had been set ex parte by the Tribunal, followed by issuance of
impugned ex parte Award against appellants and non-contesting
respondents and even no summon or notice was served upon appellants.
He also states that award impugned is illegal as it is against the facts.
8. Next contention of learned counsel for appellants is that appellant no.1
was not driving the tractor as he was not driver of tractor and that the
story alleged by respondents/claimants in their claim petition is totally
false. It is also contended by learned counsel that there is no proof
produced before the Tribunal by claimant concerning rash, negligent and
careless driving of offending tractor by appellant no.1 and that no
positive and admissible proof or evidence is on the file and that even no
issue with regard to the fact that deceased was travelling in offending
tractor was raised or settled. Learned counsel also avers that the findings
recorded during investigation has not been brought on the record nor has
been proved before the Tribunal.
9.  It is also contention of learned counsel for appellants that deceased was
not travelling in the tractor in question and that deceased had been injured
while he was walking on the road. According to learned counsel the
Tribunal has not made proper and valid enquiry in this behalf nor is there
any averments or allegation made in claim petition. Learned counsel for
appellants has also invited attention of this Court to the fact that there had
been inconsistent and contradictory statements made by witness, namely,
Bashir Ahmad, Head Constable as during cross-examination he deposed
that deceased was standing on the road when he was hit by offending
tractor and because of this, Mudasir Ahmad Bhat was killed, then
thereafter witness changed his stand and stated that deceased, Mudasir
Ahmad Bhat, was not standing on the road but he was boarding the
offending tractor. This conduct of witness as an investigator officer,
according to learned counsel for appellants, shows that there is no
positive and cogent evidence on the file to connect appellant no.1 with
rash and negligent driving of offending tractor.
10. Above contentions of learned counsel for appellants are misconceived.
Perusal of the record reveals that although appellants were duly served
yet they opted not to cause appearance to contest the claim petition before
the Tribunal and, resultantly, the Tribunal rightly initiated ex parte
proceedings against appellant.
When the record, more particularly statements of witnesses, namely,
Nazir Ahmad Paul, Ghulam Hassan Malik and Gurnam Singh, is perused,
it shows in unambiguous terms that respondent no.1 – appellant no.1
herein was plying offending tractor in a rash and negligent manner, due
to which tractor turned turtle and met with an accident.
11. It is to be kept in mind that in a situation of present nature, the Tribunal
has rightly taken a holistic view of the matter and it was to be borne in
mind that strict proof of an accident caused by a particular vehicle in a
particular manner may not be possible to be done by claimants. The
claimants were merely to establish their case on the touchstone of
preponderance of probability, and the standard of proof beyond
reasonable doubt could not have been applied in the matter relating to
payment of compensation in a motor vehicle accident.
12. It is a trite law that strict principles of proof in a criminal case will not be
applicable in a claim for compensation under the Motor Vehicles Act and
that standard to be followed in motor accident claims is one of
preponderance of probability rather than one of proof beyond reasonable
doubt. Reference in this regard is made to Sunita v. Rajasthan State Road
Transport Corporation, (2019) SCC Online SC 195; Bimla Devi v.
Himachal RTC (2009) 13 SCC 530; Dulcina Fernandes v. Joaquim
13. The Supreme Court in Anita Sharma and others v. The New India
Assurance Co. Ltd. and others (2021) 1 SCC 171, has held that in claim
cases, evidence is to be tested on preponderance of probability and
principles of strict rule of evidence, proving a point beyond reasonable
doubt, is not available in claim cases, which are adjudged under a
benevolent provision contained in Motor Vehicles Act.
14. Learned counsel for appellants has also averred that there is no evidence
qua earning of deceased and that Tribunal has without any legal basis
taken monthly income of deceased as Rs.5500/-. Again, if this
submission of learned counsel for appellants is analysed and considered
in the context of law laid down by the Supreme Court in National
Insurance Co. Ltd v. Pranay Sethi, (2017) 16 SCC 680, the same pales
into insignificance.
15. In view of above discussion, the instant appeal is without any merit and
is, accordingly, dismissed. Interim direction, if any, shall stand vacated.
16. Copy be sent down along with the record.