against her will but also got signatures on certain papers and
thereafter, she was shifted to Naroda, Ahmedabad and was confined
in one house. There also, respondent No.2 took liberty with her but
some how, on 8.7.2017, she succeeded and escaped from the custody
of respondent No.2 and reached at Patan. So much so, ornaments of
victim and her mobile phone were also taken away by respondent
No.2 and thereby has committed serious offence, which has resulted
into filing of a complaint before Becharaji Police being I- C.R. No.47 of
2017 for the offences punishable under Sections 376, 366, 328, 395,
397, 344, 406, 420, 506(2) and 120(B) of the Indian Penal Code.
3.      Respondent No.2 on account of this incident had filed one
Habeas Corpus Petition and simultaneously being apprehending of his
arrest, had filed an anticipatory bail application under Section 438 of
Code of Criminal Procedure by contending that he is an innocent
person and whatever alleged in the complaint is untrue.
4.      Said application had come up for consideration before learned
Sessions Judge, Mehsana, who by order dated 25.9.2017 was pleased
to allow the application for anticipatory bail by imposing suitable
conditions which are visible from the order in question.
5.      It is this order of grant of anticipatory bail passed in the month
of September 2017, which is made the subject matter of present
Criminal Misc. Application for seeking cancellation thereof.
6.      It appears that Rule was issued way back in the month of
December 2017 and thereafter, it has come up for consideration
before this Court, in which learned advocate Mr. Anil C. Thakore
appearing for applicant, original complainant, has contended that
serious offence of Section 376 is committed by respondent No.2 and
as such, learned Sessions Judge has not appreciated the seriousness
of the offence while extending protection of anticipatory bail. It has
been further contended that reasons which are assigned by learned
Sessions Judge are not germane to law nor the issue of custodial
interrogation has been dealt with whether it is required or not and
straightway, granted anticipatory bail. Mr. Thakore has further
submitted that while passing impugned order, proper reasons have
also not been assigned and without much discussion, straightway,
protection has been extended, which circumstance is sufficient
enough to cancel anticipatory bail, which has been granted. Mr.
Thakore has then candidly submitted that this order which is sought
to be cancelled is of September 2017 and in between trial has
commenced and as such, has left to the discretion of the Court
without much resistance thereafter.
7.     As against this, learned advocate Mr. B.S. Khatana appearing on
behalf of respondent No.2 has contended that application may not be
entertained at this stage in view of the fact that during passage of
time, trial has already begun and further while passing the order,
detailed circumstance has been examined by the Court below and as
such, it is not reflecting that any irregularity has taken place or
committed by learned Court below while exercising the discretion. In
fact, well reasoned order is passed by imposing appropriate
conditions which can protect interest of both the sides and therefore,
when this be so, there is hardly any reason to cancel the anticipatory
bail which has been granted way back in September 2017.
8.     Learned advocate Mr. Khanata has further submitted that the
main case is now put up for trial and it is not the case of prosecution
that respondent accused is not cooperating with process of trial and it
is also not the case either of applicant or of State authority that
respondent has violated any of the conditions which are imposed
while granted anticipatory bail. No such eventuality has taken place
and State authority has also chosen not to file any application for
cancellation of anticipatory bail. Further, it has been submitted that
even at the relevant point of time, age of the victim was 19 years and
there is enough material on record to justify at least by respondent
that there is no force administered as alleged in the complaint.
However, be that as it may, the only issue as to whether at this stage,
anticipatory bail which has been granted may be quashed or not, for
which no case is made out by the applicant. Hence, under the
circumstances, application being devoid of merit, deserves to be
9.     In addition to it, learned advocate Mr. Khanata has submitted
that respondent No.2 assures that he will continue to abide by the
conditions which have been imposed upon him in addition to
cooperate with trial, which is going on, hence, no relief be granted.
10.    Having heard learned advocates appearing for the parties and
having gone through the material on record, it appears that complaint
has well been examined by learned Sessions Judge at the time when
anticipatory bail has been granted way back in September 2017.
Against this grant of anticipatory bail application, State authority has
not preferred any application for cancellation nor it is case of State or
present applicant also that any condition is violated and as such,
when conditions upon which liberty is granted or protection is granted
is not misused as is visible from the stand of the either side, when
that be so, anticipatory bail which has been granted way back in
September 2017, no special circumstances are placed before the
Court to set aside the same.
11.    Yet, another circumstance which is also not possible to be
ignored is that at the relevant point of time, age of victim was stated
to be of 19 years and further, fact that trial has already begun to
adjudicate the main case and therefore, when that be so, there is
hardly any justifiable reason for this Court to set aside the order which
has been passed way back in September 2017.
12.    At this stage, learned advocate for the applicant has placed
reliance upon the recent decision delivered by the Hon’ble Apex Court
in the case of Jayaben Vs. Tejas Kanubhai Zala and Another reported
in 2022(1) Crimes 207 (SC) as well as in the case of Brijmani Devi Vs.
Pappu Kumar and Another reported in 2022(1) Crimes 38 (SC) and
based upon such, an attempt is made to see that present application
be entertained. However, examining the case on hand and the
circumstances which are placed before the Court, if compare to the
facts and circumstances of the said case, it appears that same stands
on a different footing. No-doubt, such authoritative and salutary
principles are bound to be observed as part of judicial discipline, but
here, the ratio is not possible to be applied in a mechanical form by
ignoring the facts of the case as is visible from the case on hand, and
as such, the Court is of the considered opinion that no supervening
circumstance nor any distinguishable circumstances are placed before
the Court which may warrant the Court to exercise discretion for
cancellation of bail. As has been held by catena of decisions,
cancellation of bail and grant of bail are two different issues, which
deserve to be dealt with in proper background of facts. Here, when we
see the record of the case, on page 25, there is a statement culled out
in which 19 years old victim has stated that no-doubt, a statement
was given at a relevant point of time that with her own volition, love
marriage has been executed, but then since respondent accused was
not doing any earning activity and not behaving properly, has taken a
decision not to reside with him.
13.    Further, a different stand appears to have been taken in the
Habeas Corpus petition, which came to be disposed of on 11.8.2017 in
paragraph 3 and thereby victim was allowed to go with her parents.
But, these are the circumstances to be examined during the course of
trial, which trial has already begun and therefore, to cancel
anticipatory bail which has been granted prior to 5 years, same is not
possible to be digested, especially when no attempt is made by the
applicant to seriously proceed with the present application. It appears
that anticipatory bail has been granted on 25.9.2017, against which,
on 6.10.2017, present application is filed and first order came to be
passed on 26.12.2017 and in between, during passage of time, it is
culled out that no attempt is made by the applicant to get the matter
disposed of at the earliest nor has taken any serious steps to see that
said order may be set aside and therefore, after waiting for a period of
5 years and now to take a stand that seriousness of offence has not
been considered by the Court below, especially when trial has already
begun, the Court is not inclined to encourage such stand of the
applicant, more particularly when undisputedly, present respondent
accused has not misused his liberty nor violated any condition and
there is long lapse of time passed on. As such, in this peculiar
background of facts, the Court is unable to exercise discretion. At this
stage, Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of X. v State of Telangana &
Anr., reported in (2018) 16 SCC 511, has propounded the principle
on cancellation of bail which the Court deems fit to refer hereunder:-
“14. In a consistent line of precedent this Court has emphasised the
distinction between the rejection of bail in a non-bailable case at the
initial stage and the cancellation of bail after it has been granted. In
adverting to the distinction, a Bench of two learned Judges of this Court
in Dolatram v State of Haryana4 observed that:
“4. Rejection of a bail in a non-bailable case at the initial stage
and the cancellation of bail so granted, have to be considered
and dealt with on different basis. Very cogent and overwhelming
circumstances are necessary for an order directing the
cancellation of the bail, already granted. Generally speaking, the
grounds for cancellation of the bail, already granted, broadly
(illustrative and not exhaustive) are: interference or attempt to
interfere with the due course of administration of justice or
evasion of attempt to evade the due course of justice or abuse of
the concession granted to the accused in any manner. The
satisfaction of the court, on the basis of material placed on the
record of the possibility of the accused absconding is yet another
reason justifying the cancellation of bail. However, bail once
granted should not be cancelled in a mechanical manner without
considering whether any supervening circumstances have
rendered it no longer conducive to a fair trial to allow the
accused to retain his freedom by enjoying the concession of bail
during the trial.
15. These principles have been reiterated by another two Judge Bench
decision in Central Bureau of Investigation, Hyderabad v Subramani
Gopalakrishnan5 and more recently in Dataram Singh v State of Uttar
"23. It is also relevant to note that there is difference between
yardsticks for cancellation of bail and appeal against the order
granting bail. Very cogent and overwhelming circumstances are
necessary for an order directing the cancellation of bail already
granted. Generally speaking, the grounds for cancellation of bail
are, interference or attempt to interfere with the due course of
administration of justice or evasion or attempt to evade the due
course of justice or abuse of the concessions granted to the
accused in any manner. These are all only few illustrative
materials. The satisfaction of the Court on the basis of the
materials placed on record of the possibility of the accused
absconding is another reason justifying the cancellation of bail. In
other words, bail once granted should not be cancelled in a
mechanical manner without considering whether any
supervening circumstances have rendered it no longer conducive
to a fair trial to allow the accused to retain his freedom by
enjoying the concession of bail during the trial.
18. For the above reasons, we hold that the order of the High Court
allowing the application for bail cannot be faulted. Moreover, no
supervening circumstance has been made out to warrant the
cancellation of the bail. There is no cogent material to indicate that the
accused has been guilty of conduct which would warrant his being
deprived of his liberty.”
14.     Accordingly, present application being devoid of merit, stands
DISMISSED. Rule is discharged.