Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 9660 of 2021
Counsel for Applicant :- Karunakar Srivastava
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
1.     Heard Sri Sri Karunakar Srivastava, learned counsel for the
applicant, learned AGA for the State and perused the material placed
on record.
2.     Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 0205 of 2021, under
Sections 8/20 of The Narcotic Drugs And Psychotropic Substances
Act, 1985, Police Station- Utraula, District Balrampur, during the
pendency of trial.
3.     As per prosecution story, 1 quintal 3 Kg 290 grams of ganja and
38 packets of cigarette rolling paper from a unnumbered Tata Tiago
car along with one CMP, .303 bore, one live cartridge of .303 bore are
said to have been recovered from the possession of two co-accused
persons, namely, the applicant and Ram Prakash Verma. Rs.340 cash
was recovered from the possession of the applicant and Rs.25,000/-
cash was recovered from the possession of co-accused Ram Prakash
Verma and two accused persons are stated to have run away from the
scene of recovery after seeing the raiding party.
4.     Learned counsel for the applicant has argued that in all the said
contraband was recovered from 19 packets and one polythene
amounting to total of 1 quintal 3 Kg and 290 grams and only one
sample has been taken from the said contraband. This is a clear
violation of Clause 2.4 of the Standing Order No.1 of 1989.
5.     Learned counsel for the applicant has further argued that the
said sample has been sent for testing after a delay of twenty days,
which is also clear violation of the said Standing Order, as it is
provided in it that the contraband should be sent for chemical analysis
within a period of 72 hours. The said delay has categorically
prejudiced the accused and there is every possibility of interpolation
and adulteration in the said sample.
5.     Learned counsel for the applicant has placed reliance on the
case law settled by the Apex Court in case of State of Rajasthan vs.
Tara Singh1, in which it has been held as under:-
(2) At the very outset, it must be understood that the
provisions of Section 50 would no longer be applicable to a
search such as the one made in the present case as the opium
had been carried on the head in a gunny bag. A Bench of this
Court in State of Himachal Pradesh v. Pawan Kumar, after
examining the discrepant views rendered in various
judgments of this Court has found that Section 50 of the Act
would not apply to any search or seizure where the article
was not being carried on the person of the accused.
Admittedly, in the present case, the opium was being carried
on the head in a bag. Mr. Abhishek Gupta, the learned
Counsel for the appellant-State, therefore, appears to be right
when he contends that the observations of the High Court that
the provisions of Section 50 of the Act would not be
applicable was no longer correct in view of the judgment in
Pawan Kumar's case. We find, however, that the second
aspect on which the High Court has opined calls for no
interference. As per the prosecution story the samples had
been removed from the Malkhana on the 26th of February,
1998, and should have been received in the laboratory the
very next day. The High Court has, accordingly observed that
the prosecution had not been able to show as to in whose
possession the samples had remained from 26th February,
1998 to 9th March, 1998. The High Court has also
disbelieved the evidence of PW-6 and PW-9, the former being
the Malkhana incharge and the latter being the Constable,
who had taken the samples to the Laboratory to the effect that
the samples had been taken out on the 9th of March, 1998 and
not on the 26th February, 1998. The Court has also found
that in the absence of any reliable evidence with regard to the
authenticity of the letter dated 26th February, 1998 it had to
be found that the samples had remained in some unknown
custody from the 26th February, 1998 to 9th March, 1998. We
must emphasise that in a prosecution relating to the Act the
question as to how and where the samples had been stored or
as to when they had dispatched or received in the laboratory
is a matter of great importance on account of the huge
penalty involved in these matters. The High Court was,
therefore, in our view, fully justified in holding that the
sanctity of the samples had been compromised which cast a
doubt on the prosecution story. We, accordingly, feel that the
judgment of the High Court on the second aspect calls for no
interference. The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed. The
respondent is on bail. His bail bonds stand discharged."
6.     Learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that the general
procedure for sampling provided in Standing Order No. 01 of 1989
dated 13.06.1989 has not been complied by the opposite party. He has
relied upon clause 2.1 to 2.8 of the aforesaid standing order quoted
"2.1 All drugs shall be classified, carefully, weighed and
sampled on the spot of seizure.
2.2 All the packages/containers shall be numbered and kept in
lots for sampling. Samples from the narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances seized, shall be drawn on the spot of
recovery, in duplicate, in the presence of search witnesses
(Panchas) and the persons from whose possession the drug is
recovered and a mention to this effect should invariably be
made in the panchnama drawn on the spot.
2.3 The quantity to be drawn in each sample for chemical test
shall not be less than 5 grams in respect of all narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances save in the cases of opium,
ganja and charas (hashish) were a quantity of 24 grams in
each case is required for chemical test. The same quantities
shall be taken for the duplicate sample also. The seized drugs
in the packages/containers shall be well mixed to make it
homogeneous and representative before the sample (in
duplicate) is drawn.
2.4 In the case of seizure of a single package/container, one
sample in duplicate shall be drawn. Normally, it is advisable
to draw one sample (in duplicate) from each
package/container in case of seizure of more than one
package/container.
2.5 However, when the packages/containers seized together
are of identical size and weight, bearing identical markings
and the contents of each package given identical results on
colour test by the drug identification kit, conclusively
indicating that the packages are identical in all respects the
packages/container may be carefully bunched in lots of 10
package/containers except in the case of ganja and hashish
(charas), where it may be bunched in lots of, 40 such
packages/containers.      For      each     such      lot    of
packages/containers, one sample (in duplicate) may be
drawn.
2.6 Where after making such lots, in the case of hashish and
ganja, less than 20 packages/containers remain, and in the
case of other drugs, less than 5 packages/containers remain,
no bunching would be necessary and no samples need be
drawn.
2.7 If such remainder is 5 or more in the case of other drugs
and substances and 20 or more in the case of ganja and
hashish, one more sample (in duplicate) may be drawn for
such remainder package/container.
2.8 While drawing one sample (in duplicate) from a
particular lot, it must be ensured that representative sample
the in equal quantity is taken from each package/container of
that lot and mixed together to make a composite whole from
which the samples are drawn for that lot."
7.     Learned counsel has submitted that the above clauses of the
standing order aforesaid clearly show that the police was required to
draw a sample from each packet allegedly recovered with the help of
field testing kit. The mixing of the material from all the packets and
then drawing of representative sample is not provided in the Standing
Order, as if, such a course is adopted the sample would seize to be
representative sample of the corresponding packet. In the present case
19 packets and one polythene bag were recovered from the possession
of the two accused persons and the procedure given in clause 2.4 of
the Standing Order No. 1 of 1989 was strictly required to be followed
since there were only 20 packets in all from which the sample was to
be drawn. At this point of time, it cannot be ascertained whether all
the 19 packets and one polythene bag (total 20 in all) contained the
alleged contraband of ganja or not.
8.     Learned counsel for the applicant has also relied upon the
judgment of Delhi High Court in the case of Aman Fidel Chris v.
Narcotics Control Bureau, Crl. Appeal No.1027 of 2015 & Crl. M.B.
511 of 2019 and Crl. M.A. 1660 of 2020, in support of his
contentions. In this case the conduct of the prosecution of not drawing
individual sample from each packet recovered was considered to be
violation of Standing Order aforesaid.
9.     Learned counsel for the applicant has argued that the applicant
is absolutely innocent and has been falsely implicated in the present
case with a view to cause unnecessary harassment and to victimize
him. The applicant is languishing in jail since 22.06.2021. In case, the
applicant is released on bail, he will not misuse the liberty of bail.
10. Learned A.G.A. has vehemently opposed the bail application on
the ground that the recovery of the contraband article is of commercial
11. The Apex Court in case of Noor Aga v. State of Punjab2, has
held in paragraphs 123, 124 and 125 that the standing order in dispute
and other guidelines issued by the authority having legal sanction are
required to be complied by the arresting authorities. For ready
reference the aforesaid paragraphs are quoted hereinbelow:-
“(123) Guidelines issued should not only be substantially
complied, but also in a case involving penal proceedings, vis-
a-vis a departmental proceeding, rigours of such guidelines
may be insisted upon. Another important factor which must be
borne in mind is as to whether such directions have been
issued in terms of the provisions of the statute or not. When
directions are issued by an authority having the legal
sanction granted therefore, it becomes obligatory on the part
of the sub ordinate authorities to comply therewith.
(124) Recently, this Court in State of Kerala & Ors. v. Kurian
Abraham (P) Ltd. & Anr.3, following the earlier decision of
this Court in Union of India v. Azadi Bachao Andolan 4, held
that statutory instructions are mandatory in nature.
(125) Logical corollary of these discussions is that the
guidelines such as those present in the Standing Order can
not be blatantly flouted and substantial compliance therewith
must be insisted upon for so that sanctity of physical evidence
in such cases remains intact. Clearly, there has been no
substantial compliance of these guidelines by the
investigating authority which leads to drawing of an adverse
interference against them to the effect that had such evidence
been produced, the same would have gone against the
prosecution.”
12. The Apex Court in the Case of Union of India vs. Shiv
Shankar Keshari5, has held that the court while considering the
application for bail with reference to Section 37 of the Act is not
called upon to record a finding of not guilty. It is for the limited
purpose essentially confined to the question of releasing the accused
on bail that the court is called upon to see if there are reasonable
grounds for believing that the accused is not guilty and records its
satisfaction about the existence of such grounds. But the court has not
to consider the matter as if it is pronouncing a judgment of acquittal
and recording a finding of not guilty.
13. Considering the facts of the case and keeping in mind, the ratio
of the Apex Court's judgment in the case of Union of India vs. Shiv
Shankar Keshari (supra) larger mandate of Article 21 of the
constitution of India, the nature of accusations, the nature of evidence
in support thereof, the severity of punishment which conviction will
entail, the character of the accused-applicant, circumstances which are
peculiar to the accused, reasonable possibility of securing the presence
of the accused at the trial, reasonable apprehension of the witnesses
being tampered with, the larger interest of the public/ State and other
circumstances, but without expressing any opinion on the merits, I am
of the view that it is a fit case for grant of bail.
14. Let the applicant- Om Prakash Verma, who is involved in the
aforementioned case crime be released on bail on his furnishing a
personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions.
Further, before issuing the release order, the sureties be verified.
(i) The applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall not
seek any adjournment on the date fixed for evidence when the
witnesses are present in Court. In case of default of this condition, it
shall be open for the Trial Court to treat it as abuse of liberty of bail
and pass orders in accordance with law.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present before the Trial Court on each
date fixed, either personally or through his counsel. In case of his
absence, without sufficient cause, the Trial Court may proceed against
him under Section 229-A IPC.
(iii) In case, the applicant misuses the liberty of bail during trial and in
order to secure his presence proclamation under Section 82 Cr.P.C.,
may be issued and if applicant fails to appear before the Court on the
date fixed in such proclamation, then, the Trial Court shall initiate
proceedings against him, in accordance with law, under Section 174-A
(iv) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial
Court on dates fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge
and (3) recording of statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the
opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant is deliberate or
without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the Trial Court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him
in accordance with law.
15. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a
ground for cancellation of bail.
16. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the
applicant shall not in any way affect the learned trial Judge in forming
his independent opinion based on the testimony of the witnesses.