1.     The present appeal preferred by the insurer under Section 173 of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, seeks to assail the award dated 26.03.2021
insofar as it does not grant any recovery rights to the appellant against the
respondent no.2/driver/owner of the offending vehicle, which was insured
with the appellant.
2.     Despite service, none appears for the respondents. In these
circumstances, this Court has no other option, but to take up the matter for
disposal without granting any further opportunity to the respondents.
3.     Learned counsel for the appellant submits that once it was clear from
the unrebutted testimony of the Record Clerk from the Sarai Kale Khan
Transport Authority, South Zone, New Delhi that the respondent no.2 did
not have a valid licence to drive a two wheeler vehicle, it was evident that
Digitally Signed        MAC.APP. 266/2021                                                  Page 1 of 5
the terms and conditions of the insurance policy stood breached which fact
the learned Tribunal failed to consider and consequently, did not grant
recovery rights to the appellant. In support of his plea, he seeks to place
reliance on the decision of this Court in Bajaj Allianz General Insurance
Co. Ltd. v. Akram Hussain & Ors. [MAC.APP.306/2009] .
4.     Having considered the submissions of the learned counsel for the
appellant and perused the record, I find that Sh. Rohtash Singh, Record
Clerk from Sarai Kale Khan Transport Authority, South Zone, New Delhi,
who was examined as R2/W1 by the appellant, had categorically stated
before the learned Tribunal that the respondent no. 2 was authorised to drive
only a Light Motor Vehicle—Transport i.e., LMV-TR (Commercial
Vehicle) and not a two-wheeler vehicle. In fact, this statement of the Record
Clerk has been noted in paras 11 and 12 of the impugned award itself. It
would, therefore, be apposite to refer to these paras of the impugned award
which read as under:-
“11. Respondent no. 2 has examined one witness R2Wl Sh.
Rohtash Singh, Record Clerk from Sarai Kale Khan
Transport Authority, South Zone, New Delhi. He was the
summoned witness. He has brought the report in regard to
the driving license bearing no. DL-03-20010131199 of Sh.
Jai Pal Chand S/o Sh. Mohan Chand pertaining to LMV-TR
which is valid from 06.03.2019 to 07.03.2022. As per
record, Jai Pal Chand is authorised to drive only LMV
transport. He proved the report as Ex.R2W1/1.
12. This witness was put to the test of cross examination
whereby he deposed that as per record Jai Pal Chand was
authorised to drive only commercial· vehicle not two
wheeler. He further deposed that he has not been issued
license to drive two wheeler.
Digitally Signed        MAC.APP. 266/2021                                                Page 2 of 5
5.     However, I find that despite having noted the categoric stand of the
transport authority that the respondent no.2, driver of the offending vehicle,
did not hold a valid licence to drive a two wheeler, which he was driving at
the time of the accident, the learned Tribunal rejected the appellant’s plea
that it was not liable to pay compensation. The findings of the learned
Tribunal on this aspect, as recorded in para 20, read as under:-
20; Now, the court has to assess as to how much
compensation be awarded to the petitioners and to whom
the liability to pay the compensation has to be fastened.
Primary liability for paying the damages for the injury
suffered by the victim in a road accident arising out of the
use of Motor Vehicle is of the driver. Since, the vehicle was
owned by the respondent no. 1 itself herein, therefore, the
primary liability rests upon the respondent no. 1. Here, the
insurance company has argued that he is not liable to pay
anything; because the driver of the offending vehicle was
not having the driving license to drive the two wheeler
scooty. However, that argument is not tenable. Driver was
holding a valid license to drive a commercial vehicle.
Therefore, a male person who is competent to drive the
light motor vehicle (commercial) cannot be expected to be
incompetent in driving the two wheeler. Therefore, on
such a small ground, the insurance company cannot be
escaped from paying the insured amount.(emphasis
supplied) It is admitted position on record that vehicle was
insured with the respondent no. 3, therefore, it is the
insurance company who has to pay the damages suffered to
the victims in the road accident in the present case.”
6.     The presumption of the learned Tribunal that a male who is competent
to drive a Light Motor Vehicle (Commercial) could not be expected to be
incompetent to drive a two wheeler, is in my view, wholly without any
Digitally Signed        MAC.APP. 266/2021                                                 Page 3 of 5
basis. This Court fails to appreciate as to how a person who can drive a four
wheeler can be automatically presumed to be competent to drive a two
wheeler as well. On the other hand, the skills required for driving a two
wheeler are quite different from those required for driving a four wheeler.
Driving a two wheeler would require balancing of the vehicle would not at
all be relevant for driving a commercial vehicle which is much larger in size.
It appears that the learned Trial Court has failed to appreciate that under the
Motor Vehicles Act, a Light Motor Vehicle and a two wheeler have been
placed in two distinct categories. Merely because respondent no. 2 held a
valid licence for a Light Motor Vehicle could not imply that he was
authorised or competent to drive a two wheeler.
7.     In this regard reference may also be made to the decision of this Court
in Bajaj Allianz General Insurance Co. Ltd.(supra) wherein while dealing
with a similar issue, the Court held that it could not be assumed that every
person who was competent to drive Light Motor Vehicle would be skilled in
driving a two wheeler as well. The relevant findings of the Court as
contained in para 19 of the decision read as under:-
“19. Cumulatively read the aforesaid provisions of law
make it incumbent upon a person driving a motor vehicle in
any public place to hold a valid and effective driving licence
issued to him by the Competent Authority under Chapter II,
authorizing him to drive the motor vehicle of the class
specified in the licence. It is also clear that a light motor
vehicle has been classified as a separate and distinct class
of vehicle than a motorcycle, which is a two wheeled motor
vehicle as opposed to a light motor vehicle which means a
transport vehicle or omni bus the gross weight of either of
which, or motor car or tractor or road roller, the unladen
weight of any of which, does not exceed 7,500 kilograms.
While Clause 21 defines a light motor vehicle, the definition
Digitally Signed        MAC.APP. 266/2021                                                   Page 4 of 5
of a motorcycle is as contained in Clause 27. Thus, the two
categories of vehicles must be held to be separate and
distinct. Even otherwise, it stands to reason that the
expertise which is required to drive a motorcycle is quite
different from the know-how required by a person for
driving a light motor vehicle, that is to say, it cannot be
assumed that every person who is competent to drive LMV,
will be skilled in driving a two-wheeler as well.”
8.     In the light of the aforesaid, it is evident that the offending vehicle, a
motor cycle was being driven by a person who did not have a driving licence
and therefore, it was a clear case where there was a breach of the terms and
conditions of the insurance policy. Consequently, the finding of the learned
Tribunal that the appellant was liable to pay the compensation is
unsustainable and is set aside. The appeal is, accordingly, allowed by
modifying the impugned award to the extent it does not grant any recovery
rights in favour of the appellant by directing that the appellant would be
entitled to recover the awarded amount from respondent no. 2 in accordance
with law.
9.     The appeal stands disposed of in the aforesaid terms.
Digitally Signed        MAC.APP. 266/2021                                                    Page 5 of 5