The Delhi High Court has appointed retired Supreme Court judge, Justice Arjan Kumar Sikri, as Administrator to oversee utilization of funds in the upcoming ISSF Shooting World Cup, 2023.
ISSF World Cup (Rifle/Pistol) is scheduled to be held in Bhopal in March. 
A division bench of Chief Justice Satish Chandra Sharma and Justice Subramonium Prasad observed that the country’s prestige will be affected if there is any impediment in organizing the World Cup event which would require funding from the Central Government. 
The court said that the Administrator can also take assistance of any sportsperson of his choice, who has been a national or an international shooter, to assist him in the matter. 
“The Administrator shall be free to fix his remuneration commensurate to the work and the same will be paid by the Union of India. The funds released must get the concurrence of the Administrator,” the court said. 
The bench sought a report to be furnished in a sealed cover after conclusion of the event.
The court was hearing an application moved by National Rifle Association of India (NRAI) seeking vacation or modification of the orders passed last year in a plea moved by Senior Advocate Rahul Mehra, against decisions taken by the Centre giving recognition to various National Sports Federations. 
The plea sought direction on the Central Government to grant recognition to National Sports Federations only after they comply with National Sports Code, 2011. 
On June 3 last year, a coordinate bench directed the Centre to ensure that monies, patronage and other facilities to National Sports Federations be resumed only when they comply with National Sports Code and various judicial orders.
NRAI in its application sought vacation or modification of the order stating that it has affected the smooth functioning of the National Sports Federations as the entire working capital has come to a standstill.
It was submitted that stoppage of funds would affect hosting of the World Cup and that the Association is dependent on the government for conduct of international events in the country, including training of the shooters and their participation in international events.
However, Mehra objected to the application stating that the Association ought not to have come to the court at the last minute and that granting any latitude would result in further applications being filed by other Sport Federations which are in violation of the Sports Code. 
However, he suggested an ad hoc solution that a committee comprising of a retired Judge and Abhinav Bindra, the first Olympic Gold Medal winner in Shooting, may be constituted to oversee the World Cup event. He also stated that the funds proposed to be released must be passed through the said Committee, which would then furnish its report in a sealed cover on conclusion of the event.
Calling the suggestion “a fair solution”, the bench noted that Mehra’s proposal was not opposed by the ASG and NRAI.
“In view of the above, Hon’ble Mr. Justice (Retd.) Arjan Kumar Sikri, Former Judge Supreme Court of India, is appointed as an Administrator to oversee the utilization of funds in the World Cup event that is being held in India in March, 2023,” the court said while disposing of the application. 
Title: RAHUL MEHRA v. UNION OF INDIA



