1.      This is an application on behalf of the National Rifle Association of
India (NRAI) for vacation/modification of the Orders dated 02.06.2022 and
03.06.2022 passed by this Court in W.P.(C) 8691/2020.
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 8691/2020                                                      Page 1 of 4
2.      The instant writ petition has been filed challenging various decisions
taken by the Union of India according recognition to various National Sports
Federations. The Petitioner also prayed for issuance of a writ of mandamus
directing the Union of India to grant recognition to the entities only after
considering the material demonstrating that the National Sports Federations
are in compliance with the Sports Code. The Petitioner further has also
prayed for implementation of the Sports Code in strict terms, without
granting any exemption.
3.      Various orders have been passed in the writ petition from time to
time. On 03.06.2022, a Division Bench of this Court had directed that no
more monies will be expanded by the Union of India nor any assistance will
be extended to any National Sports Federations and the Union of India was
directed to ensure that monies, patronage and other facilities to the National
Sports Federations will be resumed only when the National Sports
Federations comply with Annexure 2 of the Sports Code as well as the
orders passed by the Apex Court and this Court in various petitions.
4.      The       NRAI     has     moved    the   instant    application       for
vacation/modification of the Orders dated 02.06.2022 and 03.06.2022,
passed by this Court stating that the Orders dated 02.06.2022 and
03.06.2022 has affected the smooth functioning of the National Sports
Federations as the entire working capital has come to a standstill.
5.      It is stated that India is hosting World Cup for the shooting sport in
March, 2023 and stoppage of funds would affect the hosting of the World
Cup. It is stated that the Applicant is dependent on the Government for the
conduct of international events in India and various activities including
training of the shooters and their participation in the international events. It
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 8691/2020                                                    Page 2 of 4
is stated that in view of the upcoming World Cup event, it is expedient to
vacate/modify the Orders dated 02.06.2022 & 03.06.2022 passed by this
6.      Mr. Rahul Mehra, who is appearing in person, has objected to this
application stating that the Applicant ought not to have come to this Court
with the present application at the last minute. He further states that granting
any latitude to the Applicant would result in further applications being filed
before this Court by other Sport Federations which are in complete violation
of the Sports Code. He states that the present petition is not adversarial in
nature and has been filed only keeping in mind the interests of sports in the
country. He states that the NRAI is also in violation of various Clauses of
the Sports Code.
7.      Mr. Mehra has given an ad hoc solution stating that a committee
comprising of a retired Judge of this Court and Mr. Abhinav Bindra, the first
Olympic Gold Medal winner in Shooting, must be constituted to oversee the
World Cup event in March, 2023. He states that the funds which are
proposed to be released must be passed through the Committee and the
Committee must furnish its Report in a sealed cover before this Court upon
the conclusion of the World Cup event.
8.      The suggestion made by Mr. Mehra for constitution of a Committee to
oversee the utilisation of funds which are proposed to be released by the
Union of India is a fair solution. This proposal of Mr. Mehra is not opposed
by the learned ASG and by the learned Senior Counsel appearing for NRAI.
9.      The prestige of the country will be affected if there is any impediment
in organizing the World Cup event which would require funding from the
Union of India.
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 8691/2020                                                      Page 3 of 4
10.     In view of the above, Hon’ble Mr. Justice (Retd.) Arjan Kumar Sikri,
Former Judge Supreme Court of India, is appointed as an Administrator to
oversee the utilization of funds in the World Cup event that is being held in
India in March, 2023. The Administrator can also take the assistance of any
sportsperson of his choice, who has been a national or international shooter,
to assist him in the matter. The Administrator shall be free to fix his
remuneration commensurate to the work and the same will be paid by the
Union of India. The funds released must get the concurrence of the
11.     Let a report be furnished in a sealed cover before this Court after the
conclusion of the event.
12.     The application is disposed of with the above observations.
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 8691/2020                                                   Page 4 of 4