W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
W.P.Nos.13748, 13749 of 2015, 2565 and 4250 of 2021
W.P.No.13748 of 2015:
Department of Environment and Forests
2      The State of Tamilnadu
Department of Animal Husbandry
and Fisheries Department
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
3      The Animal Welfare Board of India
Rep. by its Chairman
W.P.No.13749 of 2015:
Department of Environment and Forests
2      The State of Tamil Nadu
Department of Animal Husbandry
and Fisheries Department
3      The Animal Welfare Board of India
Rep. by its Chairman
4       The Director General of Police
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
W.P.No.2565 of 2021:
Animal and Husbandry Department
The Government of the Tamil Nadu
3      The Director General of Police
Law and Order
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate Erode
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
7      The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate, Erode
Office of the Collectorate, Vellore
10 The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate, Erode
Office of the Collectorate, Villupuram
13 The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate, Villupuram
Office of the Collectorate, Trichy
16       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate, Trichy
Office of the Collectorate, Dindugal
19       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate, Dindugal
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
Office of the Collectorate, Kallakurichi
22       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate, Kallakurichi
Office of the Collectorate, Krishnagiri
25       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate, Krishnagiri
Office of the Collectorate, Dharmapuri
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
28       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate, Dharmapuri
Office of the Collectorate, Salem
31       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate, Salem
Office of the Collectorate, Salem
34       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate, Namakkal
Office of the Collectorate, Coimbatore
37       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate, Coimbatore
Office of the Collectorate, Tiruppur
40       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate, Tiruppur
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
Office of the Collectorate, Karur
43       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate, Karur
W.P.No.4250 of 2021:
Rep by its Volunteeer Shivram S.
Registered office at
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
Animal Husbandry and Livestock Farm
2       Department of Animal Husbandry,
Dairying and Fisheries
Secretariat, Government of Tamil Nadu
3       Directorate of Animal Husbandry
and Veterinary Service
4       The Superintendent of Police
Office of Collector
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India praying for a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to
ensure that no destruction, killing or sacrifice of any nature       of any
animal takes place in         the State of Tamil Nadu outside a registered
and licensed slaughter house and that such killing or destruction of
animals is only for arranging for food for mankind. [Prayer amended
as per the order dated 23.06.2015 in M.P.No.2 of 2015]
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
W.P.No.13749 of 2015 filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India praying for a writ of mandamus directing the respondents 1 to 4
to prevent any transport of Camels into the State of Tamil Nadu by
foot or on vehicles    without compliances to the transport rules and
their killing as religious sacrifices inside Tamil Nadu in violation of
Rules for slaughter of animals, in places other than lawful slaughter
houses, in accordance with rules.
W.P.No.2565 of 2021 filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India praying for a writ of mandamus directing the respondents 1 to
44 to take action on the petitioner representation dated 12.10.2020
and consequently forbear any persons and their agents in any manner
transporting the cows to the slaughter houses from one district to
another district in the State of Tamil Nadu without following the
section 38 (2) (h) of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960
and Rule 56 of Transport of Animal Rules, 1978.
W.P.No.4250 of 2021 filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India praying for a writ of certiorarified mandamus to call for the
records on the file of the 1st respondent in Na.Ka.No.484.E.2020
dated 29.01.2021 and quash the same as illegal and consequently
direct the 1st Respondent to take appropriate measures to protect the
interests and welfare of the animals in accordance with law.
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
For the Petitioner   : Mr.R.Srinivas
in W.P.Nos.13748 and
For the Respondents  : Mr.N.Ramesh
and respondent Nos.2 and 4
in W.P.No.13749 of 2015
and respondent Nos.1 to 4 & 6
to 44 in W.P.No.2565 of 2021
and respondent Nos.1 to 4
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
(Order of the Court was made by the Hon'ble Chief Justice)
“He who is cruel to animals becomes hard also in his
dealings with men.” - Kant.
“Compassion for animals is intimately connected with
goodness of character, and it may be confidently asserted
that he who is cruel to animals cannot be a good man.” -
Despite various provisions for prevention of cruelty to animals
like the Tamil Nadu Animal Preservation Act, 1958 [for short, "the Act
of 1958"]; the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 [for short,
"the Act of 1960"]; the Transport of Animals Rules, 1978 [for short,
"the Rules of 1978"]; the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Transport
of Animals on Foot) Rules, 2001 [for short, "the Rules of 2001"]; the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (Slaughter House) Rules, 2001 [for
short, "Slaughter House Rules"]; the Prevention of Cruelty in Animals
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
(Regulation of Livestock Markets) Rules, 2017 [for short, "Regulation
of Livestock Market Rules 2017”] and the Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals (Care and Maintenance of Case Property Animals) Rules,
2017 [for short, “the Rules of 2017"], a series of public interest
litigations have been filed making serious allegations of slaughtering
of animals in violation of the Acts and the Rules. It is despite the fact
that the Apex Court in the case of Laxmi Narain Modi v. Union of
India and other, (2013) 10 SCC 227, had laid down certain
guidelines, which are to be followed by all the State Governments
and Union Territories.
2. The facts on record show an alarming situation, which is not
only in regard to illegal slaughtering of cows, but even in reference to
camels being brought on foot in violation of the Rules of 2001 and
their slaughtering at open places in an illegal manner. It can happen
only when the administration fails to ensure compliance of the
provisions of the Acts and the Rules and does not take timely action
against the defaulters.
3. One of the writ petitions was earlier disposed of by this Court
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
by an order dated 06.04.2022 in W.P.No.11559 of 2015 [People for
Cattle in India v. State of Tamil Nadu and others]. The aforesaid writ
petition was filed alleging illegal transportation of camels from
outside the States like Gujarat and Rajasthan and slaughtering in
open places. The Court was assured that immediate steps would be
taken against the persons indulging in such practice, which may
include even lodging of an FIR for commission of the offences under
the Act of 1960.
4. Learned counsel for the petitioner in W.P.No.2565 of 2021,
drawing our attention to the provisions of the Tamil Nadu Animal
Preservation Act, 1978, particularly Section 4 thereof, submitted that
slaughtering should not be permitted in violation of the Section 14 of
the said Act.
5. Learned counsel for the petitioner in W.P.No.4250 of 2021
submitted that when the respondent State issued notification to
auction cows, young bulls and calves, they had filed the writ petition.
According to learned counsel, if the State comes across auction of
animals, they must act as per Rule 3(b) of the Prevention of Cruelty
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
to Animals (Care and Maintenance of Case Property Animals) Rules,
2017 and otherwise animals must be housed in an infirmary,
pinjrapole, SPCA, Animal Welfare Oranisation or Gaushala.
6. Drawing our attention to Rules 5 and 6 of the Regulation of
Livestock Market Rules 2017, learned counsel further submitted that
any auction of livestock to be conducted, it must be in accordance
with the provisions of said Rules.
7. We find that despite the provisions aforesaid, the State
authorities, which may include the Police administration, failed to
take immediate action on the illegal transportation of the animals and
their slaughtering and even the illegal auction.
8. The Apex Court, in a Criminal Appeal No.230 of 2020
[Raguramsharma and another v. C.Thulsi and another] on registration
of case against the accused under Sections 11(1)(a), 11(1)(b),
11(1)(d) an 11(1)(3) of the Act of 1960, observed that he was
transporting 18 buffaloes and 19 bulls in an illegal manner in the
truck which was closed air-tight so much so that the cattle could not
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
breathe properly.           This inhumane conduct of the accused was noted
by the Apex Court.            While granting interim custody of the cattle, a
condition was imposed that they may not be slaughtered. This shows
that respondents had failed to see compliance of all the provisions of
law and therefore only such an incident took place.
9. We find that day in and day out, slaughtering of animals is
taking place in violation of the Act of 1960 and even the Rules
referred in paragraph 1 of this order. In view of the above, we need
to pass appropriate orders to prevent transportion and slaughtering of
animals, which includes camels in violation of the provisions of law.
For that, certain provisions of the Acts and the Rules, which have
been enacted to protect the animals, are required to be quoted.
Accordingly, they are quoted hereunder:
10. Sections 3, 11 and 38 of the Act of 1960 provide as under:
"3. Duties of persons having charge of animals.-
It shall be the duty of every person having the care or
charge of any animal to take all reasonable measures
to ensure the well-being of such animal and to prevent
the infliction upon such animal of unnecessary pain or
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
suffering.
11. Treating animals cruelly.- (1) If any person -
(a) beats, kicks, over-rides, over-drives, over-
loads, tortures or otherwise treats any animal so
as to subject it to unnecessary pain or suffering
or causes or, being the owner permits, any animal
to be so treated; or
(b) employs in any work or labour or for any
purpose any animal which, by reason of its age or
any disease, infirmity, wound, sore or other
cause, is unfit to be so employed or, being the
owner, permits any such unfit animal to be so
(c) wilfully and unreasonably administers any
injurious drug or injurious substance to any
animal or wilfully and unreasonably causes or
attempts to cause any such drug or substance to
be taken by any animal; or
(d) conveys or carries, whether in or upon any
vehicle or not, any animal in such a manner or
position as to subject it to unnecessary pain or
suffering; or
(e) keeps or confines any animal in any cage or
other receptacle which does not measure
sufficiently in height, length and breadth to
permit the animal a reasonable opportunity for
movement; or
(f) keeps for an unreasonable time any animal
chained or tethered upon an unreasonably short
or unreasonably heavy chain or cord; or
(g) being the owner, neglects to exercise or cause
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
to be exercised reasonably any dog habitually
chained up or kept in close confinement; or
(h) being the owner of any animal fails to provide
such animal with sufficient food, drink or shelter;
(i) without reasonable cause, abandons any
animal in circumstances which render it likely that
it will suffer pain by reason of starvation or thirst;
(j) wilfully permits any animal, of which he is the
owner, to go at large in any street while the
animal is affected with contagious or infectious
disease or, without reasonable excuse permits
any diseased or disabled animal, of which he is
the owner, to die in any street; or
(k) offers for sale or, without reasonable cause,
has in his possession any animal which is
suffering pain by reason of mutilation, starvation,
thirst, overcrowding or other ill-treatment; or
(l) multilates any animal or kills any animal
(including stray dogs) by using the method of
strychnine injections in the heart or in any other
unnecessarily cruel manner; or
(m) solely with a view to providing entertainment-
(i) confines or causes to be confined any
animal (including tying of an animal as a bait
in a tiger or other sanctuary) so as to make it
an object of prey for any other animal; or
(ii) incites any animal to fight or bait any
other animal; or
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
(n) organises, keeps, uses or acts in the
management of, any place for animal fighting or
for the purpose of baiting any animal or permits
or offers any place to be so used or receives
money for the admission of any other person to
any place kept or used for any such purposes; or
(o) promotes or takes part in any shooting match
or competition wherein animals are released from
captivity for the purpose of such shooting; he
shall be punishable, in the case of a first offence,
with fine which shall not be less than ten rupees
but which may extend to fifty rupees and in the
case of a second or subsequent offence
committed within three years of the previous
offence, with fine which shall not be less than
twenty-five rupees but which may extend to one
hundred rupees or with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three months, or with both.
(2) For the purposes of sub-section (1), an owner shall
be deemed to have committed an offence if he has
failed to exercise reasonable care and supervision with
a view to the prevention of such offence: Provided
that where an owner is convicted of permitting cruelty
by reason only of having failed to exercise such care
and supervision, he shall not be liable to imprisonment
without the option of a fine.
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to-
(a) the dehorning of cattle, or the castration or
branding or nose-roping of any animal, in the
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
prescribed manner; or
(b) the destruction of stray dogs in lethal
chambers or by such other methods as may be
prescribed; or
(c) the extermination or destruction of any animal
under the authority of any law for the time being
(d) any matter dealt with in Chapter IV; or
(e) the commission or omission of any act in the
course of the destruction or the preparation for
destruction of any animal as food for mankind
unless such destruction or preparation was
accompanied by the infliction of unnecessary pain
or suffering.
38.    Power     to   make  rules.-    (1)  The    Central
Government       may,  by  notification  in   the   Official
Gazette, and subject to the condition of previous
publication, make rules to carry out the purposes of
this Act.
(2)   In   particular, and  without    prejudice   to   the
generality    of  the  foregoing   power,    the   Central
Government may make rules providing for all or any of
the following matters, namely:-
(a) the conditions of service of members of the
Board, the allowances payable to them and the
manner in which they may exercise their powers
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
and discharge their functions;
(aa) the manner in which the persons to
represent municipal corporations are to be elected
under clause (e) of sub-section (1) of section 5;
(b) the maximum load (including any load
occasioned by the weight of passengers) to be
carried or drawn by any animal;
(c) the conditions to be observed for preventing
the over-crowding of animal;
(d) the period during which, and the hours
between which, any class of animals shall not be
used for draught purposes;
(e) prohibiting the use of any bit or harness
involving cruelty to animals;
(ea) the other methods of destruction of stray
dogs referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (3)
of section 11;
(eb) the methods by which any animal which
cannot be removed without cruelty may be
destroyed under sub-section (3) of section 13;
(f) requiring persons carrying on the business of a
farrier to be licensed and registered by such
authority as may be prescribed and levying a fee
for the purpose;
(g) the precautions to be taken in the capture of
animals for purposes of sale, export or for any
other purpose, and the different appliances or
devices that may alone be used for the purpose;
and the licensing of such capture and the levying
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
of fees for such licences;
(h) the precautions to be taken in the transport of
animals, whether by rail, road, inland waterway,
sea or air and the manner in which and the cages
or other receptacles in which they may be so
transported.
(i) requiring persons owning or in charge of
premises in which animals are kept or milked to
register such premises, to comply with such
conditions as may be laid down in relation to the
boundary walls or surroundings of such premises,
to permit their inspection for the purpose of
ascertaining whether any offence under this Act is
being, or has been, committed therein, and to
expose in such premises copies of section 12 in a
language or languages commonly understood in
the locality;
(j) the form in which applications for registration
under Chapter V may be made, the particulars to
be contained therein, the fees payable for such
registration and the authorities to whom such
applications may be made;
(ja) the fees which may be charged by the
Committee constituted under section 15 for the
registration of persons or institutions carrying on
experiments on animals or for any other purpose;
(k) the purposes to which fines realised under
this Act may be applied, including such purposes
as the maintenance of infirmaries, pinjrapoles and
veterinary hospitals;
(l) any other matter which has to be, or may be,
prescribed.
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
(3)   If  any    person   contravenes,  or   abets   the
contravention of, any rules made under this section,
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to
one hundred rupees, or with imprisonment for a term
which may extend to three months, or with both.”
11. Section 4 of the Tamil Nadu Animal Preservation Act, 1958
provides as under:
“4. Prohibition of slaughter of animals without
certificate.- (1) Notwithstanding anything in any law
for the time being in force or any usage to the
contrary, no person shall slaughter or cause to be
slaughtered any animal unless on an application made
in this behalf he has obtained a certificate in the
prescribed form from the competent authority for the
area in which the animal is to be slaughtered that the
animal is fit for slaughter.
(2) All application for a certificate under sub-section
(1) shall be in such form and shall contain such
particulars as may be prescribed.
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
(3) No certificate shall be granted under sub-section
(1) unless the competent authority, for reasons to be
recorded in writing, is of opinion that-
(a) the animal is over ten years of age and is
unfit for work and breeding; or
(b)    the   animal    has    become   permanently
incapacitated for work or breeding due to injury,
deformity or any incurable disease:
Provided that nothing contained in this section
shall be deemed to affect the operation of any of
the provisions of the [Madras City Municipal Act,
1919. (Tamil Nadu Act IV of 1919), the Tamil
Nadu] Act V of 1920), the Tamil Nadu District
Board's Act, 1920 (Tamil Nadu Act XIV of 1920),
the Tamil Nadu Village Panchayats Act, 1950
(Tamil Nadu Act X of 1950), the Travancore
XXIII    of  1116),    or   the   Travancore-Cochin
of 1950); or any other law for the time being in
force or any rule, regulation or by-law made
thereunder relating to the slaughter of animals,
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
except in so far as the provisions or the rules
made    thereunder    are   inconsistent    with   sub-
section (3).
12. Rules 46 to 56 of the Transport of Animals Rules, 1978
"46. Rules 47 to 56 shall apply to the transport
by   rail of  cows,    bulls,  bullocks,   buffaloes,   yaks
and calves. (hereinafter in these rules referred to
as cattle).
47.(a) A valid certificate by a qualified veterinary
surgeon to the effect that the cattle are       in    a    fit
condition to travel by rail or road and are not
suffering      from any       infectious or       contagious
or parasitic diseases and that thay have been vaccinat
ed against rinderpest and any        other   infectious   or
contagious or parasitic diseases, shall accompany
each consignment.
(b)     In     the      absence       of such a certificate,
the carrier shall refuse    to accept     the consignment
for transport.
(c) The certificate shall be in the form specified
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
in Schedule E.
48. Veterinary first-aid equipment shall accompany
all batches of cattle.
49. (a) Each       consignment       shall    bear    a    label
showing    in bold    red    letters   the   name,     address
and telephone      number      (if any)  of   the    consignor
and consignee, the number and types of cattle             being
transported and          quantity        of       rations and
food provided.
(b) The   consignee      shall    be  informed     about     the
train  or    vehicle   in   which     the   consignment         of
cattle is being sent and its arrival time in advance.
(c) The consignment of cattle shall be booked by
the   next    train   or    vehicle    and     shall   not     be
detained    after   the   consignment      is   accepted      for
booking.
50. The     average     space     provided    per    cattle    in
Railway wagon or vehicle shall be as provided in
Tables I and II as given below:
Cattle weighing up to 200 kg            1.0 square metre (sq
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
Cattle weighing 200-300 kg                 1.20 square metre
Cattle weighing 300-400 kg                 1.40 square metre
Cattle weighing above 400 kg               2.0 square metre
Space requirement for cattle while being transported in commonly
sized road vehicles
Vehicle size Floor area          Cattle          Cattle         Cattle         Cattle
length × of vehicle in weighing up weighing 200- weighing 300-            weighing
width         square   to 200 kg (1.0 300 kg (1.20 400 kg (1.40 above 400 kg
square       metre (sq m) sq m space      sq m space      sq m space     (2.0 sq m
metre                    per cattle)     per cattle)    per cattle)    space per
51. (a) Suitable       rope     and    platforms     should    be
used for loading cattle from vehicles.
(b) In case of railway wagon the dropped door
of   the    wagon   may       be  used      as  a   ramp     when
loading or unloading is done to the platform.
52. Cattle shall be loaded after they are properly
fed and given water.
53. Cattle in advanced stage of pregnancy shall
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
not be mixed with young cattle in order to avoid
stampede during transportation.
54. (1) Watering arrangements on          route   shall be
made      and    sufficient    quantities of water shall be
carried for emergency.
(2) Sufficient     feed    and   fooder    with   adequate
reserve shall be carried to last during the journey.
(3) Adequate ventilation shall be ensured.
55. When cattle is to be transported by rail. (a)
An ordinary     goods    wagon shall carry       not more
than    ten   adult     cattle  or   fifteen    calves   on
broad gauge, not more than six adult cattle or ten calv
es on metre guage, or not more than four         cattle  or
six calves on narrow gauge.
56 When cattle are to be transported by goods vehicle
the following precautions are to be taken, namely:—
(a) specially fitted goods vehicles with a special type
of tail board on padding around the sides should be
(b) ordinary goods vehicles shall be provided with
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
anti-slipping material, such as coir matting or wooden
board on the floor and the superstructure, if low,
should be raised;
(c) no goods vehicle shall carry more than six cattle;
(d) each goods vehicle shall be provided with one
(e) while transporting the cattle, the goods vehicle
shall not be loaded with any other merchandise; and
(f) to prevent cattle being frightened or injured, they
should preferably face the engine.
13. Sections 3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 12 and 13 of the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals (Transport and Animals on Foot) Rules, 2001 read
"3. Application of the rules .-These rules shall apply
to transport of animals on foot when the distance from
the boundary of village or town or city of the origin of
such transport to the last destination is 5 km or more
than 5 km.
4. Condition of health of animals transported on
foot .-(1) Every animal to be transported on foot shall
be healthy and in good condition for such transport.
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
(2) A certificate of a veterinary doctor in respect of
each animal to be transported to the effect that such
animal is in a fit condition for such transportation and
is not suffering from any infectious, contagious or
parasitic diseases and that it has been vaccinated
against any infectious, contagious or parasitic diseases
shall accompany such animal.
(3) The certificate under sub rule (1) shall be in the
form as specified in the First Schedule.
8.     Certificate      to     be    carried      during
transportation .-In case the person transporting the
animals on foot is not the owner of the animal then
such person shall carry a certificate as specified in the
Second Schedule during such transportation.
9. Watering arrangement during transportation
of animals .-The owner of the animals shall make
watering arrangement in route during transport of
such animals on foot.
10.    Feed    and    fodder    arrangements      during
transportation      of  animals .-Sufficient   feed  and
fodder with adequate reserve of such feed and fodder
for the animals shall be made available by their owner
during their transport on foot.
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
12. Certain Prohibition on transport of animals on
(1) No person shall transport on foot an animal before
sunrise or after sunset.
(2) No animal shall be transported on foot beyond the
distance, time, rest interval and temperature specified
for such animal in the Table below, namely:—
Species (Animals) Maximum distance        Maximum no. of       Period of rest  Temperature range
covered/day/hour
walking/day of hours      (interval)        Max. Min.
Cattle (Cows)   30 km/day 4 km/hr           8 hours      At every 2 hours      12°C to 30°C
for drinking and at
Buffaloes    25 km/day 4 km/hr           8 hours      At every 2 hours      12°C to 30°C
for drinking and at
Cows and Buffaloes 16 km/day 205 km/hr          6 hours     At every 1½ hours      15°C to 25°C
Calves                                              for drinking and at
every 3 hrs for
Horses, Ponies,  45 km/day 6 km/hr           8 hours      At every 3 hours      12°C to 30°C
Mules, Donkeys                                           for drinking and at
every 6hrs for
Young ones (Foal)       25 km/day 4            6 hours      At every 2 hours      15°C to 25°C
km/hr                             for drinking and at
Goats and Sheep        30 km/day 4            8 hours      At every 2 hours      12°C to 30°C
km/hr                             for drinking and at
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
Kids and Lambs      16 km/day 2.5    6 hours At every 1½ hours             15°C to 25°C
km/hr                   for drinking and at
Pigs          15 km/day 2     8 hours At every 1½ hours             12°C to 25°C
km/hr                   for drinking and at
Piglets        10 km/day 1.5    6 hours    At every 1½ hours for    15°C to 25°C
km/hr                  drinking and at every 3 hrs
Note : After being provided with water every animal
shall be given a break of 20 minutes before the
commencement of the transport of the animal on foot
and in case of feeding the break shall be given for one
hour before the commencement of the transport of the
animal on foot.
(3) No animal shall be made to walk under conditions
of heavy rain, thunderstorms or extremely dry or
sultry conditions during its transport on foot.
13. Transportation of animals in certain cases not
permitted without shoes .-Animals whose hooves
are not provided with shoes (as in the case of pack or
drought animals) shall not be transported on foot on
hard cement, bitumen-coated or metalled roads, steep
gradients or hilly and rocky terrain, irrespective of
weather conditions (summer or winter).”
14. Rules 3, 4, 6 and 7 of the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(Slaughter House) Rules, 2001 provide as under:
“3. Animals not to be slaughtered except in
recognised or licensed houses - (1) No person shall
slaughter any animal within a municipal area except in
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
a slaughter house recognised or licensed by the
concerned authority empowered under the law for
the time being in force to do so.
(2) No animal which -
(ii) has an offspring less than three months old, or
(iii)is under the age of three months or
(iv) has not been certified by a veterinary doctor
that it is in a fit condition to be slaughtered,
shall be slaughtered
(3) The municipal or other local authority specified by
the Central Government for this purpose shall, having
regard to the capacity of the slaughter house and the
requirement of the local population of           the area in
which a     slaughter house is situated, determine        the
maximum number of animals that may be slaughtered
in a day.
4. Reception area or resting grounds - (1) The
slaughter     house    shall  have   a   reception   area  of
adequate      size   sufficient  for  livestock   subject  to
veterinary inspection.
(2) The veterinary doctor shall examine thoroughly not
more than 12 animals in an hour and not more than
96 animals in a day.
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
(3) The veterinary doctor after examining the animal
shall issue a fitness certificate in the form specified by
the Central Government for this purpose.
(4) The reception area of slaughter house shall have
proper ramps for direct unloading of animals from
vehicles or railway wagons and the said reception area
shall have adequate facility sufficient for feeding and
watering of animals.
(5)Separate     isolation   pens   shall  be   provided    in
slaughter     house     with     watering    and     feeding
arrangements for animals suspected to be suffering
from contagious and infectious diseases, and fractious
animals,   in   order    to   segregate   them    from   the
remaining animals.
(6)Adequate      holding    area   shall  be   provided    in
slaughter house according to the class of animals         to
be slaughtered and the said holding area shall have
water and feeding facilities.
(7) The resting grounds in slaughter house shall have
overhead protective shelters.
(8) Ante-mortem and pen area in slaughter house
shall be paved with impervious material such as
concrete non-slippery herring-bone type suitable to
stand wear and tear by hooves, or brick, and pitched
to suitabled rainage facilities and the curbs of said
impervious material 150 to 300 mm high shall be
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
provided around the borders of livestock pen area,
except at the entrances and such pen shall preferably
be covered.
6. Slaughter - (1) No animal shall be slaughtered
in a slaughter house in sight of other animals.
(2) No animal shall be administered any chemical,
drug or hormone before slaughter except drug for           its
treatment for any specific disease or ailment.
(3) The slaughter halls in a slaughter       house      shall
provide        separate sections of adequate dimensions
sufficient   for  slaughter   of   individual  animals      to
ensure that the animal to be slaughtered is not
within the sight of other animals.
(4) Every slaughter house as soon as        possible    shall
provide          a separate space for stunning of animals
prior   to  slaughter,   bleeding and    dressing    of   the
carcasses.
(5) Knocking section in slaughter house        may be      so
planned as to suit the animal and particularly the
slaughter; if any and such knocking section and dry la
nding area associated with it     shall   be so built    that
escape     from     this  section    can be   easily carried
out by an operator without allowing the         animal      to
pass the escape barrier.
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
(6)A curbed-in bleeding area of adequate          size    as
specified                                                 by
the Central Government shall be provided            in     a
slaughter house and it shall be so located that
the blood could not be splashed on other animals
being    slaughtered      or   on    the    carcass    being
skinned.
(7) The blood drain and         collection in a slaughter
house shall be immediate and proper.
(8) A     floor wash     point   shall   be    provided in a
slaughter      house    for intermittent     cleaning and a
handwash basin and knife       sterilizer   shall  also   be
provided for the sticker to sterilize knife and wash his
hands periodically.
(9) Dressing      of  carcasses    in a   slaughter    house
shall not be done on floor and adequate means and
tools for dehiding or belting of     the    animals shall be
provided     in   a  slaughter    house     with  means for
immediate      disposal of hides or skins;
(10)Hides       or    skins    shall     be     immediately
transported     from a slaughter house either in a
closed    wheelbarrow or by a chute provided with self-
closing door and in no case such hides or skins shall
be spread on slaughter floor for inspection.
(11)Floor wash point and adequate number of             hand
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
wash basins with         sterlizer         shall be provided in
a dressing area of a slaughter house with means for
immediate disposal of legs, horns, hooves and              other
parts of animals through spring load floor                chutes
or sidewall doors or closed wheelbarrows and in case
wheelbarrows or trucks are used in a slaughter
house,     care       shall       be      taken       that     no
point wheelbarrow or truck has           to ply     under    the
dressing rails and a    clear      passage     is   provided for
movement of the trucks.
(12)Adequate        space and         suitable      and properly
located facilities   shall   be     provided     sufficient   for
inspection    of    the viscera of        the various      types
of animals     slaughtered in a        slaughter house and it
shall have adequate        facilities   for   hand     washing,
tool    sterilisation      and       floor     washing       and
contrivances for immediate separation and disposal
of                                       condemned material.
(13)Adequate arrangements shall be                made       in a
slaughter    house     by     its     owner for identification,
inspection and correlation of carcass, viscera and
head.
(14)In a slaughter house,        a curbed     and    separately
drained area or an area of sufficient size, sloped 33m
m per metre to a floor drain, where the carcasses may
be washed with a jet of water, shall be           provided    by
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
the owner of such slaughter house.
7.Slaughter house building - The                            different
construction of a slaughter house shall be built
and maintained by           its   owner     in   the manner       as
specified below, namely :
(a) Plant Building - (i)              Materials     used shall be
impervious,       easily     cleansable,     and      resistant    to
wear and      corrosion.       (ii) Materials     such as     wood,
plaster board, and porous acoustic-type boards, which
are absorbent and difficult to keep clean shall not
be used.
(b) Floors     -   The     floors     shall  be    non-absorbent
and non-slippery with rough finish and shall have
suitable gradient for drainage.
(c)Coves - Coves with           radii   sufficient     to  promote
sanitation     shall    be installed at the juncture of floors
and    walls    in all   rooms and       which      shall   not   be
less                                                 than 100 mm.
(d) Interior Walls - (i) Interior walls shall           be   smooth
and flat and constructed of impervious materials such
as   glazed brick, glazed tile, smooth surface             Portland
cement            plaster,            or        other            non-
toxic, nonabsorbent material applied               to a     suitable
base.    (ii) Walls     shall     be    provided with       suitable
sanitary type       bumpers         to   prevent      damage      by
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
hand      trucks,    carcass     shunks,     and    the     like.
(iii) The interior walls shall have washable surface
up to the height of 2 meters from the floor so that the
splashes may be washed and disinfected.
(e) Ceilings - (i) Ceilings shall be of the height of
5 mtrs or more in workrooms and so far as structural
conditions permit, ceilings shall be smooth and              flat.
(ii) Ceilings shall be constructed of Portland          cement
plaster, large size cement asbestos boards with
joints    sealed   with    a   flexible   sealing compound,
or other acceptable impervious material and finished s
o as to minimise condensation, mould             development,
flaking and accumulation of dirt. (iii) The walls
above     glazed    type    portion and     ceiling   shall    be
painted with water-resistant        paint to maintain     them
clean.
(f) Window Ledges - Window ledges shall be sloped
at 45 degrees        to     promote sanitation and to avoid
damage to glass in windows               from impact of hand
trucks and similar equipment,          the windowsills      shall
be 1200 mm above the floor level with proper
ventilation through mechanical venting or through
working      vents    shall   be    provided     in  the     roof
structure.
(g) Doorways       and Doors - (i) Doorways            through
which product is transferred        on rails or in hand trucks
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
shall be at least 1500 mm high and            shall be atleast
1500 mm wide.         (ii) Doors shall either be of        rust-
resistant    metal    construction      throughout,       or    if
made      with    rust-resistant     metal     having       tight
softwood,     they    shall be clad on      both     sides with
soldered or welded seams. (iii) Doorjambs shall be
clad with    rust-resistant metal     securely affixed so as
to    provide     no    crevices     for     dirt     or vermin
and the juncture at which the door joins the walls shall
be effectively sealed with a flexible sealing compound.
(h)     Screens    and Insect       control -     All windows,
doorways and other openings that may admit flies shal
l be    equipped    with   effective    insect    and    rodent
screens    and 'Fly   chaser'   fans     and   ducts     or    air
curtains shall be provided over doorways in outside wa
of food handing areas that are used for dispatch or
receiving.
(i) Rodent-Proofing-Except        in   the   case     of   solid
walls constructed of glazed tile, glazed brick,
and the like,     expanded      metal      or wire mesh not
exceeding           12.5 mm mesh, shall be embedded in
walls and floor at their junction and such mesh
shall    extend    vertically   and      horizontally     to     a
sufficient    distance     to exclude      the entrance        of
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
rats and      other    rodents. (j) Vehicular           areas    for
Trucks -                         (i) Concrete paved areas,
properly drained and extending at least 6 metres
from      building,       loading      docks       or     livestock
platforms       shall    be    provided     at    places      where
vehicles are loaded or unloaded.                    (ii) Pressure
washing jets and disinfection facilities for trucks
carrying animals        shall also    be   provided       at   such
places.
(k) Drainage -        (i) All parts    of  floors     where     wet
operations are conducted           shall be well drained and as
far    as    possible,     one     drainage     inlet    shall   be
provided for each 37 metre square of floor space
(ii)    A    slope     of about      20 mm        per metre       to
drainage       inlets    shall    be     provided      for    usual
conditions and it shall be ensured that the floor slopes
uniformly       to drains with no low spots,          which collect
liquid.
(iii) Floor drains shall not be provided in freezer rooms
or dry storage areas and when floor               drains        are
installed in rooms where the water seal in traps
is likely to evaporate without replenishment, they
shall    be   provided      with    suitable   removable metal
screw plugs.
(l) Traps and vents on drainage lines - (i) Each floor
drain,      including blood        drains,     shall be equipped
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
with a deep seal trap (P-, U-, or S-shape) (ii) Drainage
lines shall be properly vented to the            outside air and
be equipped with effective rodent screens.
(m) Sanitary        drainage lines     - Drainage       line   from
toilet pans and urinals shall not be connected with
other          drainage       lines within          the plant and
shall not discharge into a grease catch basin and such
lines shall be installed so that       if   leakage       develops,
it shall not affect the product or the equipment.
(n) Lighting       and   ventilation     -   (i)  Unrefrigerated
work     rooms      shall   be    provided       with     adequate
direct natural       light   and    ventilation        or    ample
artificial    light   and       ventilation      by   mechanical
Uncoloured glass having a high transmissibility of light
shall be used in skylights and windows (iii) The glass
area shall be approximately           one-fourth          of     the
floor area of a workroom and such ratio               shall       be
increased       where    there are     obstructions,        such as
adjacent buildings, overhead catwalks, and hoists,
which      interfere    with    the   admittance         of   direct
natural     light.  (iv)   Distributed     artificial lighting    of
much quality and at such distances as may be
specified      by   the    Central    Government shall            be
provided at all places where adequate natural light
is not available or is insufficient.
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
(o)      Every abattoir       shall  be     provided     with
distributed
artificial light of an overall intensity of not less     than
200 lux at the distances as may be specified by
the Central Government throughout the slaughter
hall and workrooms and at places                where meat
inspection      is   carried    out, the    overall intensity
of artificial light shall be not less than 500 lux.
(p)           every abattoir          shall be provided with
suitable and       sufficient means of ventilation    to  the
outside      air and the construction of the slaughter hall
shall be so arranged that the dressed carcasses are
not exposed        to direct sunlight;
(q) a sufficient, safe, potable and constant supply
of fresh water shall be available at adequate pressure
through the premises.
(r) the pressure for the general purpose of floor
washing may preferably be 200 to 330 kPa for
through floor cleaning
(s)      for     thorough        and    efficient    washing
of carcasses,
a higher pressure between 1000 kPa to 1700 kPa shall
be maintained.
(t)    floor     washing      point   shall    be    provided
for minimum 37 meter square on slaughter floor            and
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
working departments.
(u) a constant supply of clean hot water shall be
available   in the slaughter      hall and workrooms during
working    hours and       the     hotwater     required       for
frequent sterilising of equipment shall not be less
than 82 degree celsius.
(v) where      necessary      for    sanitary   maintenance,
equipment s     hall be constructed and installed so as to
be completely self-draining.
(w)    the  following     materials     shall not     be    used
in an abattoir,     namely-     (i)   copper and       its alloys
in equipment used for edible products. (ii) cadmium
in any form in equipment handling edible products
(iii)equipment with painted surface in product zone
(iv)enamel       containers       or equipment         is     not
desirable and (v) lead.
(x)   all  permanently       mounted       equipment        shall
either                be          installed          sufficiently
away from walls (minimum           300 mm)       to     provide
access        for       cleaning         and         inspection.
(y) all permanently mounted equipment shall either be
installed    sufficiently    above      the   floor (minimum
300 mm) to provide access for cleaning and inspection
or be completely sealed (watertight) to the                 floor
area."
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
15. Rules 5 and 6 of the Regulation of Livestock Market Rules
2017 provides as under:
"5. Registration of existing animal markets. - (1)
The local authority shall make a list of animal markets
functional prior to the commencement of these rules.
(2) Every animal market functional prior to the
commencement of these rules shall within three
months from the date of such commencement register
themselves with the District Animal Market Monitoring
Committee      by   making    an   application   to   the
6. Establishment of new animal markets. - (1)
When the local authority considers fit and necessary to
establish an animal market within its jurisdiction, it
shall  identify   a  suitable location  and   develop    a
blueprint of the animal market.
may approve the blueprint of the animal market or
seek further modification or reject the proposal for
reasons to be recorded in writing/
(3)   Every    new    animal  market   shall   apply   for
registration to the District Animal Market Monitoring
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
16. It alleged that the provisions quoted above are not followed
and, in fact, proper monitoring to ensure compliance of the provisions
of the Acts and the Rules is not made and cows, apart from other
animals, are transported and slaughtered in open places. It is further
alleged that         despite having specific information about such cruelty,
no case is           registered against such persons.     It is only for that
reason, a reference of the various provisions of the Acts and the
Rules has been given herein above, for its compliance.
17. At this stage, learned Government Pleader submitted that
the Tamil Nadu Animal Welfare Board has addressed the Chairpersons
of the District Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Animals vide letter
dated 24.9.2020 and the subsequent letters dated 18.10.2021,
6.11.2021 and 15.11.2021 to ensure compliance of the provisions of
the Act of 1960 and the Rules of 2001, as held by the Apex Court in
the case of Geeta Seshamani v. Union of India and another,
18. The direction by the Apex Court was in reference to the
failure of some States to constitute Animal Welfare Board at the
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
District level and, therefore, every State was directed to constitute
the Animal Welfare Board within three months and ensure that the
District Societies are also constituted in every District not only to
enforce the Rules of 2001, but to prevent violation of the provisions
of law regarding transportation and slaughtering of animals.
19. The counter-affidavit filed by the State is not to oppose the
prayer for compliance of the provisions of the Acts and the Rules.
Rather, they support the prayer. However, it is the specific stand of
State that earnest steps are being taken by government to ensure
compliance of the provisions of the Acts and the Rules and if anyone
indulges in activities which are offending the provisions of the Acts
and Rules, cases are being registered and for that, directions have
been given by the State Board to prevent cruelty to animals.
20. It is stated that transportation of cows from one District to
another in the State of Tamil Nadu is not permitted without following
Section 38(2)(h) of the Act of 1960 and even Rule 56 of the Rules of
1978.         It is further stated that whenever illegal transportation of the
animals is found, not only cases are registered for the offence under
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
the Act of 1960 and the Rules made thereunder, but cases are even
registered against the vehicles involved in transportation of the
animals.       The State Government would not permit transportation of
animals in an illegal manner.         All the Departments are working in
concert with the Police and Transport Departments. The Tamil Nadu
Animal Welfare Board was formed to promote animal welfare and to
ensure strict implementation of the Act of 1960 and the Rules of 1978
and also the Rules of 2001 and they are taking all steps as
contemplated under the Act and the Rules.            The functions of the
Board has been indicated in the counter-affidavit and the same are
reproduced hereunder for ready reference:
"(a)   advise   the   State    Government   for   strict
implementation of Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
Act, 1960 in letter and spirit in Tamil Nadu and to
suggest     measures     for     its  extension    and
implementation of rules framed there under to the
whole State in phases.
(b) establish Society for Prevention of Cruelty to
Animals under the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(Establishment    and   Regulation   of  Societies    of
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals) Rules, 2000 as
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
required by sub-section (1) of section 38 of the
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Act, 1960 (Central Act
59 of 1960). The Board will ensure that the Society for
Prevention of Cruelty to Animals will establish, manage
infirmaries, animal shelters, cattle pound and monitor
private gaushalas.
(c) affiliate Bodies/Animal Welfare Organizations in
Tamil Nadu and to co-operate and co-ordinate the
work   and    activities of all  such   Non-Government
Organizations.     To issue guidelines and recommend
financial or other asistance to all Non-Government
Organizations working in Tamil Nadu in connection
with animal welfare activities and have overall control
and supervision of their work.
(d)   provide    professional   advise   to    the   State
Government on matters relating to the medical care,
animal     birth   control,   vaccinations    and    other
healthcare.
(e) advise the State Government or any local authority
or other persons on technical improvements in the
design of vehicles and farm machineries so as to
lessen the burden on draught animals.
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
(f) advise the State Government on measures to be
introduced    to  prevent     unnecessary   suffering  to
animals, during transportation from one place to
another or when they are used as performing animals
or when they are kept in captivity or confinement.
(g) advise the State Government or any local authority
or other persons       in design   and maintenance     of
slaughter houses with provision of humane methods of
slaughter, to alleviate unnecessary pain or suffering
whether     physical  or  intimidation in  pre-slaughter
stages as far as possible.
(h) advise the State Government on regulation of
animal fairs/market with a view to prevent irksome
situations for the animals and birds during the process
of trading and marketing of animals and birds.
(i) take all steps as the Board, may think fit to ensure
destruction of terminally ill animals by local authority
or persons, whenevere it becomes necessary to do so,
after being rendered insensible to pain or sufferings."
21. It is also submitted that the Society for the Prevention of
Cruelty to Animals has also been constituted as per the judgment of
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
the Apex Court in W.P.No.440 of 2000 dated 6.8.2008 [Geeta
Seshamani v. Union of India] in all the Districts. The Society informs
the Police Department regarding violation of the provisions of the Act
and the Rules while transporting the animals or slaughtering.
Therefore, the State Government is putting in all efforts not only
regarding the transportation of animals, but also with regard to their
slaughtering.
22. The counter-affidavit submitted by the State Government is
basically to show the efforts taken by them for compliance of the
provisions of the Acts and the Rules regarding transportation of
animals and prevention of slaughtering.         Thus, they are not as such
opposing the prayer made in the writ petitions, but the allegations
levelled against the State have been defended. The fact still remains
that despite of the Acts and Rules on the subject, violation in
transporting and slaughtering take place in an illegal manner day in
and day out. Therefore, strict compliance of law is to be made.
23. In view of the aforesaid and finding that the litigation here
is in the larger interest of the animals, we allow the writ petitions
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
with the following directions:
(i) The respondent State, through its concerned
Departments,       would      ensure      that     no
transportation or slaughtering of animals takes
place in violation of the provisions of the Act of
1960 and the Rules of 1978, so as the Rules of
2001 and all other relevant Rules.
(ii)Strict compliance of the provisions of the Acts
and the Rules would be made not only through
the District Level Committee, but also the State
Board,    and   they  should   be    activated  with
circulation of a copy of this order.
(iii)If anyone indulges in illegal transportation of
animals,    he/she   should   be   dealt   with   for
violation of the provisions of the Act of 1960 and
the Rules of 1978 and 2001 and immediate
action should be taken with registration of cases
against the accused.
(iv)The respondent State through its Transport
Department should monitor transportation of
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
animals and for that at the check-posts and even
at the toll-gates, the footage of CCTV cameras,
wherever available, should be made accessible
to the District Level Committee, to ensure that
vehicles   transporting  animals   in  an   illegal
manner are dealt with an iron hand.
(v)The endeavour of the State would also be to
ensure that no slaughtering is permitted in
violation of the Acts and the Rules and in open
places and if slaughtering is to be done, it
should always be in the licensed slaughtering
houses after due compliance of the Rules and
only after a certificate as contemplated under
Section 4 of the Act of 1958. It is also of Rules
3, 4, 6 and 7 of the Slaughter House Rules. The
slaughtering would not be allowed in a open
place.
(vi)In case of an illegal transportation of animals,
not only cases should be registered, but also the
animals should be recovered and kept in safe
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
custody because in the matter decided by the
Apex Court in Raguramsharma and another,
supra, it was found that animals were not being
provided with sufficient food and water or any
medical facility or first-aid and that the animals
were being transported unauthorisedly violating
the governing norms and principles and also
without   giving   sufficient  space   to   breathe
properly and therefore strict compliance of Rules
46 to 56 of Rules of 1978 would be made, apart
from Rules 3, 4, 8 to 10, 12 and 13 of the Rules
of 2001.
(vii)To check the aforesaid type of transportation,
periodical monitoring should be done and no
animals should be allowed to enter into the
territory of the State of Tamil Nadu from any
other State, if it is brought in violation of the
Rules of 1978 and 2001.
(viii)Slaughtering   should    not  be   permitted    in
violation of the provision of Section 4 of the Act
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
of 1958.
(ix)The respondent State should not allow auction
of animals in violation of the provisions of the
Acts and the Rules.
(x)The District Level Committee would be supplied
a copy of this order to ensure that regular
monitoring in compliance of this order is made
to see that no transportation or slaughtering of
animals takes place without the compliance of
the directions given by this Court and the
provisions of the Acts and Rules.
(xi)In   case    of   any   violation,    it   would   be
immediately      brought   to   the   notice   of  the
Superintendent of Police concerned to register a
case with further action in the matter and the
District Collector concerned would also see that
no transportation or slaughtering of animals in
his  district  takes   place   in   violation  of the
directions given by this Court and a regular
monitoring would be made.
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
Consequently, W.M.P.Nos.2903, 4855, 4857 of 2021 and 15956
of 2022 are closed. There will be no order as to costs.
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
Animal and Husbandry Department
The Government of the Tamil Nadu
3      The Director General of Police
Law and Order
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate Erode, Erode.
7      The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate Erode
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
Office of the Collectorate Vellore
10 The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate Erode
Office of the Collectorate Villupuram
13 The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate Villupuram
Office of the Collectorate Trichy
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
16       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate Trichy
Office of the Collectorate Dindugal
19       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate Dindugal
Office of the Collectorate Kallakurichi
22       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate Kallakurichi
Office of the Collectorate Krishnagiri
25       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate Krishnagiri
Office of the Collectorate Dharmapuri
28       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate Dharmapuri
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
Office of the Collectorate Salem
31       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate Salem
Office of the Collectorate Salem
34       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate Namakkal
Office of the Collectorate Coimbatore
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
37       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate Coimbatore
Office of the Collectorate Tiruppur
40       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate Tiruppur
Office of the Collectorate Karur
43       The Superintendent of Police
Office of the Superintendent of Police
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
Animal and Husbandry Department
Office of the Collectorate Karur
Department of Environment and Forests
Department of Animal Husbandry and Fisheries Department
Animal Welfare Board of India
48         The Director General of Police
Registry is directed to mark a copy of this
(i) The office of the Director General of Police, Tamil Nadu,
so as to forward a copy to all the Superintendent of Police
in the State.
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
(ii) The office of the Chief Secretary and Secretary,
Animal Husbandry and Fisheries Department,
Government of Tamil Nadu, so as to forward a copy
to all the District Collectors in the State.
(iii) The office of the Advocate-General, so as to forward
a copy to all Officers/Boards/Committees concerned.
W.P.No.13748 of 2015 etc.
W.P.Nos.13748, 13749 of 2015
and 2565 and 4250 of 2021