1. The State of Jharkhand through the Chief Secretary,
Department, Govt. of Jharkhand, Ranchi
1. The State of Jharkhand through the Chief Secretary, Govt.
Department, Govt. of Jharkhand, Ranchi
3. The Director, Primary Education, Govt. of Jharkhand, Ranchi
For the Petitioners      : M/s Anjani Kumar Verma & Binay Kumar
For the Respondents      : Mr. S. Ahmed, A.C. to S.C. (Mines)-I
CAV ON 27.10.2021                          Pronounced on 10.02.2022
The following issues have been referred by a learned
Single Judge of this Court to a Division Bench :-
(i)       Whether the judgment and the order passed in
W.P.(S) no. 2928 of 2008 dated 20.09.2008 or the
judgment dated 19th August 1999 passed by the
Division Bench of the then Ranchi Bench of Patna High
Court in LPA No. 47 of 1999 (R) in the Case of Gautam
Singh versus Central Coalfields Limited will govern the
field in respect of payment of Court Fee in writ
applications where there are more than one writ
petitioner in a single writ petition.
(ii)      Whether the stamp reporter is duty bound to point out
the defect mandatorily if only one set of Court Fee is
filed in a writ application when there are more than
one writ petitioner, and it is only the “Taxing Officer”
or the Court who can ignore the said defect/exempt
payment of additional set of Court Fee.
2.    Both the writ petitions have been filed inter alia for grant of
(i)   For direction to the respondents to take step for
absorption of the service of the petitioners, who are
working as Para Teachers as permanent regular teacher
taking same and similar decision taken by the other State
Governments such as the State of Orissa, Chhatisgarh
and Uttar Pradesh etc. as evident from Govt. Memo No.
10557 dated 4.5.2013 (Annexure-7), Govt. Letter dated
07.05.2013(Annexure-8) and Govt. Letter No. 805-
06/2015-16 dated 01.06.2015 (Annexure -9) respectively
in the interest of justice, equity and fairplay as per the
Constitutional mandates as enshrined in the Constitution
of India.
(ii)  For direction to the respondents to pay the monthly
wages/salary to the petitioners in minimum scale of pay
with admissible D.A. etc. as provided to regular teachers
following the Principle of Equal pay for equal work till a
decision is being taken for their absorption as regular
Primary Teachers following the settled principles of law.
3.     Several petitioners, who are working as Para Teachers, have
joined to file both the cases for a direction to the respondents to take
steps for absorption of their services as permanent regular teacher as
has been done by some other State Governments of the country.
4.     The issue for determination is as to whether all the petitioners
would have to file separate set of court fee or only one court fee is
sufficient. The Registrar General has overruled the objection raised
by the office for filing separate court fee on the basis of order dated
20.09.2018 passed by a Division Bench in W.P.(S) No.2928 of 2008.
The said Division Bench has held as under :
“ Registry is not justified in directing the petitioner to pay
separate set of court-fee as the petitioners have filed only one
writ petition. If the writ petitions would have been filed
separately, then there would have been justification in asking
for separate sets of court-fee.”
The learned Single Judge has recorded that on the basis of said
order, all the petitioners have been exempted from paying separate
Court Fee by the Lawazima Board and only one set of Court Fee was
5.     However, learned Single Judge has referred another decision of
the Division Bench of Ranchi Bench of Patna High Court rendered in
Gautam Singh vs Central Coalfields Ltd. (LPA No. 47 of 1999
(R) as well as Promod Kumar Akela & ors. vs. The Director,
BIT, Sindri, Dhanbad and ors. ( LPA No. 100 of 1999(R) ). In
the aforesaid decisions, a Coordinate Division Bench of Ranchi Bench
of Patna High Court, after considering catena of decisions on the
issue has come to the conclusion that in LPA No. 47 of 1999(R)
arising out of CWJC No. 2114 of 1988(R), 23 persons have jointly
filed a writ petition, seeking appropriate writ or direction upon the
respondents to reinstate them and regularize their services with back
wages. The petitioners therein claimed to be employees of Central
Coalfields Ltd.    and were aggrieved by the termination of their
respective services. The Court held that each of them has
independent cause of action arising out of termination of their
respective services and is asserting of his contractual/constitutional
right as was in the case of P.R. Naidu vs. Government of A.P.
(AIR 1977 SC 854). Accordingly, they were directed to pay
separate court fee.     However, in LPA No 100 of 1999(R), a writ
petition was filed by several writ petitioners for a direction upon the
respondents to permit them to sit in the supplementary examination
1998 B.Sc. (Engineering) of 1st year in the respective branches. It
was held by the Division Bench that their right to relief arises from
one and the same order of the Institute,        their cause of action is
common and their interest is similar, they can maintain a single writ
petition with one set of court fee.
6.     In view of the aforesaid two conflicting decisions, the matter
has been referred before the Division Bench.
7.     We have heard the parties, perused the records and also gone
through the judicial pronouncements, two of which have already
been discussed as above.
So far as the decision rendered by a Division Bench in W.P.(S)
No.2928 of 2008 is concerned, it simply says that since only one
writ petition has been filed,     petitioners are not required to file
separate set of court fee and if the writ petitions would have been
filed separately, then there would have been justification in asking for
separate sets of Court fee.   We are not in agreement with the
aforesaid view, for the reason that the aforesaid decision has been
rendered without considering the earlier judicial pronouncements
and, therefore, that would not have binding precedent.
8.     The aforesaid issue was considered and decided by a Division
Bench of Patna High Court in Smt. Krishna Pati Devi & ors. vs.
The State of Bihar & ors. ( 1998 SCC Online Pat. 420) . In the
aforesaid case, several persons had joined to file a writ petition
challenging a notification issued by the respondents. The learned
Single Judge had decided that though by the notification all the
petitioners are affected but there is difference between common
interest and similar interest. Therefore, separate court fee would be
required to be paid. The aforesaid order was assailed in LPA No. 580
of 1998, which was disposed of by the aforesaid pronouncement by
the Division Bench holding that if the interests among the petitioners
are common or joint when they claim an interest as class or group, in
that case only one set of court fee would be payable but when the
interest is not common but similar in the sense that each of the
petitioners has suffered individual injury as a result of the impugned
order, then in that case though the interest is similar it cannot be
termed as common interest and in such type of cases separate court
fee is required to be paid. The Division Bench in paragraph-5 thereof
“(5) Having heard counsel and going through the reasons of
the learned writ court, we are of the opinion that whenever
interest is common or similar, whether by one stroke of pen,
if the impugned notification can be set aside, one set of
court fee is only required. In the instant case, considering
the relief of the petitioners, the relief as claimed is common.
It is not that though by one notification their services were
terminated but they have claimed different reliefs. This is
how the common interest between the co-petitioners are to
be judged in respect of payment of court fee. This being so,
we are of the opinion that if one set of court fee is paid
while challenging the impugned order in the writ petition,
that is sufficient and for individual petitioners no separate
court fee is required.”
9.        The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Mota Singh & ors. vs.
State of Haryana & Ors. ( 1980 [supp] Supreme Court cases
600 )     has held that if the several writ petitioners, each having no
jural relationship qua co-petitioners, but having similar cause of
action, even then they cannot jointly file a single petition and pay
only one set of court fee thereon.
10.    A Single Bench of Patna High Court in Shiv Shankar Pandey
& ors. vs. The Union of India & anr. ( [2002] 4 PLJR 665 )
has referred to another judgment rendered by another Single Judge
in Ram Nandan Sharma vs. The State of Bihar [ 2001 (3)
PLJR 53 ] and held as to what would be relevant is that two or
more persons cannot join in a single application for a writ of
mandamus to enforce separate claims but where the claims are same
and against the same authority, two or more persons can join in a
single application for a writ of mandamus. In the aforesaid case
before the learned Single Judge , the writ petitioners were praying
for regularization of their services and for payment of salary equal to
Class IV employees. Therefore, it was held that the petitioners were
praying for individual relief and they have joined the writ petition
without there being any jural relationship between them. It has to be
borne in mind that petition is on behalf of each of them. Although,
petitioners have joined together in this petition but the same shall be
deemed to have been presented on behalf of each of the petitioners
separately as, if each of petitioners has common and joint interest,
they may be allowed to present joint petition but the petition being
on behalf of each of the petitioners individually, each shall be liable
to pay separate court fee. It has been further held by the learned
Single Judge that seeking common relief in a writ petition may be
relevant for decision on the question as to whether joint petition can
be preferred but this issue shall have no relevance at all on the
question of payment of court fee. Finally, it has been held that relief
of each of the petitioners is individual and grant of relief to one of
them would not entitle the other petitioners to have the same
benefits, thus, the petitioners are liable to pay separate court fee.
11.    Similar view has been taken by another learned Single Judge
of Patna High Court in Manoj Kumar Choudhary & ors. vs. The
State of Bihar & ors. ( 2016 [4] PLJR 169 ) but the learned
Single Judge has held that there is a difference between the common
interest and similar interest. If the petitioners are pursuing common
or joint interest for a class as a whole then only one set of court-fee
would be required, however, in case they have suffered individual
injury, then interest may be similar but would not be common. In
such case separate court-fee is required to be deposited by the
petitioners. In that case, the petitioners were seeking only to the
extent that certain examination would be held by the respondent-
University.    It was further held that in case even only one of the
petitioners succeeds then examination would be held and the entire
class would be benefited, thus, only one set of court fee can be filed
in such a situation.
12.    In another decision, learned Single Judge of Patna High Court
in CWJC No. 3963 of 2015           vide order dated 8.4.2015 has held
that, if quashing of notification would benefit all the writ petitioners,
then it would be common and similar interest and even if such relief
is granted to one of the writ petitioner, all the petitioners would
automatically get benefitted as the impugned notification has to be
quashed. Therefore, in that case also, it was held that separate court
fee is not required.
13.    A Division Bench of this Court in       Ram Naresh Singh vs.
Bokaro Steel Plant & Ors. (LPA No. 510 of 2012 ) had noticed
that the petitioners were occupying different official quarters allotted
to them and were claiming for their independent gratuity amount,
therefore, they are claiming their rights independently and none of
the co-petitioners has any common right over each other’s claim.
Therefore, verdict of learned Single Judge was upheld and Letters
Patent Appeal was dismissed.
14.    In the case in hand, all the writ petitioners, who are working as
Para Teachers, are claiming their respective absorption in the service
as permanent regular teachers. In our view, all of them are claiming
their individual rights and there is no jural relationship between the
writ petitioners. Their cases can be of a similar interest but is not of a
common interest. As mandamus has been sought for their individual
absorption in service, it cannot be held that they are pursuing a
common and joint interest or a class as a whole, rather they are
pursuing their own interest. Therefore, it has to be understood that
they are pursuing their individual relief, although they may have
similar interest. In our considered view, the petition shall be deemed
to have been presented on behalf of each of the petitioners
separately. If each of the petitioners has similar interest, they may be
allowed to present joint petition but for the purpose of payment of
court fee, they would be required to pay separate court fee. It is not
the case that in case relief is granted to one of the writ petitioners,
then all the writ petitioners would be benefited automatically.
Actually, separate orders of authority would be required to be passed
for their absorption considering the individual case. Thus, in our
considered opinion, in the present case, separate sets of Court fee is
required to be filed by the writ petitioners.
15.    Issue no.1 is answered accordingly.
16.    So far as Issue no.II is concerned, since we have held that the
law declared vide order dated 20.9.2018 by a Division Bench in
W.P.(S) No.2928 of 2008 cannot be a binding precedent and in view
of discussions made above, the law declared by the Division Bench
in LPA No.47 of 1990 (R) ( Gautam Singh vs. Central Coalfields Ltd.)
is correct, therefore, the Stamp Reporters would be duty bound to
make a scrutiny, when a writ petition is filed by several writ
petitioners as to whether separate court fee would be required to be
filed or a single Court fee would be sufficient and as per the law
declared. They would have to make an Office Note and refer the
matter to the Bench concerned for a decision on the issue. Such an
issue raised by the Stamp Reporter cannot be decided by a Lawazima
Board, rather the same would be required to be decided by an
appropriate Bench.
17.        This answers the second issue raised by the learned Single
18.          Having held as above, now we direct that the matter be
placed before the appropriate Bench having jurisdiction to hear and
decide it.