2.     This Criminal Revision under Sections 397, 401 of Cr.P.C. has
been filed against the judgment and sentence dated 15/9/2021 passed
District Vidisha in Criminal Appeal No.03/2020, thereby affirming
the judgment and sentence dated 18/12/2019 passed by the Chief
Judicial Magistrate First Class, Kurvai, District Vidisha in Regular
Criminal Trial No.173/2014, by which the applicant has been
convicted for the following offences:-
Conviction U/s        Sentence    Fine       Default (in lieu of fine)
304-A of IPC          1 year RI   1,000/-    10 days RI
3.     It is submitted by the counsel for the applicant that according
to the prosecution case, on 3/10/2013 the Government Hospital,
Ganjbasoda, District Vidisha, sent an information to the SHO
Ganjbasoda, District Vidisha that Chandrashekhar and Priti have
Devendra Valmiki Vs. State of M.P.
been brought to the hospital in dead condition. Accordingly, Marg
No.0/2013 was registered, Panchnama of the dead bodies were
prepared and they were sent for postmortem. The statements of the
witnesses were recorded and it was found that on 3/10/2013
Mahendra     alongwith    his   sister   Priti and    cousin   brother
Chandrashekhar were coming from village Parsora and when they
took a turn from Bhalbamora Chauraha towards Mandibamora, then
the present applicant, who was riding his motorcycle No.UP 94 J
3106, hit the bike of the deceased in a rash and negligent manner, as
a result, Chandrashekhar and Priti sustained grievous injuries and
ultimately succumbed to the same. The injured Mahendra Singh also
sustained injuries on his hand, forehead and mouth. 108 ambulance
was called on the spot. Injured / deceased were sent to the Civil
Hospital, Basoda, where Priti and Chandrashekhar were declared
4.    The police after recording the statements of the witnesses and
concluding the investigation, filed the charge-sheet for offence under
Sections 279, 337, 304-A, 338 of IPC read with Sections 3/181 and
5/180 of the Motor Vehicles Act.
5.    The Trial Court by order dated 8/10/15 framed charges u/s.
279, 304-A of IPC read with Sections 3/181 of Motor Vehicles Act.
Thereafter by order dated 24.10.2019, additional charge u/s. 338 of
Devendra Valmiki Vs. State of M.P.
IPC was framed. Charge U/s. 5/180 of Motor Vehicles Act was
framed against co-accused Rajeev.
6.     The prosecution in order to prove its case, examined Rambabu
7.     The applicant examined himself as DW-1 under Section 315 of
8.     The Trial Court by judgment and sentence dated 18/12/2019
convicted and sentenced the applicant for the above-mentioned
offences and acquitted the co-accused Rajeev.
9.     Being aggrieved by the judgment and sentence passed by the
Trial Court, the applicant preferred a Criminal Appeal No.3/2020,
which too has been dismissed by judgment dated 15/9/2021 passed
10.    Challenging the findings recorded by the Courts below, it is
submitted by the counsel for the applicant that four persons, i.e. two
male and one woman were riding on a motorcycle alongwith a minor
girl and thus, it is clear that they themselves were negligent as only
Devendra Valmiki Vs. State of M.P.
two persons can ride on a motorcycle. It is further submitted that in
fact no accident had taken place from the motorcycle of the applicant.
The driver of the motorcycle could not control the motorcycle and it
slipped, as a result, two persons riding on the said motorcycle died on
the spot. It is further submitted that even otherwise, the jail sentence
awarded to the applicant may be reduced to the period already
undergone by the applicant, as he is in jail from the date of dismissal
of his appeal, i.e.15/9/2021.
11.    Per contra, the revision is vehemently opposed by the counsel
for the State. It is submitted that the applicant has not pointed out any
legal flaw in the judgments passed by the Courts below and this
Court in exercise of its revisional powers cannot interfere with the
findings of facts unless and until they are perverse or contrary to
12.    Heard learned counsel for the parties.
13.    Rambabu Dangi (PW-1) and Ashok Joshi (PW-2) have stated
that they reached on the spot after the accident took place. Ashok
Joshi turned hostile as he did not support the seizure of motorcycles
vide seizure memo Ex.P/2 and P/3, however, he admitted his
signatures on the said documents. Similarly, Rambabu Dangi (PW-1)
has admitted that the spot map Ex.P/1, seizure memo Ex.P/2 and P/3
bear his signatures. But, one thing is clear that since Rambabu (PW-
Devendra Valmiki Vs. State of M.P.
1) did not support the prosecution case as an eyewitness, therefore,
he was declared hostile. Nothing substantial could be elicited from
the evidence of Rambabu Dangi (PW-1) and Ashok Joshi (PW-2),
which may support the prosecution case.
14.    Manjeet Singh Rajput (PW-3) has stated that the motorcycle
which was in front of him had hit the motorcycle coming from the
opposite direction, as a result, two persons fell on the ground and
died on the spot and they are Pritibai and Chandrashekhar. This
witness has further stated that he has seen the driver of the
motorcycle, who disclosed his name as Devendra and he also stated
that the person standing in the dock appears to be the driver of the
offending motorcycle. He further submitted that the driver of the
motorcycle was under the influence of alcohol. In cross-examination,
he has stated that he had seen the driver of the offending motorcycle
from his back. He further stated that when the by-passers enquired
about the deceased persons, then this witness disclosed that the lady
is the resident of his village and the deceased his her brother. He
further stated that he had seen the driver of the offending motorcycle
after the accident and since the accident took place 2½ to 3 years
back, therefore, today he has some suspicion as to whether the person
present in the dock is the same person or not. He further stated that
the registration number of the offending vehicle is UP 94 J 3106. He
Devendra Valmiki Vs. State of M.P.
further admitted that the deceased Priti is his aunt.
15.     Mahendra Singh Rajput (PW-8) is the wife of the injured, who
was sitting on the motorcycle. He has stated that the motorcycle was
being driven by Chandrashekhar and the deceased Chandrashekhar,
Priti, this witness and a minor girl were riding on the motorcycle. The
applicant who was also on a motorcycle came from the opposite
direction in a rash and negligent manner and hit the motorcycle, as a
result, Chandrashekhar and his sister Priti died on the spot, whereas
this witness also sustained injuries on his face. In cross-examination,
he admitted that three adults and one minor child were sitting on the
motorcycle and the deceased Priti was also having one bag with her.
He further stated that even after sustaining injuries on the accident,
he did not loose his consciousness and he was well oriented. He
further stated that immediately after the accident, he came to know
about the name of the driver of the offending motorcycle, as lot of
persons, who had gathered there, were knowing the driver of the
offending motorcycle. Even the driver of the offending motorcycle
had disclosed his name. The applicant was driving the motorcycle in
a very rash and negligent manner and at a high speed. He denied that
the accident took place all of a sudden. He further stated that the
deceased Chandrashekhar was riding his motorcycle in the right
direction, whereas the applicant came from a wrong direction and hit
Devendra Valmiki Vs. State of M.P.
the motorcycle. He further stated that the child of Chandrashekhar
has received a compensation of Rs.12,00,000/- in a motor accident
claim case, whereas this witness has received Rs.50,000-60,000/- in a
claim case. A specific suggestion was given that on account of the
accident, the applicant is still admitted in the hospital. However, it
was stated by this witness that the applicant had suffered minor
16.    Hameer Singh (PW-9) is a hearsay witness. He did not support
the prosecution case and stated that later on he came to know about
the accident and, therefore, he was declared hostile.
17.    Dr. R.K. Chidar (PW-4) had medically examined the injured
Mahendra (PW-8) and found a lacerated wound over tongue, 3 cm. X
3 cm. upto skin deep with bleeding.
18.    Deepak Kumar (PW-7) had found fracture on the left mandible
condoil bone of injured Mahendra and accordingly, he was operated
upon for inter mexilary fixation on 7/10/2013 and he was discharged
19.    The record of the Trial Court also contains bed head ticket of
injured Mahendra, according to which, he was operated upon, but
unfortunately those documents remained unexhibited, therefore, they
cannot be read.
20.    Dr. R.K. Chidar (PW-4) had also conducted the postmortem of
Devendra Valmiki Vs. State of M.P.
the deceased Priti Rajput as well as Chandrashekhar.
21.    As per the postmortem report of Priti, one abrasion over right
mandible bone was found with fracture and one lacerated wound was
found over right occipital region with fracture. The postmortem
report is Ex.P/7.
22.    As    per   the   postmortem      report    Ex.P/8 of deceased
Chandrashekhar, the following injuries were found:-
i.     One lacerated wound over right eyebrow frontal
bone with fracture, size 10 inch X 3 inch with bone
deep.
ii.    Fracture of mandible right side.
iii.   Fracture of right clevical side.
iv.    Multiple fracture of ribs of left side.
v.     Abrasion of both legs.
vi.    Abrasion over both hands.
23.    Cause of death of both the deceased was due to shock and
24.    Thus, it is clear that the deceased Priti and Chandrashekhar
sustained multiple external and internal injuries including multiple
fracture, as a result, they died on the spot and, therefore, death of
both persons is accidental in nature, whereas Mahendra (PW-8) had
also sustained injuries.
25.    The applicant entered into the witness box as DW-1 and stated
Devendra Valmiki Vs. State of M.P.
that the motorcycle on which the deceased persons and the injured
were riding was moving at a speed of 40-45 km. Per hour and as they
slipped, therefore, the persons riding on the motorcycle fell on the
ground. The minor girl also fell on the road, who was picked up by
this witness and thereafter he called the 108 ambulance and took
away the injured, whereas the minor girl was taken away by her
family members, as he handed over her to them. He further stated that
the minor girl did not sustain any injury. He further stated that he did
not sustain any injury as no accident had taken place with his
motorcycle. He further stated that Mahendra was driving the
motorcycle, which fell on the ground. He further stated that after
some time, the police also reached on the spot and eqnuired about the
name of the injured persons as well as the name of the applicant. He
further stated that the police had asked him to park his motorcycle in
the premises of the petrol pump. He further stated that no accident
had taken place from his motorcycle, but on the contrary he had
helped the injured persons.
26.    The police had prepared the spot map and from the spot map,
it appears that the accident took place on the extreme side of the road.
Thus, the evidence of the witnesses that the deceased was driving the
vehicle on the extreme left side, whereas the applicant hit the
Devendra Valmiki Vs. State of M.P.
motorcycle by coming from the wrong side appears to be correct.
Furthermore, the applicant (DW-1) himself has stated that the
motorcycle on which the deceased persons and injured Mahendra
were riding came from the side of village Bhalbamora and turned
towards Mandibamora. It is clear from the spot map, Ex.P/1, that the
accident took place on the extreme left side of the road, which is to
be used by a motorcyclist, going towards Mandibamora. Thus,
according to the applicant himself, the deceased persons were on
their left side and since the accident took place on the extreme left
side of the road, therefore, it is clear that the applicant was driving
the motorcycle in a wrong direction and hit the motorcycle of the
deceased Chandrashekhar, while they were on the extreme left side of
the road. Thus, it is the applicant who was at fault. Merely because
three male persons and one minor girl were riding on the motorcycle,
would not give any authority to the applicant to hit the said
motorcycle by coming from the wrong direction. Furthermore, the
applicant (DW-1) himself has admitted his presence on the spot.
27.    Both the Courts below have given concurrent findings of facts
about the negligent act of the applicant. Even this Court has also
considered the evidence led by the parties and has come to a
conclusion that it was the applicant himself, who was driving the
offending vehicle and by coming from the wrong side, hit the
Devendra Valmiki Vs. State of M.P.
motorcycle of the deceased, resulting in death of two persons. As the
findings of facts recorded by the Courts below cannot be said to be
perverse or contrary to record, accordingly, the conviction of the
applicant for the offences under Sections 279, 338 and 304-A of IPC
is hereby affirmed.
28.    So far as the question of sentence is concerned, it is submitted
by the counsel for the applicant that the applicant is in jail for the last
two months and, therefore, he may be sentenced to the period already
29.    Considered the submissions made by the counsel for the
30.    In the present case, it has been categorically found that it was
the applicant, who hit the motorcycle of the deceased by coming from
the wrong side. Two persons have lost their lives and one sustained
injuries on his jaw, as a result, he was operated upon. The Supreme
Court in the case of State of Punjab Vs. Saurabh Bakshi, reported
“1. Laws can never be enforced unless fear supports
them.”
Though the aforesaid statement was made centuries
back, it has its pertinence, in a way, with the enormous
vigour, in today's society. It is the duty of every right-
thinking citizen to show veneration to law so that an
orderly, civilised and peaceful society emerges. It has to
be borne in mind that law is averse to any kind of chaos.
Devendra Valmiki Vs. State of M.P.
It is totally intolerant of anarchy. If anyone defies law, he
has to face the wrath of law, depending on the concept of
proportionality that the law recognises. It can never be
forgotten that the purpose of criminal law legislated by
the competent legislatures, subject to judicial scrutiny
within constitutionally established parameters, is to
protect the collective interest and save every individual
that forms a constituent of the collective from
unwarranted hazards. It is sometimes said in an
egocentric and uncivilised manner that law cannot bind
the individual actions which are perceived as flaws by
the large body of people, but, the truth is and has to be
that when the law withstands the test of the
constitutional scrutiny in a democracy, the individual
notions are to be ignored. At times certain crimes assume
more accent and gravity depending on the nature and
impact of the crime on the society. No court should
ignore the same being swayed by passion of mercy. It is
the obligation of the court to constantly remind itself that
the right of the victim, and be it said, on certain
occasions the person aggrieved as well as the society at
large can be victims, never be marginalised. In this
context one may recapitulate the saying of Justice
Benjamin N. Cardozo “Justice, though due to the
accused, is due to the accuser too.” And, therefore, the
requisite norm has to be the established principles laid
down in precedents. It is neither to be guided by a sense
of sentimentality nor to be governed by prejudices.
23. In the instant case the factum of rash and negligent
driving has been established. This Court has been
constantly noticing the increase in number of road
accidents and has also noticed how the vehicle drivers
have been totally rash and negligent. It seems to us
driving in a drunken state, in a rash and negligent
manner or driving with youthful adventurous enthusiasm
as if there are no traffic rules or no discipline of law has
come to the centre stage. The protagonists, as we
perceive, have lost all respect for law. A man with means
has, in possibility, graduated himself to harbour the idea
that he can escape from the substantive sentence by
payment of compensation. Neither the law nor the court
that implements the law should ever get oblivious of the
Devendra Valmiki Vs. State of M.P.
fact that in such accidents precious lives are lost or the
victims who survive are crippled for life which, in a way,
is worse than death. Such developing of notions is a
dangerous phenomenon in an orderly society. Young age
cannot be a plea to be accepted in all circumstances. Life
to the poor or the impecunious is as worth living for as it
is to the rich and the luxuriously temperamental.
24. Needless to say, the principle of sentencing
recognises the corrective measures but there are
occasions when the deterrence is an imperative necessity
depending upon the facts of the case. In our opinion, it is
a fit case where we are constrained to say that the High
Court has been swayed away by the passion of mercy in
applying the principle that payment of compensation is a
factor for reduction of sentence to 24 days. It is
absolutely in the realm of misplaced sympathy. It is, in a
way mockery of justice. Because justice is “the crowning
glory”, “the sovereign mistress” and “queen of virtue” as
Cicero had said. Such a crime blights not only the lives
of the victims but of many others around them. It
ultimately shatters the faith of the public in judicial
system. In our view, the sentence of one year as imposed
by the trial Magistrate which has been affirmed by the
appellate court should be reduced to six months.
25. Before parting with the case we are compelled to
observe that India has a disreputable record of road
accidents. There is a nonchalant attitude among the
drivers. They feel that they are the “Emperors of all they
survey”. Drunkenness contributes to careless driving
where the other people become their prey. The poor feel
that their lives are not safe, the pedestrians think of
uncertainty and the civilised persons drive in constant
fear but still apprehensive about the obnoxious attitude
of the people who project themselves as “larger than
life”. In such obtaining circumstances, we are bound to
observe that the lawmakers should scrutinise, relook and
revisit the sentencing policy in Section 304-A IPC. We
say so with immense anguish.
The Supreme Court in case of State of Madhya Pradesh vs.
Surendra Singh reported in (2015) 1 SCC 222 has held as under:-
Devendra Valmiki Vs. State of M.P.
“13. We again reiterate in this case that undue
sympathy to impose inadequate sentence would do
more harm to the justice system to undermine the
public confidence in the efficacy of law. It is the
duty of every court to award proper sentence
having regard to the nature of the offence and the
manner in which it was executed or committed.
The sentencing courts are expected to consider all
relevant facts and circumstances bearing on the
question of sentence and proceed to impose a
sentence commensurate with the gravity of the
offence. The court must not only keep in view the
rights of the victim of the crime but also the
society at large while considering the imposition
of appropriate punishment. Meagre sentence
imposed solely on account of lapse of time
without considering the degree of the offence will
be counterproductive in the long run and against
the interest of the society.
M.P. v. Bablu [(2014) 9 SCC 281 : (2014) 6 SCC
(Cri) 1] , after considering and following the
earlier decisions, this Court reiterated the settled
proposition of law that one of the prime objectives
of criminal law is the imposition of adequate, just,
proportionate punishment which is commensurate
with the gravity, nature of crime and the manner in
which the offence is committed. One should keep
in mind the social interest and conscience of the
society while considering the determinative factor
of sentence with gravity of crime. The punishment
should not be so lenient that it shocks the
conscience of the society. It is, therefore, the
solemn duty of the court to strike a proper balance
while awarding the sentence as awarding lesser
sentence encourages any criminal and, as a result
of the same, the society suffers.
The Supreme Court in the case of State of Karnataka vs.
Sharanappa Basanagouda Aregoudar reported in (2002) 3 SCC
Devendra Valmiki Vs. State of M.P.
5.     It may be noted here that the respondent had
raised a plea before the learned Magistrate as well
as before the appellate court that the accident
might have occurred due to the bursting of the
right front tyre of the car as a result of which the
car went to the right side of the road and dashed
against the lorry. But this plea was not accepted by
the trial court as well as the appellate court. A
suggestion to this effect was put to the Motor
Vehicles Inspector who had examined the vehicle
after the accident. However, the Inspector also
declined the suggestion that the accident might
have occurred as a result of bursting of the tyre and
he opined that the tyre would have burst due to the
collision between the two vehicles. The possibility
of the car having gone to the extreme right side is
also ruled out by the evidence. The observation
made by the revisional court is not based on the
evidence on record.
6.     We are of the view that having regard to the
serious nature of the accident, which resulted in
the death of four persons, the learned Single Judge
should not have interfered with the sentence
imposed by the courts below. It may create and set
an unhealthy precedent and send wrong signals to
the subordinate courts which have to deal with
several such accident cases. If the accused are
found guilty of rash and negligent driving, courts
have to be on guard to ensure that they do not
escape the clutches of law very lightly. The
sentence imposed by the courts should have
deterrent effect on potential wrongdoers and it
should commensurate with the seriousness of the
offence. Of course, the courts are given discretion
in the matter of sentence to take stock of the wide
and varying range of facts that might be relevant
for fixing the quantum of sentence, but the
discretion shall be exercised with due regard to
larger interest of the society and it is needless to
add that passing of sentence on the offender is
Devendra Valmiki Vs. State of M.P.
probably the most public face of the criminal
justice system.
Thus the Court should not award flea-bite sentence for offence
under Section 304-A of IPC by showing undue sympathy. In the
present case, two persons have lost their lives and it was the applicant
who was solely negligent in causing accident by hitting the
motorcycle by coming from the wrong direction. Accordingly, this
Court is of the considered opinion that no case is made out even for
reduction of the jail sentence. The Courts below have already adopted
a very lenient view in the matter and accordingly, the sentence
awarded by the Courts below does not call for any interference.
31.    Accordingly the judgment and sentence dated 15/9/2021
passed by First Additional Sessions Judge, Ganjbasoda, Link Court
Kurvai, District Vidisha in Criminal Appeal No.03/2020 and
judgment and sentence dated 18/12/2019 passed by the Chief Judicial
Magistrate First Class, Kurvai, District Vidisha in Regular Criminal
Trial No.173/2014 are hereby affirmed.
32.    The applicant is in jail, he shall undergo the remaining jail
33.    The Registry is directed to send back the record of the Courts
below alongwith a copy of this judgment for necessary information
and compliance.
Devendra Valmiki Vs. State of M.P.
34. The revision fails and is hereby dismissed.