Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
Shri Imran Khan, Advocate for applicant.
Shri S.K. Shrivastava, Advocate for respondent no.1.
Shri C.P. Singh, Panel Lawyer for respondent No.2/State.
This application under Section 439 (2) of Cr.P.C. has been filed
for cancellation of bail granted to the respondent no.1 by order dated
5/10/2021 passed by First Additional Sessions Judge, Ganj Basoda,
District Vidisha in Bail Application No.407/2021.
2.     The necessary facts for disposal of the present application in
short are that the complainant/applicant has lodged an FIR against
the respondent no.1, who is her husband, and other in-laws on the
allegations that she got married to the respondent no.1-Anurag
Bagadiya on 20/1/2020 as per Hindu rites and rituals. An amount of
Rs.20,21,000/- in cash, diamond jewelry, silver utensils etc. were
given in dowry. She was kept properly for few days after her
marriage, but thereafter respondent no.1 and her in-laws started
harassing her on the ground that the applicant/complainant is the only
daughter of her father and her father is a big food grain merchant,
therefore, she should bring an Audi car and an amount of
Rs.50,00,000/- and only then they would keep her properly in her
matrimonial house. For demand of dowry the respondent no.1-
Anurag Bagadiya and her in-laws started harassing her physically and
mentally. When she refused to bring additional dowry, then she was
beaten by respondent no.1-Anurag Bagadiya and Smt. Manju
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
Bagadiya. In order to save the pride of her parents, she was silently
tolerating the physical and mental harassment and did not narrate the
incident to her parents. It was further alleged that her husband was
regularly asking for indulging in unnatural sex. On 5/8/2020 her
husband came to her parental home to attend the death rituals of her
grandmother and both were staying in one room, where her husband
committed unnatural sex with her. When she objected to it, then she
was threatened by her husband that in case if this fact is narrated to
anybody, then he would kill her. In order to protect the pride of the
family as well as on account of threat to her life, she did not narrate
the incident to anybody and after sometime she went to her
matrimonial house. Again in the matrimonial home at Katni she was
treated like servant. When her in-laws came to know about the
unnatural sex done by her husband-respondent no.1, then they said
that the applicant has to live as per the wishes of her husband and she
is under obligation to accept all the demands of her husband,
otherwise she would continue to suffer beating. Her in-laws have
kept all her jewelry and money and ousted her from her matrimonial
home on 16/11/2020. Under a belief that everything would improve,
she did not lodge the report, but now on 21/9/2021 she has narrated
the entire incident to her mother and accordingly, an FIR was lodged.
3.     The respondent no.1 filed an application under Section 438 of
Cr.P.C. It appears that the applicant also filed her objection to the
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
4.     The Court below by the impugned order has granted
anticipatory bail to the respondent no.1.
5.     It is submitted by the counsel for the applicant that the Court
below while granting anticipatory bail to the respondent no.1 has
held that the complainant came back to her parental home on
16/11/2020 and she is residing there from thereafter and the written
complaint was made on 21/9/2021, i.e. after 10 months of her coming
back to her parental home and after 13 months from the date on
which she was subjected to unnatural sex. No injury was found on
medical examination. It is submitted that by making such an
observation the Court below has given a finding that the allegations
of unnatural sex is delayed. However, the Court below failed to see
that the applicant, who is the wife of the respondent no.1, is primarily
interested in saving her married life and it is not expected from her to
rush to the police station for each and every individual act of
harassment or cruelty or any act of unnatural sex. If a girl is trying
hard to save her married life, then such conduct cannot be taken to
her discredit for disbelieving the allegations of unnatural sex being
delayed in nature. Unless and until an allegation is barred by
limitation, the Court below should not have given any finding with
regard to the delayed allegations at the stage of grant of bail.
Furthermore, the Court below has committed a material illegality by
holding that the custodial interrogation of respondent no.1 was not
required. It is further submitted that the applicant is being harassed
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
for demand of Rs.50,00,000/- and an Audi car and she was also
subjected to unnatural sex and, therefore, the Court below has
committed material illegality by granting anticipatory bail to the
respondent no.1 by ignoring the seriousness of the allegations made
against him.
6.     Per contra, the application is vehemently opposed by the
counsel for the State. It is submitted by the counsel for the applicant
that the criteria for cancellation of bail is completely different from
the criteria for grant of bail. There is no allegation that after the
anticipatory bail was granted, the respondent no.1 has misused the
liberty or has not cooperated with the investigation.
7.     Heard learned counsel for the parties.
8.     So far as the criteria for cancellation of bail is concerned, the
submissions made by the counsel for the respondent no.1 are not
correct. In a case where the liberty granted by the Court is misused by
the accused, then the bail can be cancelled by the same Court.
However, if the complainant/victim is of the view that the Court has
granted bail by ignoring the material available on record, then the
prosecution/complainant/victim can always challenge the said order
before the superior Court.
9.     The Supreme Court in the case of Manoj Kumar Khokhar
Vs. State of Rajasthan and another by judgment dated 11/1/2022
passed in Cr.A. No.36/2022 has held as under:-
“14. Before proceeding further, it would
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
be useful to refer to the judgments of this Court
in the matter of granting bail to an accused as
“a) In Gudikanti Narasimhulu & Ors. vs.
Public Prosecutor, High Court of Andhra
while elaborating on the content of Article
21 of the Constitution of India in the context
of liberty of a person under trial, has laid
down the key factors that have to be
considered while granting bail, which are
extracted as under:
“7. It is thus obvious that the nature
of the charge is the vital factor and the
nature of the evidence also is
pertinent. The punishment to which
the party may be liable, if convicted or
conviction is confirmed, also bears
upon the issue.
8.     Another relevant factor is as to
whether the course of justice would be
thwarted by him who seeks the
benignant jurisdiction of the Court to
be freed for the time being.
9.     Thus the legal principles and
practice validate the Court considering
the likelihood of the applicant
interfering with witnesses for the
prosecution or otherwise polluting the
process of justice. It is not only
traditional but rational, in this context,
to enquire into the antecedents of a
man who is applying for bail to find
whether he has a bad record –
particularly a record which suggests
that he is likely to commit serious
offences while on bail. In regard to
habituals, it is part of criminological
history that a thoughtless bail order has
enabled the bailee to exploit          the
opportunity to inflict further about the
criminal record of a defendant, is
therefore     not    an    exercise     in
b)    In Prahlad Singh Bhati vs. NCT of Delhi
& ORS – (2001) 4 SCC 280 this Court
highlighted the aspects which are to be
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
considered by a court while dealing with an
application seeking bail. The same may
be extracted as follows:
“The jurisdiction to grant bail has
to be exercised on the basis of well
settled principles having regard to the
circumstances of each case and not in
an arbitrary manner. While granting
the bail, the court has to keep in mind
the nature of accusations, the nature of
evidence in support thereof, the
severity of the punishment which
conviction will entail, the character,
behavior, means and standing of the
accused, circumstances which are
peculiar to the accused, reasonable
possibility of securing the presence of
the accused at the trial, reasonable
apprehension of the witnesses being
tampered with, the larger interests of
the public or State and similar other
considerations. It has also to be kept
in mind that for the purposes of
granting the bail the Legislature has
used the words "reasonable grounds
for believing" instead of "the
evidence" which means the court
dealing with the grant of bail can only
satisfy it as to whether there is a
genuine case against the accused and
that the prosecution will be able to
produce prima facie evidence in
support of the charge.”
c)    This Court in Ram Govind Upadhyay vs.
speaking through Banerjee, J., emphasized that
a court exercising discretion in matters of bail,
has to undertake the same judiciously. In
highlighting that bail cannot be granted as
a matter of course, bereft of cogent
reasoning, this Court observed as follows:
“3. Grant of bail though being a
discretionary order — but, however,
calls for exercise of such a discretion
in a judicious manner and not as a
matter of course. Order for bail bereft
of any cogent reason cannot be
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
sustained. Needless to record, however,
that the grant of bail is dependent upon
the contextual facts of the matter
being dealt with by the court and facts,
however, do always vary from case to
case. While placement of the accused
in the society, though may be
considered but that by itself cannot be
a guiding factor in the matter of
grant of bail and the same should and
ought always to be coupled with other
circumstances warranting the grant of
bail. The nature of the offence is one
of the basic considerations for the
grant of bail — more heinous is the
crime, the greater is the chance of
rejection of the bail, though, however,
dependent on the factual matrix of
the matter.”
d)    In Kalyan Chandra Sarkar vs. Rajesh
Ranjan alias Pappu Yadav & Anr. – (2004) 7
SCC 528, this Court held that although it is
established that a court considering a bail
application cannot undertake a detailed
examination of evidence and an elaborate
discussion on the merits of the case, the
court is required to indicate the prima facie
reasons justifying the grant of bail.
e)    In Prasanta Kumar Sarkar vs. Ashis
Chaterjee - (2010) 14 SCC 496 this Court
observed that where a High Court has granted
bail mechanically, the said order would suffer
from the vice of non-application of mind,
rendering it illegal. This Court held as
under with regard to the circumstances
under which an order granting bail may be
set aside. In doing so, the factors which
ought to have guided the Court’s decision
to grant bail have also been detailed as
“It is trite that this Court does not,
normally, interfere with an order
passed by the High Court granting or
rejecting bail to the accused.
However, it is equally incumbent upon
the High Court to exercise its
discretion judiciously, cautiously and
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
strictly in compliance with the basic
principles laid down in a plethora of
decisions of this Court on the point. It
is well settled that,
among other circumstances, the factors
to be borne in mind while considering
an application for bail are: (i) whether
there is any prima facie or reasonable
ground to believe that the accused
had committed the offence; (ii) nature
and gravity of the accusation; (iii)
severity of the punishment in the event
of conviction; (iv) danger of the
accused absconding or fleeing, if
released on bail;        (v)    character,
behaviour,      means,    position    and
standing     of    the    accused; (vi)
likelihood of the offence being
repeated; (vii) reasonable apprehension
of the witnesses being influenced; and
(viii) danger, of course, of justice
being thwarted by grant of bail.”
f)     Another factor which should guide the
courts’ decision in deciding a bail application
is the period of custody. However, as noted
in Ash Mohammad vs. Shiv Raj Singh @
Lalla Bahu & Anr. – (2012) 9 SCC 446, the
period of custody has to           be   weighed
simultaneously       with the totality of the
circumstances and the criminal antecedents
of the acused,        if   any.   Further,    the
circumstances which may justify the grant
of bail are to be considered in the larger
context of the societal concern involved in
releasing an accused, in juxtaposition to
individual liberty of the accused seeking
bail.
g)     In Neeru Yadav vs. State of UP & Anr. –
(2016) 15 SCC 422, after referring to a catena
of    judgments      of   this   Court on the
considerations to be placed at balance while
deciding to grant bail, observed through
Dipak Misra, J. (as His Lordship then was)
in paragraphs 15 and 18 as under:
“15. This being the position of law, it
is clear as cloudless sky that the High
Court has totally ignored the criminal
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
antecedents of the accused. What has
weighed with the High Court is the
doctrine of parity. A historysheeter
involved in the nature of crimes which
we have reproduced hereinabove, are
not minor offences so that he is not to
be retained in custody, but the crimes
are of heinous nature and such crimes,
by no stretch of imagination, can be
regarded as jejune. Such cases do create
a thunder and lightening having the
effect potentiality of torrential rain in an
analytical mind. The law expects the
judiciary to be alert while admitting
these kind of accused persons to be at
large and, therefore, the emphasis is on
exercise of discretion judiciously and
not in a whimsical manner.
18. Before parting with the case, we
may repeat with profit that it is not
an appeal for cancellation of bail as
the cancellation is not sought because
of supervening circumstances. The
annulment of the order passed by the
High Court is sought as many
relevant factors have not been taken
into consideration which includes the
criminal antecedents of the accused
and that makes the order a deviant
one. Therefore, the inevitable result
is the lancination of the impugned
order.”
h)    In Anil Kumar Yadav vs. State (NCT of
Delhi) – (2018) 12 SCC 129, this Court, while
considering an appeal from an order of
cancellation of bail, has spelt out some of
the significant considerations of which a
court must be mindful, in deciding whether
to grant bail. In doing so, this Court has
stated that while it is not possible to
prescribe      an     exhaustive        list    of
considerations which are to guide a court in
deciding a bail application, the primary
requisite of an order granting bail, is that it
should result from judicious exercise of the
court’s discretion. The findings of this
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
Court have been extracted as under:
“17. While granting bail, the relevant
considerations are: (i) nature of
seriousness of the offence; (ii)
character of the evidence and
circumstances which are peculiar to
the accused; and (iii) likelihood of the
accused fleeing from justice; (iv) the
impact that his release may make on
the prosecution witnesses, its impact
on the society; and (v) likelihood of
his tampering. No doubt, this list is
not exhaustive. There are no hard-
and-fast rules regarding grant or
refusal of bail, each case has to be
considered on its own merits. The
matter always calls for judicious
exercise of discretion by the Court.”
i)    In Ramesh Bhavan Rathod vs. Vishanbhai
Hirabhai Makwana Makwana (Koli) and Ors.,
(2021) 6 SCC 230 this Court after referring to a
catena of judgments emphasized on the need
and importance of assigning reasons for
the grant of bail. This Court categorically
observed that a court granting bail could not
obviate its duty to apply its judicial mind and
indicate reasons as to why bail has been
granted or refused. The observations of this
Court have been extracted as under:
“35.    We      disapprove       of    the
observations of the High Court in a
succession of orders in the present
case recording that the Counsel for the
parties "do not press for a further
reasoned order". The grant of bail is a
matter which implicates the liberty of
the Accused, the interest of the State
and the victims of crime in the proper
administration of criminal justice. It is
a well settled principle that in
determining as to whether bail should
be granted, the High Court, or for that
matter, the Sessions Court deciding
an application Under Section 439 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure would
not launch upon a detailed evaluation
of the facts on merits since a criminal
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
trial is still to take place. These
observations while adjudicating upon
bail would also not be binding on the
outcome of the trial. But the Court
granting bail cannot obviate its duty to
apply a judicial mind and to record
reasons, brief as they may be, for the
purpose of deciding whether or not
to grant bail. The consent of parties
cannot obviate the duty of the High
Court to indicate its reasons why it has
either granted or refused bail. This is
for the reason that the outcome of the
application has a significant bearing
on the liberty of the Accused on one
hand as well as the public interest in
the due enforcement of criminal
justice on the other. The rights of the
victims and their families are at stake
as well. These are not matters involving
the private rights of two individual
parties, as in a civil proceeding. The
proper enforcement of criminal law is a
matter of public interest. We must,
therefore, disapprove of the manner in
which a succession of orders in the
present batch of cases has recorded that
counsel for the "respective parties do
not press for further reasoned order". If
this is a euphemism for not recording
adequate reasons, this kind of a
formula cannot shield the order from
judicial scrutiny.
36. Grant of bail Under Section 439
of the Code of Criminal Procedure is a
matter involving the exercise of
judicial discretion. Judicial discretion
in granting or refusing bail-as in the
case of any other discretion which is
vested in a court as a judicial
institution-is not unstructured. The
duty to       record    reasons   is    a
significant safeguard which ensures
that the discretion which is entrusted
to the court is exercised in a judicious
manner. The recording of reasons in a
judicial order ensures that the thought
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
process underlying the order is subject
to scrutiny and that it meets objective
standards of reason and justice.”
j)    Recently in Bhoopendra Singh vs. State
of Rajasthan & Anr. (Criminal Appeal No.
1279 of 2021), this Court made observations
with respect to the exercise of appellate power
to determine whether bail has been granted
for valid reasons as distinguished from an
application for cancellation of bail. i.e. this
Court distinguished between setting aside a
perverse order granting bail vis-a-vis
cancellation of bail on the ground that the
accused has misconducted           himself or
because of some new facts requiring
such cancellation. Quoting Mahipal vs.
Rajesh Kumar (2020) 2 SCC 118, this Court
observed as under:
“16. The considerations that guide the
power of an appellate court in
assessing the correctness of an order
granting bail stand on a different
footing from an assessment of an
application for the cancellation of bail.
The correctness of an order granting
bail is tested on the anvil of whether
there was an improper or arbitrary
exercise of the discretion in the grant
of bail. The test is whether the order
granting bail is perverse, illegal or
unjustified. On the other hand, an
application for cancellation of bail is
generally examined on the anvil of the
existence           of       supervening
circumstances or violations of the
conditions of bail by a person to
whom bail has been granted.”
l)    The most recent judgment of this Court
on the aspect of application of mind and
requirement of          judicious exercise of
discretion in arriving at an order granting bail
to the accused is in the case of Brijmani Devi
vs. Pappu Kumar and Anr. – Criminal
Appeal No. 1663/2021 disposed of on 17th
December, 2021, wherein a three-Judge
Bench of this Court, while setting
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
aside     an unreasoned and casual order of
the High Court granting bail to the accused,
observed as follows:
“While we are conscious of the fact that
liberty of an individual is an invaluable
right, at the same time while
considering an application for bail
Courts cannot lose sight of the serious
nature of the accusations against an
accused and the facts that have a
bearing in the case, particularly, when
the accusations may not be false,
frivolous or vexatious in nature but are
supported by adequate material brought
on record so as to enable a Court to
arrive at a prima facie conclusion.
While considering an application for
grant of bail a prima facie conclusion
must be supported by reasons and must
be arrived at after having regard to
the vital facts of the case brought on
record. Due consideration must be
given to facts suggestive of the nature
of crime, the criminal antecedents of
the accused, if any, and the nature of
punishment that would follow a
conviction vis-a-vis the offence/s
alleged against an accused.”
15. On the aspect of the duty to accord
reasons for a decision arrived at by a court,
or for that matter, even a quasi-judicial
authority, it would be useful to refer to a
judgment of this Court in Kranti Associates
Private Limited & Anr. vs. Masood Ahmed
Khan & Ors. – (2010) 9 SCC 496, wherein
after referring to a number of judgments
this Court summarised at paragraph 47 the
law on the point. The relevant principles for
the purpose of this case are extracted as
“(a) Insistence on recording of
reasons is meant to serve the wider
principle of justice that justice must
not only be done it must also appear
to be done as well.
(b) Recording of          reasons    also
operates as a valid restraint on any
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
possible arbitrary exercise of judicial
and      quasi-judicial     or     even
(c) Reasons reassure that discretion
has been exercised by the decision-
maker on relevant grounds and by
disregarding                 extraneous
(d) Reasons have virtually become
as indispensable a component of a
decision-making         process       as
observing     principles    of natural
justice by judicial, quasi-judicial and
even by administrative bodies.
(e) The ongoing judicial trend in all
countries committed to rule of law
and constitutional governance is in
favour of reasoned decisions based on
relevant facts. This is virtually the
lifeblood of judicial decision-making
justifying the principle that reason is
the soul of justice.
(f) Judicial or even quasi-judicial
opinions these days can be as different
as the judges and authorities who
deliver them. All these decisions
serve one common purpose which is
to demonstrate by reason that the
relevant factors have been objectively
considered. This is important for
sustaining the litigants' faith in the
justice delivery system.
requirement      for    both    judicial
accountability and transparency.
(h) If a judge or a quasi-judicial
authority is not candid enough about
his/her decision-making process then
it is impossible to know whether the
person deciding is faithful to the
doctrine of precedent or to principles
of incrementalism.
(i) Reasons in support of decisions
must be cogent, clear and succinct.
A pretence of reasons or “rubber-
stamp reasons” is not to be equated
with a valid decision-making process.
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
(j) It cannot be doubted that
transparency is the sine qua non of
restraint on abuse of judicial powers.
Transparency in decision- making
not only makes the judges and
decision-makers less prone to errors
but also makes them subject to
broader      scrutiny.    (See    David
Shapiro      in Defence      of Judicial
(k) In all common law jurisdictions
judgments play a vital role in setting
up precedents for the            future.
Therefore, for development of law,
requirement of giving reasons for the
decision is of the essence and is
virtually a part of “due process”.
Though the aforesaid judgment was
rendered in the context of a dismissal of a
revision petition by a cryptic order by the
Commission, reliance could be placed on
the said judgment on the need to give
reasons while deciding a matter.
16. The Latin maxim “cessante ratione
legis cessat ipsa lex” meaning “reason is
the soul of the law, and when the reason of
any particular law ceases, so does the law
itself”, is also apposite.
17. We have extracted the relevant
portions of the impugned order above. At
the outset, we observe that the extracted
portions are the only portions forming part
of the “reasoning” of the High court while
granting bail. As noted from the aforecited
judgments, it is not necessary for a Court to
give elaborate reasons while granting bail
particularly when the case is at the initial
stage and the allegations of the offences by
the accused would not have been crystalised
as such. There cannot be elaborate details
recorded to give an impression that the case
is one that would result in a conviction or,
by contrast, in an acquittal while passing an
order on an application for grant of bail.
However, the Court deciding a bail
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
application cannot completely divorce its
decision from material aspects of the case
such as the allegations made against the
accused; severity of the punishment if the
allegations are proved beyond reasonable
doubt and would result in a conviction;
reasonable apprehension of the witnesses
being influenced by the accused; tampering
of the evidence; the frivolity in the case of
the prosecution; criminal antecedents of
the accused; and a prima facie satisfaction
of the Court in support of the charge against
the accused.
18. Ultimately, the Court considering an
application for bail has to exercise discretion
in a judicious manner and in accordance with
the settled principles of law having regard
to the crime alleged to be committed by the
accused on the one hand and ensuring purity
of the trial of the case on the other.
10.  The Supreme Court in the case of Ms. Y Vs. State of
Rajasthan and another by judgment passed today in Criminal
Appeal No.649/2022 has held as under:-
11. Once bail has been granted, the Appellate
Court is usually slow to interfere with the same as it
pertains to the liberty of an individual. A Constitution
Bench of this Court in Bihar Legal Support Society v.
Chief Justice of India, (1986) 4 SCC 767 observed as
“3. … It is for this reason that the Apex
Court has evolved, as a matter of selfdiscipline,
certain norms to guide it in the exercise of its
discretion in cases where special leave petition
are filed against orders granting or refusing bail
or anticipatory bail.…We reiterate this policy
principle laid down by the bench of this Court
and hold that this Court should not ordinarily,
save in exceptional cases, interfere with orders
granting or refusing bail or anticipatory bail,
because these are matters in which the High
Court should normally be the final arbiter.”
(emphasis supplied)
12. The above principle has been consistently followed
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
by this Court. In Prasanta Kumar Sarkar v. Ashis
Chatterjee, (2010) 14 SCC 496 this Court held as
“9. We are of the opinion that the impugned order
is clearly unsustainable. It is trite that this Court
does not, normally, interfere with an order passed
by the High Court granting or rejecting bail to the
accused. However, it is equally incumbent upon
the High Court to exercise its discretion
judiciously, cautiously and strictly in compliance
with the basic principles laid down in a plethora
of decisions of this Court on the point. It is well
settled that, among other circumstances, the
factors to be borne in mind while considering an
application for bail are:
(i) whether there is any prima facie or reasonable
ground to believe that the accused had committed
(ii) nature and gravity of the accusation;
(iii) severity of the punishment in the event of
(iv) danger of the accused absconding or fleeing,
if released on bail;
(v) character, behaviour, means, position and
standing of the accused;
(vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated;
(vii) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses
being influenced; and
(viii) danger, of course, of justice being thwarted
by grant of bail.
10. It is manifest that if the High Court does not
advert to these relevant considerations and
mechanically grants bail, the said order would
suffer from the vice of nonapplication of mind,
rendering it to be illegal…..”
13. In Mahipal v. Rajesh Kumar, (2020) 2 SCC 118
this Court followed the holding in Prasanta Kumar
Sarkar (supra) and held as follows:
“17. Where a court considering an
application for bail fails to consider relevant
factors, an appellate court may justifiably set
aside the order granting bail. An appellate court
is thus required to consider whether the order
granting bail suffers from a nonapplication of
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
mind or is not borne out from a prima facie view
of the evidence on record. It is thus necessary for
this Court to assess whether, on the basis of the
evidentiary record, there existed a prima facie or
reasonable ground to believe that the accused had
committed the crime, also taking into account the
seriousness of the crime and the severity of the
punishment…”
14. Recently, a three Judges’ Bench of this Court in
Anr. in Criminal Appeal No. 632 of 2022, has
reiterated the factors that the Court must consider at the
time of granting bail under Section 439 CrPC, as well
as highlighted the circumstances where this Court may
interfere when bail has been granted in violation of the
requirements under the abovementioned section. This
Court observed as follows:
“28. We may, at the outset, clarify that
power to grant bail under Section 439 of CrPC, is
one of wide amplitude. A High Court or a
Sessions Court, as the case may be, are bestowed
with considerable discretion while deciding an
application for bail. But, as has been held by this
Court on multiple occasions, this discretion is not
unfettered. On the contrary, the High Court of the
Sessions Court must grant bail after the
application of a judicial mind, following
wellestablished principles, and not in a cryptic or
mechanical manner.”
15. It is worth noting that what is being considered in
this case relates to whether the High Court has
exercised the discretionary power under Section 439
CrPC in granting bail appropriately. Such an assessment
is different from deciding whether circumstances
subsequent to the grant of bail have made it necessary
to cancel the same. The first situation requires the Court
to analyze whether the order granting bail was illegal,
perverse, unjustified or arbitrary. On the other hand, an
application for cancellation of bail looks at whether
supervening circumstances have occurred warranting
cancellation. In Neeru Yadav v. State of U.P., (2014) 16
SCC 508 this Court held as follows:
“12. We have referred to certain principles
to be kept in mind while granting bail, as has
been laid down by this Court from time to time. It
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
is well settled in law that cancellation of bail
after it is granted because the accused has
misconducted himself or of some supervening
circumstances warranting such cancellation have
occurred is in a different compartment altogether
than an order granting bail which is unjustified,
illegal and perverse. If in a case, the relevant
factors which should have been taken into
consideration while dealing with the application
for bail have not been taken note of, or bail is
founded       on     irrelevant     considerations,
indisputably the superior court can set aside the
order of such a grant of bail. Such a case belongs
to a different category and is in a separate realm.
While dealing with a case of second nature, the
court does not dwell upon the violation of
conditions by the accused or the supervening
circumstances that have happened subsequently.
It, on the contrary, delves into the justifiability
and the soundness of the order passed by the
court.”
11.    If the facts of the present case are considered, then it is clear
that there are specific allegations of demand of dowry and physical
and mental harassment on account of non-fulfillment of said demand.
It is specifically alleged that on 5/8/2020 she was subjected to
unnatural sex. This Court cannot lose sight of the fact that a wife is
slow in rushing to the police station for making complaint of each
and every act of harassment or maltreatment. The first intention of
the wife is to save her married life and to give sufficient time to her
in-laws as well as her husband, so that the situation may improve.
The patience shown by the wife should not be treated as a weakness
or an attempt to create a false story. Thus, if the applicant kept quiet
for one year and did not disclose to her parents about the unnatural
sex committed by the applicant, then it cannot be said that her
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
conduct of keeping mum was nothing but an attempt to explain the
delay. Even otherwise, there is specific allegation in the FIR that this
act of committing unnatural sex by her husband was disclosed by the
applicant to her parents-in-laws, therefore, by no stretch of
imagination it can be said that the applicant kept quiet about the
unnatural sex committed by the respondent no.1. Further in the light
of judgment passed by Supreme Court in the case of Rupali Devi vs.
State of U.P. reported in (2019) 5 SCC 384, compelling a married
woman to live in her parental home on account of non-fulfillment of
demand of dowry is also a cruelty.
12.    Accordingly, this Court is of the considered opinion that the
observation made by the Court below with regard to delayed
disclosure of offence under Section 377 of IPC is unwarranted and
has been made in a casual manner without appreciating the
surrounding circumstances.
13.    Looking to the seriousness of the allegations of demand of
dowry as well as of committing unnatural sex with the applicant, this
Court is of the considered opinion that the Court below committed a
material illegality by granting anticipatory bail to the respondent
no.1. Accordingly, the order dated 5/10/2021 passed by First
Additional Sessions Judge, Ganj Basoda, District Vidisha in Bail
Application No.407/2021 is hereby set aside.
14.    The respondent no.1-Anurag Bagadiya is              directed to
immediately surrender before the Investigating Officer latest by 30 th
Smt. Meghna Agarwal Vs. Anurag Bagadiya and another
15.    With aforesaid observations, the application succeeds and is
hereby allowed.