“a) Pass an order or direction to the respondent no. 1 i.e. the Respondent
University to immediately permit the petitioner to appear for the first
semester examination for MA in Social Exclusion and Inclusive Policy to be
conducted “after 20th of February 2022”.
b) For an order directing the Respondent University to consider only
convictions in criminal cases as a negative comment on a student’s
character and to completely disregard all FIRs filed while considering
admission of a student for a course or for an examination.”
2.      On 23rd February, 2022, while issuing notice, the Court passed an
order. The relevant extract whereof is as under:
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 3337/2022                                                               Page 1 of 4
1. The petitioner has approached this Court seeking a direction to the respondent
no.1 university to permit him to appear for the first semester examination of MA in
Social Exclusion and Inclusive Policy, scheduled to commence from 25.02.2022.
2. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner had earlier been
granted a provisional admission as he was not able to furnish a character
certificate. However, the said certificate, which was in terms of his undertaking
required to be furnished by 15.11.2021 was furnished only on 02.01.2022 after it
was received from the respondent no.2 on 27.11.2021. He therefore, contends that
that this delay is not attributable to the petitioner and prays that the petitioner be
permitted to appear in the examination.
6. Though learned counsel for the respondent no.1 vehemently opposes the grant of
any interim relief, he is not in a position to deny that the admission of the
petitioner was never cancelled and therefore, no such notice was ever either issued
to him or was put on the web portal of the university.
7. In the light of the aforesaid and the petitioner’s claim that he has been regularly
attending online classes being conducted by respondent no.1., grave and
irreparable loss will be caused to the petitioner if he is not permitted to appear in
the forthcoming semester examination. The respondent no.1 is directed to permit
the petitioner to appear for the first semester examination of MA in Social
Exclusion and Inclusive Policy commencing from 25.02.2022.
8. Needless to state, this permission would be subject to the outcome of the petition
and the petitioner will not be entitled to claim any special equities on this ground.”
3.      Subsequently, Petitioner was also permitted to appear in second
semester examination subject to meeting eligibility criteria vide order dated
4.      Counsel for Petitioner states that results of afore-said first and second
semester examination have been declared, however Petitioner’s name is not
reflected, as his result has been withheld.
5.      On this aspect, on query of the Court, Mr. Pritish Sabharwal, Standing
Counsel for Respondent No. 1-Jamia Millia Islamia [“JMI”], points out that
directions given by this Court allowing Petitioner to appear for said
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 3337/2022                                                                       Page 2 of 4
examinations were of interim nature. Additionally, he states that character
certificate received from Respondent No. 2–Aligarh Muslim University
[“AMU”] mentions criminal cases which have been registered against
6.      On further query of the Court, Mr. Sabharwal states that there is no
provision in ordinance of JMI on the above issue. In any event, character
certificate issued to Petitioner only makes a mention of criminal cases,
which the Court has been informed, were registered during the time when
students were protesting against Citizenship Amendment Bill 2016. Be that
as it may, there is no mention of a final decision or any conviction order
against Petitioner in respect of any criminal case. Petitioner was detained
from appearing in said examinations only on account of delay in furnishing
of character certificate. This delay, as explained by counsel for AMU, arose
on account of AMU seeking a legal opinion on the issue regarding
mentioning of criminal cases in the character certificate.
7.      Considering the above, delay in furnishing of character certificate
cannot be attributable to Petitioner. For this reason, Petitioner could not have
been denied the opportunity of writing the said semester examinations
particularly when he had attended classes.
8.      Further, in terms of interim order, Petitioner has already appeared in
the first and second semester examination. It would be a travesty of justice,
if the interim order is not confirmed at this stage.
9.      Accordingly, present petition is allowed and interim orders dated 23rd
February, 2022 is confirmed, and following directions are issued:
(a) JMI shall immediately declare the results of Petitioner in respect of first
and second semester examinations; (b) Petitioner’s admission shall be fully
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 3337/2022                                                     Page 3 of 4
regularised; and (c) accordingly, he shall be permitted to appear in third
semester examinations.
10.     With above directions, present petition is disposed of, along with
pending application(s).
Digitally Signed        W.P.(C) 3337/2022                                               Page 4 of 4