Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 666 of 2023
Counsel for Applicant :- Rajendra Prasad Mishra
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
1. Heard Sri Rajendra Prasad Mishra along with Sri Pradeep
Kumar Shukla, learned counsels for the applicant and Sri Alok
Saran with Sri Rajesh Kumar Singh, learned Additional
Government Advocates for the State.
2. Sri Rajendra Prasad Mishra, learned counsel for the applicant
has filed supplementary affidavit, today in the Court, the same
is taken on record.
3. By means of this application/petition filed under Section 482
Cr.P.C., the applicant has prayed for the following reliefs:-
"(i) to quash the impugned judgment and order dated
04.11.2020, passed by the learned Additional Session Judge,
Court No.3/ Special Judge (M.P./M.L.A.), Gonda in Crl. Case
No.100 of 2019; State vs. Prem Narayan Pandey, arising out of
Case Crime No.109 of 2003, under Section 60/72 of Excise Act,
(ii) to allow the application filed by the Public Prosecutor
under Section 321 Cr.P.C. bearing Application No.26Ka.
(iii) to quash the entire criminal proceedings of Crl. Case
No.100 of 2019; State vs. Prem Narayan Pandey, arising out of
Case Crime No.109 of 2003, under Section 60/72 of Excise Act,
Police Station-Tarabganj, District-Gonda pendng in the Court
of learned Addl. Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court No.1/ Special
4. At the very outset, learned counsel for the applicant has
drawn attention of this Court towards the order dated
04.02.2023 passed by the learned trial court rejecting the
discharge application of the petitioner which was filed pursuant
to the order dated 01.12.2022 passed by this Hon'ble Court in
Crl. Misc. Application (U/S 482 Cr.P.C.) No.8615 of 2022
marked as 57Kha, as the order has been enclosed as Annexure
No.SA-1 to the supplementary affidavit filed on 09.02.2023.
5. Learned counsel for the applicant has stated that a letter dated
14.11.2019 has been preferred from the office of the District
Magistrate, Gonda addressing to the Joint Director, Prosecution,
Gonda referring a letter dated 01.11.2019 for withdrawal of the
prosecution against the present applicant (Annexure No.3).
Pursuant thereof an application under Section 321 Cr.P.C. was
filed on 23.11.2019 before the learned trial court concerned by
6. Learned counsel for the applicant has stated that the learned
trial court refused to allow the application filed under Section
321 Cr.P.C. only on the ground that no documentary material
has been put forth demonstrating that such withdrawal is in the
interest of public justice.
7. Learned counsel for the applicant has further stated that
Section 321 Cr.P.C. clothes the Public Prosecutor to withdraw
from prosecution of any person accused of an offence, both
when no evidence was taken or even if entire evidence has been
taken. The outer limit for the exercise of this power at any time
before the judgment is pronounced. The caveat for moving the
application under Section 321 Cr.P.C. is the Public Prosecutor
has to make out some ground which would advance or further
the cause of public justice. If the Public Prosecutor shows that
he may not be able to produce sufficient evidence so sustained
the charge, an application for withdrawal from prosecution may
be legitimately made by him, as held in the case of
Sheonandan Paswan vs. State of Bihar (1987) 1 SCC 288.
8. Learned counsel for the applicant has further stated that the
nature of the case which is sought to be withdrawn would not
affect the society at large, thus, such withdrawal would not be
against the public justice.
9. Learned counsel for the applicant has stated that in the case
of State of Punjab vs. Union of India (1986) 4 SCC 335, it has
been held that the Public Prosecutor may withdraw from the
prosecution of a case not merely on the ground of paucity of
evidence but also in order to further the broad ends of public
justice, which may include social, economic and political
purpose. The ultimate guiding consideration while granting a
permission to withdraw from the prosecution must always be
the interest of administration of justice.
10. Learned counsel for the applicant has also submitted that
the Apex Court in the case of Rajendra Kumar Jain vs. State
(1980) 3 SCC 435 has summarized the legal position for
withdrawal of prosecution and has held that the Public
Prosecutor may withdraw from prosecution not merely on the
ground of paucity of evidence but on other relevant ground as
well as in order to further the broad ends of public justice,
public order and peace. The broad ends of public justice will
certainly include appropriate social, economic and political
11. Learned counsel for the applicant has also submitted that
though after framing of the charge, the evidence of the
witnesses of fact by prosecution has been examined but the
application for withdrawal can be allowed at any stage before
pronouncement of judgment, thus, even at this stage there is no
prohibition for allowed application under Section 321 Cr.P.C.
12. Learned counsel for the applicant has stated that due to
Covid-19 Pandemic period he could not challenge the order
dated 04.11.2020 immediately after passing the said order.
However, the Apex Court has extended the time in sou motu
writ petition bearing Writ (Civil) No.03 of 2020 for challenging
the orders which have been passed during Covid-19 Pandemic
13. Per contra, learned Additional Government Advocates, Sri
Alok Saran and Sri Rajesh Kumar Singh, have submitted that
pursuant to the directions being issued by this Court the
applicant filed the discharge application and the same has been
rejected by the learned trial court.
14. However, on being confronted the learned Additional
Government Advocates as to whether the impugned order dated
04.11.2020 has been passed within the four corners of law as
settled by the Apex Court, the learned Additional Government
Advocates have fairly submitted that the learned trial court has
erred in passing the impugned order by indicating that the
prosecution could not file any document/ material to convince
the court to withdraw the prosecution against the present
applicant. They have further submitted that as per the settled
law even after framing of the charges the application for
withdrawal of the prosecution can be allowed at that stage,
therefore, any appropriate order may be passed.
15. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having
perused the material available on record, I am of the considered
opinion that if the Public Prosecutor is able to show that he may
not be able to produce sufficient evidence sustaining the
charges, an application for withdrawal from the prosecution
may be legitimately filed by him.
16. In the recent judgment of the Apex Court in para-26
rendered in the case in re: State of Kerala vs. K. Ajith and
others reported in (2021) SCC OnLine SC 510 observed as
"26. The principles which emerge from the decisions of this
Court on the withdrawal of a prosecution under Section 321 of
the CrPC can now be formulated:
(i) Section 321 entrusts the decision to withdraw from a
prosecution to the public prosecutor but the consent of the
court is required for a withdrawal of the prosecution;
(ii) The public prosecutor may withdraw from a prosecution not
merely on the ground of paucity of evidence but also to further
the broad ends of public justice;
(iii) The public prosecutor must formulate an independent
opinion before seeking the consent of the court to withdraw
from the prosecution;
(iv) While the mere fact that the initiative has come from the
government will not vitiate an application for withdrawal, the
court must make an effort to elicit the reasons for withdrawal
so as to ensure that the public prosecutor was satisfied that the
withdrawal of the prosecution is necessary for good and
(v) In deciding whether to grant its consent to a withdrawal, the
court exercises a judicial function but it has been described to
be supervisory in nature. Before deciding whether to grant its
consent the court must be satisfied that:
(a) The function of the public prosecutor has not been
improperly exercised or that it is not an attempt to interfere
with the normal course of justice for illegitimate reasons or
(b) The application has been made in good faith, in the interest
of public policy and justice, and not to thwart or stifle the
(c) The application does not suffer from such improprieties or
illegalities as would cause manifest injustice if consent were to
(d) The grant of consent sub-serves the administration of
(e) The permission has not been sought with an ulterior
purpose unconnected with the vindication of the law which the
public prosecutor is duty bound to maintain;
(vi) While determining whether the withdrawal of the
prosecution subserves the administration of justice, the court
would be justified in scrutinizing the nature and gravity of the
offence and its impact upon public life especially where matters
involving public funds and the discharge of a public trust are
(vii) In a situation where both the trial judge and the revisional
court have concurred in granting or refusing consent, this
Court while exercising its jurisdiction under Article 136 of the
Constitution would exercise caution before disturbing
concurrent findings. The Court may in exercise of the well-
settled principles attached to the exercise of this jurisdiction,
interfere in a case where there has been a failure of the trial
judge or of the High Court to apply the correct principles in
deciding whether to grant or withhold consent."
17. Besides, the Apex Court in catena of cases, some of them
have been referred by the learned counsel for the applicant, held
that the Public Prosecutor may withdraw from a prosecution not
merely on the ground of paucity of evidence but also in order to
further the broad ends of public justice which may include the
social, economic and political purpose. The ultimate guiding
consideration while granting the permission to withdraw from a
prosecution must always be the interest of administration of
justice. The learned trial court may not examine the purpose
for what the application for withdrawal of the prosecution has
been filed inasmuch as the withdrawal from a prosecution is an
executive function of the Public Prosecutor. The discretion to
withdraw from the prosecution is solely that of the Public
Prosecutor and so he cannot surrender that discretion to
someone else. Admittedly, the Public Prosecutor is an Officer
of the Court and therefore, responsible to the Court. The court
performs a supervisory function and has a special duty in
granting its consent to the withdrawal. The courts duty is not to
reappreciate the grounds which led the Public Prosecutor to
request the withdrawal from the prosecution but to consider
whether the Public Prosecutor applied his mind as a free agent.
The Court has a special duty in this regard as it is the ultimate
repository of legislative confidence in granting or withholding
its consent to withdrawal from the prosecution.
18. Considering the settled legal position on the subject by the
Apex Court and the facts and circumstances of the present case,
I find that the impugned order dated 04.11.2020 suffers from
apparent illegality and perversity so the same is liable to be set
aside. Further, I find that it would be a futile exercise if the
matter is remanded back to the learned trial court to pass
appropriate order when the application filed under Section 321
Cr.P.C. fulfills all the required conditions.
19. Thus, the present petition is allowed and the impugned
judgment and order dated 04.11.2020 (Annexure No.1), passed
by the learned Additional Session Judge, Court No.3/ Special
Judge (M.P./M.L.A.), Gonda in Crl. Case No.100 of 2019; State
vs. Prem Narayan Pandey, arising out of Case Crime No.109 of
2003, under Section 60/72 of Excise Act, Police Station-
Tarabganj, District-Gonda is hereby set aside and the
application filed by the learned Public Prosecutor under Section
321 Cr.P.C. for withdrawal from the prosecution is hereby
allowed.