1.       A short but interesting question is involved in the present petition
filed under Section 482 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (“Cr.P.C.”
for brevity) invoking the inherent powers of this Court seeking
quashment of charge-sheet bearing Crime No.154/2019 registered at
Police Station Special Police Establishment Lokayukt, Jabalpur and the
consequential proceedings in shape of Special Case (Lokayukt)
No.1/2021 pending before the Court of Special Judge (Lokayukt)
2.     The question is whether the quashment of impugned charge-sheet
is permissible in law when the only evidence collected during
“(i) The written complaint dated 22.07.2019 of the complainant.
(ii) The conversation in the Digital Voice Recorder (“DVR” for brevity)
which when matched with the sample voice of the petitioner resulted into
the following information of the Regional Forensic Laboratory, Bhopal:
From the poorly recorded questioned voice recording marked Q-1
(A)/Q-1(B) and the specimen voice recording marked S-1(A)/S-2(B),
sufficient common words/sentences having sufficient amount of speech
data for auditory and spectrographic analysis could not be detected.
Hence, opinion cannot be given as to whether the voice marked exhibit
Q-1(A)/Q-1(B) is the probable voice of the person whose specimen voice
is marked exhibit S-1(A)/S-2(B).
(iii) The statement of the shadow witness Constable – Dinesh Dubey
who merely saw the complainant and the petitioner sitting in a Car, from
a distance but did not hear the conversation between them.”
3.     Learned senior counsel for petitioner submits that with the
aforesaid     available    evidence      collected    by   prosecution       during
investigation, even if the same is accepted on its face value cannot led
to commission of an offence punishable u/S. 7 of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988 (“PC Act” for brevity) as alleged.
3.1    It is also urged that there are certain other undisputed facts which
reveal patent improbability of the incident and the foundational
complaint being malicious and vexacious. These alleged undisputed
“(i) Letter dated 23.09.2019 of Senior Accounts Officer MPPKVVCL,
Jabalpur, reveals that till 11.07.2019 (the date of the incident), the final
bills put up by the complainant were pending in the Office of Sr.
Accounts Officer and not before the petitioner.
(ii) Letter dated 23.09.2019 further reveals that these bills of the
complainant reached the Office of Sr. Accounts Officer after being
routed through Shri Ranjeet Kumar Maravi, Jr. Engineer, Shri Vivek
Jaisele, Assistant Engineer and Shri Naveen Pandey, Executive
Engineer and not through the petitioner.
(iii) On 11.07.2019, this letter dated 23.09.2019 reveals that the
petitioner’s posting was in the Office of the Executive Engineer, Sub
Division and not in the STC Division.
(iv) During the period from 11.07.2019 to 22.07.2019, none of the other
similarly placed persons as that of the complainant was made any
payment against their bills under Soubhagya Yojana.
(v) This letter also reveals that there were stop payment instructions in
regard to the bills of the complainant from the Office of Superior
Authority and, therefore, question of petitioner making any payment did
not arise.
(vi) Lastly, in this letter, the Sr. Accounts Officer submitted that as
against the pending bills of the complainant, an amount of
Rs.5,06,970/- was released which included the amount demanded under
the Soubhagya Yojana but since the said amount had not been
sanctioned yet, the complainant was informed about this inadvertent
mistake and was made to refund the said amount.”
3.2.   In the aforesaid background and the alleged implicative material
collected during the investigation, learned senior counsel for petitioner
submits that when the voice sample in the DVR did not match with the
voice sample collected from petitioner, there was no occasion for the
prosecution to proceed with the matter as the so-called implicative
material collected as aforesaid fell desperately short of even the
minimum required standard necessary for taking cognizance.
3.3.   It is submitted that the statement of shadow witness is of no avail
to the prosecution as the shadow witness - Constable Dinesh Dubey is
said to have only seen from a distance the petitioner and the
complainant sitting together in a Car. The said shadow witness
admittedly did not hear the conversation between the petitioner and the
complainant and, therefore, merely by seeing two persons’ conversing,
it cannot be presumed that demand for bribe was made by the petitioner.
3.4.   It is further submitted that the other piece of evidence is the
report of the Regional Forensic Science Laboratory which is non-
implicative in nature. The said report dated 12.05.2020 is merely to the
effect that sufficient words/sentences in the recorded conversation could
not be detected for auditory and spectographic analysis. The expert’s
opined thus is no evidence in the eyes of law.
3.5.   Shri Anil Khare, learned senior counsel for petitioner in this
factual background submits that the evidence collected by the
prosecution during investigation did not even raise an iota of suspicion
much less a reasonable or serious suspicion to enable Investigating
Agency to file charge-sheet in the Court of competent criminal
3.6.   It is submitted that in the backdrop of absence of any implicative
expert opinion, the only material available with the prosecution is the
written complaint, and the statement of shadow witness - Constable
Dinesh Dubey, who had not even heard the conversation between
petitioner and complainant. In these circumstances, it is urged that the
only recourse available to the prosecution was to go in for a fresh laying
of trap and recording of conversation followed by subjecting the
recording to FSL analysis.
3.7.   In view of above, Shri Khare, learned senior counsel prays for
quashing the charge-sheet since the case squarely falls within the
parameters of para 103 & 104 laid down by the Apex Court in the case
of State of Haryana and others Vs. Bhajanlal and others, 1992
Further reliance is placed by senior counsel for petitioner on
1979 (4) SCC 526 (Panalal                    Damodar Rathi Vs. State of
Vs. State of Maharashtra) (Para 12, 13 & 14), 2011 (6) SCC 450
(State of Kerala and another Vs. C.P. Rao) (Para 7) and 2015 (3) SCC
123 (Sanjaysinh Ramrao Chavan Vs. Dattatray Gulabrao Phalke and
4. Per contra, learned counsel for prosecution relying upon the decision
of Apex Court in State of Rajasthan Vs. Ashok Kumar Kashyap, 2021
SCC Online 314 (para 24 onwards) emphasizing the limited
jurisdiction of this Court while exercising inherent powers u/S. 482 of
Cr.P.C. submits that the case for attempt to obtain undue advantage is
squarely made out by the evidence collected during investigation. The
written complaint of the complainant, the statement of the shadow
witness are urged to be enough to constitute the basic ingredients of the
offence punishable u/S. 7 of PC Act, notwithstanding absence of the
expert report.
5.     Before venturing into the arena of adjudication, it would be
appropriate to extract the relevant portion of the judgments laying down
the contures, sweep and extent of inherent powers u/S. 482 of Cr.P.C.
5.1.   In the instant case, the facts reveal that beside the written
complainant of the complainant and the statement of the shadow
witness - Constable Dinesh Dubey u/S. 161 of Cr.P.C., there is no other
implicative piece of evidence collected by the prosecution.                      The
analysis of the aforesaid two pieces of evidence reveals thus:
“(i) The written complaint of the complainant dated 11.07.2019
alleges that a final bill claiming Rs.24 lakh put up by the complainant
is pending in the Divisional Office of MPPKVVCL, Jabalpur and for
clearing the same, the Divisional Engineer Neelabh Shrivastava (not
made accused) demanding Rs.4.5 lakhs and the petitioner demanded
Rs.1.7 lakh as bribe.         The complaint further alleges that the
complainant does not wish to oblige Neelabh Shrivastava and
petitioner and instead, wants to catch them red handed.
(ii) The aforesaid complaint is mere allegation which give a cause to
the prosecution to lay a trap so as to collect implicative evidence in
support of the complaint whereafter a cognizable offence u/S. 7 or 13
of PC Act, as the case may be, can be registered.
(iii) The complainant was explained the procedure to be followed for
voice recording with the aid of DVR and the shadow witness – Dinesh
Dubey Constable was directed to accompany the complainant.
Thereafter, on 11.07.2019, the complainant along with the DVR
entered into a conversation with the petitioner in a Car at 7.30 p.m.
The conversation was recorded by the hidden DVR and when the
conversation was going on, the shadow witness – Constable Dinesh
Dubey is said to be sitting on his motorcycle at a distance from the
Car watching the complainant and the petitioner conversing with each
other.   Importantly,   the   conversation  between    petitioner    and
complainant was not heard by the said shadow witness.
(iv)Thereafter, the complainant made a further written complaint on
22.07.2019 to the prosecuting agency handing over the DVR and
detailing the events that took place on 11.07.2019 at 7.30 p.m.. This
complaint dated 22.07.2019 expressed apprehension that in all
probability, petitioner has become suspicious and, therefore, would not
accept any bribe from the complainant.
(v) The voice sample was also collected from the petitioner to enable
the expert to compare voice recorded in the DVR with the voice
sample.
(vi) On 12.05.2020, the Regional Forensic Science Laboratory, Bhopal
issued a report opining that the available voice recording in the DVR
and the voice sample are insufficient for auditory and spectrographic
analysis and thus no opinion can be given as to whether the two voice
samples are of the same person or not.”
5.2.  A close scrutiny of the aforesaid events which took place on
11.07.2019 and 12.05.2020 what comes out loud and clear is that the
written complaint letter dated 11.07.2019 contains mere allegation
against the petitioner which could have matured into registration of
offence punishable u/S.7 of P.C. Act and filing of a charge-sheet only
when     the voice in the DVR and the voice sample collected from
petitioner had matched.
5.3.   The voice recording and the voice sample provided by the
prosecution were insufficient for the expert to give any opinion and,
therefore, the allegation contained in the complaint dated 11.07.2019
remained mere allegation and thus could not have fructified into
registration of offence or filing of a charge-sheet.
5.4.   In an offence punishable u/S. 7 of the PC Act, the least that is
required of the Investigating Agency is to collect implicative
evidence/material to support the allegation contained in the written
complaint.     In     absence     of     any     such    supportive       implicative
material/evidence, if an offence is registered, merely on the basis of
written complaint of complainant, then disastrous consequence can
befall upon all public servants thereby exposing them to registration of
offence and filing of charge-sheet. A written complaint can be made by
any person who nurses a grudge or prejudice against the public servant.
The public servant would stand exposed to criminal prosecution on the
mere making of a written complaint. This scenario would led to chaos
in the administration of service. The public servant shall not be able to
discharge his official duties in a free and fair manner due to the ever
present feeling of lurking fear in the mind that any act of discharge of
official duties can trigger a criminal prosecution.
5.5    In somewhat similar circumstances before the Apex Court in the
case of Sanjaysinh Ramrao Chavan Vs. Dattatray Gulabrao Phalke
and others, 2015 (3) SCC 123 where the forensic report found the
sample supplied insufficient to come to any conclusion, Supreme Court
found it to be a wasteful exercise to proceed with the prosecution. The
relevant extract of the said judgment is reproduced below for ready
16.    It is to be noted that in the first complaint filed by the second
respondent, the de facto complainant, there is no allegation for any
demand for bribe by the appellant. The allegation of demand is
specifically against accused 2 only. That allegation against the
appellant is raised only subsequently. Be that as it may, the only basis
for supporting the allegation is the conversation that is said to be
recorded by the voice recorder. The Directorate of Forensic Science
Laboratories, State of Maharashtra vide Annexure-B report has
stated that the conversation is not in audible condition and, hence,
the same is not considered for spectrographic analysis. Learned
Counsel for the respondents submit that the conversation has been
translated and the same has been verified by the panch witnesses.
Admittedly, the panch witnesses have not heard the conversation,
since they were not present in the room. As the voice recorder is itself
not subjected to analysis, there is no point in placing reliance on the
translated version. Without source, there is no authenticity for the
translation. Source and authenticity are the two key factors for an
electronic evidence, as held by this Court in Anvar P.V. v. P.K.
17.     The Magistrate, having seen the records and having heard the
parties, has come to the conclusion that no offence is made out
against the appellant under the provisions of the PC Act so as to
prosecute him. Even according to the High Court, "the crux of the
matter is the conversation between the complainant and the accused
1 of 22.11.2010". That conversation is inaudible and the same is not
to be taken in evidence. Therefore, once the 'crux' goes, the
superstructure also falls, lacking in legs. Hence, prosecution becomes
a futile exercise as the materials available do not show that an
offence is made out as against the appellant. This part, unfortunately,
the High Court missed.
"28 Summoning of an accused in a criminal case is a serious
matter. Criminal law cannot be set into motion as a matter of
(Pepsi Foods Limited v. Special Judicial Magistrate Para 28). The
process of the criminal court shall not be permitted to be used as a
weapon of harassment.
Once it is found that there is no material on record to connect an
accused with the crime, there is no meaning in prosecuting him. It
would be a sheer waste of public time and money to permit such
proceedings to continue against such a person.
18. Unmerited and undeserved prosecution is an infringement of the
guarantee under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
"60…….. Article 21 assures every person right to life and
personal liberty. The word personal liberty is of the widest amplitude
covering variety of rights which goes to constitute personal liberty of
a citizen. Its deprivation shall be only as per procedure prescribed in
the Code and the Evidence Act conformable to the mandate of the
(State of Bihar v. P.P. Sharma)”
5.6    The Apex Court in the case of Subramanian Swamy Vs.
Manmohan Singh and another, 2012 (3) SCC 64 (Para 73 and 74)
realizing this special status admissible to public servants has held in
regard to the protection given to them. The relevant extract of the said
judgment is reproduced below for ready reference and convenience:-
“73.    It was pointed out by the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Sheonandan Paswan Vs. State of Bihar, (1987) 1 SCC 288:
"14......It is now settled law that a criminal proceeding is not
a proceeding for vindication of a private grievance but it is a
proceeding initiated for the purpose of punishment to the
offender in the interest of the society. It is for maintaining
stability and orderliness in the society that certain acts are
constituted offences and the right is given to any citizen to set
the machinery of the criminal law in motion for the purpose
of bringing the offender to book. It is for this reason that in
A.R. Antulay V. R.S.Nayak, 1984 (2) SCC 500, this Court
pointed out that (SCC p. 509, para 6)..
74. Keeping those principles in mind, as we must, if we look at
Section 19 of the P.C. Act which bars a Court from taking cognizance
of cases of corruption against a public servant under Sections 7, 10,
11, 13 and 15 of the Act, unless the Central or the State Government,
as the case may be, has accorded sanction, virtually imposes fetters
on private citizens and also on prosecutors from approaching Court
against corrupt public servants. These protections are not available
to other citizens. Public servants are treated as a special class of
persons enjoying the said protection so that they can perform their
duties without fear and favour and without threats of malicious
prosecution. However, the said protection against malicious
prosecution which was extended in public interest cannot become a
shield to protect corrupt officials. These provisions being exceptions
to the equality provision of Article 14 are analogous to provisions of
protective discrimination and these protections must be construed
very narrowly. These procedural provisions relating to sanction must
be construed in such a manner as to advance the causes of honesty
and justice and good governance as opposed to escalation of
corruption.”
5.7    This Court is supported in its view by the decision of the Apex
Court in the case of State of Haryana and others Vs. Bhajanlal and
others, 1992 Supp.1 SCC 335. The relevant extract of the said
judgment reproduced below for ready reference and convenience:-
“102.      In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant
provisions of the Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law
enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions relating to the exercise
of the extraordinary power under Article 226 or the inherent powers
under Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted and reproduced
above, we give the following categories of cases by way of illustration
wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the
process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it
may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined and
sufficiently channelised and inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and
to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases wherein such power
should be exercised.
(3)    Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or
'complaint and the evidence collected in support of the same do
not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case
(5)   Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd
and inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent
person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient
5.8    For an allegation to mature into an FIR, least that is required is
that the allegation/first information discloses commission of cognizable
offence. Whereas for an FIR to mature into a charge-sheet/final report
u/S.173(2) Cr.P.C., it has to undergo the arduous journey from Sec.154
to Sec. 176 (Chapter XII) Cr.P.C. where implicative evidence if any is
collected in support of the FIR in a unilateral process called
5.9    Investigation is a unilateral process, being out of bounds for the
accused. The investigating agency is thus expected to act in a free, fair
and impartial manner with no element of prejudice coming into play for
or against the accused or victim. Investigation as is well known is a
probe in the dark starting from the known to the unknown moving
backwards in time, in search of truth.
5.10 The task of investigating agency is rendered all the more difficult
in face of the accused being entitled to remain silent. Ironically the
accused despite knowing the truth cannot be compelled to disclose the
5.11 Investigating agency is thus obliged while discharging it’s
statutory duty under Chapter XII of Cr.P.C. to ensure that the final
report u/S. 173(1) Cr.P.C. if prepared and filed in the Court is
accompanied with such supportive/corroborative evidence which gives
rise to serious and strong suspicion of involvement of accused in the
offence alleged. Another test of a valid and lawful charge-sheet/final
report is that if the evidence/material contained therein is left
uncontroverted then the same can sustain a conviction.
5.12 Let us visualize the situation which may arise if the prosecution
with available evidence is permitted to proceed with the trial :-
(a) The written complaint dated 22.07.2019 alleging demand of bribe
will be supported by complainant in his examination-in-chief.
(b) However, the petitioner/accused in cross-examination would
contradict the averments of complainant in examination-in-chief.
(c) That would leave the testimony of complainant uncorroborated.
(d)The other evidence collected by prosecution are :-
(i) Statement u/S. 161 Cr.P.C. of shadow witness - Constable
(ii) FSL report dated 12.05.2020.
(e) The Sec.161 Cr.P.C. statement of shadow witness has zero
corroborative value since this witness admittedly did not hear the
conversation between petitioner/accused and the complainant.
Moreso, when the shadow witness is not a lip-reader.
(f) The other corroborative piece of evidence is the FSL report dated
12.05.2020 which is not implicative.
Thus to allow the trial to proceed on the basis of an uncorroborated
complaint would be an exercise in futility leading to no fruitful result
except wasting the precious time of the trial Court.
5.13 Therefore, a charge-sheet/final report can fructify into taking of
cognizance of offence alleged only when the implicative evidence in
charge-sheet gives rise to a triable case where foundational ingredients
of offence alleged are prima facie palpable.
6.     In a recent decision, the Apex Court while noticing absence of
supporting material to the FIR held that the jurisdiction under Section
482 of Cr.P.C. can very well be exercised on the anvil of the law laid
down in the case of State of Haryana and others Vs. Bhajanlal (supra)
and the recent decision           in the case of Neeharika Infrastructure
Pvt.Ltd. Vs. State of Maharashtra and others, AIR 2021 SC 1918. The
relevant extract of the said judgment reproduced below for ready
“15.       As observed hereinabove, there may be some cases where the
initiation of criminal proceedings may be an abuse of process of law.
In such cases, and only in exceptional cases and where it is found that
non interference would result into miscarriage of justice, the High
Court, in exercise of its inherent powers Under Section 482 Code of
Criminal Procedure and/or Article 226 of the Constitution of India,
may quash the FIR/complaint/criminal proceedings and even may stay
the further investigation. However, the High Court should be slow in
interfering the criminal proceedings at the initial stage, i.e. quashing
petition filed immediately after lodging the FIR/complaint and no
sufficient time is given to the police to investigate into the allegations
of the FIR/complaint, which is the statutory right/duty of the police
under the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure. There is no
denial of the fact that power Under Section 482 Code of Criminal
Procedure is very wide, but as observed by this Court in catena of
decisions, referred to hereinabove,        confernment of wide power
requires the court to be more cautious and it casts an onerous and
more diligent duty on the court. Therefore, in exceptional cases, when
the High Court deems it fit, regard being had to the parameters of
quashing and the self-restraint imposed by law, may pass appropriate
interim orders, as thought apposite in law, however, the High Court
has to give brief reasons which will reflect the application of mind by
the court to the relevant facts.”
7.     In the conspectus of above discussion, the material collected by
the prosecution falls desperately short of the minimum required
standard necessary for filing a final report u/S. 173 of Cr.P.C. and taking
7.1    Pertinently when the Investigating Agency was faced with a non-
implicative Forensic Report then the only option available to the
Investigating Agency was to go in for a fresh exercise of recording of
statement of petitioner by laying of another trap.                      Instead, the
Investigating Agency decided to proceed with the half baked material in
shape of written complaint and the statement of shadow witness –
Constable Dinesh Dubey, who had not even heard the conversation
between petitioner and the complainant. This kind of an exercise by
Investigating Agency amounts to utter abuse of process of Court. The
charge-sheet filed is thus a waste of precious time of the Court which
would be involved in a trial where discharge is inevitable and fait
accompli.
8.        Regard being had to the above, this case is one of those rarest of
rare cases where without entering into the reliability, genuineness or
veracity of the evidence collected, this Court is compelled to invoke it’s
inherent powers u/S.482 Cr.P.C. to truncate the prosecution which in
turn is based on premature investigation.
9.        Consequently, this Court is left with no option but to hold that the
filing of the charge-sheet in Crime No.154/2019 and the consequential
proceeding in Special Case (Lokayukt) No.1/2021 pending before Court
of Special Judge (Lokayukt) Jabalpur are abuse of process of the Court.
10.       Accordingly,      the charge-sheet   in   respect     of   FIR/Crime
No.154/2019 registered at Police Station Special Police Establishment
(Lokayukt), Jabalpur and the consequential proceeding in respect of
Special Case (Lokayukt) No.1/2021 pending before the Court of Special
Judge (Lokayukt) Jabalpur stand quashed.
Shri Anil Khare, learned Senior Counsel with Shri Abhinav
Shrivastava, learned counsel for the petitioner.
respondent No.1.
(1) FIR lodged in connection with offence punishable u/S.7 of P.C.
Act cannot fructify into a charge sheet when the only evidence collected
by the Investigating Agency is the written complaint, the statement of
shadow witness, who has only seen the accused with the complainant
from a distance, but has not heard the conversation of demand of bribe
and the F.S.L. report which opines that voice sample collected does not
match the recorded voice.
(2) Proceeding with trial with the aforesaid piece of evidence is a
futile exercise which shall achieve no object except wasting the
precious time of the Court and vexing accused, victim and as well as the
justice dispensation system.
(3) If the voice sample had not matched with the voice recording
then it was the bounded duty of Investigating Agency to have
conducted another trap instead of filing a charge sheet with half baked
evidence, which is inherently improbable to lead to any logical
conclusion.
Order passed in separate sheets on 23.02.2022.