1. This Civil Second Appeal has been filed against the judgment dated
21.11.2013, passed by District Judge, Kulgam (for short “First
Appellate Court”), dismissing the application seeking condonation of
delay and as a consequence of which dismissing the appeal as well
holding it as time barred.
2. Appellant therein had challenged the said decree on the grounds:
a) that the Judgment being patently illegal cryptic erroneous
and as such not sustainable in the eyes of law.
b) that the judgment has been passed in hot haste without
application of mind and is in flagrant violation of the laws of
land.
c) that the court although has framed the issues but has not
recorded the findings on the issues as was required under law.
d).that the subordinate court has based his judgment on       oral
evidence without seeking the evidence of Patwari concerned
regarding latest revenue record.
d). that the sale deed has not been challenged in the lis, as such,
decree passed by the court is outcome of suppression of
material facts by the other side.
3. The brief facts of the case are that plaintiff-respondent no.1 herein
filed a civil suit titled as Shameema v. Salam Thokar and another
before the court of Munsiff Damhal Hanji Pora, Kulgam (for short
“Trial Court”) on 14.11.2005, praying for grant of permanent
injunction against defendants, including present appellant – who had
been defendant no.2 therein, restraining them from alienating land
measuring 14 Kanals 05 Marlas falling under survey No.201 min
situated at village Chugalpora District Kulgam, as the dispute between
the parties is that the partition of the land has not been done between
the co-owners and suit land being undivided between the parties. The
defendants in their written statement have claimed that the land has
been partitioned between the co-sharers and no portion of it is
undivided and furthermore defendant no.1 has already transferred a
portion of land to defendant no.2 before institution of suit and formal
sale deed to that effect has been executed way back on 26.11.2008, as
the sale deed stands registered by the Sub Registrar on 06.12.2008.
The possession of land also stands delivered, and as a consequence of
which the injunction suit is liable to be dismissed.
4. The Trial Court framed the following issues for consideration:
1. Whether plaintiff has been married as Khan-Nisheen daughter
and after the death of her father she is in possession of the suit
land is enjoying usufruct out of it. OPP
2. Whether plaintiff and defendant No. 1 are the co-owners and co-
sharers of and suit land has not been partitioned between them.
3. Whether suit land is in joint possession of plaintiff and
defendants and has not been partitioned by revenue officers. OPP
4. Whether the defendant No. 1 has already transferred the same
land to defendant No. 2 and defendant No. 2 is in possession of
5. Whether defendant No. 1 has offered to plaintiff to purchase the
suit land and after her refusal defendant No. 1 has transferred the
same to defendant No. 1.      OPD
6. Whether plaintiff has no cause of action to file the suit. OPD
5. After framing of issues, parties were directed to lead evidence but
defendants remained absent and their counsel did not appear on their
behalf, so ex parte proceedings were initiated against the defendants
on 17.10.2008, and plaintiff/respondent no.1 was directed to lead
evidence in ex parte.
6. The Trial court while deciding the matter on 29.12.2012, observed
that the suit land was in joint possession of plaintiff and defendant
No.1 and was unpartitioned. All the witnesses are stated to have
deposed that plaintiff had been married as Khana-Nisheen daughter
and was in possession of her fathers’ inherited property and the suit
land was in joint possession of plaintiff and defendant No.1 and
defendant No.1 was bent upon to alienate the suit land to defendant
No.2 – appellant herein, who was also causing interference in the suit
land.
7. The suit was decreed in ex parte in favour of the plaintiff, thereby
defendant No.1 was permanently restrained from alienating the suit
land to defendant No.2 or any other person till the suit land was
partitioned by revenue authority and defendant No.2 was also
permanently restrained not to cause any sort of interference in the suit
land.
8. Against Trial Court judgement dated 29.12.2012, appellant preferred
an Appeal before First Appellate Court. As there was delay in filing
the appeal, an application for condoning delay was also preferred.
Both were dismissed vide impugned judgement dated 21.11.2013.
9. Against the Trial court and First Appellate court, appellant has filed
this Civil Second Appeal. This Court on 19.04.2017, has framed the
following substantial questions of law:
1) Whether the seeker of condonation of delay was required to
explain the period of his absence during the trial of the suit.
2) Whether the condonation of delay would promote
substantial justice.
3) Whether in the peculiar facts and circumstances the decree
for permanent injunction could be passed.
10.Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record on file.
11.The first substantial question of law is: “whether the seeker of
condonation of delay was required to explain the period of his
absence during the trial of the suit”, is
12.Appellant-Bashir Ahmad Dar was aggrieved of ex parte decree dated
29.12.2012, so he filed an appeal. Since there was delay of 24 days in
filing of appeal, he moved an application (File No.03/Civil Misc.),
along with the appeal on 24.04.2013 seeking condoning of the delay
in filing the appeal, on the grounds which for facility of reference are
reproduced hereunder:
“1. That the suit captioned Shameema v/s Salam Thokar and
anr was filed before the Ld. Munsiff D.H. Pora on 14.11.2005
and the applicant/appellant was arrayed as defendant no.2 in the
said case.
2. That the appellant/applicant has purchased land measuring
15 marlas by way of registered sale deed registered on
06.12.2008, out of the suit land and obtained possession thereof
from defendant no.1.
3. That although applicant had signed the vakalat nama in the
case but the defendant no.1 has taken the full responsibility to
prosecute the case and maintain regular contact with the
counsel resultantly applicant on the assurance of the defendant
no. 1 could not develop full contact with his counsel.
4. That in the month of December, 2012 applicant approached
his counsel Mr. A. M. Fayaz who informed the applicant about
the ex-parte proceedings initiated in the case against defendants
but still assured the applicant of better results in favour of the
defendants.
5. That in the last week of December, 2012, the applicant was
informed that the file is lying with the presiding officer for
writing judgment and since then applicant has been
approaching the subordinate court to know the final result of
the case but applicant was always told that the judgment in the
case is still incomplete. It is on 17.04.2013, that the applicant
was informed to apply for the certified copy of the judgment
and get the same. Applicant applied for the copy and obtained
the copy of the judgment on 18.04.2014.
6. That on 19.04.2013, the applicant could not due to holiday
consult his counsel at Kulgam on 20.04.2013, due to lawyers
strike applicant again could not seek legal guidance and was
told by the counsel to meet on Monday i.e. on 22.04.2013.
Applicant without any delay got the appeal drafted with the
instant application for seeking condonation of delay and the
same is submitted for the kind consideration of this court.
7. That the delay caused in filing this appeal has been
sufficiently explained and it was due to non supply of the copy
of judgment to the applicant that the appeal could not be
presented well in time and as such the delay caused in the
matter needs to condoned in the interest of justice otherwise
applicant would suffer irreparable loss.
In the premises, it is therefore humbly prayed that
the instant application may be allowed, delay caused in the
matter may be condoned and the appeal accompanied with this
application be registered and taken up for just consideration
and disposed under law.”
13.The reasons given in the application seeking condonation of delay for
filing the appeal are that in the month of December 2012, when
appellant approached his counsel he was informed that ex parte
proceedings were initiated against him and thereafter he was informed
that the file was lying with the Presiding Officer for writing of
judgment and since then he had been approaching the Trial Court, but
could not know about the final result of the case and he was told that
judgment was still incomplete. Thereafter on 17.04.2013, he was
informed by his counsel to apply for the certified copy of the
judgment for which he applied on 18.04.2013.
14.The appeal was to be filed within a period of 90 days from the date of
passing of the judgment dated 29.12.2012 and the limitation would
have expired on 30.03.2013. Application seeking condonation of
delay along with the appeal was filed by appellant on 24.04.2013.
Thus, there was delay of 24 days. The appellant has given explanation
in the application regarding delay.
15.The First Appellate court, while dealing with the application seeking
condonation of delay, has observed that initially appellant had caused
appearance before the Trial Court on 14.05.2012, and thereafter
absented as a result whereof ex parte proceedings were initiated
against him and that in the application appellant had not rendered any
explanation to convince the court as regards the circumstances that
prevented him from remaining absent after filing written statement on
14.05.2008, till filing of the appeal and thus failed to explain such
inordinate delay.
First Appellate Court has also observed that appellant could not
convince it as to why appellant had not made any effort to know about
fate of the case in which he had filed written statement, continuously
for a period of seven years and what made him to prefer an appeal
against the ex parte decree.
First Appellate Court has taken into account the absence of
appellant before the Trial court as according to First Appellate Court
the appellant has not given sufficient reasons that prevented him to
appear before Trial Court during pendency of the civil suit till it
culminated in passing of ex parte decree.
First Appellate Court should have been alive to the position that
an application seeking condonation of delay is to be decided while
taking liberal view subject to explanation given by appellant more
particularly when even there is not any inordinate delay. The appellant
was to explain the delay which occasioned in not filing the appeal
within the limitation period after passing of the decree and judgment.
He was required to explain the period of delay. However, the First
Appellate court has passed order impugned rejecting the application
by holding that no sufficient cause has been shown by the appellant
for his absence before the Trial court for the period ex parte
proceedings were initiated against him till passing of the judgment.
The observation and finding of the First Appellate Court are
erroneous as the law provides that delay is to be explained for the
period beyond the period of limitation prescribed. The limitation in
this case would run from the date of passing of the decree and not
from any date prior to passing of the same. The applicant-petitioner,
therefore, was required to explain that what occasioned after passing
of the decree, which is explained in the application supported by an
affidavit. The First Appellate Court instead of limiting consideration
to that period has gone beyond the provisions and has taken into
account the period of absence before the Trial court. The finding of
the First Appellate Court thus being perverse, which gives rise to the
first substantial question framed above, which is answered as under:
“The seeker of condonation of delay is not required to
explain the period of his absence during the trial, what is
required is the period of delay which runs as per the Limitation
Act and in this case the period of limitation had started from the
date of decree, therefore, any delay after explaining of such
limitation was only to be explained by the appellant.
Thus, while deciding the substantial question of law, the
impugned order of the Appellate court dated 21.11.2013 is set
aside.
Rest of questions framed are not required to be
considered.”
16.The application along with the appeal shall be remanded back to First
Appellate court, who shall decide the application seeking condonation
of delay in filing the appeal strictly in accordance with law.
17.Parties to appear before that First Appellate court on 18.03.2023.
18.Copy be sent down along with record.