The petitioner is the second accused in the case registered as
V.C.No.3/2021/TSR by the Vigilance and Anti-Corruption Bureau
2. The petitioner was employed as an Overseer in the
3. The prosecution case, in short, is as follows: The first
accused is a contractor. He demanded money from the de facto
complainant for payment of the same to the second accused and
other officials of the Choondal Grama Panchayat to induce them to
grant completion certificate in respect of the new building which
was constructed by the brother-in-law of the de facto complainant.
On 16.02.2021, at about 17:00 hours, the first accused met the de
facto complainant at the parking area of Sankara Shopping
Complex at the place Kecheri in Thrissur and he obtained/accepted
from the de facto complainant an amount of Rs.25,000/-. Thus, the
first accused committed the offence punishable under Section 7A of
the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (for short 'the Act') read
with Section 120B of the Indian Penal Code and the second
accused committed the offence       punishable under Section 7(a) of
the Act read with Section 120B of the Indian Penal Code.
4. During the investigation of the case, Annexure-2 notice
issued from the Court of the Enquiry Commissioner and Special
Judge (Vigilance), Thrissur, directing the petitioner to appear at the
Chithranjali Studio in Thrikkakara, for recording samples of his
voice, was served on him. The direction given to the petitioner was
to appear at 09.00 hours on 27.07.2021 in that studio.
5. This petition under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 is filed for quashing Annexure-2 notice issued to
the petitioner and all further proceedings based on it.
6. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the
7. At the time of hearing, learned counsel for the petitioner
has challenged Annexure-2 notice only on two grounds: (1) The
order compelling the petitioner to give voice sample violates the
protection guaranteed under Article 20(3) of the Constitution of
India. (2) The order directing the petitioner to give voice sample
was passed by the Special Court without granting him an
opportunity of being heard.
8. Article 20(3) of the Constitution provides that, “no person
accused of any offence shall be compelled to be a witness against
9. The answer to the question, whether a direction given to
an accused to give sample of his voice for comparison would
violate Article 20(3) of the Constitution, is no longer res integra. In
Ritesh Sinha v. State of Uttar Pradesh [AIR 2019 SC 3592 :
(2019) 8 SCC 1], the Supreme Court has held that direction to an
accused to give voice sample does not infringe Article 20(3) of the
Constitution of India. The Apex Court has also held as follows:
“We unhesitatingly take the view that until
explicit provisions are engrafted in the Code of
Criminal Procedure by Parliament, a Judicial
Magistrate must be conceded the power to order
a person to give a sample of his voice for the
purpose of investigation of a crime. Such power
has to be conferred on a Magistrate by a process
of judicial interpretation and in exercise of
jurisdiction vested in this Court under Article 142
of the Constitution of India”.
10. The other contention of the petitioner is that the Special
Court should have granted him an opportunity of being heard
before     passing     any   such   order.  The    question    of granting
opportunity of being heard to an accused before passing an order
for taking voice sample would arise only if his consent is required
for taking such sample. Since the direction given by a court to an
accused to give voice sample for the purpose of comparison does
not violate Article 20(3) of the Constitution, his consent is not
required for that purpose. The accused has no right of option in the
11. The same view has been taken by this Court in Daisy v.
State of Kerala [2020 (3) KHC 115 : 2020 (2) KLT 639], in
which it has been observed as follows:
“The   next  contention   of the  learned    Senior
Counsel for the petitioner was that notice was not
issued to the petitioner before directing her to
furnish the voice sample. Since the direction of
the court below was on a request made by the
investigating agency in the course of investigation
and in the absence of any legal bar, the Court
below was not expected to issue notice to the
petitioner.”
12. The prayer for quashing Annexure-2 notice cannot be
allowed for another reason also. Annexure-2 notice was issued by
the office of the Special Court. The basis of Annexure-2 notice is
the order dated 22.07.2021 of the Special Court which is referred
to in it. The petitioner has not cared to produce the copy of the
aforesaid order of the Special Court and to challenge it. In the
statement filed by the investigating officer, it is mentioned that the
Special Court had earlier issued direction to the petitioner to
appear at Chitranjali Studio on 22.04.2021 at 08:45 hours and
thereafter the petitioner had approached the Special Court with the
petition Crl.M.P.75/2021 with a prayer for granting him time to
appear at the studio and that the order dated 22.07.2021 was
passed by the Special Court in that petition. Learned counsel for
the petitioner has not refuted the correctness of the above factual
aspects. It means that the petitioner was very well aware of the
orders dated 22.04.2021 and 22.07.2021 passed by the Special
13. It is mentioned in the statement filed by the investigating
officer that the mobile phone seized during the investigation of the
case contains details of the conversion between the petitioner and
the de facto complainant with regard to the demand for bribe and
voice analysis of both accused and the de facto complainant is
essential to prove the demand made. Therefore, taking voice
samples of the petitioner is very essential for an effective
investigation of the case.
14. The investigating agency has to adopt advanced scientific
technology and methods of investigation to solve crimes [See
Rajendra Pralhadrao Wasnik v. State of Maharashtra :
15. In the aforesaid circumstances, the challenge made to
Annexure-2 notice fails. The petition is dismissed.