Heard learned counsel for the accused/applicant as well as
learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the record.
This bail application has been moved by the accused/applicant-
Chandbibi for grant of bail, in Case Crime No. 359 of 2020,
under Sections 364, 366, 368,120-B IPC and Section 3/5 Uttar
Pradesh Prohibition of Unlawful Religious Conversion
during trial.
Learned counsel for the accused-applicant while pressing the
bail application submits that the accused-applicant has falsely
been implicated in the instant case and she has not committed
any offence as claimed by the prosecution.
It is further submitted that the applicant was not named in the
FIR and the victim was also not recovered from the custody of
the applicant and it is shown that soon after the abduction the
victim had appeared before the Police Station concerned along
with her father and thereafter her statement under Section 161
Cr.P.C. was recorded by the Investigating Officer, wherein also
no allegation of any kind has been levelled against the
It is further submitted that the statement of the prosecutrix was
also recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C., wherein also no
allegation of any kind either with regard to the kidnapping/
abduction of the prosecutrix or of any abetment has been
levelled against the applicant and it has been categorically
stated that she had gone with co-accused Jibraeel on her own
volition and free will and she is in love with him and also that
she had changed religion on her own volition.
It is further submitted that even if the case of prosecution is
taken on its face value no involvement of the applicant is
evident in any illegal activity and it has been categorically
stated by the prosecutrix in her statement recorded under
Sections 161 and 164 of Cr.P.C. that the applicant had not done
any illegal act. However, it was on 26.2.2021 when the
additional statement of the prosecutrix is shown to have been
recorded by the Investigating Officer wherein for the very first
time the allegation pertaining to the forceful conversion of
religion pertaining to the prosecutrix has been levelled and the
same could not be believed in the back ground of the fact that in
the statement of the prosecutrix recorded under Section 164
Cr.P.C. she has not levelled any imputation against the applicant
and therefore the additional statement of the prosecutrix
recorded by the Investigating officer could not be believed.
It is further submitted that the age of the prosecutrix is more
than 19 years at the time of occurrence and having regard to her
statement recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. no offence has
been committed by the applicant.
It is further submitted that the applicant is a lady and is in jail in
this matter since 12.12.2020. Charge sheet has already been
submitted and there is no apprehension that the accused-
applicant after release on bail, may flee from the process of law
or will misuse the liberty and also that she is not having any
criminal antecedents.
Learned A.G.A., however, opposes the prayer for bail of the
applicant on the ground that in the additional statement of the
prosecutrix it has been specifically stated that amongst other
persons who were instrumental in pressurizing the victim for
changing her religion the instant applicant was one of them and
therefore she could not escape criminal liability.
It is also submitted by learned AGA that the offence is heinous
and having regard to the additional statement of the prosecutrix
recorded under Section 161 of the Cr.P.C. she had been
converted to other religion without her consent. However, he
could not dispute the facts pertaining to the fact that the
prosecutrix was major at the time of occurrence and also that no
complicity of the applicant is evident in the earlier statements of
the prosecutrix recorded under Sections 161 and 164 of Cr.P.C.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having
perused the record, it is evident that the applicant was not
named in the FIR. The prosecutrix/ victim has also not been
recovered from the custody of the applicant and it appears that
the prosecutrix on her own had appeared before the police
station Tambaur along with her father and her statement under
Section 161 of Cr.P.C. was recorded wherein no imputation of
any kind was alleged against the applicant. Thereafter
statement of the prosecutrix was recorded under Section 164
Cr.P.C., wherein also no imputation of any kind was alleged
against her. However, it was in the additional statement of the
prosecutrix recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., the allegation
of being instrumental in forceful conversion of the victim was
levelled/ attributed to the applicant.             It has been
overwhelmingly submitted by learned counsel for the applicant
that subsequent/ additional statement of the prosecutrix before
the Investigating Officer could not be believed in the light of
her earlier statement recorded before the Magistrate under
Section 164 of the Cr.P.C. wherein no imputation/ allegation of
any kind was levelled against the applicant. The applicant is a
lady, she is in jail in this matter since 12.12.2020. Charge sheet
in the matter has already been filed. The presence of the
applicant before trial court could be secured by placing
adequate conditions/ restrictions.
Having regard to the overall facts and circumstances of the case
and keeping in view the submissions made by learned counsel
for the applicant I find substance only for the purpose of
releasing the applicant on bail. The bail application is, thus,
Let the applicant- Chandbibi involved in the aforesaid case be
released on bail on furnishing a personal bond with two sureties
in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned
(i) The applicant would not leave the local limits of the police
station, wherein she is permanently residing, without prior
permission of the police station concerned.
(ii) The applicant shall not tamper with the prosecution
evidence by intimidating/pressurizing the witnesses, during the
investigation or trial.
(iii) The applicant shall cooperate in the trial sincerely without
seeking any adjournment.
(iv) The applicant shall not indulge in any criminal activity or
commission of any crime after being released on bail.
In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a
ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties
be verified by the court concerned before the bonds are