This Criminal Revision Case has been filed to set aside the
impugned orders passed in Crl.M.P.Nos. 1158, 1189 of 2022, dated 13.07.2022
by the learned Additional District Judge, Principal Special Court for EC and
NDPS Act Cases, Madurai and enlarge the revision petitioner on statutory bail,
by allowing this revision.
The petitioner is arrayed as an accused in C.C.No.488 of 2018.
Pending investigation, the respondent/complainant viz., the Superintendent of
Customs, AIR Intelligence Unit, Madurai Airport, filed a petition in Crl.MP.No.
1158 of 2022, seeking extension of time for completing the investigation. In the
meantime, Crl.MP.No.1189 of 2022 was filed by the petitioner under Section
167(2) Cr.P.C, seeking statutory bail. Both the petitions were heard together
and a common order was passed by the trial Court, by allowing the petition in
Crl.MP.No.1158 of 2022 by extending the time limit and dismissing the petition
in Crl.MP.No.1189 of 2022, which was filed for statutory bail. Against which,
this present revision has been preferred.
4.The learned counsel for the petitioner would straightaway rely
upon the Judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jigar @ Jimmy
Pravinchandra Adatiya Vs State of Gujarat in
it is held in paragraph Nos.30, 31 as follows:
“30. The logical and legal consequence of the grant of
extension of time is the deprivation of the indefeasible right available
to the accused to claim a default bail. If we accept the argument that
the failure of the prosecution to produce the accused before the Court
and to inform him that the application of extension is being considered
by the Court is a mere procedural irregularity, it will negate the
proviso added by sub-section (2) of Section 20 of the 2015 Act and that
may amount to violation of rights conferred by Article 21 of the
Constitution. The reason is the grant of the extension of time takes
away the right of the accused to get default bail which is intrinsically
connected with the fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 21 of
the Constitution. The procedure contemplated by Article 21 of the
Constitution which is required to be followed before the liberty of a
person is taken away has to be a fair and reasonable procedure. In
fact, procedural safeguards play an important role in protecting the
liberty guaranteed by Article 21. The failure to procure the presence of
the accused either physically or virtually before the Court and the
failure to inform him that the application made by the Public
Prosecutor for the extension of time is being considered, is not a mere
procedural irregularity. It is gross illegality that violates the rights of
the accused under Article 21.
31. An attempt was made to argue that the failure to
produce the accused will not cause any prejudice to him. As noted
earlier, the grant of extension of time to complete the investigation
takes away the indefeasible right of the accused to apply for default
bail. It takes away the right of the accused to raise a limited objection
to the prayer for the extension. The failure to produce the accused
before the Court at the time of consideration of the application for
extension of time will amount to a violation of the right guaranteed
under Article 21 of the Constitution. Thus, prejudice is inherent and
need not be established by the accused.”
5.Further, the learned counsel for the petitioner would point out the
irregularities to the effect that the petition in Crl.MP.No.1158 of 2022 was not
filed by the Special Public Prosecutor, but it was filed by the Investigation
Officer and the only the counter-signature was obtained from the Special Public
Prosecutor. According to him, this does not satisfy the requirements of Law, as
pointed out by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in number of Judgments, such as
Sanjay Kumar Kedia @ Sanjay Kedia Vs Intelligence Officer in 2009(17)
SCC 631, which followed the earlier Judgment reported in 1994(4) SCC 602,
which was rendered in Hitendra Vishnu Thakur and others Versus State of
Maharashtra and others, which was also reproduced the said fact extensively.
Para No.23 of the said Judgment runs hereunder, wherein, it has been held that
“A public prosecutor is an important officer of the State
Government and is appointed by the State under the Code of Criminal
Procedure. He is not a part of the investigating agency. He is an
independent statutory authority. The public prosecutor is expected to
independently apply his mind to the request of the investigating agency
before submitting a report to the court for extension of time with a view to
enable the investigating agency to complete the investigation. He is not
merely a post office or a forwarding agency. A public prosecutor may or
may not agree with the reasons given by the investigating officer for seeking
extension of time and may find that the investigation had not progressed in
the proper manner or that there has been unnecessary, deliberate or
avoidable delay in completing the investigation. In that event, he may not
submit any report to the court under clause (bb) to seek extension of time.
Thus, for seeking extension of time under clause (bb), the public prosecutor
after an independent application of his mind to the request of the
investigating agency is required to make a report to the Designated Court
indicating therein the progress of the investigation and disclosing
justification for keeping the accused in further custody to enable the
investigating agency to complete the investigation. The public prosecutor
may attach the request of the investigating officer along with this request or
application and report, but his report, as envisaged under clause (bb), must
disclose on the face of it that he has applied his mind and was satisfied with
the progress of the investigation and considered grant of further time to
complete the investigation necessary. The use of the expression "on the
report of the public prosecutor indicating the progress of the investigation
and the specific reasons for the detention of the accused beyond the said
period" as occurring in clause (bb) in sub- section (2) of Section 167 as
amended by Section 20(4) are important and indicative of the legislative
intent not to keep an accused in custody unreasonably and to grant
extension only on the report of the public prosecutor. The report of the
public prosecutor, therefore, is not merely a formality but a very vital report,
because the consequence of its acceptance affects the liberty of an accused
and it must, therefore, strictly comply with the requirements as contained in
clause (bb). The request of an investigating officer for extension of time is
no substitute for the report of the public prosecutor.”
6.Even if the application is routed through the Public Prosecutor that
will not be sufficient, he is expected to apply his mind independently, while
seeking extension of time by the investigating agency.               The said fact was
followed by number of Judgments by the various High Courts, such as Punjab
and Haryana High Court, Orissa High Court and Bombay High Court, which
need not be reproduced herein extensively, since the disputed point is very
limited one.
7.Per contra, on the side of the respondent, it is stated that to the
request of the investigating agency, extension application was routed through
the Public Prosecutor, after his independent application of mind. The same was
heard by the concerned Special Court. This is sufficient enough for finding that
there was an independent application of mind by the Special Public Prosecutor.
8.The records with reference to above said petition has been called
for, wherein, it came to light that the Crl.MP.No.1158 of 2022 was presented on
04.07.2022, before the Special Court and notice was ordered to the revision
petitioner and his counsel on record. The learned counsel also appeared before
the Court and sought time to file his objection. Thereafter only, both the
petitions were taken up together for common disposal on 13.07.2022. At that
time, it was submitted by the prosecution that the accused was arrested on
09.01.2022 and the petition seeking for extension of time was filed on
04.07.2022. According to the trial Court, the above said application was filed
before the expiry of 180 days, provided under the NDPS Act. The statutory bail
application under Section 167(2) Cr.P.C was filed by the revision petitioner on
9.The trial Court, being satisfied with the grounds mentioned in the
petitions, granted extension of time to the prosecution and rejected the claim of
statutory bail to the petitioner.
10.By way of filing an amendment petition, the learned counsel
appearing for the petitioner, challenged the order of statutory bail in Crl.MP.No.
1189 of 2022, which was dismissed by the trial Court.
11.In view of the above said discussion, it is found that the
extension of time limit granted by the trial Court is not legally sustainable and it
is liable to be set aside. Consequently, the petition seeking for statutory bail,
moved the revision petitioner is liable to be allowed.
12.In the result, this Criminal Revision Case is allowed and the
orders passed by the trial Court in Crl.MP.Nos.1158 and 1189 of 2022, dated
13.07.2022 are set aside. Accordingly, the revision petitioner is ordered to be
released on statutory bail, on executing a personal bond for a sum of Rs.
10,000/- (Rupees Ten Thousand only) with two sureties each for a like sum to
the satisfaction of the Judicial Magistrate, Thiruvaiyaru,           and on further
condition that the petitioner shall report before the respondent daily at 10.30
a.m. until further orders.
Principal Special Court for EC and NDPS Act Cases,