1.     The petitioner holds Indian passport bearing No.K0166531 issued
by respondent No.2, which is valid w.e.f. 20 th November, 2012 to 19th
November, 2022. The petitioner filed an application on 20th December,
2021 for renewal/re-issue of the passport in his favour, which was going to
expire on 19th November, 2022.
2.     The grievance of the petitioner is that even after the lapse of
substantial time, there was no intimation from respondent No.2 in respect
of status of his request for renewal/re-issue of the passport. The petitioner
was, however, informed that his police verification was awaited. With a
view to know the reasons for delay in issuance of renewal/re-issue of the
passport, the petitioner moved an application under Right to Information
Act for seeking information in respect of the latest status of his passport
file submitted on 20th December, 2021. In response to the Right to
Information application filed by the petitioner, the respondents intimated
to the petitioner that the delay was due to non-receipt of police verification
report. It was, however, on 13.04.2022, the petitioner received a message
from the passport office that the police had submitted an adverse report
against him. The adverse police report was, however, not shared with the
petitioner. The petitioner filed another application under Right to
Information Act on 18th April, 2022, which was replied by the Public
Information Officer of the respondents on 13th May, 2022 by serving a
copy of the communicated dated 21.04.2022 intimating to the petitioner
that the passport office had received a report from the police, which
indicates that FIR No.3/2019 is registered against him, as such, the
petitioner is required to furnish No Objection Certificate from the Hon‟ble
Court. The petitioner submits that since there was no criminal proceeding
pending in any Court, therefore, he could not submit No Objection
Certificate from the Court. This made the respondent to close the case of
the petitioner for renewal/re-issue of the passport, which fact was
intimated to the petitioner by the Passport office through a text message
3.     Feeling aggrieved by the communication of the respondents dated
21.04.2022 and the closure of request of the petitioner for re-issue of the
passport, the petitioner has filed the instant petition seeking, inter alia, a
direction to the respondents to renew/re-issue the passport in favour of the
petitioner before the earlier passport issued in favour of the petitioner
expires. The petitioner also prays for a writ of certiorari to quash the
impugned notice dated 21.04.2022, whereby the petitioner has been
intimated that an FIR is registered against him and that he is required to
furnish No Objection Certificate from the Court.
4.     The impugned notice is assailed and the writ of mandamus prayed
for in the petition is claimed primarily on the ground that under the
Passport Act, 1967 [“ the Passport Act”] and the Rules framed thereunder,
there is no provision for asking the applicant for passport to submit „No
Objection Certificate‟ from the Court when there are no criminal
proceedings pending against him in any competent Court of law. It is
submitted that mere registration of FIR and initiation of investigation by
the police authorities is no ground to reject the request for grant or renewal
of the passport. Reliance in this regard is placed by the petitioner on
Section 6 of the Passport Act to argue that the passport authority can refuse
to issue passport or travel documents for visiting any foreign country only
on the grounds mentioned in Clause (a) to (i) of Sub Section 2 of Section 6
of the Passport Act. Clause (f) only provides for refusing the issue of
passport on the ground that proceedings in respect of an offence alleged to
have been committed by the applicant are pending before a criminal Court
5.     Mr. Pranav Kohli, learned Senior Counsel, appearing for the
petitioner argues that the proceedings in respect of an offence shall be
deemed to be pending before a criminal Court only when a final report is
presented to the Court by the police or cognizance of a criminal complaint
against the applicant is taken by the competent Criminal Court. He submits
that in the instant case, there is only an FIR registered and investigation
undertaken by the police and, therefore, no criminal proceeding can be said
to be pending before any Criminal Court. He, therefore, submits that the
ground taken by respondent No.2 to close the case of the petitioner for re-
issue/renewal of the passport is untenable and is not traceable to any
provision of the Passport Act or the Rules framed thereunder.
6.     On being put on notice, the respondents have filed their objections
through Mr. Vishal Sharma, learned Deputy Solicitor General of India. It
is admitted by the respondents that the petitioner has applied for passport
facility  in   re-issue    category   on    20.12.2021   vide      file     No.JM
1075937147421. It is submitted that in his application the petitioner has
declared under his signatures that he has not been charged with any
criminal proceedings nor is there any arrest warrant or summon pending
before any Court of law in India against him. It is submitted that on
12.04.2022, an adverse police report was received by the passport office
with the remarks that the applicant is involved in case FIR No.3/2019
under Section 5(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act. The petitioner
was asked to provide „No Objection Certificate‟ from the Court with
regard to the FIR mentioned in the police report but the petitioner failed to
submit requisite NOC and rather submitted a clarification, which was not
found satisfactory. It is submitted that in these circumstances, the passport
office was left with no option but to close the case and the same was,
accordingly, closed on 02.06.2022.
7.     Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
material on record, the only question that arises for determination in this
case is “whether mere registration of FIR and initiation of investigation by
the Investigating Agency is a ground good enough to deny the issue/re-
issue of the passport in favour of the applicant involved in such FIR?”
8.     Indisputably, the right to travel abroad is a facet of personal liberty
guaranteed to the citizens of this Country under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India. This is so authoritatively held in Satwant Singh
Sawhney v. D.Ramarathnam, AIR 1967 SC 1836 and Menaka Gandhi
v. Union of India and another AIR 1978 SC 597 and, therefore, this
right can only be curtailed by imposing restrictions as are authorized by
law. The Passport Act is an Act of Parliament that deals with the issue of
passports and travel documents to regulate the departure from India of
citizens of India and other persons and for the matters incidental or
ancillary thereto. Section 5 of the Passport Act deals with applications, to
be submitted for obtaining passports, travel documents and other orders
thereon. The refusal of the passport or travel documents is dealt with by
Section 6 of the Passport Act, which for facility of reference is reproduced
“6. Refusal of passports, travel documents. etc. (1) Subject to the other
provisions of this Act, the passport authority shall refuse to make an
endorsement for visiting any foreign country under clause (b) or clause (c) of
sub-section (2) of section 5 on any one or more of the following grounds, and
no other ground, namely: -
(a) that the applicant may, or is likely to, engage in such country in
activities prejudicial to the sovereignty and integrity of India:
(b) that the presence of the applicant in such country may, or is likely
to, be detrimental to the security of India;
(c) that the presence of the applicant in such country may, or is likely
to, prejudice the friendly relations of India with that or any other
(d) that in the opinion of the Central Government the presence of the
applicant in such country is not in the public interest.
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the passport authority shall
refuse to issue a passport or travel document for visiting any foreign country
under clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 5 on any one or more of the
following grounds, and on no other ground, namely: -
(a) that the applicant is not a citizen of India.,
(b) that the applicant may, or is likely to, engage outside India in
activities prejudicial to the sovereignty and integrity of India.,
(c) that the departure of the applicant from India may, or is likely to,
be detrimental to the security of India;
(d) that the presence of the applicant outside India may, or is likely to,
prejudice the friendly relations of India with any foreign country;
(e) that the applicant has, at any time during the period of five years
immediately preceding the date of his application, been convicted by a
court in India for any offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced
in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than two years;
(f) that proceedings in respect of an offence alleged to have been
committed by the applicant are pending before a criminal court in
(g) that a warrant or summons for the appearance, or a warrant for the
arrest, of the applicant has been issued by a court under any law for the
time being in force or that an order prohibiting the departure from
India of the applicant has been made by any such court;
(h) that the applicant has been repatriated and has not reimbursed the
expenditure incurred in connection with such repatriation;
(i) that in the opinion of the Central Government the issue of a
passport or travel document to the applicant will not be in the public
interest.”
9.     Sub Section (1) of Section 6 of the Passport Act clearly provides
that application for grant or renewal of passport shall be refused only on
the grounds mentioned in the Section and on no other ground. Apart from
other grounds, Clause (f) of Sub Section (2) of Section 6 provides that
request for grant or renewal of passport or travel documents can be
refused, if proceedings in respect of an offence alleged to have been
committed by the applicant are pending before a criminal Court in India.
10.    Mere registration of an FIR or pendency of investigation by the
Investigating Agency is no ground to refuse issue or renewal of passport
requested by the applicant. At this stage, when FIR alone is registered and
investigation is undertaken by the Investigating Agency, there are no
proceedings before a criminal Court. The criminal proceedings commence
before the competent Court of criminal jurisdiction only when a final
report is laid by the investigating agency before the Court or in case of a
private complaint, when the criminal Court of competent jurisdiction takes
cognizance and proceeds in the manner provided under the Code of
Criminal Procedure. Till such eventuality happens, we cannot say that
there are criminal proceedings pending in the Court. If that be the clear and
unequivocal position emerging from the scheme of Code of Criminal
Procedure, there is not even an iota of doubt that registration of FIR and
the investigation taken thereupon by the investigating agency cannot be
said to be the proceedings pending before a criminal Court in India to
attract disqualification laid down in Clause (f) of Sub Section (2) of
Section 6 of the Passport Act.
11.    To the similar effect are the provisions of Section 10 of the Passport
Act, which deal with variation, impounding and revocation of passports
and travel documents. Under Section 10 of the Passport Act, the passport
authority may impound or cause to be impounded or revoke a passport or
travel document, if apart from others, it is brought to its notice that the
proceedings in respect of an offence alleged to have been committed by
the holder of the passport or travel documents are pending before a
criminal Court in India. This is so provided in Clause (e) of Sub Section
(3) of Section 10. Clause (h) of Sub Section (3) of Section 10 further
provides that the passport already issued can be impounded or revoked by
the passport authority, if it is brought to its notice that a warrant or
summons for the appearance, or a warrant for the arrest of the holder of the
passport or travel document has been issued by a Court under any law for
the time being in force or if an order prohibiting the departure from India
of the holder of the passport or other travel document has been made by
any such Court.
12.    The issue as to when can the proceedings be said to be pending
before the Criminal Court was considered by the Madras High Court in
Venkatesh Kandasamy v. Government of India, Ministry of External
Affairs, AIR 2015 Mad 3 and it was held that no proceedings can be said
to have been initiated under Clause (a) of Section 190 of the Criminal
Procedure Code unless cognizance is taken by the Court for proceeding
further in the matter.
13.    In the aforesaid case, Madras High Court found that all criminal
complaints as against the applicant were only at the stage of investigation
and, therefore, it was not a case of the passport authorities that final reports
have been filed in the criminal Court in any of the criminal complaint so as
to make the case come within the four corners of Section 6(2)(f) of the
Passport Act. Similar order passed by the passport authorities was set aside
by the Madras High Court.
14.    Mr. Vishal Sharma, learned DSGI relies upon GSR 570 (E) dated
25th August, 1993 read with Office Memo dated 10th October, 2019 and
submits that in a case where FIR is registered against the applicant and
investigation is pending, it is incumbent upon the applicant to obtain No
Objection Certificate from the concerned Criminal Court. He, however,
could not elaborate as to which Court the applicant is supposed to
approach when there are no criminal proceedings pending in the Court and
FIR is only at the stage of investigation.
15.    Be that as it may, the circular instructions issued by the government
of India cannot override the statutory provision of Section 6(2)(f), which is
applicable to the instant case. The Section has already been interpreted
herein above the light of various decisions rendered by various High
Courts across the Country. Otherwise also, the circular and office memo
relied upon by the respondents also speak about proceedings in respect of
offence alleged to have been committed by the applicant which are
pending before a criminal Court in India and do not contemplate or
encompass cases where there is only FIR registered and the same is at the
stage of investigation.
16.    Viewed thus, I am of the considered view that the ground on which
the request of the petitioner for re-issue of the passport has been rejected is
totally untenable and unsustainable in law. The respondents cannot insist
upon the petitioner to produce NOC from the Court when there are no
criminal proceedings pending in any competent Court of criminal
jurisdiction. From the documents on record, it is abundantly clear that
there is only an FIR pending investigation against the petitioner and no
final report in the matter has so far been submitted to the Court.
17.    In view of the above, I find merit in this petition. The same is,
accordingly, allowed and a direction is issued to the respondent No.2 to
grant passport facility to the petitioner in the re-issue category without
insisting for production of NOC from the Court. However, before doing
so, the respondents may verify as to whether final report in FIR No.3/2019
registered against the petitioner has been submitted to the competent Court
of law or not.
Needless to say that in case final report in the FIR aforesaid
registered against the petitioner has been presented to the competent Court
of law, respondent No.2 shall pass appropriate orders after due application
of mind and if necessary may demand furnishing of NOC from the
concerned Court to be submitted by the petitioner. Let the matter be
considered and decision taken thereon within a period of four weeks from
the date a copy of this judgment is served upon the respondent(s).