This is an application for bail on behalf of the applicant,
Gulshan in connection with Case Crime No.454 of 2020,
under Sections 302, 307, 506 IPC, Police Station Kotwali
Mainpuri, District Mainpuri.
Heard Mr. Ansar Ahmad learned Counsel for the applicant
and Mr. S.S. Tiwari, learned A.G.A. appearing on behalf of
the State through video conferencing.
The submission of Mr. Ansar Ahmad learned Counsel for
the applicant is that the role assigned to the applicant is of
assaulting the injured witness Rohit Kumar and the role of
shooting is assigned to the other co-accused, but not the
applicant. He submits that once the injured witness has
testified to the fact that it was not the applicant Gulshan
who shot the deceased or injured Rohit Kumar, his case is
distinguishable from the other applicant and he is entitled
to bail.
Learned A.G.A. has opposed the prayer for bail. Mr.
Tiwari, submits that it is a case of honour killing,
inasmuch as Rahul and Jyoti had married contrary to the
wish of Jyoti's family. It is pointed out that Jyoti was from
a different caste than that of Rahul Kumar's and this had
much endangered her family. The assailants in this case
include Brijesh Mishra, Jyoti's father, whereas the other
co-accused Ashok Mishra is Jyoti's father's brother and co-
accused Raghvendra and Raghurai, are Ashok Mishra's
sons whereas the applicant Gulshan is Brijesh Mishra's
son, that is to say, Jyoti's brother. Mr. Tiwari submits that
the assault as a whole wherein the applicant has
participated is a brazen act of honour killing and a refusal
by family members of Jyoti to abide by the constitutional
values so dear to the law for ensuring personal liberty of
citizens. It is argued that Jyoti's family, going by the eye-
witness account have eliminated her to redeem their false
notions of family honour and shot her husband also to
punish him.
This Court has considered the the rival submissions
advanced on both sides. Prima facie, it is a brazen case of
honour killing where family members, including the
deceased Jyoti's father, uncle, cousin and her brother have
all participated to put an end to a young life on account of
a false sense of family pride, which they have prima facie
sought to redeem through this crime. The applicant is
certainly an active participant in the entire episode, though
he may not have wielded the gun or inflicted the fatal
In the opinion of this Court, prima facie if these
allegations were to be established at the trial, there is no
place for citizens in our society who act in derogation of
the much cherished constitutional values of individual
liberty, and, instead, repose faith in archaic social values of
family honour to an extent that they would go to eliminate
a family member choosing a life partner for herself.
No case for bail in the opinion of this Court is made out.
The bail application is hereby rejected.
