1.     By this petition, the petitioner seeks regular bail in case FIR No.
152/2021 under Section 188/269/270/153-A IPC, 3 Epidemics Disease Act
and 51(b) of Disaster Management Act registered at PS Connaught Place.
2.     Learned counsel for the petitioner contends that the petitioner is in
custody in the above-noted FIR since 10th August, 2021 and all offences
except Section 153-A IPC are bailable offences.         Further, even going
through the various video footages, the petitioner while giving his interview
to the Press or making any statement has not passed any offensive remarks
against any particular religion which could incite violence and hence has
committed no offence under Section 153-A IPC.          As per the footages
available the event took place from 10.00 AM to 11.45 AM when no offence
under Section 153-A IPC was committed and the petitioner had left the spot
at around 2.00 PM. Thus the slogan shouting which took place at 4.00 PM
and is the genesis of the FIR in question was not done by the petitioner and
the petitioner was not even present at the spot at that time and hence cannot
be prosecuted for the act of the people who indulged in slogan shouting at
4.00 PM. It is stated that even as per the statement made to the Press, the
petitioner’s demand was of a Hindu Rashtra which cannot be said to be an
offence under Section 153-A IPC. Reliance is placed on the decisions
reported as (1997) 7 SCC 431 Bilal Ahmed Kaloo Vs. State of A.P.; (1988) 1
Patricia Mukhim Vs. State of Meghalaya & Ors.; (2021) SCC Online
Bombay 1127 Sunaina Holey Vs. State of Maharashtra and (1994) SCC
Online Bombay 461 Joseph Bain D’Souza & Anr. Vs. State of Maharashtra
3.     Learned APP for the State opposing the bail application states that the
petitioner was a co-organizer of the event and is thus responsible for the
incitement which continued till the evening. Even in the interview given by
the petitioner along with the co-accused Pinki Chaudhary inciting words
against the other community have been stated. The decision of the Supreme
Court in Bilal Ahmed Kaloo (supra) is not applicable on the facts of the
case. Even the decision in Sunaina Holey relates to a facebook post and is
thus not applicable to the facts of the present case. It is stated that video
coverage of the incident clearly makes out the offence punishable under
Section 153-A IPC. Reliance is placed on the decision of the Supreme
Court reported as (2004) 4 SCC 684 State of Karnataka Vs. Praveen Bhai
4.      The above-noted FIR was registered on the complaint of a Head
Constable from PS Connaught Place who was on duty at Bank of Baroda,
Sansad Marg near Jantar Mantar. He stated that on 8th August, 2021 while
he was on duty along with the other staff, at 9.00 AM approximately many
protestors having flags and banners in their hands came for protest for an
unknown programme. They were made to understand that preparation for
15th August were going on, farmers were also on protest and guidelines
under the DDMA have also been issued. Imposition of Section 144 Cr.P.C.
in the area was also informed and that no one can protest at that place
without permission. However, they were very aggressive for their demands.
Out of those, few people were making objectionable remarks about a
particular religion. The people present there were also not following the
rules of social distancing and few people were without masks. Since the
protestors were protesting without permission and have violated the DDMA
guidelines, Section 144 Cr.P.C. order No. 1231-59/SO/ACP/Connaught
Place dated 21st June, 2021, legal action be taken against them.
5.      A status report has been filed in response to the present petition as per
which Ashwani Upadhyay, Convener, Unite India Movement sent an e-mail
on 4th August, 2021 to the DCP, New Delhi District and Preet Singh, the
petitioner herein, President, Save India Foundation, submitted an application
with the request to allocate them suitable place and provide appropriate
security on 8th August, 2021 from 10 AM to 5 PM. In the e-mail and the
letter it was stated that Quit India Movement was launched on 8th August,
1942 and they wanted to celebrate it. The two applications were considered
and rejected in view of the directions of the DDMA prohibiting all types of
social/political/sports/entertainment/cultural/academic/religious/festival and
other related gatherings and congregations, as also to prevent and control the
outbreak of the pandemic. The organizers also gave an undertaking that the
gathering would be restricted to 50 – 60 persons. However, the permission
was denied keeping in view the enforcement of DDMA guidelines, ongoing
Parliament session and imposition of Section 144 Cr.P.C. in New Delhi
6.     As per the status report, since it was learnt through social media that
the organizers were inviting people to gather at Jantar Mantar on 8th August,
2021 and there was possibility of a large gathering on the occasion, hence
adequate force including paramilitary forces were deployed at the spot. On
8th August, 2021 at around 9 AM, from various parts of Delhi and India and
from various Hindu organizations people started gathering in front of Park
Hotel near Jantar Mantar with the number of people increasing rapidly. The
organizers were asked repeatedly to stop and restrict the number of persons
as stated in the undertaking given to the Police. Large number of people
gathered around the place of function at around 10.30 AM. Since people
were not maintaining social distancing and most of them were not wearing
mask and maintaining social distancing, the organizers were told to reduce
the number of persons as per the undertaking and also disperse as early as
possible but they did not pay heed. Later it was informed by some people
that some of the participants were raising objectionable slogans against a
particular community in their interview to the various media groups even
when the programme was going on. However, they could not be identified
on the spot. Later on in the day some videos surfaced in social media
explaining how some people had made such objectionable slogans. Pursuant
thereto above-noted FIR was registered and investigation was carried out to
identify the said persons.      Initially Sections 188/269/270/153-A IPC, 3
Epidemic Disease Act and Section 51 Disaster Management Act was
invoked, however during the investigation Sections 120-B/34 IPC was also
7.     According to the status report petitioner was the co-organizer of the
event along with Ashwani Upadhyay and his mobile number was the pilot
number, he had reached Jantar Mantar along with the supporters of Save
India Foundation and started the programme without going into the depth of
the possibility of repercussions of joining the event. It is stated that as
planned by the petitioner and his co-accomplices, people gathered in huge
numbers and seeing this opportunity petitioner and his associates conspired
to use the platform to create communal disharmony and to give communal
colour to their plan. It is stated that on the one hand the petitioner gave an
undertaking for a gathering of 60 to 70 persons and on the other hand he
flashed his personal mobile number at all places requesting people to join
them at Jantar Mantar on 8th August, 2021 at 10.00 AM.             He erected
hoardings in this regard. It is further stated that from the CDR analysis of
the petitioner’s phone, presence of the petitioner from the night of 7 th
August, 2021 till 2.00 PM on 8th August, 2021 has been established and
when the programme was going on, the petitioner along with Bhupender
Tomar @ Pinki Chaudhary and Deepak Singh made hate speeches and used
hate words. Nine accused have already been arrested.
8.     State relies upon an interview of the petitioner and Pinki Chaudhary
simultaneously to the Press wherein main conversation is with Pink
Chaudhary and the petitioner has stated certain facts like:
“Hindu Rashtra to doo april ko hi ho ho-jayega”,
“yogi eek hai bhogi soo hai, soo yogi kee jarorat hai”,
“kuch loag es desh mein abhi gadhe baaki hai, unhe gadhe par
bithake unhe aagee sarka deenge. Shayar nahi hai ye kayar
hein, band kamre me toh kuch be kah deeve, yahan dahado naa,
yahan hum khade hain, aaoo aamna saamna kar-loo”
9.     Learned counsel for the petitioner and learned APP for the State have
addressed extensive arguments on the issue whether the words spoken by the
petitioner make out an offence under Section 153A IPC or not, however, at
this stage it would not be appropriate for this Court to express any opinion
on the said determination which is required to be gone into at the stage of
charge or during trial. However, the interview by the petitioner was not an
isolated interview and was part of simultaneous conversation with number
of speakers. Further large number of people gathered at the spot due to
petitioner co-organizing the protest and therefore the petitioner would be
liable for any offence committed in furtherance of the common object of the
assembly. However, as per the video footages and the call records of the
petitioner, the petitioner left the spot at around 2.00 PM whereafter the main
provocative words/ slogans were shouted by the co-accused at around 4.00
10.    The petitioner has been in custody since 9/10.08.2021.The petitioner
is no more required for custodial interrogation. It is, therefore, directed that
the petitioner be released on bail on his furnishing a personal bond in the
sum of ₹50,000/- with two surety bonds of the like amount subject to the
satisfaction of the learned Trial Court/ Duty Magistrate, further subject to
the condition that the petitioner shall not leave the country without the prior
permission of the Court concerned and in case of change of residential
address and/or mobile phone number, the same will be intimated to the
Court concerned by way of an affidavit.
11.    Petition is disposed of.
12.    Order be uploaded on the website of this Court.