for Alia Hasan (earlier wife of petitioner No.2)
for respondents No.5 to 9.
Prayer in this writ petition is for issuance of a direction to
the official respondents to protect the life and liberty of the petitioners
at the hands of respondents No.5 to 9.
Counsel for the petitioners has argued that the petitioners
have performed the marriage and are apprehending threat to their life
and liberty at the hands of respondents No.5 to 9. It is further submitted
that previously, the petitioner No.2 was married to one Alia Hasan and
the marriage was annulled by way of divorce documents dated
26.07.2018, 27.08.2018 and 27.09.2018 i.e. vide 03 divorce deeds
executed by petitioner No.2 – Aslam Khan himself.
A perusal of these 03 divorce deeds relied upon by the
petitioners reveals that these are one sided documents prepared by
petitioner No.2 and there are two common witnesses namely Shehnaz
Ali and Feroz Khan. There is no signature of the first wife of petitioner
No.2 namely Alia Hasan, giving her consent to such divorce. Even
otherwise, a perusal of these divorce deeds further reveal that the
For Subsequent orders see LPA-769-2021 Decided by HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AUGUSTINE GEORGE
marriage of petitioner No.2 was performed with Alia Hasan on
06.07.2013 and out of the said wedlock two daughters namely Sohalia
Aslam and Amima Aslam were born, who are alive and residing with
the first wife of petitioner No.2 i.e. Alia Hasan.
Counsel for the petitioners has further argued that after this
one sided customary divorce, the petitioner No.2 has now performed
marriage with petitioner No.1 on 20.08.2021. The Co-ordinate Bench
while taking up this petition has directed the petitioners to inform the
Court as to how much amount, the petitioner No.2 is ready to give to
his earlier wife to enable her to maintain herself.
Despite taking 02 dates, no such proposal has come.
This Court cannot ignore the fact that the Court being legal
guardian of the 02 minor girls, who are living at the mercy of their
mother – Alia Hasan, as the petitioner No.2 is not only claiming to have
divorced his first wife Alia Hasan but he has also refused to maintain
and take care of the upbringing of his 02 minor daughters aged 4½
years and 02 years.
On the face of it, the present petition is nothing but a ploy
to seek a seal of this Court regarding the lustful and adulterous life of
petitioner No.2 with petitioner No.1 and the Court cannot be a party to
the same. The arguments of petitioner No.2 that he has a right to
perform second marriage under Muslim Law is misconceived as this
Court instead of taking an academic view is more concerned about the
welfare of 02 minor girls as it is clear that petitioner No.2 has
intentionally failed to maintain his first wife and 02 minor daughters.
Accordingly, the present petition is dismissed with
Rs.1,00,000/- costs to be paid to Alia Hasan.
Whether speaking/reasoned:              Yes/No
For Subsequent orders see LPA-769-2021 Decided by HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AUGUSTINE GEORGE
for appellant No.1.
for appellant No.2.
for the private respondents.
The present appeal has been preferred against the order dated
01.09.2021 passed by the learned Single Judge in Criminal Writ Petition
No.7903 of 2021, titled as 'Ishrat Bano & another Vs. State of Punjab &
others', which was preferred by the appellants seeking protection to their life
and liberty, which they said was threatened at the hands of respondents No.5
to 9. Highlighting this aspect, appellants had submitted a representation to
the Senior Superintendent of Police, Maler Kotla, dated 17.08.2021
(AnnexureP-5) with copies thereof to the Station House Officer, Police
Station City-1, Maler Kotla and Station House Officer, Police Station
Amargarh, Maler Kotla, respondents No.2 to 4. Counsel for the appellants
states that the only prayer of the appellants before this Court is that their life
and liberty may be protected and they have nothing to say with regard to the
aspect of criminal case(s) registered against them, for which the law will
take its own course and the appellants would avail of the remedy
accordingly.     He, therefore, asserts that the appeal may be allowed to the
limited extent, as prayed for.
On the other hand, learned counsel for private respondents No.5
to 9, Mr. Sunny Singla, Advocate, has tried to project and argue with regard
to the legality of the divorce as well as the subsequent marriage but keeping
in view the fact that the said aspect has not been considered by the learned
Single Judge nor are we inclined to look on this aspect and are limiting it to
the prayer which has been made by the counsel for the appellants by leaving
it open to the parties to agitate the said aspect in the proper forum. It is
made clear that we have not opined about the validity or otherwise either on
the alleged divorce given by appellant No.2 to one Alia Hasan or the alleged
marriage between the appellants.
The aspect which we are considering and dealing with is with
regard to the threat to the life and liberty to the appellants as has been
asserted by them. No doubt, in case a criminal case is registered against any
of the parties, the law should take its own course, however, the life and
liberty of any person who has approached the Court with such a grievance
need to be taken care of and the protection be provided as permissible in
law. No person can be permitted or allowed to take law in his hands and
therefore, keeping in view the said aspect, we dispose of the present appeal
by observing that the Senior Superintendent of Police, Maler Kotla, shall
take into consideration the representation dated 17.08.2021 (Annexure P-5)
submitted by the appellants and if some substance is found therein, take
appropriate steps in accordance with law to ensure that the life and liberty is
not jeopardized of the appellants at the hands of the private respondents.
This direction shall not be construed in any manner to restrain the official
respondents to proceed against the appellants in case there is some criminal
case registered against them. The law shall take its own course and it shall
be open to the authorities/investigating agency to proceed against the
appellants, if required in law and in accordance thereto.
Whether speaking/reasoned:                         Yes/No