1.           The petitioner joined the CRPF service in April 1990. While the
petitioner was posted in 31Bn, then deployed at Jammu, an FIR bearing No.
66/1996 for commission of offence under Section 302 RPC came to be
registered against him in Police Station, Bari Brahamana on the allegation that
he had committed the murder of Inspector M.C.R.C.Reddy. While the trial
against the petitioner was pending adjudication in the competent Court of
criminal jurisdiction, the respondents simultaneously embarked upon a
Departmental Enquiry and dismissed the petitioner from the service vide order
dated 11.03.2000. The trial of the petitioner, however, ended in acquittal vide
judgment dated 16.10.2002 passed by the Principal Sessions Judge, Jammu.
2.     The petitioner called in question order of his dismissal dated 11.03.2000
in SWP No. 1019/2000. The said writ petition was allowed by a Bench of this
Court vide judgment dated 03.11.2004 and the order of dismissal of the
petitioner from service was set aside. The petitioner was ordered to be
reinstated in service with all consequential benefits, however, reserving
libertyto the respondents to hold an enquiry against the petitioner in accordance
with CRPF Act and the rules framed thereunder.
3.            In compliance with the judgment of this Court, respondent No.2
revoked the order of dismissal of the petitioner and reinstated him into service
with all consequential benefits. However, simultaneously, with a view to
holding fresh enquiry, the petitioner was again placed under suspension
retrospectively w.e.f 11.03.2000 till the finalization of the departmental
enquiry. This was done by respondent No.2 vide his order dated
26.07.2005.The petitioner was once again served with memorandum and
Article of Charges on 01.10.2005. The petitioner pleaded not guilty to the
charges framed against him and submitted his detailed reply on 14.10.2005. It
is alleged by the petitioner that a number of enquiry officers were appointed to
enquire into the charges from time to time, but, during the departmental
enquiry, none of the witnesses examined by the respondents could substantiate
the charges. The Enquiry Officer i.e. respondent No.3 concluded the enquiry
and submittedhis report vide Letter No.G.II-1/06-07-AKS dated 28.02.2007 to
the Disciplinary Authority. As per the Enquiry Officer, the charges framed
against the petitioner were not proved. However, the respondent No.4 vide his
letter dated 09.03.2007 communicated to respondent No.3, the Enquiry Officer,
that there were some shortcomings in the enquiry report. Responding to the
letter of respondent No.4, respondent No.3 amended his report and changed his
initialenquiry report with his observation that the charges framed against
thepetitioner were partially proved.The subsequent enquiry report dated
28.02.2007, was, accordingly, submitted by respondent No.3 to respondent
No.4. The petitioner was given a copy of the enquiry report and was asked to
file reply.Once again, the petitioner submitted a detailed replydenying
unequivocally the charges framed against him and submitted that none of the
witnesses examined during the enquiry had supported the charges.
4.          Be that as it may, respondent No.2, who was the Disciplinary
Authority qua the petitioner vide his order dated 09.06.2007 after considering
the reply filed by the petitioner, concluded that the charges against the
petitioner were partially proved. The petitioner was inflicted the penalty of
‘stoppage ofannualincrement for a period of five years with cumulative effect’.
The petitioner was reinstated into service and was treated to be under
suspension w.e.f 12.06.1996 till the passing of order dated 09.06.2007.
5.          The petitioner is aggrieved by the enquiry report dated 28.02.2007
submitted by respondent No.3 and the consequential order of penalty passed by
respondent No.2 on 09.06.2007 and has challenged the same, inter alia, on
(i). That,in terms of Rule 27 (ccc) of CRPF Rules, the petitioner
could not have been punished without seeking prior sanction of
the Inspector General, therefore, the order impugned is required
to be set aside.
(ii). That as per the order impugned, the Articles of Charges
were not the same on which the petitioner has been held guilty.
(iii) That the Enquiry Officer has not applied his mind as he did
not state in the enquiry report as to how the charges were
partially proved against the petitioner.
(iv) That the order impugned is contrary to the judgment passed
by this Court in SWP No. 1019/2000 in which, the respondents
were directed to reinstate the petitioner in service with all
consequential benefits, as such respondent No.2 could not have
passed the order impugned.
(v) That respondent No.2 was not competent to pass the order
impugned and therefore the same deserves to be set aside being
bad in law.
6.            On being put on notice, the respondents have filed the reply. It is
submitted by the respondents that the enquiry has been conducted against the
petitioner in accordance with the provisions of CRPF Act and the Rules framed
theruender. It is further submitted that the disciplinary authority has passed the
order on the basis of enquiry report submitted by the enquiry officer and that
in terms of the judgment passed by this Court in a writ petition No. 1019/2000,
the petitioner was reinstated in service and departmental enquiry was initiated
against the petitioner pursuant to the directions of this Court whereby
opportunity was grantedto them to hold an inquiry against the petitioner in
accordance with the rules. With regard to          competence of the competent
authority to dismiss the petitioner from service, it is submitted that the
Commandant is the appointing authority of thepetitioner in terms of Rule 7(b)
of CRPF Rules and, therefore, is fully competent to dismiss/remove/suspend a
person who has committed an offence.
7.            Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on
8.            Learned counsel for the petitioner while arguing the matter
restricted his argument to the following two points:
(i)    That, although the Enquiry Officer had found the charges
framed against the petitioner not proved in the enquiry, yet, the
Disciplinary Authority held the petitioner partially guilty of the
charges framed and imposed a penalty of ‘stoppage of increment
of the petitioner for a period of five years with cumulative effect’
and period of suspension from 12.06.1996 till the passing of the
impugned order has been treated as ‘period of suspension’. This
was done by the Disciplinary Authority without even providing
any opportunity of being heard to the petitioner; and,
(ii). That, this Court, vide judgment dated 03.11.2004 passed in
SWP No. 1019/2000 while quashing the order of dismissal of the
petitioner from service, also directed         reinstatement of the
petitioner in service with all consequential benefits. It is in
compliance      with  the    aforesaid   judgment,    the    petitioner
wasreinstated into service on 26.07.2005, but was again placed
under suspension till the finalization of fresh enquiry initiated. It is
submitted that the Disciplinary Authority has even treated the
period of suspension of the petitioner as it is w.e.f 12.06.1996 and
therefore, the order impugned is in violation of the judgment dated
03.11.2004 passed by this Court.
9.     I have given my thoughtful consideration to the contentions aforesaid
raised by the petitioner. I am in agreement with the learned counsel for the
petitioner that both the charges framed against the petitioner have been held not
proved by the Enquiry Officer. For facility of reference, the Article of Charges
i.e Article I and Article II are reproduced hereunder:
That the said No. 9011707587 CT/GD Laxman Dass of E/31 Bn
CRPF, while functioning as Coy Writer during his posting with the
said Coy during the year 1996 has committed an act of misconduct
and remissness in his capacity as a member of the Force u/s 11(i)
CRPF Act 1949 in that he allegedly made a false transaction in
the OR’s Mess Cash Book and also misappropriate mess money
worth Rs.1000/-(One thousand rupees) only during May 96 while
performing the duties of Coy writer for late Inspector. MCRC
Reddy, the then OC E/31 Bn CRPF. As a result No. 9011707587
CT/GD Laxman Dass misbehaved and manhandled his OC in the
F.N. Later on, in the evening while late Inspector M.C.R.C.Reddy
was sleeping in his tent No. 9011707587 CT/GD Laxman Dass
shot dead late Inspector M.C.R.C.Reddy with his service rifle for
which he has been tried by the Civil Court Jammu under IPC
That the said No. 9011707587 CT/GD Laxman Dass of E/31 Bn
CRPF while functioning as Coy Writer during his posting with the
said Coy during the year 1996 has committed an act of misconduct
and misbehavior in his capacity as a member of the Force u/s
11(i) CRPF Act 1949, wherein his Coy Commander late Inspector.
M.C.R.C.Reddy, when enquired about the false transaction of
Rs.1000(one thousand only) allegedly made in the Mess Cash
Book during May/June 96, the said constable got infuriated and
misbehaved with his Coy Commander and also assaulted his OC.
Later on in the evening No. 90117075787 CT/GD Laxman Dass
shot dead late Inspector M.C.R.C.Reddy on 12.06.96 by firing 18
rounds from personal weapon SLR bearing No. 447 Body No.
15428678 for which he has been tried separately by the Civil
Court Jammu under IPC 302, by putting him into judicial custody
at civil jail Jammu and placing him under suspension w.e.f
10.           From a reading of Article of chargesaforesaid, it is abundantly
clear that there is no charge with respect to any misconduct or remissness on
the part of the petitioner in respect of handling of his service rifle as has been
held to be proved by the Enquiry Officer. The allegation against the petitioner,
as is apparent from a reading of Article I and Article II of the charges, is that he
had committed an act of misconduct and remissness in his capacity as member
of the Force, in that, he allegedly made false transaction in the OR’s Mess Cash
Book and also misappropriated mess money worth Rs.1000. It is this allegation
which the petitioner was asked to meet and enquiry was also conducted into
that allegation. It was, thus, not open to the Enquiry Officer to return a finding
that the petitioner had committed an act of misconduct and remissness in his
capacity as a member of the Force by not keeping his official rifle in the safe
custody. It is on the basis of this partial proof of the charge, the petitioner has
been visited with penalty imposed vide order impugned.
11.          I am also at a loss to understand as to how the Disciplinary
Authority could treat the period of suspension of the petitioner as it is, w.e.f
12.06.1996 when this Court while allowing SWP No. 1019/2000 vide
judgment dated 03.11.2004 has quashed the order of dismissal of the petitioner
and ordered his reinstatement with all consequential benefits.
12.           It is true that, while allowing the writ petition of the petitioner
and setting aside the order dated 11.03.2000 dismissing the petitioner from
service, the Writ Courtgave liberty to the respondents to hold an enquiry
against the petitioner in accordance with the CRPF Act and the rules framed
thereunder. Pursuant to the directions passed by this Court on03.11.2004, the
petitioner was reinstated into service with all consequential benefits, but was
again put under suspension for the purposes of holding the fresh enquiry. This
was done by respondent No.2 vide his order dated 26.07.2005. That being the
position, the suspension of the petitioner, the enquiry held against him and
ultimately the order of dismissal passed by the Disciplinary Authority, came to
be effaced with the passing of judgment dated 03.11.2004 in SWP
No.1019/2000. The petitioner was, thus, placed under suspension afresh only
on 26.07.2005. The maximum that could have been done by the Disciplinary
Authority was to treat the period of suspension of the portioner w.e.f
26.07.2005 till the passing of the impugned order as it is and nothing beyond.
13.However, having regard to the fact that the allegation, which is said to have
been proved against the petitioner in the enquiry was not part of the charges
framed against him, the entire impugned order is vitiated in law. The Enquiry
Officer could not have returned a finding on the allegation which was not part
of the charge-sheet framed against the petitioner, nor the Disciplinary
Authority could have imposed any punishment on the basis of suchfinding of
fact returned by the Enquiry Officer which was totally foreign to and unrelated
with the charges framed against the petitioner. The mandate of enquiry officer
holding disciplinary enquiry is to conduct enquiry into the charges framed
against the delinquent and restrict his finding to the charges framed. He cannot
return his findings beyond the terms of his reference i.e., beyond the charges to
be investigated or enquired into. Any such findings, if returned, would be in
violation of principles of natural justice (Audi Alteram Partem). It is trite that
nobody can be condemned unheard. Delinquent must know the charges he is
going to meet in the disciplinary enquiry and may, accordingly, put up his
defense. Finding of fact which are foreign to the charge and even if deducible
from evidence recorded during enquiry, cannot be used against the delinquent.
Indisputably, there was no charge against the petitioner that he was negligent in
keeping his service rifle in safe custody or that, by his negligence and
remissness, the petitioner allowed his gunto be used by someone for killing
Inspector M.C.R.C.Reddy. Needless to point out that the criminal trial which
the petitioner faced for committing the murder of M.C.R.C.Reddy ultimately
ended in acquittal of the petitioner. This is evident from the judgment of
acquittal recorded by the Principal Sessions Judge, Jammu on16.10.2002.
14.           From a reading of judgment of acquittal aforesaid, itclearly
transpires that the petitioner was acquitted for want of adequate evidence to
connect him with the commission of crime.
15.           Be that as it may, since the allegation taken to have been proved
by the Enquiry Officer and made the basis for disciplinary action by the
Disciplinary Authority was not part of the charge sheet, as such, the action
impugned taken by the Disciplinary Authority is in its entirety vitiated and,
thus, cannot sustain in law.
16.          For the foregoing reasons, this petition is allowed. Order
impugned is set aside. Petitioner shall be deemed to be in the service of the
respondents with all consequential benefits as if he was never suspended or
punished for misconduct in terms of the impugned order. This, however, does
not mean the respondents cannot frame fresh charge and hold a fresh inquiry if
permissible in law.