1)    The petitioner has sought bail in FIR No.118/2010 for offences
under Section 302, 380 and 457 RPC registered with Police Station,
2)    As per the case of the prosecution, deceased Rukhsana Jabeen
was married to the petitioner in the year 2006. The deceased was
working as a Nurse in the Health Department of the J&K Government
whereas the petitioner was working as Constable in the Police
Department. After the marriage, the petitioner is alleged to have
harassed his wife and taken away her gold ornaments. On 25.08.2010
when the deceased was proceeding to her duty during night in an
ambulance, the petitioner boarded the said ambulance and forcibly
tried to deboard the deceased from the said ambulance. The petitioner
is stated to have beaten up his wife besides extending threats to her.
On 29.09.2010, the deceased was found dead in her room. The police
was, accordingly, informed and after lodging of the FIR, investigation
was set into motion. During the investigation of the case, it was found
that, the deceased, had been done to death by the petitioner. The
challan against the petitioner was filed and he is facing trial for
offences under Section 302, 380 and 457 RPC.
3)     The petitioner has sought bail only on the ground of his long
incarceration and on account of violation of his right to speedy trial.
According to the petitioner, he is in custody for the last more than 12
years but the trial against him has not concluded as yet. It has been
contended that there is no likelihood of completion of trial in near
future, as such, the petitioner deserves to be enlarged on bail.
4)     I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
record of the case including the trial court record.
5)     Learned counsel for the petitioner has reiterated during his
arguments that the speedy trial is a fundamental right of an accused
and once this right is violated, the accused is entitled to be enlarged on
bail. In this regard, learned counsel has relied upon the judgments of
the Supreme Court in the cases of Indrani Pratim Mukerjea vs. Central
Bureau of Investigation and anr. (Petition for Special Leave to Appeal
(Crl.) No.1627/2022 decided on 18.05.2022) and Saudan Singh vs.
State of Uttar Pradesh (Criminal Appeal No.308/2022 decided on 25th
6)     Per contra, Mr. Sajjad Ashraf, learned Government Advocate,
has submitted that the petitioner has committed a heinous offence by
murdering his wife and there is enough evidence on record to prima
facie show his involvement in the alleged crime, as such, rigour of
Proviso (1) to Section 437 of the Criminal Procedure Code is attracted
to the instant case having regard to the fact that the offences
committed by the petitioner carry maximum punishment of deaths
sentence. It is also averred that on an earlier occasion when the
petitioner was granted temporary bail in the year 2014, he had
threatened the prosecution witnesses.
7)     A perusal of the record shows that the petitioner has been
arrested in the instant case on 15.12.2010 and the challan against him
was laid before the trial court on 12.01.2011. The record further
shows that 44 witness have been cited in the challan and till date
evidence of the prosecution has not been completed.
8)     In the light of aforesaid facts, the question arises as to whether a
person who has been accused of having committed a heinous offence
like murder, is entitled to be enlarged on bail on the ground of his
long incarceration of more than 12 years. This question has been a
matter of discussion before the Supreme Court in a number of cases. It
would be apt to refer to some of the judgments of the Supreme Court
on this issue.
9)     One of the earliest judgments on the concept of speedy trial was
delivered by the Supreme Court in the case of Hussainara Khatoon vs.
Home Secretary, State of Bihar, (1980) 1 SCC 81. In the said case, the
Supreme Court deprecated the delay in commencement of trials,
which would apply equally to long pendency of trials. The Court
observed that un-necessarily prolonged detention in prison of
undertrials before being brought to the trial, is an affront to all
civilized norms of human liberty. The Court observed as under:
“There is also one other infirmity of the legal and
judicial system which is responsible for this gross
denial of justice to the undertrial prisoners and that is
the notorious delay in disposal of cases. It is a bad
reflection on the legal and judicial system that the trial
of an accused should not even commence for a long
number of years. Even a delay of one year in the
commencement of the trial is bad enough; how much
worse could it be when the delay is as long as 3 or 5 or
7 or even 10 years. Speedy trial is of the essence of
criminal justice and there can be no doubt that delay
in trial by itself constitutes denial of justice. It is
interesting to note that in the United States, speedy
trial is one of the constitutionally guaranteed rights.
The Sixth Amendment to the Constitution provides
"In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy
the right to a speedy and public trial."
So also Article 3 of the European Convention on
Human Rights provides that:
"every one arrested or detained…..shall be entitled to
trial within a reasonable time or to release pending
trial."
We think that even under our Constitution, though
speedy trial is not specifically enumerated as a
fundamental right, it is implicit in the broad sweep
and content of Article 21 as interpreted by this Court
in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India. We have held in
that case that Article 21 confers a fundamental right
on every person not to be deprived of his life or liberty
except in accordance with the procedure prescribed by
law and it is not enough to constitute compliance with
the requirement of that Article that some semblance
of a procedure should be prescribed by law, but that
the procedure should be "reasonable, fair and just". If
a person is deprived of his liberty under a procedure
which is not "reasonable, fair or just", such deprivation
would be violative of his fundamental right
under Article 21 and he would be entitled to enforce
such fundamental right and secure his release. Now
obviously procedure prescribed by law for depriving a
person of his liberty cannot be 'reasonable, fair or just'
unless that procedure ensures a speedy trial for
determination of the guilt of such person. No
procedure which does not ensure a reasonable quick
trial can be regarded as 'reasonable, fair or just' and it
would fall foul of Article 21. There can, therefore, be
no doubt that speedy trial and by speedy trial we
mean reasonably expeditious trial, is an integral and
essential part of the fundamental right to life and
liberty enshrined in Article 21.
The question which would, however, arise is as to
what would be the consequence if a person accused of
an offence is denied speedy trial and is sought to be
deprived of his liberty by imprisonment as a result of a
long delayed trial in violation of his fundamental right
under Article 21. Would he be entitled to be released
unconditionally freed from the charge levelled against
him on the ground that trying him after an unduly
long period of time and convicting him after such trial
would constitute violation of his fundamental right
under Article 21 ? That is a question we shall have to
consider when we hear the writ petition on merits on
the adjourned date….”
10)     In Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee vs. Union of India,
(1994) SCC 731, the Supreme Court dealt with the issue of delay in
trial in the following manner:
“……..In substance the petitioner now prays that all
under-trials who are in jail for the commission of any
offence or offences under the Act for a period
exceeding two years on account of the delay in the
disposal of cases lodged against them should be
forthwith released from jail declaring their further
detention to be illegal and void and pending decision
of this Court on the said larger issue, they should in
any case be released on bail. It is indeed true and that
is obvious from the plain language of Section 36(1) of
the Act, that the legislature contemplated the creation
of Special Courts to speed up the trial of those
prosecuted for the commission of any offence under
the Act. It is equally true that similar is the objective of
6 19 NE 2d 902: 60 Ohio App 119 * Words and
Phrases, Permanent Edn., Vol. 10, p. 380 Section
309 of the Code. It is also true that this Court has
emphasised in a series of decisions that Articles 14, 19
and 21 sustain and nourish each other and any law
depriving a person of "personal liberty" must prescribe
a procedure which is just, fair and reasonable, i.e., a
procedure which promotes speedy trial….
Now to refuse bail on the one hand and to delay trial
of cases on the other is clearly unfair and
unreasonable and contrary to the spirit of Section
36(1) of the Act, Section 309 of the Code and Articles
14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution. We are conscious of
the statutory provision finding place in Section 37 of
the Act prescribing the conditions which have to be
satisfied before a person accused of an offence under
the Act can be released. Indeed we have adverted to
this section in the earlier part of the judgment. We
have also kept in mind the interpretation placed on a
similar provision in Section 20 of the TADA Act by the
Constitution Bench in Kartar Singh v. State of
Punjab10. Despite this provision, we have directed as
above mainly at the call of Article 21 as the right to
speedy trial may even require in some cases quashing
of a criminal proceeding altogether, as held by a
Constitution Bench of this Court in A.R. Antulay v. R. S.
Nayak11, release on bail, which can be taken to be
embedded in the right of speedy trial, may, in some
cases be the demand of Article 21 As we have not felt
inclined to accept the extreme submission of quashing
(1992) 1 SCC 225 :1992 SCC (Cri) 93 the proceedings
and setting free the accused whose trials have been
delayed beyond reasonable time for reasons already
alluded to, we have felt that deprivation of the
personal liberty without ensuring speedy trial would
also not be in consonance with the right guaranteed
by Article 21. Of course, some amount of deprivation
of personal liberty cannot be avoided in such cases;
but if the period of deprivation pending trial becomes
unduly long, the fairness assured by Article 21 would
receive a jolt. It is because of this that we have felt
that after the accused persons have suffered
imprisonment which is half of the maximum
punishment provided for the offence, any further
deprivation of personal liberty would be violative of
the fundamental right visualised by Article 21, which
has to be telescoped with the right guaranteed
by Article 14 which also promises justness, fairness
and reasonableness in procedural matters. What then
is the remedy? The offences under the Act are grave
and, therefore, we are not inclined to agree with the
submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner
that we should quash the prosecutions and set free
the accused persons whose trials are delayed beyond
reasonable time. Alternatively he contended that such
accused persons whose trials have been delayed
beyond reasonable time and are likely to be further
delayed should be released on bail on such terms as
this Court considers appropriate to impose. This
suggestion commends to us….”
11)    Again, Umarmia vs. State of Gujarat, (2017) 2 SCC 731, the
Supreme Court, while granting bail to an undertrial who had been in
custody for about 12 years, observed as under
“…..This appeal is filed against the judgment dated
16-6-2010 in Criminal Misc. Sr. No. 44 of 2010 by
which the Court of Designated Judge (TADA) at
Porbandar (hereinafter referred to as “the Designated
Court”) rejected the bail application filed by the
appellant under Section 439 CrPC and Section 20(8) of
the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act,
1987 (hereinafter referred to as “the Act”). Crime No.
I-43 of 1994 was registered under Section 154 CrPC for
the offences committed under Sections 121, 121-A,
122, 123, 124-B read with Section 34 of the Penal
Code, 1860, Sections 25(1-A), (1-B) and 25(1-AA) of
the Arms Act, Section 9-B of the Explosives Act,
Sections 3, 4, 5 and 6 of the Explosive Substances Act
and Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the Act.
2. The statement of one Suresh recorded under Section
108 of the Customs Act revealed that explosive
substances, powder RDX boxes, bags containing
firearms, 45 bags of weapons, 15 boxes of RDX and
225 pieces of silver ingots were smuggled into the
country and taken to Zaroli and Dhanoli Villages of
Valsad District. The first charge-sheet was filed on 12-
1-1995 in which the name of the appellant is found at
Serial No. 1 in Column 2 which refers to persons who
were absconding. The 11th supplementary charge-
sheet was filed on 6-6-2005 wherein it was mentioned
that the appellant was arrested at 1700 hrs on 10-12-
10. After considering the submissions of both sides, we
are of the opinion that the appellant is entitled to be
released on bail for the following reasons:
A.      The prior approval required under Section 20-
A(1) of the TADA Act was not taken from the
District Superintendent of Police before the FIR
was recorded.
B.      Admittedly, the appellant had been suffering
incarceration for more than 12 years.
D.      There is no likelihood of the completion of trial
in the near future.
E.      Though there is a confessional statement of the
appellant recorded under Section 15 of the
TADA, the same cannot be looked into by us in
view of the violation of Section 20-A(1) of the
11. This Court has consistently recognised the right of the
accused for a speedy trial. Delay in criminal trial has been
held to be in violation of the right guaranteed to an
accused under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
(See Supreme Court Legal Aid Committee v. Union of
Undertrial Prisoners) v. Union of India, (1994) 6 SCC 731:
1995 SCC (Cri) 39] and Shaheen Welfare Assn. v. Union of
India [Shaheen Welfare Assn. v. Union of India, (1996) 2
SCC 616 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 366] .) The accused, even in cases
under TADA, have been released on bail on the ground
that they have been in jail for a long period of time and
there was no likelihood of the completion of the trial at
the earliest. [See Paramjit Singh v. State (NCT of
Delhi) [Paramjit Singh v. State (NCT of Delhi), (1999) 9 SCC
252 : 1999 SCC (Cri) 1156] and Babba v. State of
Maharashtra [Babba v. State of Maharashtra, (2005) 11
12. Though the appellant is involved in serious offences
and has absconded for a period of 10 years before he was
arrested in 2004, we see no reason to confine him to jail
as he has already suffered more than 12 years in custody
and the trial may not be completed in the near future.
Taking note of the above, we grant relief of bail to the
appellant subject to the following conditions…….”
12)    Recently, in the case of Union of India vs. K. A. Najeeb, (2021)
3 SCC 713, a three Judge Bench of the Supreme Court, while
considering the long incarceration as also the effect of rigour of
Section 43-D(5) of the UAPA Act, observed as under:
“17. It is thus clear to us that the presence of
statutory restrictions like Section 43-D(5) of the UAPA
per se does not oust the ability of the constitutional
courts to grant bail on grounds of violation of Part III
of the Constitution. Indeed, both the restrictions
under a statute as well as the powers exercisable
under constitutional jurisdiction can be well
harmonised. Whereas at commencement of
proceedings, the courts are expected to appreciate
the legislative policy against grant of bail but the
rigours of such provisions will melt down where there
is no likelihood of trial being completed within a
reasonable time and the period of incarceration
already undergone has exceeded a substantial part
of the prescribed sentence. Such an approach would
safeguard against the possibility of provisions like
Section 43-D(5) of the UAPA being used as the sole
metric for denial of bail or for wholesale breach of
constitutional right to speedy trial.”
13)    In yet another judgment in the case of Ashim alias Asim Kumar
Haranth Bhattacharya vs. National Investigation Agency, (2022) 1
SCC 695, the Supreme Court observed as under:
“9. We have to balance the nature of crime in
reference to which the appellant is facing a trial. At
the same time, the period of incarceration which has
been suffered and the likely period within which the
trial can be expected to be completed, as is informed
Bail App No.109/2022                                            P a g e | 10
to this Court that the statement of PW 1/de facto
complainant has still not been completed and there
are 298 prosecution witnesses in the calendar of
witness although the respondent has stated in its
counter-affidavit that it may examine only 100 to 105
witnesses but indeed may take its own time to
conclude the trial. This fact certainly cannot be
ignored that the appellant is in custody since 6-7-
2012 and has completed nine-and-half years of
incarceration as an undertrial prisoner.
10. This Court has consistently observed in its
numerous judgments that the liberty guaranteed in
Part III of the Constitution would cover within its
protective ambit not only due procedure and fairness
but also access to justice and a speedy trial is
imperative and the undertrials cannot indefinitely be
detained pending trial. Once it is obvious that a
timely trial would not be possible and the accused
has suffered incarceration for a significant period of
time, the courts would ordinarily be obligated to
enlarge him on bail.
11. Deprivation of personal liberty without ensuring
speedy trial is not consistent with Article 21 of the
Constitution of India. While deprivation of personal
liberty for some period may not be avoidable, period
of deprivation pending trial/appeal cannot be unduly
long. At the same time, timely delivery of justice is
part of human rights and denial of speedy justice is a
threat to public confidence in the administration of
justice.”
14)    Again, in the case of Jagjeet Singh & Ors. Vs. Ashish Mishra
@ Monu & anr. 2021 LiveLaw (SC) 376, the Supreme Court, relying
up the ratio laid down in K. A. Najeeb’s case (supra), observed that no
accused can be subjected to unending detention pending trial,
especially when law presumes him to be innocent until proven guilty.
It has been further observed that even when statutory provisions
expressly bar the grant of bail after a reasonably long period of
incarceration, such stringent provision will melt down.
Bail App No.109/2022                                           P a g e | 11
15)     From the foregoing enunciation of the law laid down by the
Supreme Court, it becomes clear that long incarceration of an
undertail without any likelihood of conclusion of trial in near future
infringes upon the right of speedy trial of such undertrial. While the
Supreme Court has, in some cases, gone to the extent of quashing the
trial itself but consistent view of the Supreme Court has been that in
case the delay in conclusion of the trial amounts to oppression or
harassment, the Court can interfere in such situations and grant bail to
an accused in a heinous crime like murder also. While doing so, the
Court has to take into consideration several factors like, length of
delay, the justification for the delay, the accused's assertion of his
right to speedy trial, and prejudice caused to the accused by such
delay. It is also clear that the Criminal Courts are not obliged to
terminate the trial or criminal proceedings only on account of lapse of
time and acquit the accused but in appropriate cases, the Court can
grant appropriate relief or suitable directions in favour of the accused.
Thus, in deciding bail applications, one of the important factors which
should be taken into account is the delay in concluding the trial. If an
accused is denied bail but is ultimately acquitted, nobody is going to
compensate him for the period he has spent in custody. Therefore,
long incarceration of an accused may not be by itself a ground for
grant of bail but it certainly becomes a ground for grant of bail to an
accused, if the delay in conclusion of trial is attributable to the
16)     That takes us to the facts attending to the instant case because it
is in the light of the facts of a particular case that courts have to come
to a conclusion whether an accused is entitled to bail on the ground of
long incarceration. The trial court record shows that out of 44
witnesses, at the present moment of time two prosecution witnesses
are yet to be examined. The record further shows that for the last three
years PWs (26), (41), (42) and (44) are being summoned for recording
their statements and the prosecution has succeeded in procuring the
presence of only one witness out of these four witnesses during these
three years whereas statements of PWs (26), (41) and (44) are yet to
be recorded. PWs (26), (41) and (44) are all police officials but the
learned trial court is struggling to procure their attendance for
recording their statements. Even the warrants of arrest against these
three witnesses have been issued by the trial court but the same are
not being executed. The record further shows that on 03.10.2022, the
learned trial court has even issued a show cause notice to SHO, P/S,
Batamaloo, for his failure to execute the warrants against the
witnesses but no fruitful purpose has been achieved in spite of taking
such steps.
17)     From the foregoing sequence of events, it is clear that the delay
in conclusion of the trial is solely attributable to the prosecution. The
officers and officials of the police department, who are obliged and
duty bound to assist in the speedy trial of the cases, are avoiding to
appear before the Court as witnesses thereby protracting the trial. It is
Bail App No.109/2022                                          P a g e | 13
not a case where some civil witnesses, who may have been won over
by the accused and avoiding to depose in support of the prosecution
but it is a case where even the police officials have scant regard for
the process of the Court and they are avoiding to help the prosecution
in speedy trial of the case. Without the cooperation and assistance of
the prosecuting agency and the police department, the speedy trial will
always remain a distant dream. The present case is a classic example
of prolongation of the trial by the prosecuting agency and the police
department whose officials are duty bound to render assistance in
speedy trial of cases. It is high time that the respondents should put
their house in order and instruct their officers and officials to render
all possible assistance in conclusion of criminal trials instead of
blaming the Criminal Courts for the delay.
18)    The trial court does have power to terminate the trial by closing
the prosecution evidence but I am conscious of the fact that in heinous
offences like murder, the Courts generally do not take this extreme
step, particularly when the witnesses to be examined are material
witnesses like witnesses to memo of disclosure and recovery and the
investigating officer, as is the present case. The Courts refrain from
closing the evidence in such cases as it amounts to failure of justice
but this should not be taken as a device by the prosecution to protract
the trial.
19)    Learned counsel for the respondents has, while relying upon the
judgment of this Court in the case of Sohan Singh vs. UT of J&K
Bail App No.109/2022                                             P a g e | 14
(Bail App No.253/2020 decided on 24.06.2021), contended that long
incarceration of an accused cannot be the sole ground for enlarging
him on bail, particularly in a murder case.
20)    There cannot be any quarrel with the proposition of law
propounded by learned Government Advocate but in a case where
trial has been prolonged to infinite limits on account of non-
cooperation of the prosecution and the police department, the accused
can certainly be enlarged on bail even in a murder case. As already
discussed hereinbefore in the case of long incarceration of an accused
without any hope of conclusion of trial in near future, the rigour of 1 st
Proviso to Section 437 of the Cr. P. C would melt down. If the
argument of learned Government Advocate is accepted, then the
respondent and its officials can very well avoid appearance in the
Court for another ten years thereby ensuring that the petitioner does
not come out of jail for next one decade.
21)    The reliance placed by the learned Government Advocate on
the ratio laid down in Sohan Singh’s case (supra) is misconceived as
the said ratio cannot be made applicable to the facts of the instant
case. In Sohan Singh’s case, the period of incarceration of the accused
was about five years, out of which, the trial of the case had been
stayed by the High Court/Supreme Court for a couple of years and, as
such, the delay in trial was not attributable to the prosecution. In the
instant case, the responsibility of delay in trial is wholly attributable to
Bail App No.109/2022                                            P a g e | 15
the prosecution. The contention of the learned Government Advocate
is, therefore, without any merit.
22)     Contention of the respondents that the petitioner has misused
the concession of temporary bail by threatening prosecution
witnesses, at this stage of the trial is not tenable because statements of
all the civil witnesses in the case have already been recorded and there
is no chance of threatening of civil witnesses by the petitioner at this
23)     For all what has been discussed hereinbefore, I find that the
petitioner has carved out a case for grant of bail on account of his long
incarceration for more than 12 years and on account of the fact that by
the conduct of the prosecution and the police department, there is
hardly any chance of conclusion of trial in near future.
24)     Accordingly, the petitioner is directed to be released on bail
subject to the following conditions:
each to the satisfaction of the trial court;
(II)   That, in case he has a passport, he
shall surrender the same before the trial
court and he shall not travel out of the
(IV)     That he shall appear before the trial
Court on each and every date of
25)     The application stands disposed of in above terms.
Whether the order is speaking:      Yes/No