Counsel for Applicant :- Raghvendra Singh,Anil Kumar Tiwari
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
1. Heard Sri Raghvendra Singh, learned counsel for the applicants, Sri
Tilak Raj Singh, learned AGA-I on behalf of the State and Sri
Ramendra Kumar, learned counsel for the opposite parties no. 2 to 4.
2. By means of the instant application the applicants are seeking
quashing of the charge sheet dated 26.03.2015 filed in respect of Case
Crime No. 511/2014, under Sections 307, 323 IPC, Police Station
Kotwali Akbarpur, District Ambedkar Nagar and proceedings of
Session Trial No. 111/2015 titled State v. Sunni @ Nitish & Ors.
pending in the Court of IIIrd Additional District and Session Judge,
Ambedkar Nagar arising out of the aforesaid charge sheet on the
ground that on 09.12.2022 a compromise has been entered into
between the parties settling the dispute and now the opposite parties
no. 2 to 4 do not want to pursue the matter.
3. The aforesaid case was initiated on the basis of an FIR bearing Case
Crime No. 511/2014 lodged on 19.12.2014 by the opposite party no. 2
Ram Prasad against the petitioners stating that the petitioner no. 2
Narendra Kumar was raising construction of a wall on a land in
dispute. The informant asked him not to raise any construction till the
decision of the court whereupon the petitioner no. 1, who is son of
petitioner no. 2, started beating the informant. When the informant's
sons came to intervene, the petitioner no. 2 Narendra shot at the
informant's son Sanjeev and another accused person shot at Umesh,
another son of the informant. The petitioner no. 1 Sanni assaulted the
informant with a rod causing injury in his head. The informant's
youngest son Santosh was also shot at but he was not hurt.
4. After investigation, the police submitted a charge sheet against the
petitioner no. 1 Sunni under Sections 323 and 307 IPC and against the
petitioner no. 2 Narendra for offences under Section 30 of the Arms
Act and on 08.11.2015, the learned court passed an order summoning
the petitioner nos. 1 & 2 for being tried for the aforesaid offences.
5. The injury form of Sanjeev Kumar mentions a firearm entry wound
on the right side of his chest and exit wound on the shoulder,
however, his X-ray examination did not reveal any bonny injury.
6. The injury form of Umesh Kumar also mentions a firearm injury on
the right side of his chest and his X-ray examination too did not reveal
any bonny injury.
7. In his statement recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., the informant
had stated that the petitioner no. 2 had fired at his son Sunni and the
petitioner no. 3 Sushil had fired a shot at his second son Umesh. Sunni
had assaulted the informant with the iron rod causing injury on his
head and a shot was fired towards his youngest son Santosh also he he
was not hurt.
8. The injured Sanjeev also stated that the petitioner no. 2 Narendra
had fired a shot at him. The other injured Umesh Kumar stated that
the petitioner no. 2 had fired a shot at Sanjeev and the petitioner no. 3
Sushil, son of Jamuna had fired a shot which hit him.
9. As per the averments made in support of the application, the parties
have entered into a compromise. A copy of the compromise has been
annexed with the affidavit, which does not bear any date. It has been
mentioned in the compromise that the accused persons and the injured
persons have entered into a compromise and the injured persons have
pardoned the accused persons and they do not want any proceedings
to continue against the accused persons.
10. In Gian Singh v. State of Punjab, (2012) 10 SCC 303, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court summarized the legal position regarding
power of the High Court in quashing criminal proceedings on the
basis of a compromise, in the following words: -
61. The position that emerges from the above discussion can be
summarised thus : the power of the High Court in quashing a
criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in exercise of its inherent
jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given to a
criminal court for compounding the offences under Section 320 of
the Code. Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory
limitation but it has to be exercised in accord with the guideline
engrafted in such power viz. : (i) to secure the ends of justice, or (ii)
to prevent abuse of the process of any court. In what cases power to
quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or FIR may be
exercised where the offender and the victim have settled their
dispute would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case
and no category can be prescribed. However, before exercise of
such power, the High Court must have due regard to the nature
and gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental
depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot be
fittingly quashed even though the victim or victim’s family and the
offender have settled the dispute. Such offences are not private in
nature and have a serious impact on society. Similarly, any
compromise between the victim and the offender in relation to the
offences under special statutes like the Prevention of Corruption Act
or the offences committed by public servants while working in that
capacity, etc.; cannot provide for any basis for quashing criminal
proceedings involving such offences. But the criminal cases having
overwhelmingly and predominatingly civil flavour stand on a
different footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly the
offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile, civil,
partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out of
matrimony relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes where the
wrong is basically private or personal in nature and the parties have
resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases, the High
Court may quash the criminal proceedings if in its view, because of
the compromise between the offender and the victim, the possibility
of conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of the criminal
case would put the accused to great oppression and prejudice and
extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
criminal case despite full and complete settlement and compromise
with the victim. In other words, the High Court must consider
whether it would be unfair or contrary to the interest of justice to
continue with the criminal proceeding or continuation of the
criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process of law
despite settlement and compromise between the victim and the
wrongdoer and whether to secure the ends of justice, it is
appropriate that the criminal case is put to an end and if the answer
to the above question(s) is in the affirmative, the High Court shall be
well within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding.
11. In Narinder Singh and Others Vs. State of Punjab and
Another, (2014) 6 SCC 466, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has been
pleased to sum up and lay down the principles by which the High
Court would be guided in giving adequate treatment to the settlement
between parties and exercising its power under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
while accepting the settlement and quashing the proceedings or
refusing to accept the settlement in the following words:-
“29.1 Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to be
distinguished from the power which lies in the Court to
compound the offences under Section 320 of the Code. No
doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court has
inherent power to quash the criminal proceedings even in those
cases which are not compoundable, where the parties have
settled the matter between themselves. However, this power is
to be exercised sparingly and with caution.
29.2 When the parties have reached the settlement and on that
basis petition for quashing the criminal proceedings is filed, the
guiding factor in such cases would be to secure:
(i) ends of justice, or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court.
While exercising the power the High Court is to form an
opinion on either of the aforesaid two objectives.
29.3 Such a power is not be exercised in those prosecutions
which involve heinous and serious offences of mental depravity
or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are
not private in nature and have a serious impact on society.
Similarly, for offences alleged to have been committed under
special statute like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the
offences committed by Public Servants while working in that
capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
compromise between the victim and the offender.
29.4 On the other, those criminal cases having overwhelmingly
and pre-dominantly civil character, particularly those arising
out of commercial transactions or arising out of matrimonial
relationship or family disputes should be quashed when the
parties have resolved their entire disputes among themselves.
29.5 While exercising its powers, the High Court is to examine
as to whether the possibility of conviction is remote and bleak
and continuation of criminal cases would put the accused to
great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be
caused to him by not quashing the criminal cases.
29.6 offences under Section 307 IPC would fall in the
category of heinous and serious offences and therefore is to
be generally treated as crime against the society and not
against the individual alone. However, the High Court would
not rest its decision merely because there is a mention of
Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is framed under this
provision. It would be open to the High Court to examine as
to whether incorporation of Section 307 IPC is there for the
sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient evidence,
which if proved, would lead to proving the charge under
Section 307 IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the
High Court to go by the nature of injury sustained, whether
such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of the body,
nature of weapons used etc. Medical report in respect of
injuries suffered by the victim can generally be the guiding
factor. On the basis of this prima facie analysis, the High Court
can examine as to whether there is a strong possibility of
conviction or the chances of conviction are remote and bleak.
In the former case it can refuse to accept the settlement and
quash the criminal proceedings whereas in the later case it
would be permissible for the High Court to accept the plea
compounding the offence based on complete settlement between
the parties. At this stage, the Court can also be swayed by the
fact that the settlement between the parties is going to result in
harmony between them which may improve their future
29.7 While deciding whether to exercise its power under
Section 482 of the Code or not, timings of settlement play a
crucial role. Those cases where the settlement is arrived at
immediately after the alleged commission of offence and the
matter is still under investigation, the High Court may be
liberal in accepting the settlement to quash the criminal
proceedings/investigation. It is because of the reason that at
this stage the investigation is still on and even the charge sheet
has not been filed. Likewise, those cases where the charge is
framed but the evidence is yet to start or the evidence is still at
infancy stage, the High Court can show benevolence in
exercising its powers favourably, but after prima facie
assessment of the circumstances/material mentioned above. On
the other hand, where the prosecution evidence is almost
complete or after the conclusion of the evidence the matter is at
the stage of argument, normally the High Court should refrain
from exercising its power under Section 482 of the Code, as in
such cases the trial court would be in a position to decide the
case finally on merits and to come a conclusion as to whether
the offence under Section 307 IPC is committed or not.
Similarly, in those cases where the conviction is already
recorded by the trial court and the matter is at the appellate
stage before the High Court, mere compromise between the
parties would not be a ground to accept the same resulting in
acquittal of the offender who has already been convicted by the
trial court. Here charge is proved under Section 307 IPC and
conviction is already recorded of a heinous crime and,
therefore, there is no question of sparing a convict found guilty
of such a crime.”
12. In Gold Quest International (P) Ltd. v. State of T.N., (2014) 15
SCC 235, the Hon’ble Supreme Court held that: -
“8. In view of the principle laid down by this Court in the aforesaid
cases, we are of the view that in the disputes which are
substantially matrimonial in nature, or the civil property disputes
with criminal facets, if the parties have entered into settlement,
and it has become clear that there are no chances of conviction,
there is no illegality in quashing the proceedings under Section
482 CrPC read with Article 226 of the Constitution. However, the
same would not apply where the nature of offence is very serious
like rape, murder, robbery, dacoity, cases under the Prevention of
Corruption Act, cases under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act and other similar kind of offences in which
punishment of life imprisonment or death can be awarded.”
13. The aforesaid decision in Narinder Singh (supra) has been
followed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Madhya Pradesh
vs. Laxmi Narayan & Others (2019) 5 SCC 688 and in that case the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that:-
“15.1 that the power conferred under Section 482 of the Code
to quash the criminal proceedings for the non-compoundable
offences under Section 320 of the Code can be exercised having
overwhelmingly and predominantly the civil character,
particularly those arising out of commercial transactions or
arising out of matrimonial relationship or family disputes and
when the parties have resolved the entire dispute amongst
15.2 such power is not to be exercised in those prosecutions
which involved heinous and serious offences of mental
depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such
offences are not private in nature and have a serious impact on
15.3 similarly, such power is not to be exercised for the
offences under the special statutes like Prevention of
Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants
while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely on
the basis of compromise between the victim and the offender;
15.4 offences under Section 307 IPC and the Arms Act etc.
would fall in the category of heinous and serious offences and
therefore are to be treated as crime against the society and not
against the individual alone, and therefore, the criminal
proceedings for the offence under Section 307 IPC and/or the
Arms Act etc. which have a serious impact on the society
cannot be quashed in exercise of powers under Section 482 of
the Code, on the ground that the parties have resolved their
entire dispute amongst themselves. However, the High Court
would not rest its decision merely because there is a mention
of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is framed under
this provision. It would be open to the High Court to examine
as to whether incorporation of Section 307 IPC is there for
the sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient
evidence, which if proved, would lead to framing the charge
under Section 307 IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to
the High Court to go by the nature of injury sustained,
whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of
the body, nature of weapons used etc. However, such an
exercise by the High Court would be permissible only after the
evidence is collected after investigation and the charge sheet is
filed/charge is framed and/or during the trial. Such exercise is
not permissible when the matter is still under investigation.
Therefore, the ultimate conclusion in paragraphs 29.6 and 29.7
of the decision of this Court in the case of Narinder Singh
(supra) should be read harmoniously and to be read as a whole
and in the circumstances stated hereinabove;"
14. In Arun Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh Through its Secretary
& Ors. (2020) 3 SCC 736, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held:—
“14. In another decision in Narinder Singh v. State of Punjab
(2014) 6 SCC 466 it has been observed that in respect of
offence against the society it is the duty to punish the offender.
Hence, even where there is a settlement between the offender
and victim the same shall not prevail since it is in interests of
the society that offender should be punished which acts as
deterrent for others from committing similar crime. On the
other hand, there may be offences falling in the category where
the correctional objective of criminal law would have to be
given more weightage than the theory of deterrent punishment.
In such cases, the court may be of the opinion that a settlement
between the parties would lead to better relations between them
and would resolve a festering private dispute and thus may
exercise power under Section 482 CrPC for quashing the
proceedings or the complaint or the FIR as the case may be.
15. Bearing in mind the above principles which have been laid
down, we are of the view that offences for which the
appellants have been charged are in fact offences against
society and not private in nature. Such offences have serious
impact upon society and continuance of trial of such cases is
founded on the overriding effect of public interests in
punishing persons for such serious offences. It is neither an
offence arising out of commercial, financial, mercantile,
partnership or such similar transactions or has any element
of civil dispute thus it stands on a distinct footing. In such
cases, settlement even if arrived at between the complainant
and the accused, the same cannot constitute a valid ground to
quash the FIR or the charge-sheet.
16. Thus the High Court cannot be said to be unjustified in
refusing to quash the charge-sheet on the ground of
compromise between the parties.”
15. In Daxaben v. The State of Gujarat & Ors. 2022 SCC OnLine
SC 936 the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as under:-
“50. In our considered opinion, the Criminal Proceeding cannot be
nipped in the bud by exercise of jurisdiction under Section 482 of the
Cr. P.C. only because there is a settlement, in this case a monetary
settlement, between the accused and the complainant and other
relatives of the deceased to the exclusion of the hapless widow of the
deceased. As held by the three-Judge Bench of this Court in Laxmi
Narayan (supra), Section 307 of the IPC falls in the category of
heinous and serious offences and are to be treated as crime against
society and not against the individual alone. On a parity of
reasoning, offence under section 306 of the IPC would fall in the
same category. An FIR under Section 306 of the IPC cannot even be
quashed on the basis of any financial settlement with the informant,
surviving spouse, parents, children, guardians, care-givers or
anyone else. It is clarified that it was not necessary for this Court to
examine the question whether the FIR in this case discloses any
offence under Section 306 of the IPC, since the High Court, in
exercise of its power under Section 482 CrPC, quashed the
proceedings on the sole ground that the disputes between the
accused and the informant had been compromised.”
16. From a perusal of the aforesaid decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court, the principles governing quashing of criminal proceedings on
the basis of compromise are that there is no thumb rule in this regard
and each case has to be decided on the facts and circumstances of its
case. Before exercising such power, the High Court must have due
regard to the nature and gravity of the crime and the power to quash is
to be exercised sparingly and with caution. Such a power is not to be
exercised in cases involving heinous and serious offences, which
include offence under Section 307 IPC.
17. In the present case, the FIR allegations are that a land dispute is
existing between the parties regarding which a case was pending. In
spite of pendency of the civil dispute, the accused persons started
raising a wall at about 10 a.m. and upon being objected by the
informant and his sons, the petitioner no. 2 fired a shot which hit the
informant's sons Sanjeev on hischest and the petitioner no. 3 fired
another shot which hit Umesh, another son of the informant, on his
chest. The medico-legal examination report of Sanjeev and Umesh are
available on record, which support the FIR allegations. The statements
of the informant and his injured sons Sanjeev and Umesh also support
the FIR allegations. The police had submitted a charge sheet against
the petitioners no. 1 & 2 and thereafter the name of the petitioner no. 3
has been added on 25.10.2021 on an application filed under Section
18. Since there was an old property dispute between the parties, the
accused persons were known to the informant and his sons. The
incident took place in broad day light and there is no reason to doubt
the identity of the persons who caused the incident.
19. The accused persons have sought quashing of the charge-sheet and
the proceedings merely on the ground that on 09.12.2022 the parties
have entered into a compromise stating that the informant and the
injured persons have pardoned the accused persons and they do not
want any further proceedings in the matter and the accused persons
may get the proceedings terminated in terms of the compromise. The
acts allegedly committed by the petitioners involve firing gun shots in
broad day light hitting two persons in their chests and such offence is
a very serious offence and the material on record, namely, the medico
legal examination report of the injured persons and the statements
recorded during investigation, fully support the FIR allegations. The
offence alleged has to be treated as a crime against the society and not
against the injured sons of the informant alone and, therefore, this
Court is of the view that the informant and his sons have no authority
to pardon the accused persons.
20. Keeping in view the aforesaid discussion, this Court is of the
considered view that the proceedings of the case against the
petitioners cannot be quashed on the basis of a compromise entered
into between the parties. The application under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
praying quashing of the charge sheet and the entire proceedings
initiated on the basis thereof, on the sole ground that the parties have
entered into a compromise, lacks merits and, accordingly, the same is
dismissed.