the custody of respondents No.3.1 to 3.2 to the
petitioner in the interest of justice;
(C) Pending admission hearing and final disposal
of this petition, Your Lordships be pleased to
direct the respondents No.3 to release the
respondents No.3.1 to 3.2 from their illegal
confinement forthwith;
(D) Your Lordship be pleased to pass such other
and further orders as may be deemed fit, just and
proper in the peculiar facts and circumstances of
the present case.”
2. We have heard the learned senior advocate,
Mr.Mihir Thakore appearing with learned
advocate, Ms.Zainab Bharmal.
3. Before we could proceed with the advance
hearing, learned advocate, Mr.Pravin Gondaliya
appearing for the private respondent No.3 has
fairly submitted that arrangements have been
made for the weekend meeting for the wife to come
over and meet the children.
3. We also have expressed our desire that the
parties can also venture into the possibility of
amicable settlement on the issues, where there are
serious disputes. The good offices of the learned
advocates could be used for the said purpose.
4. Presently, the matter is adjourned to
2. The petitioner         visited Mumbai where respondent
husband and the children are staying and talk of
settlement was on. This Court also was of the opinion
that any family dispute and, more particularly, when it
concerns the custody of children, we expect the parties
to explore possibility of settlement. We appreciate the
manner in which the learned advocates on both the
sides promptly responded and made the best possible
efforts for the same. The Mediator, High Court
Mediation Centre and Secretary, High Court Legal
Services Committee, endeavoured to bring about such
settlement with the assistance of learned advocates on
both the sides. However, the same yielded no success.
3. The parties completed the pleadings and on the last
occasion, learned advocate Mr. Pravin Gondaliya,
learned        advocate for    the   respondent      No.3        had
ventilated the grievance that in the process of getting
Overseas Citizenship of India (OCI) Card, the petitioner
is not cooperating and has raised objections. This may
become the reason for the process of issuance of OCI
Card not to sail through smoothly.
4. We, therefore, had fixed the matter for final hearing, as
parties have already completed the pleadings. Learned
advocate for the petitioner, on instructions, today, has
sought withdrawal of this petition, according to her,
the petitioner is back to USA and shall take recourse
to legal proceedings. It is strongly objected by other
side urging that it is the petitioner's design to derail
the process of OCI Card and her ill intention was to
somehow ensure that children do not continue to stay
in India.
5. According to us, pendency of divorce petition along
with child custody matters before the competent
Courts if is the reason for such request, the same
needs to be regarded. Custody of both the daughters
by way of a temporary restrain was denied by Superior
Court of New Jersey, Chancery Division, Family Part,
Middlesex County USA on 06.10.2021.
6. While permitting withdrawal, which is the right of
every party, this Court is of the opinion that to both
the parties need to act in the best interest of their
children and it is therefore desirable for them to
attempt an amicable settlement.
7. Let the proceedings before the Family Court be
expedited, considering the young age of the children,
parties will be at liberty to request to the concerned
authority issuing the OCI Card of the pendency of
various litigations by and between the parties.
8. Petition is dismissed and disposed of as withdrawn.
The petitioner also may cooperate in the process of OCI