Counsel for Petitioner :- Arun Kumar Misra,Sanjay Kumar Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,R.B. Singh
Heard Sri R. K. Ojha, learned Senior Advocate, assisted by Sri
Arun Kumar Mishra, learned counsel for the petitioner and Sri
Shailendra Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
respondent nos.1 to 6.
This writ petition has been filed praying for quashing of the
order dated 08.09.2021 passed by Special Secretary, Uttar
Pradesh Sashan, Lucknow / respondent no.2 and also the order
dated 06.12.2021 passed by Registrar / Inspector U.P. Education
Madrasa Education Board Lucknow / respondent no.4. Further
prayer has been made to direct the respondents to not disturb
peaceful functioning of the petitioner as Principal and pay his
arrears of salary and month to month salary as and when due.
There is Madrasa in the name and style of "Madarsa Darul
Uloom Ahle Sunnat Badrool Uloom at District Basti" which is
under the grant-in-aid list of the State Government. The
petitioner was appointed on the substantive vacancy created on
the post of Principal on account of superannuation of earlier
incumbent on 01.04.2019. Earlier he was Assistant Teacher in
Alia in Darul Uloom Ahle Sunnat, Anwarul Raza Gaura
Chowki, Post Babhanjeet, District Gonda from 29.09.2011 to
On the basis of aforesaid experience he applied for the post of
Principal in the Madarsa. After following due procedure he was
selected and appointment letter was issued in his favour.
Petitioner joined his duties on 01.10.2019 and on 05.10.2019
the Committee of Management forwarded the papers for grant
of approval to his appointment. Complaint was made against
appointment of the petitioner and the State Government
directed inquiry into the allegations which led to passing of the
order dated 23.07.2020 by respondent no.4. The District
Minority Welfare Officer, Basti verified the experience of the
petitioner as Assistant Teacher from District Minority Welfare
Officer, Gonda and certified the same.
A local Member of Legislative Assembly sent a letter to the
Chief Minister of the State alleging that the conditional order of
approval of appointment of the petitioner dated 23.07.2020 is
against the Rules and should be cancelled.
On the letter of the M.L.A the impugned order dated 08.09.2021
was passed by the Special Secretary, Uttar Pradesh Shashan,
Lucknow / respondent no.2 and by the impugned order dated
06.12.2021 the aforesaid order was given effect by the
respondent no.4.
Learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner
has submitted that both the impugned orders are grossly illegal
and have been passed by the State Government without any
notice or opportunity of hearing. The approved appointment of
the petitioner could not have been cancelled without holding
inquiry and proving the allegations against the petitioner before
the inquiry officer by leading reliable evidence. The impugned
orders are absolutely arbitrarily and have been passed on the
dictate of Member of Legislative Assembly.
Counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of respondent nos. 1
to 5, wherein it has been submitted that in pursuance of two
letters dated 03.09.2020 and 05.10.2020 sent by Sri Sanjay
Pratap Jaiswal, M.L.A and Sri Swami Prasad Maurya, Labour
and Employment Minister, the Secretary / Executive Officer,
Haj Committee conducted an inquiry regarding the appointment
of the petitioner and it was found to be against the rules and
hence the approval granted to the petitioner regarding his
appointment was withdrawn by the impugned order. It has
further been stated that one, Jalaluddin Khan, has filed a writ
petition before the Lucknow Bench of this court praying for
quashing of the appointment of the petitioner, which is still
pending. It has further been submitted that in the inquiry the
petitioner was given full opportunity of hearing and the
respondent no.4 after considering the material on record had
withdrawn the approval granted to the appointment of the
petitioner on the post of Principal. Hence vide order dated
23.07.2020 it was withdrawn by respondent no.2.
After hearing the rival contentions it is clear from the order
dated 23.07.2020 that respondent no.2 only considered the
complaint made by Sri Sanjay Pratap Jaiswal, local MLA and
Sri Swami Prasad Maurya, Minister of Labour and employment
U.P. and got some exparte inquiry report from Secretary /
Executive Officer of Haj Committee and thereafter took the
decision of cancelling the approval of appointment of the
petitioner since he was required to communicate his decision to
It is deplorable that the representative of the public compel the
public servant to pass illegal orders and the public servant
comply their illegal dictates without any demur. The illegality
in the conduct of the respondents is apparent from the material
on record. The impugned orders have been passed in gross
violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India and are
hereby quashed.
The petitioner is directed to be reinstated in service forthwith
and his arrears of salary shall be paid to him within six weeks
from today. The period during which the petitioner was forced
out of employment shall not be considered to be break in his
service.His month to month salary shall be paid to him from
this month.
In case of delay in payment, as directed hereinabove, the
petitioner would be entitled to get 9 percent simple interest per
annum on the amount due to be paid to him from the date it fell
due to the date of actual payment.
The State Government would be free to recover the interest paid
to the petitioner from the public servant/servants found
responsible for the delay.