Prayer in this petition filed by the petitioner, who is an Advocate
and is appearing in person, is to take legal action against Prince Harry
Middleton son of Prince Charles Middleton resident of United Kingdom and to
direct the United Kingdom Police Cell to take action against him, as despite a
promise to marry the petitioner, the said promise has not been fulfilled. It is also
prayed that arrest warrants be issued against him so that no further delay occur
in their marriage.
Though the Court today was held through virtual hearing, however,
on a request made by the petitioner in person, this case has been specially taken
up in the Court in actual hearing.
After hearing the petitioner in person, I find that this petition is
nothing, but just a day-dreamer’s fantasy about marrying Prince Harry. This
petition, though very poorly drafted, both grammatically and lacking the
knowledge of pleadings, speaks about some emails between the petitioner and
Prince Harry, in which the person, sending the email, has stated that he promise
to marry soon.
On a Court query, whether the petitioner has ever travelled to
United Kingdom, reply was in negative and the petitioner only stated that she
had conversation through social media, where she has even sent messages to
Prince Charles that his son Prince Harry is engaged with her.
A careful perusal of Annexures P-1 to P-3, which are printouts of
so-called conversation, would reveals that even the same are not true copies, as
some portion has been deleted/erased.
It is well known fact that fake IDs are created on various social
media sites like Facebook, Twitter etc. and authenticity of such conversation
cannot be relied upon by this Court. There is every possibility that so-called
Prince Harry may be sitting in a Cyber Cafe of a village in Punjab, looking for
greener pastures for himself.
In view of the above, this Court finds no ground to entertain this
petition and can only show its sympathy for the petitioner that she has believed
such fake conversation to be true.
Accordingly, the present petition is dismissed.
Whether speaking/reasoned : Yes/No