The petitioner is before this Court calling in question an
order dated 27.09.2022 which dismisses the petitioner from
2. Heard the learned senior counsel Sri.Jayakumar.S.Patil
appearing for the       petitioner and Sri.B.V.Krishna, learned
Additional     Government        Advocate   appearing     for   the
3. Brief facts that leads the petitioner to this Court in the
subject petition as borne out from the pleadings are as follows:
The      petitioner     is   appointed    as     Archak     in
Sri.Boganandeeshwara Temple, Nandi village, Chikkaballapur
pursuant to a consent being rendered by the 1st respondent. On
5.8.2015 a formal appointment order was issued by the
Government appointing the petitioner as an Archak of the said
temple.     Things standing thus, on 23.12.2020 anonymous
complaints emerge against the petitioner alleging certain
irregularities in the performance of his duties as Archak in the
temple, pursuant to which, a show cause notice comes to be
issued against the       petitioner   on 24.12.2020    by the 1st
respondent. The petitioner claims to have submitted his reply
to the said show cause notice on 3.1.2021 and proceedings
WP No. 20999 of 2022
were conducted by the 1st respondent and the result of the
proceedings was placing the petitioner under suspension.
4. Later, it transpires that no enquiry was conducted for
over a year. The petitioner then, knocks the doors of this Court
in Writ Petition No.8668 of 2022 seeking quashment of the
order of suspension, which was passed close to an year ago by
the time he approached this Court in the said petition.               This
Court, by an order dated 22.8.2022 passed the following order:
“3. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties
and having perused the petition papers, this Court is
inclined to grant a limited indulgence in the matter as
under and for the following reasons:
(a) It would be profitable to recall that historically,
“…In the later Vedic period a compromise was effected by
sanctioning the use of liquors at ceremonial and sacrificial
functions only, while condemning its common usage…”1.
There are a few temples in the country such as Temple of
Kaal Bhairava in Ujjain (Madhya Pradesh) & Kali Temple
at Patiala (Punjab) wherein, a particular kind of liquor is
ritualistically offered to the deities and later distributed to
the willing devotees. However, that is not the case with
Sri. Bhoganandeeshwara Temple in which the petitioner
has been the Archak.
(b) It hardly needs to be stated that several
religious scriptures prohibit consumption of liquor. The
Somasundaram O, Raghavan D. V. & Murthy A. G, ‘Drinking habits
in ancient India’, Indian Journal of Psychiatry, Vol. 58(1), pp 93–96,
WP No. 20999 of 2022
Hindu Shaastraas define the following seven things as the
most powerful addictions that can affect any person. Here
they are.
The first one is Dyuta, which means gambling; the second
one is maamsa meaning meat eating; the third one is
suraa which means consumption of liquor; the fourth one
is veshyaa which means prostitution; the fifth one
is kheta which means hunting for pleasure; the sixth one
is chourya which means stealing; & the seventh one
is paraangana which means eloping with other’s wives.
(c) Learned AGA is more than justified in
contending that the newly added provisions of Section
10(A) of the 1997 Act proscribe ‘sapta vyasanaas’, i.e.,
seven sins, one of them being consumption of liquor
(these seven sins do not exactly approximate to the
Shaastric prohibitions). The said Section has the following
“Disqualification of Archaks.- A person shall be
disqualified for being appointed as Archak or being
continued as Archak if he,- (a) is suffering from any
virulent or contagious disease; or (b) is unable to recite
Vedic mantras or Shlokas relating to        the rituals in
temple concerned with clarity and without any fault,
other than temples, where reciting of vedic Mantras or
Shlokas is not compulsory or mandatory; (c) is not free
Explanation.-     The    expression    ‘Sapta    Vyasanas’
means gambling, consuming intoxicating liquor and
drugs, smoking, immoral sexual conduct, involved in
heinous crime, stealing and cheating.”
Therefore, the impugned notice & suspension order
cannot be readily voided for askance.
(d) The above having been said, one more aspect
needs to be clarified: the impugned proceedings are
WP No. 20999 of 2022
initiated on the basis an anonymous letter and a
photograph depicting petitioner holding bottles of liquor.
However, it is the contention of petitioner that these
photographs are morphed ones. Therefore, there has to
be a reasonable enquiry into the matter, cannot be
disputed. That enquiry, by its nature cannot be
permitted to be dragged on for months together, as
rightly contended by Mr. Jayakumar S Patil, learned
Sr. Advocate appearing for the petitioner. There is
force in the said submission. Now that about one &
a half year having lapsed, no progress is reported in
the enquiry. More often than not the poor archakas
depend upon ‘Thatte Kasu’ or the offerings to keep
their life boat afloat in these costly days. Therefore,
suspension cannot be continued endlessly.
(e) Even in service law, the Apex Court in
AJAY KUMAR CHOUDHARY vs. UNION OF INDIA,
(2015) 7 SCC 291, held that suspension cannot
continue indefinitely, contemplating or pending
disciplinary enquiry. There is logic, reason & justice
for such observations coming from highest Court of
the country. If that be so, there ought to have been
review of the suspension order periodically, at least
each spell not extending beyond six months. An
argument to the contrary cannot be countenanced
without straining the rules of reason, justice &
In the above circumstances, this petition
succeeds in part; a Writ of Mandamus issues to the
2nd respondent to accomplish the enquiry in
question within a period of two weeks from the
date a copy of this order is produced, failing which,
the suspension of the petitioner shall be treated as
having been rescinded and he will be permitted to
discharge duties of archakship as before, subject to
outcome of the delayed enquiry.
A mandamus was issued to the 2nd respondent to
complete the enquiry within a period of two weeks from the
date of receipt of the copy of the said order, failing which,
suspension of the petitioner would be treated as having been
rescinded and he would be permitted to discharge his duties as
Archak of the temple.       After the passage of the order what
comes about is the order of dismissal without holding any
enquiry, as was directed by this Court in the aforesaid petition.
It is this order of dismissal that is called in question in the
subject petition.
5. Learned senior counsel Sri.Jayakumar S Patil, taking
this Court through the documents appended to the petition
would seek to demonstrate on the merit of the matter that the
petitioner is not guilty of any misconduct as is alleged and has
been framed by forces that are inimical to his presence in the
temple.    He would further contend that this Court has clearly
directed completion of enquiry within two weeks. The enquiry
is not completed and an order of dismissal is passed without
WP No. 20999 of 2022
hearing the petitioner and would seek the petition be allowed
and the impugned order be quashed.
6. Learned Additional Government Advocate representing
the respondents though would seek to defend the action, would
admit the position that the petitioner has not been heard
pursuant to the order passed by this Court on 22.8.2022 and
the order comes to be passed immediately thereafter by
dismissing the petitioner from the duties of Archak.
7.  I  have  given   my  anxious   consideration  to  the
submissions made by the learned counsel for both the parties
and have perused the material on record.
8. The afore-narrated facts of the appointment of the
petitioner, the generation of complaints, issuance of show
cause notice and conduct of partial enquiry,      are all not in
dispute.   This Court by an order dated 22.8.2022 had passed
the afore-quoted order, whereby this Court directed completion
of enquiry within two weeks from the date of receipt of the
WP No. 20999 of 2022
copy of the order and if the enquiry would not be completed
within two weeks, the suspension would automatically get
revoked and the petitioner would be permitted to discharge his
9. It is admitted that no enquiry was conducted pursuant
to the order passed by this Court nor the petitioner was notified
for any enquiry to be conducted pursuant to the said order.
What comes about is an order dismissing the petitioner from
the duties of Archak without holding any enquiry as was
directed by this Court.      Therefore, the order not only runs
counter to the order passed by this Court on 22.8.2022, but is
in blatant violation of the principles of natural justice and denial
of opportunity to defend himself. On these reasons, the order
of dismissal is rendered unsustainable and requires to be
obliterated. Obliteration of the order will result in a direction of
permitting the petitioner to perform his duties subject to the
outcome of the enquiry. This direction is issued in the peculiar
facts of the case, for the reason that the respondents seek to
overreach the earlier order by passing an order of dismissal.
WP No. 20999 of 2022
10. For the aforesaid reasons, the following:
(i)       Writ Petition is allowed.
(ii)      Impugned order dated 27.09.2022 dismissing
the petitioner from service stands quashed.
(iii)     The respondents are directed to          afford an
opportunity of hearing to the petitioner and
complete the enquiry as was directed by this
Court in the aforesaid petition within two weeks
from today.
(iv)      Till such time, the petitioner shall be permitted
to perform as Archak in the temple which would
be subject to the result of the enquiry.