rep.by Mr.Rajanikanth P.Patel, Aashram road,
Ahmedabad, Gujarath & 3 others.
Date of Judgment Pronounced: 09.06.2022
1.    Whether Reporters of Local newspapers may (Yes/No)
be allowed to see the Judgments?
2.    Whether the copies of judgment may be          (Yes/No)
marked to Law Reports/Journals?
3.    Whether their Lordship/ Ladyship wish to       (Yes/No)
see the fair copy of the Judgment?
rep.by Mr.Rajanikanth P.Patel, Aashram road,
Ahmedabad, Gujarath & 3 others.
!    Counsel for Petitioners:      Sri K.Vasudeva Reddy
^    Counsel for respondents:      Sri B.G.Ravinder Reddy
? Cases referred
The present Civil Miscellaneous Appeal assails the order
dated 16.08.1999 in W.C.No.82 of 1995, on the file of the
Commissioner for Workmen’s Compensation and Assistant
Commissioner of Labour, Karimnagar, wherein and whereby,
the claim made by the appellant herein, for compensation for
death of Yeddandi Yellavva, who is the daughter of the
appellant, was dismissed, in the course of employment with the
opposite party, while rolling the Beedies.
2.     The impugned order shows that the Commissioner has
framed the preliminary issue with regard to maintainability of
the claim of the appellant which is as follows:-
“Whether the workwoman employed in Beedi
manufacturing process is covered under the
purview of Workmen’s Compensation Act or
not.”
3.     The Commissioner held that the occupation of the
deceased do not comes under the purview of Workman as
defined under Section 2(n) of Workmen’s Compensation Act and
CMA.No.2065 of 2002
consequently, the preliminary issue was answered in favour of
the opposite party and dismissed the claim petition.
4.     The only substantial question of law is whether a ‘Beedi
Roller’ is a workman within the definition of Section 2(n) of
Workmen’s Compensation Act so that her claim is maintainable
before the Commissioner for Workmen’s Compensation &
Assistant Commissioner of Labour at Karimnagar.
5.     The counsel for the appellant has canvassed that the
definition of Workman as contended under Section 2(n) read
with schedule 2 of the Workmen’s Compensation Act clearly
establishes that the deceased was the workwoman.
6.     On the contrary, the contention of the learned counsel for
the   opposite   party  is  that,   the  orders   passed      by      the
Commissioner      require  no    inference   since    there     is     no
manufacturing process so as to construe the deceased as a
7.     To answer the substantial question of law raised in the
present appeal, it is apt to refer to Section 2(n)(ii) and Clause 2
of   Schedule II of Workmen’s Compensation Act as well as
Section 2(k) of Factories Act and they are as follows:-
CMA.No.2065 of 2002
“ Section 2 (n) - “Workman” means any person (other than
a person whose employment is of a casual nature and who
is employed otherwise than for the purposes of the
employer’s trade or business) who is –
(ii) Employed in any such capacity as is specified in
Schedule II. Whether the contract of employment was
made before or after passing of this Act and whether such
contract is expressed or implied, oral or in writing; but does
not include any person working in the capacity of a
member of the Armed Forces of the Union and any
reference to a workman who has been injured shall, where
the workman is dead, include a reference to his
dependants or any of them.”
List of persons who, subject to the provisions of Section
2(1)(n) are included it the definition of workmen:-
The following persons are workmen within the meaning of
Section 2(1)(n) and subject to the provisions of that section,
that is to say, any person who is
(ii)   employed, otherwise than in a clerical capacity, in
any premises wherein or within the precincts where of a
manufacturing process as defined in Clause (k) of Section 2
of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948) is being carried on
or in any kind of work whatsoever incidental to or
connected with any such manufacturing process or with the
article made [whether or not employment in any such work
is within such premises or precincts] and steam, water or
other mechanical power or electrical power is used.
Section 2(k) of Factories Act, 1948:- “Manufacturing
Process” means any process for-
(i)    making, altering, repairing, ornamenting,
finishing, packing, oiling, washing, cleaning,
breaking up, demolishing, or otherwise
treating or adapting any article or substance
with a view to its use, sale, transport, delivery
CMA.No.2065 of 2002
(ii)  pumping oil, water, sewage or any other
substance; or
(iii) generating,     transforming    or  transmitting
(iv)  composing types for printing, printing by
letter press, lithography, photogravure or
other similar process or book binding;
(v)   constructing,       reconstructing,    repairing,
refitting, finishing or breaking up ships or
(vi)  preserving or storing any article in cold
storage.
8.     A glance at the definition of Clause 2(n) of the Workmen’s
Compensation Act shows that any person employed in any such
capacity as is specified in Schedule-II, comes under the
definition of Workman. Clause 2 of Schedule-II clearly shows
that any person employed otherwise than in clerical capacity in
any premises or within the precincts where the manufacturing
process as defined under the Clause-k of Section 2 of Factories
Act is coming under the definition of workman. The definition of
2(k) also makes it clear that the process of making any article or
substance with a view to usage, sale, transport, delivery or
disposal is constituted as manufacturing process. The rolling of
Beedies is nothing but making of any article or substance with a
view to usage or sale or transport. Therefore, the activity of the
deceased being the Beedi roller, clearly falls within the definition
of a workwoman.
9.     The   learned   Commissioner     while adverting     to     the
provisions contained under the Workmen’s Compensation Act,
clearly taken into consideration the duties of the deceased with
reference   to   schedule   II as    well  as the   definition       of
“Manufacturing Process” as defined under the Factories Act,
10.    For the above reasons, the order of the Commissioner for
Workmen’s Compensation and Assistant Commissioner of
Labour at Karimnagar, requires to be set-aside.       The matter
requires to be remanded for adjudication of the claim on merits.
This appeal is of the year 2002 and the claim is of the year
1995. Almost all, 27 years have been completed from the date
of incident.   This requires a time bound disposal of the case
before   the   Commissioner     for   Workmen’s   Compensation,
11.    In the result, the appeal is allowed. The impugned order
is set-aside.    The matter is remanded to Commissioner for
Workmen’s Compensation and Assistant Commissioner of
Labour, Karimnagar, for disposal of claim on merits and the
said exercise shall be done within a period of two months from
CMA.No.2065 of 2002
the date of receipt of this order. In the circumstances, there
shall be no order as to costs.
12.    Miscellaneous petitions, if any pending, shall stand