This writ petition has been filed for a direction to the respondents to
allot a house under the public quota for rent at Tower Block, Taylors Road,
Kilpauk, Chennai to the petitioner by considering the petitioner's
representation dated 21.09.2017.
2. According to the petitioner, he has enrolled in Bar Council of
Tamil Nadu on 11.11.1987 as an Advocate. He was appointed as President
of the District Consumer Redressal Forum, Madurai on 31.10.2005 and
was drawing Rs.16,750/- basic salary per month and served for 9 months
and thereafter he was transferred to Namakkal on 13.07.2006. During the
relevant period, he was in charge of Karur and Dindigul Districts and
disposed of several cases on merits.
3. The petitioner's wife served as nurse in Government Zonal Eye
Hospital and retired on 31.05.2017. The petitioner's daughter is studying
B.D.S. 3rd year and his son has completed 12th standard and is awaiting to
join college.
4. Under these circumstances, the petitioner has applied for
allotment of a house on rental basis under public quota. The criteria to be
looked into to give house under public quota is that the candidate should
have done any good deed or charity to the general public and preference
shall be given to such person who has come forward to serve the society
morally with their good deeds. In this regard, the petitioner pointed out that
he served the society by disposing several cases of litigants while working
as President of the District Consumer Redressal Forum in Karur and
Dindigul districts. Therefore, he has given a representation on 21.09.2017
but the respondents have not taken into consideration to dispose of the
same. Hence the Writ Petition.
5. Per contra, the learned counsel appearing for the respondents
would submit that the petitioner is a practicing advocate and he was
appointed as a President of District Consumer Redressal Forum and his
wife had also retired from service on 31.05.2017 as Nurse. Therefore, he
would submit that they can manage on their own without any house being
allotted on rental basis under the public quota.
W.P.No.27614 of 2017
6. However, in reply, the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner
would submit that he served as President of the Consumer Redressal Forum
and disposed of many number of cases and he has substantially contributed
the good deed to the public. Therefore, he is entitled for allotment of the
house under public quota.
7. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned
counsel appearing for the respondents and perused the entire materials
available on record.
8. There are two categories under which the Government allots
rental accommodation, viz., “Public Quota” and “Government Quota”.
Though 'public quota' is shown as a distinct quota, it essentially forms part
of the Government quota, as 20% of the accommodation made available
by the Government is carved out to be allotted under the 'public quota'. The
claim of the petitioner has to be considered under public quota since in the
present case, the petitioner, a practicing lawyer, aged 60 years and
admittedly served as a President of the Consumer Redressal Forum and
disposed of many number of cases and therefore, this Court is of the view
W.P.No.27614 of 2017
that the petitioner is entitled to seek rental accommodation under 'public
9. This Court in the case of “T. Sornapandian & Others v/s The
Principal Secretary to Government, Housing & Urban Development
(HB(2) HB5(2)) Department, Chennai & Others” in W.A.Nos.453 to 457
of 2019 etc., batch, dated 01.03.2019, a Division Bench of this Court
observed as regards the 'public quota' as under:
“The question is what is “public quota”? The
respondents have not placed any material as to what
would constitute 'public quota'. Going by the meaning of
the word 'public', we may be right in assuming that this
quota is meant for the general public. If this is the liberal
meaning to be assigned to the word 'public quota', who
are the general public who will be entitled to this
accommodation.         Admittedly,     the    number        of
houses/tenements available under this quota are limited
and available only in three cities, viz., Chennai, Madurai
and Coimbatore. Therefore, how does the Government
distribute this largess to the public. Are there any Rules
framed by the Government to regulate the allotment? To
our knowledge, there is nothing in place in the form of a
statutory rule or an executive instruction. Consequently,
who would fall within the definition of “public”. Is there
W.P.No.27614 of 2017
an income criteria? Is it based on social status? or is it
based on any outstanding or sterling performances of an
individual for the cause of public and the welfare of the
State or to a meritorious person, who has put service
above self etc. All these questions remain unanswered.”
10. A perusal of the above, the allotment of residential
accommodation under public quota has not been specifically prescribed to
whom it has to be actually allotted. In such circumstances, it has to be
construed that a person who renders service to the public, is certainly
entitled to the residential accommodation under public quota.
11. In fact, the services rendered by the Advocates in assisting the
Courts in the matter dispensation of justice will fall under the category of
public service since the litigant public would get resolved their disputes by
engaging them. Advocate is an Officer of the Court, discharges public law
functions of providing access to justice to the needy litigants. He has also
the responsibility of ensuring that administration of justice carried on
unhindered. The role of a Lawyer is indispensable in the system of delivery
of justice. The Advocate's duty is as important as that of a Judge and they
play a vital role in the preservation of justice system and since the duty of
a lawyer is to assist the Court in the administration of justice, the practice
W.P.No.27614 of 2017
of law has a public utility flavor. Though the lawyers are viewed in society
as highly competent and capable, but low in warmth and trustworthiness.
Nowadays, many of the young Advocates, though they have mastered their
degree in law, are facing many difficulties in society since they are in the
irregular income group in their initial stage of practice facing difficulties
to meet out their financial needs and to eke out their livelihood. While so,
it is more difficult for them to find out their shelter on rental basis. Further,
many of the landlords of houses, will not evince interest to let their property
to the Advocates, apprehending that they may delay in payment of rent in
time and likewise, the Banks also will hesitate to provide loans to the
Advocates due to their income category. In the present case, it is
unfortunate to note that the petitioner, having completed nearly 35 years of
practice as an Advocate and also for short period as President of the
District Consumer Redressal Forum, at the age of 60, he could not own a
house and still facing difficult in finding his shelter and seeking the
assistance of the Government and applied for allotment of residential
accommodation under public quota.
12. Therefore, taking into consideration the predicament of many of
the lower-income young Advocates and their services rendering to the
W.P.No.27614 of 2017
society by assisting the Courts in the matter of dispensation of justice to a
greater extent, this Court feels that it would be appropriate to give
preference by reserving some percentage in public quota to the Advocates
fraternity in the matter of allotment of residential accommodation to them
in consultation of Bar Council of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry, initially for
those who are practicing at the High Court of Madras and its Bench at
Madurai. Accordingly, this Court pass the following order:
(i) the respondents are directed to consider the representation of the
petitioner, dated 21.09.2017, on merits and in accordance with law within
a period of eight weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
(ii) this Court directs the respondents and the Government of Tamil
Nadu to frame a scheme in consultation with the Bar Council of Tamil
Nadu and Puducherry to consider for the allotment of houses on rental basis
by giving preference to the practicing young advocates until the prescribed
age, in public quota or otherwise, after taking into consideration of
financial status of concerned advocate, who apply for residential
accommodation on rental basis for limited number of years.
13. With the above, the Writ Petition is disposed of. No costs.
W.P.No.27614 of 2017
Housing and Urban Development Department,
Government of Tamil Nadu,
Bar Council of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry,
Housing and Urban Development Department,
Government of Tamil Nadu,