The order of suspension, dated 29.01.2022, passed by the third
respondent, is under challenge in this writ petition.
2. The petitioner was working as Superintendent in the Regional
Workshop (Health), Tiruchirapalli and placed under suspension on the ground
“On 29.01.2022 F.N. inspite of being continuously
warned by the Workshop Superintendent, Regional
Workshop (H), Trichy (the Head of Office) at many
instances previously not to shoot video of the co-
employees and officers at the work place, continued to
take video using her mobile phone.     At around 10.45
W.P.(MD) No.2476 of 2022
a.m., when the Workshop Superintendent in order to
prevent her from taking the video and stop the unlawful
activity, picked her mobile phone in the presence of
office staff, while the video was being shot and handed
it over to Thiru.K.Balakumar, Watchman, Regional
Workshop       (H),     Trichy   for     safe       custody.
Tmt.D.S.Radhika suddenly resorted to violence, used
abusive and filthy language and tried to attack the
Officer. When the Officer moved away by instinct, she
bit the hand of Thiru.K.Balakumar, Watchman, who
stood behind the Workshop Superintendent thereby
causing grievous injury to him.      The Watchman was
immediately admitted in the Mahatma Gandhi Memorial
Government Hospital, Trichy, for treatment.”
3. The allegations set out in the impugned order are no doubt
serious in nature.
4. The learned Additional Government Pleader appearing for the
respondents 1 to 4, while submitting the facts, narrated that there are several
allegations against the petitioner mostly regarding high-handedness and
misbehaving indifferently with the other officials of the Department etc.
W.P.(MD) No.2476 of 2022
5. However, this Court cannot conduct enquiry in respect of such
allegations, which all are to be gone into by the Disciplinary Authority at the
time of enquiry.       The fact remains that there are allegations and counter
allegations both by the petitioner and the respondents. Thus, the Competent
Authority has to conduct a detailed enquiry based on the documents and
evidences available as the charges are serious in nature.
6. This Court is of the considered opinion that using mobile
phones by the public servants during office hours has become nowadays a
normal scenario. Using mobile phones and taking videos inside the office is a
grave misconduct.        The officials working in the Government Departments
should never be allowed to use mobile phones inside the office for their
personal use. If at all any emergency call is to be attended, proper permission
must be obtained from superiors to go out from the office and use mobile
phones. In all circumstances, the mobile phones must be either switched off
or kept in vibration / silent mode, without causing any disturbance or
nuisance to be public, who all are attending the office as well as the other
officials working in the office.     This must be the minimum discipline to be
followed in the Government Offices. Such allegations of using mobile cameras
inside the office very frequently is causing disturbance and no doubt, this will
W.P.(MD) No.2476 of 2022
disrupt the functioning of the public offices in the Departments and therefore,
this Court is of the considered opinion that the Government should take
serious note of this and the first respondent has to issue appropriate
circular / instructions to all the Government Offices to ensure that the mobile
phones are either kept in a common cloakroom at the time of entering into the
office and for emergency calls, the official numbers kept in the office are to be
utilized. In the event of allowing the employees to use mobile phones, without
any restriction inside the office or allowing them to use mobile cameras inside
the office, the same will result in serious consequences, even amongst the
employees and the public, who all are attending the office. Therefore, the first
respondent has to take note of the serious situation and issue appropriate
circular / instructions to all the subordinate officers not to use mobile phones
in the Government offices and it must be maintained in such a manner to
ensure that mobile phones are not used by the public servants more
specifically    during working    hours.     Necessary    procedures     are to be
contemplated for regulating the usage of mobile phones in the Government
Offices, failing which the same will result in indiscipline in the working place
and the case on hand is a classic case, where the usage of mobile phone
resulted in serious disputes.
W.P.(MD) No.2476 of 2022
7. It is brought to notice of this Court by the learned Additional
Government Pleader for the respondents 1 to 4 that many public servants are
using mobile phones and cameras in the Government Offices and this Court is
of the great surprise, whether the employees are using mobile phones during
office hours or performing their duties and responsibilities as allotted to them.
If such indiscipline and misconduct are allowed to be continued, no doubt,
they are committing a greatest sin to the public by getting tax payers' money
as huge salary. Therefore, the Government is duty bound to ensure that the
public servants are not wandering with mobile phones inside the office during
office hours and it is to be regulated in accordance with the Tamil Nadu
8. As far as the impugned order of suspension is concerned, the
allegations set out are serious in nature warranting an enquiry to be
conducted. The respondents are directed to conduct enquiry by following the
procedures contemplated and conclude the same as expeditiously as possible.
W.P.(MD) No.2476 of 2022
9. In view of the factum established, this Court is inclined to pass
the following orders:
(i)     The relief as such sought for in this writ petition
stands rejected.
(ii)    The respondents 1 to 3 are directed to issue
appropriate Circular / Instructions to all the
Subordinate Officers / Officials across the State of
Tamil Nadu regulating the usage of Mobile Phones
and Mobile Cameras inside the Office premises
during office hours and in the event of any
violation of the Guidelines / Instructions to be
formulated, strict actions are to be initiated under
the relevant Tamil Nadu Government Servants'
(iii)   The respondents 1 to 3 are directed to frame
regulations for the usage of Mobile Phones and
Mobile Cameras inside the Office during office
hours and exceptions are to be carved out for
usage of official Mobile Phones and Telephones by
W.P.(MD) No.2476 of 2022
the Field Officers and by the Officials, who all are
authorized for such purpose.
(iv)  The above exercise is directed to be done by the
respondents 1 to 3, within a period of four weeks
from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
10. Accordingly, the writ petition is disposed of.           No costs.
Consequently, connected miscellaneous petition is closed.
11. Registry is directed to list the matter on 13.04.2022 for
reporting compliance before this Court.
W.P.(MD) No.2476 of 2022
Health, Medical and Family Welfare Department,
2.The Director of Public Health and Preventive Medicine,
Directorate of Public Health and Preventive Medicine,
Office of the Workshop Superintendent,
W.P.(MD) No.2476 of 2022