1.     This Criminal Appeal has been preferred by appellants
Ahsan, Naushey, Ahmad Hasan, Abdul Hasan and Sher Ali
against the judgment and order dated 13.04.2006 passed by
Sessions Judge, Rampur in Sessions Trial No.326 of 2004 (State
Versus Ahsan & others) whereby accused-appellants were
convicted for the offence under sections 147, 148, 302/149 IPC
and sentenced for offence under section 302/149 IPC to
imprisonment for life and a fine of Rs.15,000/-. Appellants were
also directed to undergo one year additional R.I. in default of
payment of fine. They were also sentenced for the offence under
section 147 IPC to undergo one year R.I. and for the offence
under section 148 IPC to undergo two years R.I. Further, in
Sessions Trial No.327 of 2004 (State Versus Abdul Hasan),
appellant Abdul Hasan was convicted and sentenced for the
offence under section 25 Arms Act to undergo two years R.I.
with a fine of Rs.5000/- and in default of payment of fine, he has
to further undergo three months R.I. Further, in Sessions Trial
No.328 of 2004 (State Versus Sher Ali), appellant Sher Ali was
convicted and sentenced for the offence under section 25 Arms
Act to undergo two years R.I. with a fine of Rs.5000/- and in
default of payment of fine, he has to further undergo three
months R.I. All the sentences were directed to run concurrently.
2.     Prosecution story, in nutshell, as unfolded in the written
report (Ex.Ka.-1), is as follows:
On 29.12.2003, informant Shareef Ahmad (P.W.1) son of
Chotey moved a written report (Ex.Ka.-1), scribed by Irshad
(P.W.3), mentioning therein that on 29.12.2003, informant's
cousin brother Abrar (deceased) along with Karamat was coming
back to Rampur on a motorcycle and on another motorcycle,
informant, Afsar and Ibrahim were following them. Due to
muddy terrain, they slowed down their motorcycles as and when
they reached at the fields of Navi Ahmad. At the same time, at
about 8:30 A.M., from the shrubs standing on the East side,
Ahsan, Naushey, Ahmad Hasan, Abdul Hasan and Sher Ali, who
belong to same village, armed with firearms, appeared in front of
them, dragged Abrar from the motorcycle and with common
intention, all the accused persons fired upon him with their
respective firearms with intention to kill, which resulted into the
death of Abrar on the spot. When the informant's side raised
alarm, accused persons ran away from the sugarcane field
situated on the west side. Incident is of Jungle Kishanpur.
Informant's side and accused persons were having old enmity and
there were litigation pending between them.
3.    On the basis of written report (Ex.Ka.-1), on the same day
i.e. 29.12.2003 at 9:30 A.M., Chik First Information Report
No.187 of 2003 at Crime No.480 of 2003 under Sections 147,
148, 149, 302 IPC was registered against accused-persons as
4.    After lodging the first information report, police rushed to
the spot, prepared inquest report and after sealing the dead body
on the spot sent the same for postmortem along with necessary
papers. Police had also recovered 3 empty cartridges of 12 bore
and 1 empty cartridge of 315 bore from the place of incident and
prepared recovery memo Ex. Ka.-3. They also took blood stained
and plain earth from the place of incident and prepared recovery
memo as Ex.Ka.-4. Site plan were also prepared, which are
Ex.Ka.-15, 16, 21 and 23. Police had also taken custody of the
motorcycle of the deceased from the place of incident and
prepared recovery memo as Ex.Ka.-5. During investigation,
accused Abdul Hasan, Naushey and Sher Ali were arrested. On
pointing out of accused Abdul Hasan, 1 live cartridge of 315 bore
with country made pistol used in the crime was recovered on
6.1.20004. On the same day, 2 live cartridges of 12 bore along
with country made pistol used in the crime was also recovered by
the police on pointing out of accused Sher Ali, of which joint
recovery memo was prepared as Ex.Ka.-6. On the basis of this
recovery memo, a first information report was lodged at police
station Kotwali, Rampur against accused Abdul Hasan at crime
no.02 of 2004 under section 25 Arms Act and against accused
Sher Ali at crime no.03 of 2004 under section 25 Arms Act.
Police after interrogation of witnesses, fulfilling the formalities
and completion of investigation, submitted charge-sheet in the
aforesaid crime numbers as Ex.Ka.-19 and 20; respectively and
also submitted charge-sheet in main crime no.480 of 2003, as
Ex.Ka.-22 against all the named accused.
5.    Postmortem on the dead body of the deceased Abrar was
conducted on 29.12.2003 at 4:35 P.M. by Dr. Raj Kishore Tandon
(P.W.5), Medical Officer at District Hospital, Rampur. Deceased
was aged about 35 years. Probable time since death was about 6
– 8 hours. Deceased was an average built body. Rigor mortis was
found present on neck and both extremities. No sign of
decomposition was found. Eyes were closed.
On examination of body of the deceased, following
antemortem injuries were found :
(i) Gunshot wound 11 cm. x 4 cm. x mouth cavity deep
over right cheek. Blackening, tattooing and scorching present.
(ii) Gunshot wound 4 cm. x 3 cm. x mouth cavity deep
below right nostril. Blackening, tattooing and scorching present.
(iii) Gunshot wound 1 cm. x 1 cm., below left angle of
mouth. Blackening, tattooing and scorching present. Injury no. (i)
and (iii) were connected to each other.
(iv) Gunshot wound 1 cm. x 1.5 cm. over left abdomen 1
cm. below umbilicus. Blackening, tattooing and scorching
(v) Gunshot wound 0.8 cm. x 0.6 cm. x abdominal cavity
deep 6 cm. below umbilicus. Blackening was present and bullet
was seen.
(vi) Gunshot wound 3 cm. x 6 cm. over right chest below
shoulder, above clavicle. Blackening, tattooing and scorching
present. One cork and 11 pellets were recovered.
(vii) Abrasion 5 cm. x 5 cm. over right chest below nipple.
(viii) Gunshot wound 3 cm. x 2 cm. over right side of
buttock. 11 pellets, tickli and cork were recovered.
(ix) Lacerated wound 3 cm. x 2 cm. over right buttock.
On internal examination, under injury no. (vii), 5 – 6 ribs were
found broken. 22 pellets, wadding cork and 2 bullets were
recovered. Both chambers of heart were empty. Peritoneum was
ruptured and bullet was recovered from it. Cavity was full of
blood. Upper and lower jaws of baccal cavity were found broken.
Cause of death of deceased was shown as shock and
haemorrhage due to antemortem injuries. Postmortem report is
6.      Live and empty cartridges as well as firearms used in the
crime were sent to Forensic Science Laboratory for chemical
examination. According to its Report, which is Ex.Ka.-26, empty
cartridge of 315 bore, which was recovered from the place of
incident, was fired from the country made pistol (Ex.-1) used in
crime, but as far as empty cartridges of 12 bore are concerned,
which was recovered from the place of incident, due to lack of
personal characteristics, it could not be said that whether they
were fired from the country made pistol (Ex.-3).
7.    After submitting the charge-sheets by the concerned police,
concerned Magistrate took cognizance in the matter and case
being exclusively triable by the Sessions Judge was committed
for trial to Sessions Court.
8.    Accused were brought from jail. Learned trial court framed
charge against the accused-appellants for the offences, as
mentioned above, to which they denied and claimed their trial.
9.   In order to prove its case, prosecution examined nine witness
in total. They are P.W.1 Shareef Ahmad, the informant, P.W.2
Ibrahim, P.W.3 Irshad, scriber of the written report, P.W.4 Sunder
Lal, the investigating officer who has conducted the inquest
proceedings, P.W.5 Dr. Raj Kishore Tandon, who has conducted
the postmortem on the body of deceased, P.W.6 Head Moharrir
Dharamveer Singh, the chik writer, P.W.7 Inspector Vijay Kumar
Sharma, the investigating officer who subsequently investigated
the case, P.W.8 HCP Prempal Singh and P.W.9 Inspector Hardeo
Singh, who investigated the main case. Statement of Karamat
(C.W.1) was recorded as court witness. Out of them, P.W.1
Shareef Ahmad, P.W.2 Ibrahim and C.W.1 Karamat were
examined as eye-account witnesses of the incident. Under
Section 311 Cr.P.C., statement of eye-account witness C.W.1
Karamat was recorded.
10.    After completion of prosecution evidence, statement of
accused-appellants were recorded under section 313 Cr.P.C. in
which they have stated that entire prosecution case is false. They
have taken the plea of false implication on account of animosity.
They have also stated that witness have give false evidence due
to rivalry. Fair investigation was not conducted in the matter.
Accused Sher Ali and Abdul Hasan, have denied the recovery of
live cartridges and firearms. According to accused, deceased
Abrar was of criminal background, therefore, some one else has
committed his murder. Some documentary evidence was also
adduced by the accused-appellants in their defence.
11. Learned court below after hearing the parties vide impugned
judgment and order convicted and sentenced the accused-
appellants for the aforesaid offences. Hence, this Appeal.
12.   We have heard Sri Vinod Kumar, learned advocate for the
appellants and Sri Roopak Chaubey, learned Additional
Government Advocate for State-respondent.
13.    Learned counsel for appellants castigating prosecution
evidence and finding recorded by Trial Court in impugned
judgment and order has addressed the Court that prosecution was
not able to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt. First
information report said to have been lodged in the matter is ante-
timed document. Presence of the scribe of the written report at
the time of preparing the written report at the place of occurrence
is improbable and unbelievable. He was the resident of another
village. He has not clearly explained the reason for which he had
gone to the place of occurrence. It was next argued that special
report was not sent immediately after the registration of the F.I.R.
This fact also shows that the first information report was not in
existence at the time mentioned in it. This fact also demolishes
the whole prosecution story on this sole ground only. Referring
to the entire evidence, it was further submitted that the written
report was prepared at the concerned police station itself on the
basis of advise of police. Witnesses said to be present at the place
of occurrence at the time of incident were actually not present.
They were procured later on. Present incident was committed by
some unknown person. None has seen the incident. This fact
finds support with the evidence of C.W.1 Karamat. It was next
submitted that the recovery of weapon, said to have been used in
commission of crime, on pointing out of the appellants / accused
Abdul Hassan and Sher Ali is false. Same is not supported with
the Forensic Science Laboratory Report. It was next argued that
recovery is from the open place accessible to general public.
Thus, it cannot be relied on. Learned counsel for the appellants
further submitted that there was enmity between the parties.
Owing to this reason, appellants were falsely implicated in this
case. To substantiate this argument, learned counsel for the
appellants placed reliance upon the statement of C.W.1 Karamat
and further argued that the deceased Abrar and C.W.1 Karamat
both were sitting on the same motorcycle. C.W.1 Karamat has
not named the appellants in committing the present offence.
Thus, this fact also shows that first information report was
lodged on the basis of due consultation and advise for the reason
stated here-in-above. It was next submitted that medical evidence
does not support the oral version. Prosecution was not able to
prove the specific role assigned to each and every accused. It was
next contended that the motorcycle on which the informant and
other witnesses were said to be going, had not been produced
before the Court. Thus on this ground also, prosecution story
becomes doubtful. Witnesses have made false statement before
the Court. Had they been present on the sport, they would have
tried to save the deceased. Thus, conduct of said eye account
witnesses itself shows that they were not present on the spot at
the time of incident. It was next argued that motive has also not
been proved in this case beyond reasonable doubt and is not
supported by any independent evidence. It was next argued that
appellants are in jail since from the date of their arrest i.e. for
about 18 years. Punishment imposed upon the appellants is of
life imprisonment. Thus, appellants are also liable to be extended
benefit of Section 57 IPC. Referring to the entire facts and
evidence of the case, it was further submitted that prosecution
has failed to prove the date, time and place of the occurrence
beyond reasonable doubt. Findings arrived at by the trial court on
this point are perverse and illegal. Thus, prayer was made to
allow the appeal setting aside the impugned judgment and order.
Learned counsel for the appellants in support of his
contention placed reliance on the following case laws :
1. Swamy Shraddananda (2) alias Murli Manohar
Mishra Versus State of Karnataka, (2008) 13
2. Vikas Yadav Versus State of Uttar Pradesh and
3. Union of India Versus V. Sriharan alias Murugan
and Others, (2016) 7 Supreme Court Cases 1
14.    On the other hand, learned A.G.A. appearing for the State
submitted that the written report (Ex.Ka.- 1) was prepared at the
place of occurrence by the Scriber Irshad (P.W.3). Presence of the
scriber at the place of occurrence is not improbable and
unbelievable. Referring to the inquest report and other papers
prepared along with it, it was further argued that all the aforesaid
documents were prepared at the place of occurrence itself. First
Information Report was lodged on the basis of written report at
the time mentioned in it. Eye account witnesses were present at
the place of occurrence at the time of incident. They have fully
supported the prosecution case on each and every point. Medical
evidence fully supports the oral version. Merely, non-sending the
special report immediately, as required under section 157 Cr.P.C.,
will not be sufficient to disbelieve the statement of eye account
witnesses. It was further contended that enmity is a double edge
weapon which can be a motive for the crime and prosecution has
established the enmity part. It was further submitted that
recovery said to have been made on pointing out of the
appellants Abdul Hassan and Sher Ali have also been proved by
the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt. Prosecution launched
against them on the basis of sanction accorded by the then
also shows the use of recovered weapon in the present crime.
Thus, referring to the findings arrived at by the trial court in the
impugned judgment and order, learned A.G.A. argued that there
is no illegality, infirmity or perversity in the findings of the trial
court. Punishment imposed upon the appellants are in accordance
with law. Appellants cannot be released taking recourse to the
provisions of Section 57 I.P.C., particularly when they committed
the murder of the deceased in broad day light by opening
indiscriminate fire upon him.
15.    We have considered the rival contentions raised by learned
counsel for the parties and have gone through the entire record.
16.     Findings arrived at by the trial court in the impugned
judgment and order are that the first information report is not
ante-timed document. Presence of the scribe at the time of
preparing the written report has been proved by the prosecution
beyond reasonable doubt. Non-sending of special report
immediately after the incident by the police concerned is not
sufficient to disbelieve the prosecution evidence. Prosecution
was able to prove the date, time and place of incident, which is
also supported by the statement of C.W.1 Karamat. Presence of
eye account witnesses at the place of occurrence at the time of
incident is not doubtful. Incident took place before them.
Deceased was done to death on the date, time and place of
occurrence by the appellants opening indiscriminate fire upon
him. Medical evidence fully supports the oral version. Recovery
of country made pistol has also been proved by the prosecution
beyond reasonable doubt.
17.   Now Court proceeds to discuss the submissions advanced
by learned counsel for the parties in light of evidence adduced in
the matter.
So far as lodging of the first information report on the date
and time mentioned in it is concerned, offence is said to have
been committed on 29.12.2003 at about 8:30 A.M. when
deceased and one Karamat (C.W.1) both were going to Rampur
on a motorcycle. Informant and other witnesses were also
following the deceased on their motorcycle. Scribe of the written
report (Ex.Ka-1) is P.W.3 Irshad. He has categorically explained
the reason for his presence at the place of occurrence at the time
of preparing the written report. He has stated that he was going
towards the village concerned in connection with the recovery of
his remuneration. Although he did not specify the name of the
person from whom he had gone to recover the wages, yet he has
clearly stated that what facts were stated by Sharif Ahmad P.W.1,
the same were scribed by him in written report (Ex.Ka.-1). He
has admitted his signature as well as signature of the informant
on the written report. If the inquest report prepared in the matter
is minutely perused, it reveals that its preparation started at 10:00
A.M., written report is said to have been lodged at 9:30 A.M. and
distance between the place of occurrence and the police station
concerned is about 10 Kms. P.W.1 has clearly stated that he went
to the concerned police station on a motorcycle to lodge the first
information report. If the time of incident, time of lodging the
first information report and mode of travel to reach police station
concerned are taken together, then also the submission raised by
the learned counsel for the appellants that first information report
is an ante-timed document, cannot be accepted. P.W.3 has clearly
stated that when he reached near the place of occurrence, there
was crowd of 20 – 25 persons over there. He also reached at the
place of occurrence. Papers on which written report was
prepared, were with him and on the request of the informant, he
prepared the written report at the place of occurrence. If all these
facts are taken in its entirety, it come out that the first
information report was lodged at the time mentioned in it by
P.W.1 on the basis of the written report (Ex.Ka-1) scribed by
P.W.3 Irshad. Submission raised by learned counsel for the
appellants contrary to this fact is not acceptable. Non-sending of
the special report immediately after registration of the first
information report is also not sufficient to disbelieve the content
of the first information report. Since there are eye-account
witnesses, thus entire prosecution evidence cannot be thrown out
merely on this basis. Finding arrived at by the trial court
regarding the existence of first information report at the time
mentioned in it is in accordance with law. There is no illegality,
infirmity or perversity in the finding recorded by the trial court
on this point.
18.    So far as the date, time and place of occurrence are
concerned, when police reached at the place of occurrence and
prepared the inquest report, empty cartridges said to have been
used by the accused persons lying on the spot were also
recovered by them and same were taken into custody and fard
was also prepared in this respect. Dead body of the deceased
was lying at the place of incident. Inquest report was prepared at
the same place, which bear the crime number and other details.
Recovery of empty cartridges at the place of occurrence itself
shows that the incident took place at the place of occurrence
itself. If the statement of C.W.1 Karamat is taken into
consideration, it is apparent that he has also supported the date,
time and place of occurrence in his statement. A lengthy cross-
examination was made from him, but nothing has come out in it
to disbelieve the date, time and place of occurrence as stated by
P.W.1 and P.W.2 or as disclosed in the first information report. If
the medical evidence is also taken into consideration, the Doctor
concerned, who had conducted the postmortem, has also opined
that death of the deceased would have taken place on 29.12.2003
at 8:30 A.M. The trial court while analyzing the entire evidence
was of the view that prosecution has proved the date, time and
place of occurrence from its evidence beyond reasonable doubt.
If the findings of the trial court arrived at on this point are
minutely analyzed with the Statement of P.W.1 Shareef Ahmad,
P.W.2 Ibrahim, P.W.3 Irshad, P.W.5 Dr. R.K. Tandon and C.W.1
Karamat, it cannot be termed to be illegal or perverse. Thus, we
are of the view that prosecution was able to prove the date, time
and place of incident beyond reasonable doubt.
19.    As far as medical evidence is concerned, number of firearm
injuries were found at the time of postmortem on the body of the
deceased. Prosecution case is that when the deceased reached at
the place of occurrence, he was pulled by the accused-persons
and they opened indiscriminate fire upon him. Looking to the
manner in which present incident was committed, it will not be
possible for any witness to collect the correct details of firing
made by each and every accused. Since all the appellants were
armed with firearms, they opened indiscriminate fire upon the
deceased, this fact has been supported by the prosecution
witnesses during trial, postmortem report also shows that number
of firearm injuries were found on the body of the deceased,
doctor concerned, who conducted the postmortem, has also
opined that injuries found on the body of the deceased have come
in the manner and style as stated by the prosecution witnesses
and death of the deceased could take place at the time mentioned
in the written report (Ex.Ka.-1). Thus, we are of the view that
finding arrived at by the trial court on point of medical evidence
cannot be termed to be illegal or perverse.
20.    As far as presence of eye-account witnesses at the place of
occurrence at the time of incident is concerned, prosecution case
is that the deceased along with C.W.1 Karamat was going on a
motorcycle to Rampur. Informant P.W.1 Shareef Ahmad, P.W.2
Ibrahim and one Afsar were following the motorcycle of the
deceased on their motorcycle. When they reached at the place of
occurrence, they slowed down the motorcycle as there was mud
on the way. Then and there accused-persons reached and pulled
out the deceased from the motorcycle and opened fire upon him.
Although, none of the witnesses have sustained injuries nor they
tried to save the deceased, yet in the facts and circumstances of
the case and the manner in which present incident took place, if
the witnesses said to be present at the place of occurrence did not
try to save the deceased, this fact itself is not sufficient to
disbelieve their presence at the place of occurrence. When
number of accused are opening indiscriminate fire and the
witnesses are unarmed, thus their conduct cannot be said to be
unnatural and unbelievable and on this ground presence of the
witnesses at the place of occurrence cannot be doubted. The
person, who was also sitting on the motorcycle of the deceased,
namely, C.W.1 Karamat was also examined by the court. Except
naming the appellants, he has clearly and categorically supported
the prosecution case regarding the date, time, place and manner
of incident. Although, in the examination, C.W.1 Karamat
showed unawareness about the presence of witnesses at the place
of occurrence, but this fact alone is not sufficient to hold that
P.W.1 and P.W.2 were not present on the spot at the time of
incident, particularly when the date, time, place and manner of
incident have been categorically supported by C.W.1. It is
pertinent to mention here that accused persons and C.W.1 both
are resident of same locality, it might be possible due to this
reason he has not named the accused-appellants in his statement.
P.W.1, P.W.2 both have clearly and categorically stated that
appellants have committed the present offence before them.
21.    Presence of P.W.1 and P.W.2 at the place of occurrence can
also not be doubted on this ground that third person sitting on the
motorcycle of Shareef Ahmad has not been examined. It is
golden rule of the criminal jurisprudence that if the statement of
solitary witness is reliable, the conviction can be held. Thus,
quantity of the witnesses is not material, rather quality of the
statement is material.
22.    So far as the enmity between the parties is concerned,
P.W.1 Shareef Ahmad has clearly disclosed the enmity on which
ground present incident was committed by the appellants. It is
pertinent to mention that enmity is a double edged weapon.
At one point of time, it may be a reason to falsely implicate the
person, but it may also be a reason to commit an offence. Thus,
on the ground of enmity only, the entire prosecution case where
there are eye account witnesses and prosecution case is supported
by medical evidence, cannot be disbelieved.
23.     If the statement of P.W.1 and P.W.2 are taken into
consideration, although nothing specific has been mentioned in
the written report regarding the enmity and only this fact was
mentioned in the written report that present incident was
committed due to old enmity and litigation pending between the
parties, same has been proved by the prosecution beyond
reasonable doubt and in the present matter, it can safely be held
that present incident was committed by the appellants due to
enmity disclosed in the first information report and as stated by
the prosecution witnesses. Thus, motive part has also been
proved by the prosecution. Submission raised on this score by the
learned counsel for the appellants is not acceptable.
24.    So far as the interestedness of the witnesses are concerned,
P.W.1 is the the family member of the deceased, but P.W.2 has
clearly admitted on question put by the defense in cross-
examination that he is not the relative or friend of P.W.1 Shareef
Ahmad or the deceased. Witness, who is the relative of the
deceased, may always not be categorized in the category of
interested witness. In the present matter, presence of P.W.1
Shareef Ahmad and P.W.2 Ibrahim at the place of occurrence at
the time of incident is clearly established. First information
report was lodged promptly at the time mentioned in it. Thus,
submission raised on behalf of the appellants in this respect is not
acceptable. Witnesses claiming themselves to be eye account
witnesses were actually present at the place of occurrence. Their
statement made before the Court during trial which have been
tested by lengthy cross-examination, cannot be disbelieved only
on this ground that P.W.1 Shareef is the family member of the
25.   When appellants Abdul Hassan and Sher Ali were arrested,
they disclosed to the police that they can recover the weapon said
to have been used in commission of the crime. On their
disclosure statement made before the police, arresting officer
took them to the place disclosed by them for recovery of weapon
said to have been used in commission of the crime and on
pointing out of the appellant Abdul Hassan, one country made
pistol of 315 bore and one live cartridge was recovered by the
police concerned. Similarly, on pointing out of appellant Sher
Ali, one country made pistol of 12 bore and two live cartridges
were also recovered from the place disclosed by them. Empty
cartridges recovered from the place of occurrence and the
country made pistol and live cartridges recovered on pointing out
of the aforesaid accused had been sent for examination at
Forensic Science Laboratory. Report of Forensic Science
Laboratory, which is Ex.Ka.-26, clearly reveals that empty
cartridges recovered from the place of occurrence had been used
from the country made pistol 315 bore. Although no definite
opinion was given in the FSL Report regarding the use of country
made pistol 12 bore in commission of the crime, yet recovery
said to have been made in the matter of country made pistol 12
bore on pointing out of Sher Ali cannot be doubted. The place
from where the aforesaid country made pistol and live cartridges
have been recovered was not an open place nor accessible to
general public. Thus, finding arrived at by the trial court
regarding recovery of country made pistols on pointing out of the
appellants Abdul Hassan and Sher Ali cannot be doubted,
because this fact has been proved by the prosecution from their
evidence beyond reasonable doubt, which is also supported to
some extent with the FSL Report. If the statement of prosecution
witnesses are compared with the findings arrived at by the trial
court on this issue, the Court is of the opinion that finding of the
trial court regarding recovery of country made pistol 315 and 12
bore along with live cartridges on pointing out of the aforesaid
accused cannot be doubted.
26.    In this matter, prosecution for the offence under section 25
Arms Act has also been started after obtaining sanction /
permission from the then District Magistrate. Thus, Court is of
the view that prosecution was able to prove its case against the
appellants Abdul Hassan and Sher Ali for the offence under
section 25 Arms Act beyond reasonable doubt. Finding arrived at
by the trial court in this respect is not interfereable.
27.    Trial court has convicted and sentenced the appellants for
the offence under sections 147, 148, 302/149 IPC. Since
appellants were five in numbers, they committed the present
offence in furtherance of common object forming an unlawful
assembly armed with deadly weapons. Thus, conviction and
sentence of the appellants for the offence under section 147 IPC
cannot be termed to be illegal or perverse. Similarly, all the
appellants were armed with deadly weapon, thus their conviction
and sentence for the offence under section 148 IPC is also not
interfereable. All the appellants have actively participated in
commission of the crime in furtherance of common object of an
unlawful assembly formed by them, thus conviction and sentence
for the offence under section 302 / 149 IPC is also in accordance
with law and it does not require any interference.
28.    As regards sentence imposed upon the appellants is
concerned, it is always a difficult task requiring balancing of
various considerations. The question of awarding sentence is a
matter of discretion to be exercised on consideration of
circumstances aggravating and mitigating in the individual cases.
29.    It is settled legal position that appropriate sentence should
be awarded after giving due consideration to the facts and
circumstances of each case, nature of offence and the manner in
which it was executed or committed. It is obligation of court to
constantly remind itself that right of victim, and be it said, on
certain occasions person aggrieved as well as society at large can
be victims, never be marginalised. The measure of punishment
should be proportionate to gravity of offence. Object of
sentencing should be to protect society and to deter the criminal
in achieving avowed object of law. Further, it is expected that
courts would operate the sentencing system so as to impose such
sentence which reflects conscience of society and sentencing
process has to be stern where it should be. The court will be
failing in its duty if appropriate punishment is not awarded for a
crime which has been committed not only against individual
victim but also against society to which criminal and victim
belong. Punishment to be awarded for a crime must not be
irrelevant but it should conform to and be consistent with the
atrocity and brutality which the crime has been perpetrated,
enormity of crime warranting public abhorrence and it should
'respond to the society's cry for justice against the criminal'.
[Vide : (Sumer Singh vs. Surajbhan Singh and others, (2014)
7 SCC 323, Sham Sunder vs. Puran, (1990) 4 SCC 731, M.P.
v. Saleem, (2005) 5 SCC 554, Ravji v. State of Rajasthan,
In view of above propositions of law, the paramount
principle that should be the guiding laser beam is that
punishment should be proportionate to gravity of offence.
30.    Appellants were convicted and sentenced for the offence
under section 302 / 149 IPC for life imprisonment and a fine of
Rs. 15000/- and in default of payment of fine, one year rigorous
imprisonment. Hence, applying the principles laid down by the
Apex Court in the aforesaid judgments and having regard to the
totality of facts and circumstances of case, nature of offence and
the manner in which it was executed or committed, in our view,
sentence imposed upon the appellants is neither exorbitant nor
excessive and same is adequate and also proportionate to gravity
of offence. They have been awarded minimum sentence for the
offence under Section 302 / 149 IPC.
31.     Considering entire aspects of the matter and looking to the
circumstances, under which present offence has been committed,
we are of the view that impugned judgment and order passed by
trial court is well thought and well discussed and trial court has
rightly held that prosecution has succeeded to prove guilt of
accused-appellants beyond reasonable doubt. As such, impugned
judgment and order passed by trial court is liable to be upheld.
32.    So far as submission raised on behalf of the appellants to
release the appellants taking recourse to the Section 57 IPC is
concerned, looking to the manner in which present offence was
committed by the appellants, the Court is the view that benefit
provided under section 57 IPC cannot be extended to the
appellants merely on this ground that they are languishing in jail
in this matter for about 18 years. It is not a fit case to release the
appellants on the aforesaid ground. Thus submission raised by
learned counsel for the appellants on this ground is also not
33.    Thus Appeal filed by the appellants, for the reason
discussed here-in-above, finding no merit, is liable to be
dismissed and impugned judgment and order convicting and
sentencing accused-appellants is liable to be confirmed.
34.    Resultantly, Appeal is dismissed. Impugned judgment and
order dated 13.04.2006 passed by Sessions Judge, Rampur in
Sessions Trial No.326 of 2004 (State Versus Ahsan & others)
convicting and sentencing all the appellants for the offence
under sections 147, 148, 302/149 IPC, in Sessions Trial No.327
of 2004 (State Versus Abdul Hasan) convicting and sentencing
the appellant Abdul Hasan for the offence under section 25 Arms
Act and in Sessions Trial No.328 of 2004 (State Versus Sher Ali)
convicting and sentencing the appellant Sher Ali for the offence
under section 25 Arms Act is upheld. Appellants are in jail. They
shall serve out the sentences awarded by the trial court until and
unless remission is granted by the competent Authority.
35.   Copy of this judgment alongwith lower court record be
sent forthwith to the Court concerned for compliance and
compliance report be sent to this Court.