APPLICATION U/S 438 CR.P.C. No. - 7968 of 2022
Counsel for Applicant :- Mohammad Zakir
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Heard learned counsel for the applicant, learned A.G.A.
appearing for the State and perused the record.
The present anticipatory bail application under Section 438
Cr.P.C. has been filed for grant of anticipatory bail as the
accused-applicant is apprehending his arrest in connection with
Case Crime No.718 of 2022, under Sections 323, 326, 120-B
IPC, Section 75/80 of the Juvenile Justice Act and Section 3/5
of U.P. Law Against Religion Prohibition of Conversion Act ,
It is contended on behalf of the applicant that he is innocent and
has been falsely implicated in the present case. He further
submitted that F.I.R. against the applicant was lodged as per
information through social media by the the police against the
applicant with the allegation that the applicant has converted
the religion of the victim/Sonu by adopting correct procedure
i.e. writing 'godnama' on a stamp of Rs. 50/- and by cutting the
exterior part of penis by sharp edged weapon. Learned counsel
for the applicant submitted that the applicant has no concern
with the conversion of the religion of the child- Sonu. He also
submitted that foster parents Smt. Soni @ Kunni Devi and
Mithlesh Yadav has given the child to the applicant and the
applicant given the child to Smt. Babli and Umar Mohammad.
Smt. Babli has been granted anticipatory bail by the court
below and co-accused Umar Mohammad has been granted
regular bail. Further submission is that the applicant shall fully
cooperate with the investigation. Therefore the applicant may
be enlarged on anticipatory bail and he is ready to cooperate
with the trial. If the applicant is granted anticipatory bail, he
will never misuse the same.
Learned A.G.A. opposed the prayer for anticipatory bail.
Without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
considering the nature of accusation and the fact that the
applicant is entitled to be released on anticipatory bail in this
case.
In the event of arrest of the applicant Julfikar shall be released
on anticipatory bail till the submission of police report, if any,
under section 173 (2) Cr.P.C. before the competent Court on his
furnishing a personal bond with two sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the Station House Officer of the
police station concerned with the following conditions:-
(i) the applicant shall make himself/herself available for
interrogation by a police officer as and when required;
(ii) the applicant shall not directly or indirectly, make any
inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the
facts of the case so as to dissuade them from disclosing such
facts to the Court or to any police office;
(iii) the applicant shall not leave India without the previous
permission of the Court and if the applicant has passport the
same shall be deposited by the applicant before the S.S.P./S.P.
concerned.
In default of any of the conditions, the Investigating Officer is
at liberty to file appropriate application for cancellation of
anticipatory bail granted to the applicant.
The Investigating Officer is directed to conclude the
investigation of the present case in accordance with law
expeditiously preferably within a period of three months from
the date of production of a certified copy of this order
independently without being prejudice by any observation made
by this Court while considering and deciding the present
anticipatory bail application of the applicant.
The applicant is directed to produce a certified copy of this
order, before the S.S.P./S.P. concerned within ten days from
today, who shall ensure the compliance of present order.
The anticipatory bail application is, accordingly, disposed of.