[1]    The present group of matters arising out of almost similar
incidents and occurrence of similar offences, learned advocates
appearing on both the sides requested the Court to take up
conjointly. Hence, Court considering the request, took up the
hearing.        Particulars about each of the application and
complaint numbers etc. provided hereunder for the sake of
Application No. FIR No.         Offences                 Date of order
[2]    Since the identical grievance is voiced out by the original
complainant Shree Vikas Co. Op. Bank Limited (LIQ), the Court
has taken up all applications together by treating Criminal Misc.
Application No. 3712 of 2018 as a lead matter.
[3]    It is the say of the present applicant that there are almost
20 FIRs came to be lodged against the accused persons, which
are numbered as I-C.R.No.23/2003 to I-C.R.No.43/2003 with
DCB Police Station, District: Surat for the offences punishable
under Sections 409, 420, 467, 468, 471, 114, 34 and 120(B) of
the Indian Penal Code.        The main accused person, namely,
Dilipbhai Ishwarbhai Chudawala, who was the Vice Chairman of
the applicant - bank at a relevant point of time is centering
around all FIRs and had got sanctioned different loans in the
name of his relatives without proper security and though
relatives accused persons did not repay the amount of loan with
interest to the applicant - bank, which has resulted into filing of
the complaint as stated above.
[3.1] It is asserted in the application that out of total 15 accused
persons, 4 accused persons have expired, which are narrated in
paragraph 4 of the application. It is the say of the applicant that
pursuant to the aforesaid criminal cases which have been
lodged, the respective accused persons have filed an application
for seeking anticipatory bail before the learned District and
Sessions Judge, Surat which were registered as Criminal Misc.
Application        No.937/2003   to      Criminal   Misc.      Application
No.948/2003,          Criminal Misc.     Application   No.950/2003             to
Criminal Misc. Application No.959/2003. The said applications
came to be disposed of by common order dated 05.12.2003 and
respective all accused persons were enlarged on anticipatory
bail by imposing appropriate terms and conditions.
[3.2] It has further been mentioned in the application that
subsequently original accused persons, who were enlarged on
anticipatory bail, filed a regular bail application as well before
the District and Sessions Judge, Surat being Criminal Misc.
Criminal Application No. 2004 of 2003 which application also
came to be allowed by imposing suitable conditions vide order
[3.3] It is the case of the applicant that those accused persons
were under an obligation to abide by the undertaking, filed
during the proceedings of anticipatory bail and were also
supposed to file a fresh undertaking and original accused
person, namely, Dilipbhai Ishwarbhai Chudawala was under an
obligation to deposit an amount of Rs. 1 Lac per month in view
of undertaking filed during the proceedings of anticipatory bail
and also the other accused persons were to deposit an amount
of Rs. 25,000/- per month during the course of anticipatory bail.
It was observed by the court below at a relevant point of time
that in case of breach of undertaking, the bail deserved to
cancelled.          The original   accused    persons    i.e. Dilipbhai
Ishwarbhai Chudawala deposited regularly an amount of Rs.1
Lac per month till June, 2013 in view of the condition but then
the persons stopped making any payment to the bank and as
such the applicant bank was constrained to file an application
for cancellation of bail being Criminal Misc. Application No. 808
of 2015 which the learned District and Sessions Judge, Surat
was pleased to reject the same by common order dated
21.09.2017 and it is this common order, dated 21.09.2017, is
made the subject matter of present applications.
[4]    When the applications are taken up for hearing, Mr. H. B.
Champavat, learned counsel appearing for the applicant has
submitted that the anticipatory bail ought to have been canceled
by the court below in view of the fact that some of the
respondent accused have not observed the conditions of grant of
anticipatory bail and as such the court ought not to have
disposed of the application for cancellation of bail by brief
order.     However, without much resistance, Mr. Champavat,
learned advocate has candidly submitted that almost in similar
circumstance, with respect to this very offence, the Co-ordinate
Bench of this Court while examining the case of other accused
persons in group of matters headed by Criminal Misc.
Application No.3721 of 2018 has dismissed all the applications
vide order dated 02.05.2022 and as such without any much
resistance has straightway left it to the discretion of the Court
that in view of the fact that the Co-ordinate Bench has dismissed
the applications in exactly similar situation, the present
applications may be disposed of.            In addition to it, Mr.
Champavat, learned advocate has submitted that the order
passed by the court below is of 21.09.2017 and as such the said
order which was passed for seeking cancellation of anticipatory
bail quite before some time may not be disturbed at this
juncture and has left it to the discretion of the court by
tendering a copy of order dated 02.05.2022 passed by the Co-
ordinate Bench of this Court in Criminal Misc. Application
No.3721 of 2018. No other submissions have been made.
[5]    In response to this, Mr. Manan Shah, learned advocate
appearing on behalf of respondents accused, who stated to have
received specific instructions to represent the respondents
accused, has also submitted that the Co-ordinate Bench has
exactly in a similar situation, dismissed the applications filed by
applicant - bank in respect of the offences vide order dated
02.05.2022 and as such present applications also may be
disposed of on the similar line.
[6]    Mr. Hardik Soni, learned APP appearing on behalf of State
has submitted that the impugned order is dated 21.09.2017 and
looking to the reasons which are assigned in paragraph 8 of the
judgment, the discretion at this stage does not deserve to be
exercised, more particularly, when exactly on a similar
circumstance with respect to this very offences, the Co-ordinate
Bench has dismissed the applications of the applicant - bank
vide order dated 02.05.2022 and as such has requested to
dispose of the present applications on the similar line on which
the Co-ordinate Bench has passed an order.
[7]    Having heard the learned advocates appearing for the
parties and having gone through the aforesaid brief submissions
parctically on concurrence made by learned advocate Mr. H. B.
Champavat, it appears that undisputedly the Co-ordinate Bench
in a group of matters headed by Criminal Misc. Application No.
3721 of 2018 has dismissed the applications vide order dated
02.05.2022, considering the circumstances which are prevailing
on record and this fact having not been disputed, Court see no
reason to interfere with in the impugned order at this stage of
the proceedings.
[8]    It is further reflected from the record and the reasons
which are assigned by the Court below while passing the
impugned order dated 21.09.2017 that while exercising
discretion at a relevant point of time, the proper attention has
been made to the circumstances which were reflecting and has
assigned cogent reasons as well and as such the said order does
not deserve to be interfered with. Further, there is no specific
case made out by the applicant - bank about misuse of liberty or
no specific instance of violation of conditions have been
succinctly made in an application or pointed out to the Court.
Hence, in that view of the matter, when no submissions on that
count have been made by learned advocates, court see no
reason to entertain the present applications. While coming to
this conclusion, the Court has also taken note of the
observations which have been made by the Co-ordinate Bench of
this Court dated 02.05.2022 and as such in peculiar background
of aforesaid fact, the court is not inclined to interfere with an
order of grant of anticipatory bail.
[9]     Further apart from that even independent of it the law on
the issue of cancellation of bail is well propounded by catena of
decisions few of same relevant quoted hereunder:
“(i)    In the case of Myakala Dharmarajam & Ors., v. State
of Telangana & Anr., reported in (2020) 2 SCC 743, Hon’ble
Apex Court in paragraph 8 held as under:
“8. In Raghubir Singh v. State of Bihar2 this Court held that
bail can be cancelled where (i) the accused misuses his
liberty by indulging in similar criminal activity, (ii) interferes
with the course of investigation, (iii) attempts to tamper
with evidence or witnesses, (iv) threatens witnesses or
indulges in similar activities which would hamper smooth
investigation, (v) there is likelihood of his fleeing to another
country, (vi) attempts to make himself scarce by going
underground or becoming unavailable to the investigating
agency, (vii) attempts to place himself beyond the reach of
his surety, etc. The above grounds are illustrative and not
exhaustive. It must also be remembered that rejection of
bail stands on one footing but cancellation of bail is a harsh
order because it interferes with the liberty of the individual
and hence it must not be lightly resorted to.”
(ii)    In the case of X. v State of Telangana & Anr., reported
in (2018) 16 SCC 511, Hon’ble Apex Court in paragraphs 14, 15
“14. In a consistent line of precedent this Court has
emphasised the distinction between the rejection of bail in
a non-bailable case at the initial stage and the cancellation
of bail after it has been granted. In adverting to the
distinction, a Bench of two learned Judges of this Court in
Dolatram v State of Haryana observed that:
“4. Rejection of a bail in a non-bailable case at the initial
stage and the cancellation of bail so granted, have to be
considered and dealt with on different basis. Very cogent and
overwhelming circumstances are necessary for an order
directing the cancellation of the bail, already granted.
Generally speaking, the grounds for cancellation of the bail,
already granted, broadly (illustrative and not exhaustive) are:
interference or attempt to interfere with the due course of
administration of justice or evasion of attempt to evade the
due course of justice or abuse of the concession granted to
the accused in any manner. The satisfaction of the court, on
the basis of material placed on the record of the possibility of
the accused absconding is yet another reason justifying the
cancellation of bail. However, bail once granted should not be
cancelled in a mechanical manner without considering
whether any supervening circumstances have rendered it no
longer conducive to a fair trial to allow the accused to retain
his freedom by enjoying the concession of bail during the trial.
15. These principles have been reiterated by another two
Judge Bench decision in Central Bureau of Investigation,
Hyderabad v Subramani Gopalakrishnan5 and more
recently in Dataram Singh v State of Uttar Pradesh:
"23. It is also relevant to note that there is difference between
yardsticks for cancellation of bail and appeal against the order
granting bail. Very cogent and overwhelming circumstances
are necessary for an order directing the cancellation of bail
already granted. Generally speaking, the grounds for
cancellation of bail are, interference or attempt to interfere
with the due course of administration of justice or evasion or
attempt to evade the due course of justice or abuse of the
concessions granted to the accused in any manner. These are
all only few illustrative materials. The satisfaction of the Court
on the basis of the materials placed on record of the
possibility of the accused absconding is another reason
justifying the cancellation of bail. In other words, bail once
granted should not be cancelled in a mechanical manner
without considering whether any supervening circumstances
have rendered it no longer conducive to a fair trial to allow the
accused to retain his freedom by enjoying the concession of
bail during the trial.
18. For the above reasons, we hold that the order of the
High Court allowing the application for bail cannot be
faulted. Moreover, no supervening circumstance has been
made out to warrant the cancellation of the bail. There is no
cogent material to indicate that the accused has been
guilty of conduct which would warrant his being deprived of
his liberty.”
(iii)    In the case of Manoj Kumar Khokhar v State of
Rajasthan & Anr., reported in (2022) 3 SCC 501, Hon’ble
Apex Court in paragraphs 29 and 38 held as under:
“29. Recently in Bhoopendra Singh vs. State of Rajasthan &
Anr. (Criminal Appeal No. 1279 of 2021), this Court made
observations with respect to the exercise of appellate
power to determine whether bail has been granted for valid
reasons as distinguished from an application for
cancellation of bail. i.e. this Court distinguished between
setting aside a perverse order granting bail vis−a−vis
cancellation of bail on the ground that the accused has
misconducted himself or because of some new facts
requiring such cancellation. Quoting Mahipal vs. Rajesh
Kumar − (2020) 2 SCC 118, this Court observed as under:
“16. The considerations that guide the power of an appellate
court in assessing the correctness of an order granting bail
stand on a different footing from an assessment of an
application for the cancellation of bail. The correctness of an
order granting bail is tested on the anvil of whether there was
an improper or arbitrary exercise of the discretion in the
grant of bail. The test is whether the order granting bail is
perverse, illegal or unjustified. On the other hand, an
application for cancellation of bail is generally examined on
the anvil of the existence of supervening circumstances or
violations of the conditions of bail by a person to whom bail
has been granted.”
38. Thus, while elaborate reasons may not be assigned for grant
of bail or an extensive discussion of the merits of the case may
not be undertaken by the court considering a bail application,
an order de hors reasoning or bereft of the relevant reasons
cannot result in grant of bail. In such a case the prosecution or
the informant has a right to assail the order before a higher
forum. As noted in Gurcharan Singh vs. State (Delhi Admn.) −
1978 CriLJ 129, when bail has been granted to an accused, the
State may, if new circumstances have arisen following the grant
of such bail, approach the High Court seeking cancellation of
bail under section 439 (2) of the CrPC. However, if no new
circumstances have cropped up since the grant of bail, the State
may prefer an appeal against the order granting bail, on the
ground that the same is perverse or illegal or has been arrived
at by ignoring material aspects which establish a prima−facie
case against the accused.”
[10] Further, it has been brought to the notice of this Court
that in respect of two main accused, qua one of the accused,
namely, Kalpesh Jariwala, the first information report itself is
quashed and set aside on the basis of his having repaid the
entire amount for which the offence was registered and that fact
has been clearly mentioned in paragraph 6 of the decision dated
02.05.2022 passed by the Co-ordinate Bench of this Court in
Criminal Misc. Application No.3721 of 2018. This fact having
not been disputed by either side, the Court see no reason to
interfere with an order dated 21.09.2017 which has been
questioned in the present proceedings. Accordingly, when there
is no case is made out by the applicant nor urged before the
court about violation of any of the conditions nor any misused of
liberty, in view of aforementioned subsequent event as well, the
present applications does not deserve to be entertained.
Accordingly, the same are dismissed. Notice is discharged.