Writ Petition (S) No.788 of 2012
Rajendra Sharma, S/o Shri Badri Prasad Sharma, aged
about 49 years, Jail Prahari (Constable) from O/o Sub
– Jail Dhamtari, R/o through Shri Bhudhar Prasad
1. State of Chhattisgarh, Through the Secretary, Ministry
of Home Department, Mantralaya, D.K.S. Bhawan, G.E.
2. Inspector    General    of    Jail,   Chhattisgarh,   D.K.S.
3. Superintendent of Jail, Ambikapur, Distt.Surguja (CG)
with Ms Swati Agrawal, Advocate
Order on Board (Through Video Conferencing
1.    The petitioner herein being Jail Guard was terminated
from service by order dated 23.5.2000 by the competent
authority,   which  he   preferred   an  appeal  before  the
appellate authority on 26.6.2000. That appeal has been
allowed by the impugned order 31.8.2010 (Annexure P­4)
and he has been reinstated in service, but full pay
and allowances from the date of termination till the
date   of reinstatement    has   not  been  granted  on  the
principle of 'No Work No Pay'. This part of order not
granting   full  pay   and  allowances   from  the  date  of
termination till the date of reinstatement has been
called  in   question  by  the  petitioner   in  this  writ
petition.
2. Mr.H.B.Agrawal, learned Senior Counsel with Ms Swati
Agrawal,   learned  counsel   for  the  petitioner,   would
submit that full pay and allowances from the date of
termination till the date of reinstatement ought to
have been granted to the petitioner in the light of
Rule 54 (2) of the Fundamental Rules, whereas it has
not been granted on the principle of 'No Work No Pay',
as such, the principle of 'No Work No Pay' would not
be applicable.
3. On the other hand, Mr.Sunil Otwani, learned Additional
Advocate   General   for  the   respondents/State,    would
submit that the appellate authority has considered the
facts and circumstances of the case and rightly held
that the petitioner is not entitled for full pay and
allowances on the principle of 'No Work No Pay'.
4. I  have  heard   learned  counsel   for  the   parties  and
considered   their  rival   submissions  made   hereinabove
and   also   went   through   the   records   with   utmost
circumspection.
5. The Fundamental Rules specially sub­rule (2) of Rule
54 clearly entitles the Government servant for full
pay and allowances in case of full exoneration, then
question   would  be  whether   the  State  Government   is
justified in denying full pay and allowances to the
petitioner invoking the principle of 'No Work No Pay'
for the period 23.5.2000 to 31.8.2010 ?
6.    The principle of 'No Work No Pay' is based upon a
fundamental concept in a Law of Contact of Employment
namely wages and salary are paid by the employer in
consideration       of  work   /   service     rendered   by  the
employee. 'No Work No Pay' principle has been laid
down keeping in view public interest that a Government
servant who does not discharge his duty is not allowed
pay and arrears at the cost of public exchequer. (See
Union Territory, Chandigrh v. Brijmohan Kaur1).
7.    The Supreme Court in the matter of State of Bihar and
others v. Kripa Nand Singh and another 2 has observed
that 'No Work No Pay' is the rule and 'No Work Yet
Pay'      is  the   exception.   It    was   pointed    out  that
exception would apply only when employee is compelled
(compulsory      waiting  period)    not   to   attend  his  duty
without      any  violation  or   without    any   fault  on  his
part.
8.    The Supreme Court in the matter of               State of Uttar
Pradesh and others v. Madhav Prasad Sahrma 3 has held
that principle of 'No Work No Pay' cannot be applied
as     a   rule  of   thumb.  Full    back    wages  in   certain
circumstances        may   be   justified    particularly     when
promotion is wrongly denied.
9.    Similarly, in the matter of            Commissioner, Karnataka
Housing Board v.          C. Muddaiah4 the Supreme Court has
reiterated that principle of 'No Work No Pay' is not
absolute in a given case, if it is that the person was
willing to work but he was illegally and unlawfully
not      allowed    to   do    so,   the   Court    may    in  the
circumstances, direct the authority to grant him all
benefits considering “as if he had worked”.
10.   In the considered opinion of this Court, the principle
of 'No Work No Pay' would not be applicable where the
rule expressly direct otherwise like sub­rule (2) of
Rule      54  of   the    Fundamental    Rules,    which   clearly
provides     that    the   Government    servant   who   had  been
dismissed, removed or compulsorily retired has been
fully      exonerated,      shall   be    paid    full   pay   and
allowances to which he would have been entitled, had
he     not    been    dismissed,    removed     or   compulsorily
retired, but subject to proviso to sub­rule (2) of
Rule     54  and   if   the   termination   of   the   proceedings
instituted      against    the   Government    servant   had  been
delayed due to reasons directly attributable to the
Government servant, but in that case also, the amount
determined under proviso to sub­rule (2) shall not be
less   than    the    subsistence    allowance      and    other
allowances admissible under Rule 53, as such, when the
rule  expressly    provides   for  grant   of   full    pay  and
allowances    on   full   exoneration   of    the    Government
servant    from      punishment/criminal       charges,      the
principle   of     'No   Work   No   Pay'   would      have   no
application and said principle         of 'No Work No Pay'
would not override sub­rule (2) of Rule 54 of the the
Fundamental    Rules     which   provides     full    pay    and
allowances on full exoneration.
11. In view of above legal position, the part of impugned
order   dated    31.8.2010   (Annexure    P­4)    holding    the
petitioner   to    be   not  entitled   for    full    pay   and
allowances from the date of termination till the date
of reinstatement is hereby set­aside.           The matter is
remitted to the appellate authority to consider the
case  of  the    petitioner   for  grant   of   full    pay  and
allowances   from   23.5.2000   to  31.8.2010    in   light   of
sub­rule (2) of Rule 54 of the Fundamental Rules and
also in light of the judgment delivered by this Court
in the matter of Shankar Lal Soni (died) through LR's
v. State of Chhattisgarh and others (WPS No.994/2010),
decided on 9.7.2021 within two months from the date of
receipt of a copy of this order by passing a reasoned
and speaking order.
12. The writ petition is allowed to the extent indicated
hereinabove. No order as to cost(s).