District Dhanbad, through its proprietor Maina Devi, aged
about 78 years, wife of Late Nand Kishore Aggarwal, Care of
Mr. Lakshman Modi, resident of Flat No.400, Surya
1.       Indian Oil Corporation Limited, through its D.G.M.
(R.S.), having its office at Indian Oil Bhawan, Dhanbad, P.O. &
having its office at Indian Oil Bhawan, Dhanbad, P.O. & P.S.
For the Petitioner        :Mr. Vipul Poddar, Advocate
For the Respondents :Mr. Rahul Lamba, Advocate
The matter has been taken up through video
2.       The instant application has been filed under Section
11(6)(C) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 for
appointment of an independent Arbitrator and for reference
of the dispute arising out of Clause 21 of the Agreement
dated 29.09.1967 for Petrol HSD Dealer Agreement,
between the parties for adjudication.
3.      The   brief   facts     of the   case    which  led the
petitioner/applicant to approach this Court by filing the
instant application, are that an agreement was entered in
between the petitioner/applicant and respondents, to be
known as Petrol HSD Dealer Agreement, for the purpose of
sale and disposal of Petrol / High Speed Diesel Oil and
certain other petroleum products.
The aforesaid contract contains a provision as
under Clause 21 for settlement of dispute through
The petitioner/applicant was carrying out the
business in terms of the aforesaid contract. However, an
explanation was sought for on 15.09.1999 asking to reply
as to why the penal action should not be initiated in line
with Clause 14 of the said dealership agreement in violation
of the terms and conditions of the aforesaid dealership
The   petitioner/applicant      replied.   However, the
aforesaid reply was not found to be satisfactory and in
consequence     thereof,    the    dealership    agreement  was
The petitioner/applicant approached to this Court
by filing writ petition being C.W.J.C. No.827 of 2000 (R).
However, the aforesaid writ petition was dismissed against
which intra-court appeal being L.P.A. No.696 of 2001 was
preferred but the same was also dismissed vide order dated
The petitioner/applicant, thereafter, made a request
for appointment of Arbitrator vide         application dated
28.04.2018. According to the petitioner/applicant, when
the Arbitrator, in terms of the contract, has not been
appointed, the instant application under Section 11(6)(C) of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 has been filed.
The instant application was heard on 22.11.2021.
Mr. Rahul Lamba, learned counsel, after waiving notice on
behalf of respondents, had sought for four weeks’ time to
file counter affidavit. The matter was directed to be posted
The matter has been listed today for hearing of the
Mr. Lamba, learned counsel appearing for the
respondents, has submitted that although no counter
affidavit has been filed, but he is ready to argue the matter
on merit.
The matter has been heard on merit with the
consent of the learned counsel for the parties.
4.      Mr. Vipul Poddar, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner/applicant, has submitted that it is a fit case
where the sole Arbitrator is required to be appointed for
adjudication of the claim in terms of Arbitration Agreement
as contained under Clause 21.
He further submits that the petitioner/applicant, in
terms of the aforesaid condition stipulated in the contract,
made request for appointment of Arbitrator vide application
dated 28.04.2018 but the same was not responded. It is the
laches on the part of the respondents in not appointing the
Arbitrator, therefore, the instant application.
5.       Per contra, Mr. Rahul Lamba, learned counsel
appearing for the respondents, submits that the instant
application is not maintainable on the ground of limitation.
According to him, the instant application has been
filed after inordinate delay of about 20 years from the date
of passing of the order by the Hon’ble Division Bench of this
Court in L.P.A. No. 696 of 2001 whereby liberty was
granted to the petitioner/applicant to approach before the
authority for appointment of Arbitrator.
He further submits that the request for appointment
of Arbitrator was also made after lapse of about 16 years
from the date of order passed in L.P.A. No. 696 of 2001.
He, in order to strengthen his argument, has relied
upon the judgment rendered by Hon'ble Apex Court in
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited and Another v. Nortel
wherein the issue of limitation was the sole criteria for
consideration and while delving upon the issue, the Hon'ble
Apex Court has held that the provision of Article 137 of the
First Schedule of the Limitation Act, 1963, will be
applicable, thereby the proceeding for appointment of
Arbitrator, if filed beyond the period of three years as
provided under Article 137 of the Limitation Act, 1963, will
be barred by limitation and in view of the matter, such
application is fit to be dismissed at the threshold.
6.      Mr. Vipula Poddar, learned counsel appearing for
the petitioner, in response to such submission, has
submitted that the contention which has been raised by the
learned counsel for the respondents to the effect that on the
ground of expiry of the period of three years from date of
occurrence of cause of action, the instant application is fit
to be dismissed, is not worth to be considered in view of the
judgment rendered by Hon'ble Apex Court in Uttarakhand
Purv Sainik Kalyan Nigam Limited v. Northern Coal
Field Limited [(2020) 2 SCC 455] and Zostel Hospitality
Private Limited through its authorized representative
v. Oravel Stays Private Limited through its Director
7.      We have heard the learned counsel for the parties
and perused the documents available on record.
8.      The undisputed fact in this case is that the
petitioner/applicant     had    entered   into  a    dealership
agreement on 29.09.1967 for the purpose of sale and
disposal of Petrol / High Speed Diesel Oil and certain other
petroleum products. The aforesaid agreement contains a
clause of resolution of dispute as under Clause 21 thereof.
The petitioner/applicant, while carrying out its business,
on the ground of commission of certain irregularities, an
explanation was sought for vide notice dated 15.09.1999 as
to why the penal action be not taken. The aforesaid notice
was    replied   by   the  petitioner/applicant   denying   the
allegation of commission of alleged irregularities. The
aforesaid    reply   was   not   found  satisfactory   and   in
consequence thereof, the agreement was terminated vide
order of termination dated 12.03.2001.
The petitioner/applicant, being aggrieved with the
aforesaid action of the respondents, preferred a writ
petition being C.W.J.C. No.827 of 2000(R) but was
dismissed on the ground of availability of alternative
The petitioner/applicant then preferred intra-court
appeal being L.P.A. No. 696 of 2001 which was also
dismissed vide order dated 22.04.2002 on the ground of
availability of alternative remedy of arbitration clause in the
The petitioner/applicant has not acted immediately
after passing of the order by the Hon’ble Division Bench of
this Court in L.P.A. No. 696 of 2001, rather, the
petitioner/applicant    made    request    vide   letter   dated
28.04.2018 for appointment of Arbitrator, as would appear
from Annexure-5 to the paper book.
The grievance of the petitioner/applicant that even
though request for appointment of Arbitrator was made
vide request letter dated 28.04.2018 but no response
thereof was received, therefore, the instant application
under Section 11(6)(C) of the Act, 1996 has been filed.
Learned    counsel    for   the   respondents     raised
objection   about     non-maintainability    of   the    instant
application on the ground of filing of this application after
inordinate delay. He, in support of his argument has relied
upon the judgment rendered by Hon'ble Apex Court in
Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited and Another (Supra).
While on the other hand, learned counsel appearing
for the petitioner/applicant has relied upon the judgment
rendered by Hon'ble Apex Court in Uttarakhand Purv
Sainik    Kalyan     Nigam    Limited    (Supra) and Zostel
9.      This   Court,   having    appreciated   the   argument
advanced on behalf of learned counsel for the parties, is
required to answer the issue about the maintainability of
the instant application on the ground of applicability of the
provision of Article 137 of the Limitation Act, 1963.
This Court, before answering the aforesaid issue, is
also required to consider as to whether the provision of
Article 137 of the Limitation Act, 1963 will be held
applicable in a petition filed under Section 11(6)(C) of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.
This Court, to answer the issue of applicability of
the provision of Article 137 of the Limitation Act, 1963, has
gone across the judgment rendered by Hon'ble Apex Court
in Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited and Another (Supra),
wherein the provision of Article 137 of the Limitation Act,
1963 has been held applicable in a proceeding while
considering the application filed under Section 11(6)(C) of
the Act, 1996, as would appear from paragraph Nos. 45.1,
50, 51 and 53.1 thereof, which reads hereunder as:-
―45.1. In para 144, the Court observed that the
judgment in Mayavati Trading [(2019) 8 SCC 714] had
rightly held that the judgment in Patel Engg. [(2005) 8
SCC 618] had been legislatively overruled. Para 144 reads
―144. As observed earlier, Patel Engg. Ltd. explains
and holds that Sections 8 and 11 are complementary
in nature as both relate to reference to arbitration.
Section 8 applies when judicial proceeding is pending
and an application is filed for stay of judicial
proceeding      and    for  reference   to   arbitration.
Amendments to Section 8 vide Act 3 of 2016 have not
been omitted. Section 11 covers the situation where
the parties approach a court for appointment of an
arbitrator. Mayavati Trading (P) Ltd., in our humble
opinion, rightly holds that Patel Engg. Ltd. has been
legislatively overruled and hence would not apply even
post omission of sub-section (6-A) to Section 11 of the
Arbitration    Act.  Mayavati    Trading   (P)  Ltd. has
elaborated upon the object and purposes and history of
the amendment to Section 11, with reference to sub-
section (6-A) to elucidate that the section, as originally
enacted,    was     facsimile   with     Article  11    of
the UNCITRAL Model of law of arbitration on which the
Arbitration Act was drafted and enacted.‖
(emphasis supplied)
While exercising jurisdiction under Section 11 as the
judicial forum, the court may exercise the prima facie test
to screen and knockdown ex facie meritless, frivolous,
and dishonest litigation. Limited jurisdiction of the courts
would ensure expeditious and efficient disposal at the
referral stage. At the referral stage, the Court can
interfere ―only‖ when it is ―manifest‖ that the claims are
ex facie time-barred and dead, or there is no subsisting
dispute. Para 148 of the judgment reads as follows :
―148. Section 43(1) of the Arbitration Act states that
the Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply to arbitrations as
it applies to court proceedings. Sub-section (2) states
that for the purposes of the Arbitration Act and the
Limitation Act, arbitration shall be deemed to have
commenced on the date referred to in Section 21.
Limitation law is procedural and normally disputes,
being factual, would be for the arbitrator to decide
guided by the facts found and the law applicable. The
court at the referral stage can interfere only when it is
manifest that the claims are ex facie time-barred and
dead, or there is no subsisting dispute. All other cases
should be referred to the Arbitral Tribunal for decision
on merits. Similar would be the position in case of
disputed ―no-claim certificate‖ or defence on the plea
of novation and ―accord and satisfaction‖. As observed
in Premium Nafta Products Ltd. [2007 UKHL 40] , it is
not to be expected that commercial men while entering
transactions inter se would knowingly create a system
which would require that the court should first decide
whether the contract should be rectified or avoided or
rescinded, as the case may be, and then if the contract
is held to be valid, it would require the arbitrator to
resolve the issues that have arisen.‖
(emphasis supplied)
50. In the notice invoking arbitration dated 29-4-2020,
it has been averred that:
―Various communications have been exchanged
between the petitioner and the respondents ever since
and a dispute has arisen between the petitioner and
the respondents, regarding non-payment of the
amounts due under the tender document.‖
51. The period of limitation for issuing notice of
arbitration would not get extended by mere exchange of
letters, or mere settlement discussions, where a final bill
is rejected by making deductions or otherwise. Sections 5
to 20 of the Limitation Act do not exclude the time taken
on account of settlement discussions. Section 9 of the
Limitation Act makes it clear that: ―where once the time
has begun to run, no subsequent disability or inability to
institute a suit or make an application stops it.‖ There
must be a clear notice invoking arbitration setting out the
―particular dispute‖ [Section 21 of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996.] (including claims/amounts)
which must be received by the other party within a period
of 3 years from the rejection of a final bill, failing which,
the time bar would prevail.
53.1. The period of limitation for filing an application
under Section 11 would be governed by Article 137 of the
First Schedule of the Limitation Act, 1963. The period of
limitation will begin to run from the date when there is
failure to appoint the arbitrator. It has been suggested
that Parliament may consider amending Section 11 of the
1996 Act to provide a period of limitation for filing an
application under this provision, which is in consonance
with the object of expeditious disposal of arbitration
proceedings.‖
Thus, after the law having been laid down by the
Hon'ble Apex Court in Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
and Another (Supra) wherein the provision of Article 137
of the Limitation Act, 1963 has been held applicable,
therefore, this Court is required to see as to whether the
instant application filed under Section 11(6)(C) of the Act,
1996 can be said to be maintainable, request for which has
been made after lapse of about 16 years from the date of
order passed by Hon’ble Division Bench of this Court in
L.P.A. No.696 of 2001.
10.      This Court, before considering the aforesaid issue,
has also gone across the pleading made by the learned
counsel for the petitioner in order to scrutinize as to
whether any reason has been explained to show the delay
in filing the said application after inordinate delay but no
such explanation has been furnished except the age of the
petitioner/applicant who is now 78 years.
There is no dispute about the fact that the
limitation can be condoned if the party will show sufficient
cause for its condonation but, no such reason is there.
Further, the question of applicability of Section 5 of the
Limitation Act, 1963 will also be required to be considered
but no such issue has been raised, therefore, no such
finding is being given.
Therefore, in the given facts of the case, admittedly
the order of termination of the dealership agreement which
was     passed    on    12.03.2001     against   which    writ
petition/intra court appeal was preferred, which was
dismissed by the Division Bench of this Court. The order
passed by the Hon’ble Division Bench of this Court in
L.P.A. No. 696 of 2001 was not questioned by the
petitioner/applicant, as has been informed in course of
argument, as such, the order passed by the Hon’ble
Division Bench of this Court in L.P.A. No.696 of 2001 has
remained conclusive. As such, according to the considered
view of this Court, the date of filing of the request for the
purpose of counting the period of limitation of three years
will be required to be counted from the date of order passed
by the Hon’ble Division Bench of this Court in L.P.A.
No.696 of 2001 i.e., on 22.04.2002.
Admittedly herein, after the disposal of the aforesaid
intra-court appeal, which was dismissed on 22.04.2002
granting liberty to the petitioner/applicant for availing the
alternative remedy for resolution of dispute as per the
stipulation made in the dealership agreement and by taking
recourse thereof, for the first time the petitioner/applicant
has made request for appointment of sole Arbitrator in view
of arbitration clause, as provided under Clause 21 of the
aforesaid dealership agreement, on 28.04.2018, after lapse
of about 16 years.
11.     Mr.     Poddar,      learned    counsel     for    the
petitioner/applicant,    has    relied upon    the   judgment
rendered by Hon'ble Apex Court in Uttarakhand Purv
Sainik Kalyan Nigam Limited (Supra) in order to fortify
his case about the issue of non-considering the limitation
at this stage, rather, it may be left open to be adjudicated
by the Arbitrator.
12.    This Court has considered the judgment rendered
by Hon'ble Apex Court in Uttarakhand Purv Sainik
Kalyan Nigam Limited (Supra) of which the reliance has
been placed about the observation made at paragraph 7.5
to 7.14 and paragraph 8 thereof. Paragraphs 7.5 to 7.14
and paragraph 8 of the aforesaid judgment are quoted
―7.5. Further, the Chief Justice was required to
decide all threshold issues with respect to jurisdiction,
the existence of the agreement, whether the claim was
a dead one; or a time-barred claim sought to be
resurrected; or whether the parties had concluded the
transaction by recording satisfaction of their mutual
rights and obligations, and received the final payment
without objection, under Section 11, at the pre-
reference stage. The decision in Patel Engg. [(2005) 8
SCC 618] was followed by this Court in Boghara
12 SCC 349], and other decisions.
7.6. The Law Commission in the 246th Report [
Amendments to the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,
1996, Report No. 246, Law Commission of India
(August 2014), p. 20.] recommended that:
―33. … the Commission has recommended
amendments to Sections 8 and 11 of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996. The scope of the judicial
intervention is only restricted to situations where the
court/judicial authority finds that the arbitration
agreement does not exist or is null and void. Insofar
as the [Ed. : The matter between two asterisks has
been emphasised in original.] nature [Ed. : The
matter between two asterisks has been emphasised
in original.] of intervention is concerned, it is
recommended that in the event the court/judicial
authority is prima facie satisfied against the
argument challenging the arbitration agreement, it
shall appoint the arbitrator and/or refer the parties
to arbitration, as the case may be. The amendment
envisages that the judicial authority shall not refer
the parties to arbitration only if it finds that there
does not exist an arbitration agreement or that it is
null and void. If the judicial authority is of the
opinion that prima facie the arbitration agreement
exists, then it shall refer the dispute to arbitration,
and leave the existence of the arbitration agreement
to be finally determined by the Arbitral Tribunal.‖
(emphasis supplied)
7.7. Based on the recommendations of the Law
Commission, Section 11 was substantially amended by
the 2015 Amendment Act, to overcome the effect of all
previous judgments rendered on the scope of power by
a non obstante clause, and to reinforce the
kompetenz-kompetenz principle enshrined in Section
16 of the 1996 Act. The 2015 Amendment Act inserted
sub-section (6-A) to Section 11 which provides that:
―(6-A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may
be, the High Court, while considering any
application under sub-section (4) or sub-section (5)
or sub-section (6), shall, notwithstanding any
judgment, decree or order of any court, confine to the
examination of the existence of an arbitration
agreement.‖
7.8. By virtue of the non obstante clause
incorporated in Section 11(6-A), previous judgments
rendered     in Patel    Engg. [(2005)   8   SCC     618]
and Boghara Polyfab [(2009) 1 SCC 267] , were
legislatively overruled. The scope of examination is
now confined only to the existence of the arbitration
agreement at the Section 11 stage, and nothing more.
7.9. Reliance is placed on the judgment in Duro
Felguera S.A. v. Gangavaram Port Ltd. [(2017) 9 SCC
729] , wherein this Court held that :
―48. … From a reading of Section 11(6-A), the
intention of the legislature is crystal clear i.e. the
court should and need only look into one aspect—the
existence of an arbitration agreement. What are the
factors for deciding as to whether there is an
arbitration agreement is the next question. The
resolution to that is simple — it needs to be seen if
the agreement contains a clause which provides for
arbitration pertaining to the disputes which have
arisen between the parties to the agreement.‖
(emphasis supplied)
7.10. In view of the legislative mandate contained
in Section 11(6-A), the Court is now required only to
examine the existence of the arbitration agreement. All
other preliminary or threshold issues are left to be
decided by the arbitrator under Section 16, which
enshrines the kompetenz-kompetenz principle.
7.11. The doctrine of ―kompetenz-kompetenz‖, also
referred    to    as     ―compétence-compétence‖,      or
―compétence de la recognized‖, implies that the
Arbitral Tribunal is empowered and has the
competence to rule on its own jurisdiction, including
determining all jurisdictional issues, and the existence
or validity of the arbitration agreement. This doctrine
is intended to minimise judicial intervention, so that
the arbitral process is not thwarted at the threshold,
when a preliminary objection is raised by one of the
parties. The doctrine of kompetenz-kompetenz is,
however, subject to the exception i.e. when the
arbitration agreement itself is impeached as being
procured by fraud or deception. This exception would
also apply to cases where the parties in the process of
negotiation, may have entered into a draft agreement
as an antecedent step prior to executing the final
contract. The draft agreement would be a mere
proposal to arbitrate, and not an unequivocal
acceptance of the terms of the agreement. Section 7 of
the Contract Act, 1872 requires the acceptance of a
contract to be absolute and unqualified. If an
arbitration agreement is not valid or non-existent, the
Arbitral Tribunal cannot assume jurisdiction to
adjudicate upon the disputes. Appointment of an
arbitrator may be refused if the arbitration agreement
is not in writing, or the disputes are beyond the scope
of the arbitration agreement. Article V(1)(a) of the New
York Convention states that recognition and
enforcement of an award may be refused if the
arbitration agreement ―is not valid under the law to
which the parties have subjected it or, failing any
indication thereon, under the law of the country where
the award was made‖.
7.12. The legislative intent underlying the 1996 Act
is party autonomy and minimal judicial intervention in
the arbitral process. Under this regime, once the
arbitrator is appointed, or the tribunal is constituted,
all issues and objections are to be decided by the
7.13. In view of the provisions of Section 16, and
the legislative policy to restrict judicial intervention at
the pre-reference stage, the issue of limitation would
require to be decided by the arbitrator. Sub-section (1)
of Section 16 provides that the Arbitral Tribunal may
rule on its own jurisdiction, ―including any objections‖
with respect to the existence or validity of the
arbitration agreement. Section 16 is as an inclusive
provision, which would comprehend all preliminary
issues touching upon the jurisdiction of the Arbitral
Tribunal. The issue of limitation is a jurisdictional
issue, which would be required to be decided by the
arbitrator under Section 16, and not the High Court at
the pre-reference stage under Section 11 of the Act.
Once the existence of the arbitration agreement is not
disputed, all issues, including jurisdictional objections
are to be decided by the arbitrator.
7.14. In the present case, the issue of limitation
was raised by the respondent Company to oppose the
appointment of the arbitrator under Section 11 before
the High Court. Limitation is a mixed question of fact
and law. In ITW Signode (India) Ltd. v. CCE [(2004) 3
SCC 48] a three-Judge Bench of this Court held that
the question of limitation involves a question of
jurisdiction. The findings on the issue of limitation
would be a jurisdictional issue. Such a jurisdictional
issue is to be determined having regard to the facts
and the law. Reliance is also placed on the judgment of
this        Court          in NTPC          Ltd. v. Siemens
Atkeingesellschaft [(2007) 4 SCC 451] , wherein it was
held that the Arbitral Tribunal would deal with
limitation under Section 16 of the 1996 Act. If the
tribunal finds that the claim is a dead one, or that the
claim was barred by limitation, the adjudication of
these issues would be on the merits of the claim.
Under sub-section (5) of Section 16, the tribunal has
the obligation to decide the plea; and if it rejects the
plea, the arbitral proceedings would continue, and the
tribunal would make the award. Under sub-section (6)
a party aggrieved by such an arbitral award may
challenge      the     award     under       Section    34.
In IFFCO Ltd. v. Bhadra Products [(2018) 2 SCC 534]
this Court held that the issue of limitation being a
jurisdictional issue, the same has to be decided by the
tribunal under Section 16, which is based on Article
16 of the UNCITRAL Model Law which enshrines the
kompetenz principle.
8. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we set aside the
impugned judgment and order dated 11-1-2018
passed by the High Court, and direct that the issue of
limitation be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal.‖
13.     This Court has considered the observations made at
paragraph 7.5 onwards as also paragraph 8 and found
therefrom,     more      particularly,    paragraph      7.14     and
paragraph 8, to the effect that the issue of limitation was
raised by the company to oppose the appointment of
Arbitrator under Section 11 before the High Court. It has
been observed therein that the limitation is a mixed
question of fact and law and, as such, finding on the issue
of   limitation     would      be   jurisdictional    issue.     Such
jurisdictional issue would be determined having regard to
the fact and the law to be decided by the Arbitral Tribunal.
14.     It requires to refer herein that the judgment
rendered by the Hon’ble Apex Court in Uttarakhand Purv
Sainik Kalyan Nigam Limited (Supra) was rendered on
27.11.2019 while the judgment in Bharat Sanchar Nigam
Limited      and     Another       (Supra)    was    rendered      on
10.03.2021. It is settled that recent judgment of Hon’ble
Apex Court, having answered the issue, will have binding
precedence over the former judgment.
It further appears from the judgment rendered by
the Hon’ble Apex Court in Bharat Sanchar Nigam
Limited and Another (Supra) that Uttarakhand Purv
Sainik     Kalyan      Nigam      Limited      (Supra)    has    been
considered, as would appear from paragraph 33 thereof
and after taking into consideration the ratio laid down
therein, the Hon’ble Apex has observed which has been
quoted and referred hereinabove.
15.     Further,     learned      counsel    appearing       for  the
petitioner has relied upon the judgment rendered in Zostel
Hospitality       Private      Limited     (Supra)     which      was
pronounced on 19th September, 2018. From its perusal, it
appears that the issue about applicability of Article 137 of
the Limitation Act, 1963 was not the subject matter, rather,
the Hon'ble Apex Court, in the aforesaid judgment, has
opined that the respondent can raise the                    issue of
arbitrability of disputes before the Arbitrator with a further
observation to the effect that needless to say, our
expression of the view that an arbitration clause exists and
the arbitrator should be appointed, would not affect the
suit filed by the respondents. The observation made at
paragraph 9 of the aforesaid judgment is quoted hereunder
―9. In view of the aforesaid, we are of the opinion that
the respondents can raise the issue of arbitrability of
the disputes before the arbitrator. Needless to say, our
expression of the view that an arbitration clause exists
and the arbitrator should be appointed, would not
affect the suit filed by the respondents.‖
16.     Thus, it is evident that the judgment rendered by
Hon'ble Apex Court in Uttarakhand Purv Sainik Kalyan
Nigam Limited (Supra) since has been considered in the
judgment rendered in the case of Bharat Sanchar Nigam
Limited and Another (Supra), wherein the applicability of
Article 137 of the Limitation Act has been decided holding
about it applicability in an application filed under Section
11(6)(C) of the Act, 1996 which is after the judgment passed
in the case of Uttarakhand Purv Sainik Kalyan Nigam
Limited (Supra). Therefore, according to the considered
view of this Court, after taking into consideration the
position of law that where the ratio is being decided
answering the issue, will have the binding precedence, as
has been settled by Hon'ble Apex Court in ICICI Bank and
Another v. Municipal Corpn. Of Greater Bombey and
Others [(2005) 6 SCC 404], wherein at paragraph 8 it has
―8.     ...    ... The ratio and effect of the judgment is required to
be ascertained with reference to the question of law as decided by
the Court. The ratio of the judgment or the principle upon which
the question before the Court is decided is alone binding as a
precedent. The decision of the Supreme Court upon a question of
law is considered to be a binding precedent, and this must be
ascertained and determined by analysing all the material facts and
issues involved in the case.‖
17.     So far as the applicability of the judgment rendered
in the case of Zostel Hospitality Private Limited (Supra),
this Court is of the considered view that no particular issue
about applicability of the provision of Article 137 of the
Limitation Act, 1963 fell for consideration before the
Hon'ble Apex Court, therefore, the aforesaid judgment since
is on different aspect, is not applicable in the facts and
circumstances of the case.
So far as the argument made on behalf of the
learned counsel for the petitioner that the issue of
limitation be left open to be decided by the Arbitrator is
concerned, this Court is not in agreement with such
submission after taking into consideration the judgment
rendered in the case of Bharat Sanchar Nigam Limited
and Another (Supra) wherein if the application itself is not
maintainable on the ground of inordinate delay in filing
application under Section 11(6)(C) of the Act, 1996, instead
of referring it before the sole Arbitrator, is required to be
answered at the threshold i.e., at the stage of delving upon
the application filed under Section 11(6)(C) of the Act, 1996.
18.     This Court, therefore, on the basis of the discussion
made hereinabove and considering the binding of the
judgment rendered by Hon'ble Apex Court in Bharat
Sanchar Nigam Limited and Another (Supra), is of the
view    that   the    instant  application    filed  by    the
petitioner/applicant under Section 11(6)(C) of the Act,
1996, having been filed after lapse of a period of more than
16 years from the date of order passed by the Hon’ble
Division Bench of this Court in L.P.A. No. 696 of 2001, is
barred by limitation since filed after delay of more than the
period of three years, as has been provided under Article
137 of the First Schedule of the Limitation Act, 1963.
19.     Accordingly, the instant application fails and is
dismissed.