Respondent :- State Of U.P. Through Secretary (Home) And 2
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
Hon'ble Munishwar Nath Bhandari,Acting Chief Justice
Hon'ble Anil Kumar Ojha,J.
Heard Sri Manish Goyal, Additional Advocate General assisted
by Ms. Akanksha Sharma for the respondents.
Pursuant to the order of this Court on last two dates, the
Director General of Police submits that action has been taken
against those police officers who defaulted in conducting the
investigation in a fair and proper manner. The D.G.P. has
admitted serious lapse in the investigation and accordingly, the
investigating officer Pahup Singh has been placed under
"ददिनननांक 16.09.2019 कको जवनहर नवकोदिय दवदनलय, भकोगनगाँव जनपदि ममैनपपुररी ककी ककन
11 ककी दवजनन वगर ककी छनत्र कन शररीर दवनांग कके प्रवकेश कक मम पनांखम ककी ररॉड मम बनके छके दि पर
दिपपु टके सके लटकन पनयके जननके पर ममृतकन कके दपतन शरी सपुभनष चन्द्र पनण्डकेय दनरन थननन भकोगनगाँव
पर ददिनननांक 17.09.2019 कको मपु०अ०सनां० 392/2019 धनरन 302/376/511/34 भनदिदव व
पकोक्सको 7/8/18 एक्ट कके अन्तगर त पनांजरीकमृत करनयन गयन। इस अदभयकोग ककी प्रनममभक
दववकेचनन कके दिदौरनन आपकके दनरन दवदनलय पररसर मम लगके सरीसरीटरीवरी कमैमर कके आधके -अधधूरके
फपुटकेज 78 ददिवस दवलमब सके प्रनप्त दकयके गयके।
2.        ममृतकन कके वमैजनइनल स्लनइड व चडरी मम मननव वरीयर ककी पपुदष्टि समबन्धरी एफ० एस०
एल०, आगरन ककी आख्यन ददिनननांक 17.10.2019 कको प्रनप्त हकोनके कके उपरनन्त आपकके दनरन
45(पपतनलरीस) ददिवस ककी लमबरी अवधध तक एक भरी ननदमत यन सनांददिग्ध व्यदक्ति कके रक्ति कन
नमधूनन प्रप्त कर डरी०एन०ए० दमलनन हकेतपु दवधध दवजनन प्रयकोगशनलन नहहीं भकेजन गयन।
3.       ममृतकन ककी पकोस्टमनटर म ररपकोटर मम "HYMEN TORN, CLOTTED BLOOD
PRESENT IN VAGINA" जमैसके तथ्ययों कको गमभरीरतन सके नहहीं धलयन गयन। यददप यह
महत्वपधूरर तथ्य ममृतकन कके सनथ दिरपु नचनर हकोनके ककी तरफ प्रथम दृष्टियन इनांदगत करतन हमै
(उलकेखनरीय हमै दक बनदि मम एफ० एस० एल०, आगरन ककी ररपकोटर मम इसककी पपुदष्टि भरी हह ई हमै)
तथनदप ममृतकन कके स्कधूल यधूदनफरॉमर कको सरीज कर पररीकर हकेतपु दवधध दवजनन प्रयकोगशनलन
4.     ममृतकन ककी ममृत्यपु कके समबन्ध मम ददिनननांक 17.09.2019 कको मपुकदिमन पनांजरीकमृत हकोनके कके
उपरनन्त आपकके दनरन मपुकदिमम ककी अदभयपुक्तिन शरीमतरी सपुषमन सनगर कन त्वररत बयनन नहहीं
दकयन गयन बमलक अत्यधधक दवलमब सके ददिनननांक 08.12.2019 कको लगभग 03 मनह बनदि
बयनन अनांदकत दकयन गयन धजस कनरर मपुकदिमम ककी दववकेचनन पर दवपररीत प्रभनव पडन।
            इस प्रकनर स्पष्टि हमै दक उक्ति महत्वपधूरर अदभयकोग ककी दववकेचनन मम आपकके दनरन
घकोर लनपरवनहरी एवनां उदिनसरीनतन बरतरी गयरी धजससके जहननां एक ओर घटनन कके सफल
अननवरर पर प्रदतकधूल प्रभनव पडन वहहीं दिस          धू ररी ओर जन सनमनन्य मम पपुधलस ककी छदव
A perusal of the reasons for placing him under suspension
shows serious lapses in the investigation. It was found that in
the vaginal slide, human semen was found apart from sperm on
the underwear of the deceased girl. Despite receipt of the report
from F.S.L., Agra, the Investigating Officer did not send for
DNA test of those persons within 45 days who were named in
the F.I.R. or who were suspected and thereby subsequent DNA
remains of no use. There are other aspects which have been
taken note of for placing the officers under suspension.
It is also stated that the inquiry against the then Superintendent
of Police, Mainpuri would also be completed soon. It is also
stated that two other officers Om Prakash, Additional
Superintendent     of   Police   and    Priyank   Jain,   Deputy
Superintendent of Police have also been placed under
suspension.
The new S.I.T. has constituted to investigate the matter within
the shortest possible time and possibly, it would be completed
within a period of six weeks.
Sri Amrendra Nath Singh, Senior Counsel assisted by Ms.
Chhaya Gupta, Sri Prabha Shankar Mishra and other Bar
Members has submitted that it is not only a case of serious lapse
of investigation but a case where the effort of the investigating
team was to give benefit to the accused. Referring to the F.I.R.,
he submitted that the incident said to have taken place at around
5.30-6.00 AM but the parents were not informed about the
incident by the Principal of the school rather knowledge of the
incident could be gathered from the relative Sri Vijay Mishra
who was present in the hospital for the treatment of his wife.
It is also stated that statement of the father was not recorded
despite being material apart from record of call details of
15.09.2019 was taken when the deceased said to have called the
mother.
Learned Senior Counsel further referred to Section 173 Cr.P.C.,
as amended. It is to show duration to complete the investigation
in a case registered for the offence under Sections 376, 376-A,
376-AB, 376-B, 376-C, 376-D, 376-DA, 376-DB or 376-E
I.P.C. In the instant case, even the statement of the named
accused were recorded after three months and were not arrested
despite serious allegations against them. The effort was to
somehow make them free and thereby no evidence relevant to
the case was collected rather subsequent investigation was also
to give clean chit to the accused.
Learned Senior Counsel Sri Amrendra Nath Singh submits that
now the investigation should be conducted under the
supervision of the High Court.
He further submits that the accused were named, yet they have
not been arrested otherwise truth would have come.
We have considered the submissions made by the learned
Senior Counsel Sri Amrendra Nath Singh and Sri Prabha
Shankar Mishra appearing for the Bar to assist the Court.
We find that the D.G.P. has realised that the serious lapses in the
investigation of the case and thereby three officers have been
placed under suspension and the inquiry against the then
Superintendent of Police would be completed at the earliest. A
new S.I.T. team has been constituted to hold a fresh
investigation because the investigation conducted till date
cannot be trusted and accordingly we direct the new team to
investigate the matter afresh. It would be after taking note of the
allegations in the FIR and the lapses committed by the earlier
investigating team. They would collect all the evidence relevant
to the case. The investigation would be under the supervision of
It is made clear that if any matter comes before any Court in
reference to the present case, the detailed order of this Court
would be produced before the Court concerned to give reasons
for holding a fresh investigation and further action in the matter
so that direction in the public interest litigation may not go
unnoticed by any Court for taking proper decision.
Since Section 173 (2) Cr.P.C. mandates completion of
investigation within time frame, the D.G.P. is directed to find
out whether necessary order has been issued by the State
Government to direct the investigating officers for compliance
of the provisions, as amended. If circular/direction has been
issued till date, then immediately an order be issued. Delay in
the investigation in such cases should be made subject or
explanation otherwise delay without any reason should invite
action against the defaulting officers. The provision of Section
173 Cr.P.C., as amended, should not be taken casually rather
seriousness should be attached. The Government is directed to
take action against the defaulting officers, if cause delay in
investigation of the offence under Section 173 Cr.P.C. If the
investigating officers are not efficient then in future they should
not be assigned investigation of the case. It is further directed
that in the investigation, all scientific methods should be
applied because defective investigation or investigation without
collection of proper evidence, results in acquittal and therefore
only the conviction rate is only 6 to 7%.
We direct the police administration to not only monitor the
investigation but guide the investigating officers to apply the
scientific methods for investigation and for that periodically
training program should be arranged. At the end, we further
direct that not only the investigating officer but the officers who
supervise the investigation should be made responsible if any
defect is found in the investigation.
At this stage, learned Senior Counsel Sri Amrendra Nath Singh
submits that looking to the seriousness of the case and direction
of this Court, the security of the family and the petitioner in
person may be required, thus a direction for it may be given. We
accept the prayer and direct the respondents to provide adequate
security to the family of the deceased so as the petitioner in
person. The D.G.P. is directed to closely monitor the progress of
the investigation so that it may be reached to its logical
The Registry is directed to send copy of this order to the
District Judge, Mainpuri who may circulate the copy of the
order amongst subordinate officers.
The presence of the D.G.P. along with other police officers is
dispensed with till further order.
Let this petition be listed again on 18.10.2021 at 10.00 AM as
first case.
