Sree Pookkottukalikavu Temple, Kadambur in Ottapalam
Taluk is a Temple under the administrative control of Malabar
Devaswom Board. The 5th respondent Executive officer is in
charge of the administration of the Temple. A Board of
Trustees constituted as per the orders of the Area Committee
under the provisions of Section 41 read with Section 39(5) of
the Madras Hindu Religions and Charitable Endowments Act,
1951 is managing the affairs of the Temple. As per Ext.P1
order    dated    20.02.2021, respondent    Nos.6   to  8   were
appointed as non-hereditary trustees in the Temple. The
petitioners allege that respondent Nos.6 to 8 are not
disqualified to be appointed as non-hereditary trustees for the
reason that they are active politicians and involved in several
criminal cases. Pointing out a few specific instances for
establishing such allegations, the petitioner has filed this Writ
Petition invoking the extraordinary jurisdiction of this court
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeking the
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
“(i)    Issue a writ of certiorari or any other appropriate writ, order
or direction calling for the records leading to Ext.P1 and
(ii)    Issue a writ of mandamus or any other appropriate writ,
order or direction directing the 2nd respondent to consider
and pass orders on Ext.P8 representation filed by the
petitioners and the appointment of respondents 6 to 9 as per
Ext.P1   may     be  stayed    till    orders  are passed   and
communicated to the petitioners.”
2.     On 19.10.2022, when this matter came up for
consideration, the learned Standing Counsel for Malabar
Devaswom Board took notice for respondents 1 to 4. Urgent
notice was ordered to respondent Nos.5 to 9. After hearing
the learned counsel for the petitioner and also the learned
Standing Counsel for Malabar Devaswom Board, this Court
passed an interim order restraining respondent Nos.6 to 9
from dealing with the fixed deposit of Rs.60 lakhs in the name
of the Temple in any manner until further orders.
3.     The    3rd  respondent       filed   a  counter  affidavit
justifying that the appointment of respondent Nos.6 to 9 was
done following the proper procedure. It is further contended
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
that the petitioners have filed a representation, Ext.P8 only
after the expiry of 18 months from the date of appointment of
respondent Nos.6 to 9. The petitioners without affording a
reasonable time to take a decision on Ext.P8, rushed to this
Court with this Writ Petition.
4.    Respondent No.5 filed a counter affidavit taking a
similar stand as that of respondent No.3. Respondent Nos.6 to
9 filed a counter affidavit claiming that there was no
disqualification for them at the time of appointment. They
took the stand that they were not holding any post in any
political party, at the time when they were appointed as non-
hereditary trustees. They would contend that on the basis of
Ext.P1 they took charge as non-hereditary trustees on
24.02.2021 and in the meeting of the Board of Trustees, the
6th respondent was elected as the Chairman of the Board.
They have been managing the affairs of the Temple without
giving room for any complaint. However, the petitioners out of
political rivalry had submitted Ext.P8 representation much
after respondent Nos.6 to 9 assuming charge. The Writ
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
Petition has been filed without any basis and it is not
5.    They further would contend that on 23.10.2021,
the 6th respondent was deputed as Secretary of a Local
Committee of C.P.I.(M). He therefore did not function as the
chairman of the Board thereafter. In the meeting held on
06.05.2022, the 7th respondent was selected as the new
Chairman. Later, the 7th respondent was deputed as the
Secretary of Pookkottukavu Centre Branch of C.P.I.(M) and
therefore he resigned as Chairman of the Board of Trustees.
6.    The 8th respondent is not an office bearer of any
political party as alleged by the petitioners. He was the
Meghala Secretary of DYFI from January 2021 to December
2021. Since DYFI is not a political party or does not have
political affiliation he has no disqualification to continue as a
non-hereditary trustee. The allegations that since there are
criminal cases against them, respondent Nos.6 to 8 are
disqualified to be the non-hereditary trustees is incorrect.
Some false cases are initiated against respondent No.8. As
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
long as there is no conviction, it cannot be said that there is
disqualification. Accordingly, these respondents would contend
that the Writ Petition deserves to be dismissed on merits also.
7.    The petitioners have filed separate reply-affidavits
in answer to the counter affidavits filed by the 3 rd respondent,
the 5th respondent and respondents No.6 to 9. An additional
counter affidavit was filed by respondents 6 to 9 in answer to
the reply affidavit of the petitioners.
8.    In answer to a query from this Court, the 5 th
respondent has placed on record Exts.R5(a) and R5(b) audit
reports of the Pookkottukalikavu Devaswom for the period
from 2008 to 2019.
9.    Heard     the learned  counsel appearing for     the
petitioners, the learned Standing Counsel for the Malabar
Devaswom Board and the learned counsel appearing for the
5th respondent as also respondent Nos.6 to 9.
10.   Respondents No.6 to 9 were appointed as non-
hereditary trustees in Pookkottukalikavu Temple as per Ext.P1
dated 20.02.2021. Two reasons stated by the petitioners as
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
disqualifications for their appointment are that they are the
office bearers of a political party and that they face criminal
cases.    The    petitioners   specifically   alleged   that  the  6 th
respondent is a Local Committee Secretary of C.P.I.(M),
Pookkottukavu Unit, the 7th respondent is a Branch Secretary
of Pookkottukavu Centre Branch of C.P.I.(M) and the 8 th
respondent      is   the   Meghala    Secretary     of  DYFI.   These
respondents do not dispute the said contentions. They admit
those facts in the counter affidavit filed by them. They would
contend that only after their appointment as non-hereditary
trustees respondents No. 6 and 7 became office bearers and
therefore they did not have any disqualification for taking up
the appointment. Respondents Ns.6 and 7 took the stand that
on their appointment to the respective offices of the political
party,    they    relinquished   their   office   as   non-hereditary
trustees. The stand of the 8th respondent is that DYFI is not a
political party and therefore his holding the post of Meghala
Secretary of DYFI is not a disqualification.
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
11.   In the light of the admission made by respondent
Nos.6     to  8   that    they  were  office bearers  of    political
party/DYFI, the photographs produced by the petitioners to
prove that fact do not require consideration. The pertinent
question to be considered is: whether a person actively
involved in politics, whether or not holding an official post, is
disqualified to be a non-hereditary trustee in a Temple. Also,
whether facing criminal prosecution is a disqualification?
12.   Ext.R6(a) is the notification inviting application for
appointment of non-hereditary trustees in Pookkottukalikavu
Temple. Clause 3(7) spells out one of the disqualification
13.   This Court considered the said aspect in Suresh v.
State of Kerala and others [2021 (2) KLT 885] and
Chathu Achan v. State of Kerala [2022 (6) KLT 388]. In
Suresh (supra) this Court held that,-
“9.  When     the   Government  had  considered   the
Ext.P11 revision filed by the petitioner and passed
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
the    Ext.P12   order,    the  relevant    aspects   were
considered; that order was passed after hearing both
sides.   The   petitioner    had   also   highlighted  the
photographs to buttress his contention that they are
active politicians. The very same argument is raised
by the learned counsel before this Court. But, as a
matter of fact, it is trite that when such an allegation
is raised by the petitioner, he is expected to bring in
foolproof evidence to support the contention. It
seems that photographs like Exts.P7 to P9 were
produced before the Government, which were not
acted upon. Basing on such an evidence, which is not
specific but vague, this Court also cannot accept the
arguments of the petitioner. The identity of the said
persons is not ascertainable by this Court. Secondly,
even assuming that respondents 7 to 9 have some
political leaning or rather they are sympathizers of a
political party, that fact will not disentitle them to be
considered     for   appointment      as    non-hereditary
trustees.    There     is   clear   distinction   between
sympathizing with a political party and indulging in
active participation in the activities of the party. The
taboo under subclause (g) of clause 3 of Ext.P2 will
be attracted only if they are active politicians or are
office bearers of a political party, for which absolutely
no evidence is forthcoming.”
14.    This Court considered the said question in great
detail in Chathu Achan (supra). After considering the said
proposition of law laid down in Suresh (supra), and entire
aspects of the matter, this Court held in paragraph No.43 as
“43. The provisions of Clauses 3 and 4 of Ext.P5
notification, referred to hereinbefore at paragraph 38,
make it explicitly clear that, for appointment as non-
hereditary trustee of the temple, the applicant should
be a regular worshipper of the temple, who is prepared
to actively work for the betterment of the temple. He
should be a permanent resident of the Taluk in which
the temple situates, who believe in idolatry. Persons
who are busy with their employment, office bearers of
political parties, active politicians or those indulging in
active participation in the activities of a political party
cannot aspire appointment as non-hereditary trustee of
the temple. Therefore, it is for the 3 rd respondent
Commissioner to take necessary steps to ensure that
any appointment made as nonhereditary trustee of the
temples under the control of Malabar Devaswom Board
is strictly in terms of the disqualification and eligibility
clauses provided in Ext.P5 and similar notifications. If
found necessary, the format of the application for
appointment as a non-hereditary trustee in the temple
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
under the control of Malabar Devaswom Board has to
be modified in an appropriate manner, by requiring the
applicant    to   furnish  particulars   in terms    of  the
disqualification and eligibility clauses in Ext.P5 and
similar   notifications.  It  is  for  the  3 rd respondent
Commissioner to take necessary steps in this regard, if
found necessary, after placing before the Malabar
Devaswom Board, as expeditiously as possible, at any
rate, within a period of one month from the date of
receipt of a certified copy of this judgment.
15.   When clause 3(7) in Ext.R6(a) notification is
considered in the light of the interpretation given by this Court
in Chathu Achan (supra), no person actively involved in
politics is not eligible to be appointed as a non-hereditary
trustee in a Temple.
16.   The learned counsel appearing for respondents
No.6 to 9 would submit that respondent Nos.6 and 7 became
office    bearers     of   political   party    subsequent     to   their
appointment as non-hereditary trustees and therefore there
was no disqualification for them to be non-hereditary trustees.
The further submission of the learned counsel is that DYFI is
not a political party and in order to fortify her contention, she
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
placed reliance on the Constitution of DYFI, Ext.R6(e). The
learned counsel further would explain that unless a person
accepts politics as a profession, he cannot be termed as an
active politician for which the meaning given in Webster
Dictionary     and    Oxford Advanced     Learners  Dictionary is
referred to.
17.   Meaning given to the word 'politician' in the new
Webster Dictionary is “one who occupies himself with politics
as a profession”. The Oxford Advanced Learners Dictionary
defines 'politician' as “a person whose job is concerned with
politics, especially as an elected member of the Parliament,
etc.” We are afraid, such a technical meaning of the word
'politician' can be accepted to understand clause 3(7) in
Ext.R6(a) notification which says that active politicians or
persons holding official posts in any political party are
ineligible. The terms are used disjunctively. So persons who
are actively involved in politics, whether or not they hold any
post in a political party are ineligible. Nonetheless as a matter
of fact, respondents No.6 to 8 have no case that they have
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
18.   Admittedly, respondent No.6 was elected as Local
Committee Secretary of a political party with effect from
23.10.2021. The 7th respondent was appointed as Branch
Secretary of Pookkottukavu Centre of a political party. The 8 th
respondent was deputed as the Meghala Secretary of DYFI in
January 2021. Appointment of these respondents as non-
hereditary trustees was on 20.02.2021. Either before or after
their appointment as non-hereditary trustees, in the same
year, they came to occupy the respective posts in the political
19.   It is a matter of common knowledge that the
functioning of a political party and selection/election of its
office bearers is not similar to public employment. Whichever
be the political party, one who is actively involved in the
activities    of    that political   party alone is  ordinarily
selected/elected as an office bearer. Having been selected as
office bearer of the political party/DYFI before or soon after
the appointment as non-hereditary trustees, respondent
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
Nos.6 to 8 cannot contend that they were not active
politicians. No much deliberation is required in that regard in
order to conclude that respondent Nos.6 and 7 were active
politicians and respondent No.8 was an active worker of DYFI
even at the time of their making applications for appointment
as non-hereditary trustees and also appointment.
20.   In Ext.R6(e) it is stated that a member of the DYFI
can work in any political party. That does not mean that the
DYFI does not have any political colour. Whether or not it has
any affiliation to any particular political party, what is evident
from Ext.R6(e) constitution is that the area of activities of
DYFI is politics and related activities. As such it cannot be said
that the activities of DYFI are non political.
21.   We     have perused     the   file relating   to  the
appointment of respondent Nos.6 to 9 as non-hereditary
trustees. In the application submitted by them there is a
declaration that they did not have any disqualification as
referred to in the notification, which obviously is incorrect.
They should have disclosed their political activities and the
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
criminal cases in which they involved. Curiously enough the
officials of the Malabar Devaswom Board did not make any
enquiry regarding such backgrounds of those respondents and
the Area Committee which made the appointment did not
bother to delve into any such matters. In such circumstances,
we are of the view that respondent Nos.6 to 8 were
disqualified to be appointed as non-hereditary trustees at the
time of their making applications and appointment, on
account of their involvement in active politics.
22.   Going by the parameters prescribed in Ext.R6(a)
notification, persons who are convicted for more than six
months for offences involving moral turpitude are alone
ineligible to be non-hereditary trustees. It is, however,
specifically prescribed in Ext.R6(a) that persons who apply to
be    appointed     as   non-hereditary trustees shall be  idol
worshippers and persons having interest in the advancement
of the Temple. They should also be persons used to be
involved in the affairs of the Temple. A person having
reverence and adoration for a deity can alone be treated as a
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
worshipper. A person facing criminal prosecution for an
offence involving moral turpitude cannot be considered a true
worshipper of that standard required for a person to be
appointed as a trustee in a Temple. A trustee is a person
obligated to conduct temple affairs in accordance with custom
or usage. In A.A. Gopalakrishnan v. Cochin Devaswom
Board and others [(2007) 7 SCC 482] a Three-Judge
Bench of the Apex Court explained the diligence and devotion
a trustee of a Temple should have, as follows:
“The properties of deities, temples and Devaswom
Boards, require to be protected and safeguarded by
their   Trustees/Archaks/Sebaits/employees.     Instances
are many where persons entrusted with the duty of
managing and safeguarding the properties of temples,
deities  and    Devaswom    Boards   have  usurped    and
misappropriated such properties by setting up false
claims of ownership or tenancy, or adverse possession.
This is possible only with the passive or active collusion
of the concerned authorities. Such acts of 'fences eating
the crops' should be dealt with sternly.”
23.   When      those  are    the  necessary     qualifications
required for a person to be appointed as a non-hereditary
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
trustee,     and     danger of   appointing    unqualified   and
untrustworthy persons as trustees, the Malabar Devaswom
Board shall stipulate eligibility criteria in consonance with
that. The Malabar Devaswom Board therefore shall take a
decision in that regard before proceeding with any new
appointment of non-hereditary trustees in the Temples under
24.   The learned counsel appearing for the Malabar
Devaswom Board would submit that statutory remedy is
available to challenge the appointment of a non-hereditary
trustee and therefore this Writ Petition should not be
entertained. Ext.P1 is an order of the Assistant Commissioner
in terms of the resolution of the Area Committee. Such an
order can certainly be questioned before the Commissioner
invoking the provisions of Section 18 of the HR&CE Act. The
learned Standing Counsel and also the learned counsel
appearing for the 5th respondent raised a further contention
that on account of the inordinate delay in approaching this
Court, the petitioners are not entitled to get a writ or order as
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
claimed. It is true that the petitioner approached this Court
only in September 2022 to challenge Ext.P1 order dated
20.02.2021. There is a considerable delay.
25.   In M/s Magadh Sugar and Energy Limited v.
State of Bihar [2021 (5) KLT 667 (SC)] it was held that if
an effective and alternative remedy is available no writ
petition is maintainable. This decision was rendered after
considering all the previous decisions on the point starting
from Whirpool Corporation v. Registrar of Trademarks,
Mumbai [(1998) 8 SCC 1]. In Magadh Sugar (supra) the
Apex Court held,
“19. While a High Court would normally not exercise its
writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution if
an   effective    and  efficacious alternate  remedy    is
available, the existence of an alternate remedy does
not by itself bar the High Court from exercising its
jurisdiction in certain contingencies. This principle has
been     crystallized  by    this  Court   in  Whirpool
Corporation v. Registrar of Trademarks, Mumbai
and Harbanslal Sahni v. Indian Oil Corporation
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
SCC 107). Recently, in Radha Krishan Industries v.
State of Himachal Pradesh & Ors. (2021 (2) KLT
OnLine 1158 (SC) = 2021 SCC OnLine SC 334) a
two judge Bench of this Court of which one of us was a
part of (Justice D.Y.Chandrachud) has summarized the
principles governing the exercise of writ jurisdiction by
the High Court in the presence of an alternate remedy.
This Court has observed:
“28. The principles of law which emerge are that:
(i) The power under Article 226 of the Constitution
to issue writs can be exercised not only for the
enforcement of fundamental rights, but for any
other purpose as well;
(ii) The High Court has the discretion not to
entertain a Writ Petition. One of the restrictions
placed on the power of the High Court is where an
effective alternate remedy is available to the
aggrieved person;
(iii) Exceptions to the rule of alternate remedy arise
(a) the Writ Petition has been filed for the
enforcement of a fundamental right protected by
Part III of the Constitution;
(b) there has been a violation of the principles of
natural justice;
(c) the order or proceedings are wholly without
jurisdiction; or
(d) the vires of a legislation is challenged;
(iv) An alternate remedy by itself does not divest
the High Court of its powers under Article 226 of
the Constitution in an appropriate case though
ordinarily, a writ petition should not be entertained
when an efficacious alternate remedy is provided
(v) When a right is created by a statute, which
itself prescribes the remedy or procedure for
enforcing the right or liability, resort must be had to
that particular statutory remedy before invoking the
discretionary remedy under Article 226 of the
Constitution. This rule of exhaustion of statutory
remedies is a rule of policy, convenience and
discretion; and
(vi) In cases where there are disputed questions of
fact,   the   High   Court    may    decide   to  decline
jurisdiction in a Writ Petition. However, if the High
Court is objectively of the view that the nature of
the controversy requires the exercise of its writ
jurisdiction, such a view would not readily be
interfered with.”                      (emphasis supplied)
26.    The    petitioners     could    have     approached     the
statutory authorities to redress their grievance. Not only that
they did not avail that remedy, but also they approached this
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022
Court after the lapse of a long period after appointment of
respondent Nos.6 to 9 as non-hereditary trustees. That apart,
the term of their office expires on 20.02.2023. In such
circumstances, there would not be any useful purpose in
issuing a writ quashing Ext.P1 order. Therefore, we refrain
from setting aside Ext.P1. This Writ Petition is disposed of by
directing the Malabar Devaswom Board, the 1 st respondent to
ensure that hereafter every appointment of non-hereditary
trustee in the Temples under its control is done strictly in
accordance with the directions in Chathu Achan [2022 (6)
KLT 388] (supra) and also the observations we made
The Writ Petition is disposed of accordingly.
W.P.(C) No.29670 of 2022