2           Rule. Rule is made returnable forthwith with the consent
of the parties and is taken up for final disposal. Learned Special Public
Prosecutor waives notice for the respondent No. 1-National
waives notice for the respondent No. 2–State.
3           By this appeal preferred under Section 21 of the National
Investigation Agency Act, 2008 (`NIA Act’), the appellant seeks
quashing and setting aside of the impugned order dated 31 st January
2019 passed by the learned Special Court in Bail Application (Exhibit
124)    in NIA Special Case No. 3/2018, by which, the appellant’s
application for bail came to be rejected and as such, seeks his
enlargement on bail.
4           Mr. Solkar, learned counsel for the appellant seeks bail on
merits, on the ground of parity as well as on the ground of delay in
commencement of the trial.
5           As far as merits are concerned, learned counsel for the
appellant submitted that there is absolutely no cogent, legitimate,
admissible evidence qua the appellant to connect him with the alleged
offence. He submitted that a perusal of        the statements of four
witnesses on which the prosecution places reliance, would only
indicate that the accused persons including the appellant and the said
witnesses would have discussions over threats to Islam and that actions
of the ISIS and other issues like beef ban, communal riots, injustice to
Muslims in Palestine, etc. would be discussed. He submitted that from
a perusal of the said statements, it appears that there were only
discussions between the accused and the witnesses and nothing more.
6           Learned counsel for the appellant further submitted that
the other allegation as against the appellant is that the appellant
showed the place where the said discussions took place. He submitted
that the said circumstance cannot be said to be incriminating. He
further submitted that the third circumstance relied upon by the
prosecution is an Oath (Baith) allegedly written and signed by the
appellant. He submitted that the said Oath (Baith) is easily available on
the internet.   Learned counsel denies that the appellant has either
written or signed the said Oath (Baith). He further submitted that the
prosecution had initially sent the said Oath (Baith) alongwith sample
writings of the appellant and other accused to the State Examiner of
Documents, Aurangabad, however, the same were returned, due to
non-availability of the handwriting expert in Urdu and Arabic
Language, as the said Oath (Baith) was written in Arabic/Urdu. He
submitted that hence the said Oath (Baith) alongwith specimen
handwriting/signatures of the appellant and other accused was sent to
Chief Examiner of Documents (`CFSL’), Hyderabad in 2016 and that
the CFSL, Hyderabad had opined that for want of adequate specimen
signatures/handwriting, opinion could not be given and as such gave its
report to the investigating agency on 25 th January 2017. He submitted
that the investigating agency misled this Court and suppressed the said
report despite being repeatedly asked by this Court to produce the
same. Learned counsel relied on the orders passed by this Court in the
aforesaid appeal. He further submitted that when the matter was
pending before this Court and after this Court passed its order dated
17th June 2019, immediately on the next day i.e. on 18 th June 2019,
the NIA sent the Oath (Baith) alongwith very same specimen
signatures/handwriting which was sent to the CFSL, Hyderabad, to the
CFSL, Pune and within two weeks, obtained a report and tendered the
same before this Court. He submitted that according to the CFSL,
Pune, the handwriting/signature on the Oath (Baith) was that of the
appellant.
7           Be that as it may, he submitted that even a perusal of the
contents of the Oath (Baith) would show that there is nothing
incriminating in the Oath (Baith). He submitted that the appellant has
no antecedents and that the appellant is languishing in custody since
his arrest on 14th July 2016. Learned counsel also submitted that
similarly placed co-accused- Iqbal Ahmed Kabir Ahmed was released
on bail by this court (Coram : S.S. Shinde & N. J. Jamadar, JJ.) vide
order dated 13th August 2021, after considering the statements of the
witnesses and other material against the said accused. According to
Mr. Solkar, the appellant is in custody since 14 th July 2016, since his
arrest and that till date, not a single witness has been examined. He
submits that the prosecution intends to examine about 550 witnesses
and as such, it is unlikely that the case would conclude soon.
8           Mrs. Pai, learned Special Public Prosecutor (‘Spl. P.P.’)
vehemently opposed the appeal. She submitted that no interference is
warranted in the impugned order rejecting the appellant’s bail
application and that there are prima facie serious allegations against
the appellant. Learned Spl. P.P. relied on 4-5 statements of the
witnesses in support of her submission to show that the appellant
would have discussions pertaining to Islam and on various crisis all
over the world including discussion on ISIS. She submitted that the
prosecution had not suppressed the handwriting report of the CFSL,
Hyderabad and that, the report given by CFSL, Pune shows that the
Oath (Baith) was written and signed by the appellant. She further
submitted that there is no parity with accused No. 3 i.e. Iqbal Ahmed
Kabir Ahmed. She further submitted that the delay in commencement
of the trial is not a ground for enlarging the appellant on bail.
According to the learned Spl. P.P., the bar of section 43-D(5) would
come into play, having regard to the material on record as against the
appellant.
9           Learned Spl. P.P. relied on the affidavit dated 6 th June
2019, and additional affidavit dated 15 th July 2019, both filed by
Vikram Mukundrao Khalate, Superintendent of Police, NIA, Ministry
of Home Affairs, Mumbai Branch, an additional affidavit dated 2 nd
August 2019, filed by Inderjit Singh Bisht, Deputy Superintendent of
Police, NIA, Ministry of Home Affairs, Mumbai Branch, as well as, an
additional affidavit dated 23rd May 2022, filed by Pravin Ingawale,
Superintendent of Police, NIA, Ministry of Home Affairs, Mumbai
Branch, Mumbai, to oppose the bail of the appellant. She also relied
on the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Ramesh Bhavan
Rathod vs. Vishanbhai Hirabhai Makwana (Koli) & Anr. 1 to oppose
the grant of bail to the appellant.
10          Perused the papers. The appellant is original accused No. 4
in a case registered by the NIA i.e. Case No. 03/2016/NIA/MUM for
the alleged offence punishable under Section 120B and 471 of
the Indian Penal Code as well as Sections 13, 16, 18, 18B,
20, 38 and 39 of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967
(`UAPA’) and Sections 4, 5 and 6 of the Explosive Substances
Act, 1908. It appears that initially, the appellant was arrested by the
ATS, Kalachowki Police Station in C.R. No. 8/2016 and on
investigation, charge-sheet was filed by the ATS as against the
appellant and others. Thereafter, the C.R registered with the
Kalachowki Police Station was transferred to the NIA and was
renumbered as are 03/2016/NIA/MUM and after further investigation,
NIA filed supplementary charge-sheet in the said case.
11           It is the prosecution case that the accused No. 1-Naser Bin
Abubaker Yafai @ Chaus was in contact with the members of the
Islamic States/Islamic States of Iraq and Levant (ISIL)/ Islamic State of
Iraq and Syria/Daish, a terrorist organization banned by the
Government of India vide Notification K.A. 534(A) on 16 th February
2015. According to the prosecution, accused No. 1-Naser and accused
No.2 - Mohammed Shahed Khan procured material to prepare an IED
and accused No. 3-Iqbal Ahmed and the appellant are alleged to have
conspired with the co-accused. It is the prosecution case that an
electric switch board on which the IED was soldered, was discovered
in the house of the accused No. 3 Iqbal Ahmed. It is also alleged that
the Oath (Baith) owing allegiance to a banned terrorist organization
was recovered from the house of accused No.3-Iqbal Ahmed. The said
Oath (Baith) is alleged to have been written and signed by the
appellant.
12            Before we proceed to decide the appeal of the appellant, it
is pertinent to note that pending the trial, the co-accused i.e. accused
No. 1-Naser and accused No. 2-Mohd. Shahed pleaded guilty to the
charges, pursuant to which, they were convicted for the said offences
and sentenced to suffer rigorous imprisonment for 7 years. As far as
accused No. 3-Iqbal Ahmed is concerned, he has been enlarged on bail
by this Court vide order dated 13 th August 2021, after considering the
evidence qua him.
13            Before we proceed to consider the aforesaid appeal on
merits, we may note, that we are mindful of the provisions of Section
43-D of the UAPA relating to bail. Needless to state, that while
deciding the appeal, we are bound to consider the following:
(i) whether there is any prima facie or reasonable ground to
believe that the accused had committed the offence;
(ii) nature and gravity of the charge;
(iii) severity of the punishment in the event of conviction;
(iv) danger of the accused absconding or fleeing, if released on
(v) character, behaviour, means, position and standing of the
(vi) likelihood of the offence being repeated;
(vii) reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being tampered
(viii) danger, of course, of justice being thwarted by grant of bail.
[(State of U.P. v. Amarmani Tripathi - (2005) 8 SCC 21, para 18 :
14            Thus, whilst considering the appeal on merits by virtue of
the proviso to sub-section (5) of Section 43-D, it is the duty of the
Court to be satisfied that there are no reasonable grounds for believing
that the accusations against the accused are prima facie true or
otherwise. Keeping the aforesaid settled position in mind, we now
proceed to consider the evidence placed on record by the prosecution,
as against the appellant.
15           The allegation as against the appellant is of perpetrating
unlawful activities, terrorist acts, recruiting persons for terrorist acts
and/or being member of a terrorist gang or organization, and
association with, and/or support to, terrorist organization. According
to the prosecution, there are statements of witnesses who were
allegedly   members     of   the   group    which   assembled    opposite
Mohammadiya Masjid, Parbhani, to have regular discussions on Islam.
In the compilation tendered by the learned Spl. P.P. today, which is
taken on record, five statements were relied upon by the prosecution,
which, according to her, point towards the complicity of the appellant.
16           A perusal of the statement of the first witness i.e. W-1
which is at page 49 of the said compilation tendered by the learned
Spl. P.P. shows, that the said witness was a friend of accused No. 1-
Naser and other accused and that they all would meet after dinner at
Mumtaz Nagar, Parbhani on the ground opposite Mohammadiya
Masjid, for discussion. The said witness has stated that they would
discuss the atrocities on Islam in the world and in the country and on
Hindu organizations.     He has stated that the appellant, by giving
reference of various incidents, would inspire them to work for Islam.
He has further stated that their discussion included even discussions on
ISIS organization. He has further stated that all of them would also
remain present for the programmes organized by AIAMS.
17          A perusal of the statement of the second witness i.e. W-2,
which is at page 50 of the compilation, shows that the said witness was
a friend of the accused, including the appellant and that they would
gather in the night on the ground at Mumtaz Nagar. He has stated that
they would discuss several topics, and in particular, on injustice to the
Muslims, beef ban, communal riots, injustice to Muslims in Palestine,
secondary treatment to Muslims in India, and on actions of ISIS and
whether the said actions were in accordance with Islam.         The said
witness has further stated that the accused No.1-Naser @ Chaus and
the appellant used to tell them that they need to obtain detailed
knowledge of ISIS and would support the actions of ISIS. He has
further stated that co-accused-Mohd. Shahed Khan (accused No.2)
used to speak about the atrocities on Muslims in Syria and the
acceptance of the Khilafat of one Abi Bakar Al Baghdadi Al Hussaini
Al Quraishi, which view was seconded by accused No.3-Iqbal Ahmed.
The said witness has further stated that he would participate in the
discussion with the said accused (including the appellant) and that
from the said discussion, he felt that the said accused (including the
appellant) were fundamentalists and had jihadi leanings and that the
accused were of the view that there were atrocities on Islam and that
they should do something to avenge the said atrocities.
18          The statement of the next witness i.e. W-3 is at page 52 of
the compilation.   The said statement was recorded on 10 th August
2016. A perusal of the same shows that the said witness would meet all
the accused after dinner at Mumtaz Nagar, Parbhani, on the ground
opposite Mohammadiya Masjid, for discussion. The said witness has
stated that they would discuss about the atrocities on Islam in the
world and in the country and on Hindu organizations. He has stated
that the appellant, by giving reference of various incidents, would
inspire them to work for Islam. He has further stated that their
discussion included various issues like the beef ban, Dadri incident,
Muzaffarpur incident, Gujarat riots, etc. and that possible solutions
were also discussed.     He has further stated that some members
discussed about ISIS and that, they had attended the programme of
AIAMS Organization in December 2014 at Akola and would also
remain present for their other programmes. He has further stated that
the appellant had formed a Whats App Group `Bunianam Marsoos’
and that he was also a member of the said Whats App group.
According to the said witness, from the discussions that took place, he
felt that the said persons i.e. the accused Nos. 1 to 4 were
fundamentalists, having jihadi thoughts and that they felt that they
should do something to avenge the incidents of atrocities on Islam.
19          The statement of another witness, W-4 was recorded on
17th August 2016.    The said statement is on page No. 54 of the
compilation. A perusal of the same shows that he alongwith other
witnesses and accused would meet on the ground at Mumtaz Nagar,
opposite Mohammdiya Masjid, after dinner and would discuss the
happenings that took place all over the world and in India; that the
discussion would be on religion, beef ban, attacks of ISIS on France.
He has further stated that the appellant, a resident of Hingoli, would
attend the discussions on Saturday, Sunday and other holidays, as he
was a teacher.
20         A perusal of statement of another witness, W-5 dated 18 th
July 2016, which is at page 56 of the compilation, shows that the said
witness has stated that accused No. 3-Iqbal Ahmed had in 2014
created a Whats App group by the name `Ittehad’ and that he was an
Admin of the same and that the appellant was also a member of the
said group. He has stated that the appellant, a teacher in Hingoli,
would put posts on Islam on the said Whats App group and on Qur’an
and that there was interaction on the said groups on religion and on
Qur’an. He has further stated that from the chats, he felt that accused
No. 1-Naser was attracted to ISIS.
It is pertinent to note, that admittedly, no Whats App chats
have been produced by the prosecution in their charge-sheet, as a
result   of    which,    no    light  is   thrown   on    the    nature    of
discussion/chats/posts allegedly put up by any of the accused.
Therefore, in the facts, mere statements of witnesses stating that there
was a Whats App group formed, without any material to support the
same, the same cannot be relied upon. Infact, none of the witnesses
have stated anything incriminating in the said chats.
21           A perusal of the statements of the aforesaid witnesses even
if taken at its face value, would only indicate that the accused persons
and the said witnesses would have regular discussions over threats to
Islam; real, perceived or imaginary. It is the perception of the witnesses
that the said accused had jihadi leanings or were fundamentalists. All
the statements,     if perused, indicate that the statements are in the
realm of discussions and deliberations that took place between the
accused and the witnesses. Prima-facie, there is no material to indicate
that the appellant instigated the commission of any offence or
insurgency, nor that the appellant advocated violent reactions. From
the statements of all the witnesses, it also appears that the appellant
would visit the ground to have discussions only on the weekends and
on holidays, as the appellant was teaching at a school at Parbhani.
From a perusal of the said statements, one can reasonably conclude
that, at the highest, what took place were mere discussions as to what
was transpiring in India and the world and that everyone should work
for Islam. The said statements prima-facie cannot be said to be
incriminating. Infact, the very same statements were relied upon by the
prosecution whilst opposing the bail application of accused No. 3-
Iqbal Ahmed, with respect to his presence and participation in the
discussions that took place; forming of Whats App group, etc. This
Court, whilst considering the said statements, observed in para 32 that
the statements, at the highest, would show that they were in the realm
of discussions and that there was no prima facie material to indicate
that the accused therein instigated the commission of an offence or
insurgency.
22          Coming to the next circumstance relied upon by the
prosecution, which is, showing of the spot by the appellant, where the
discussions took place. The said circumstance, by no stretch of
imagination, can be said to be incriminating, having regard to what is
observed by us aforesaid.
23          Another circumstance relied upon by the prosecution as
against the appellant is the Oath (Baith) allegedly written and signed
by the appellant. The English translation of the said Oath (Baith) is on
page 39 of the compilation tendered by the learned Spl. P.P.
Admittedly, the name at the end of the Oath (Baith) is mentioned as
`Abu Zunera Al Hindi’. According to the prosecution, the appellant
has used `Abu’ in several of his email Ids and that Zunera is the name
of his daughter. The said Oath (Baith) was allegedly found at the
residence of accused No. 3-Iqbal Ahmed. The said Oath (Baith),
translated copy of which is at page 39, appears to be a declaration of
the acceptance of one Abi Bakar Al Baghdadi Al Hussaini Al Quraishi
as the `Caliph’ of the Muslims. It is pertinent to note that initially the
said Oath (Baith), handwritten in Urdu was sent alongwith the sample
writings and signatures of all the accused to the State Examiner of
Documents, Aurangabad, in 2016. It appears that on 12 th September
2016, the State Examiner of Documents, Aurangabad sent its letter
dated 12th September 2016 to the ATS stating therein, that the seized
documents could not be examined due to non-availability of
handwriting expert in Urdu/Arabic and as such it was not possible to
give any opinion. It is further stated in the said letter that they had
taken guidance even from the Chief State Examiner of Documents,
Pune. Accordingly, the said documents were sent back by the State
Examiner of Documents, Aurangabad. It appears that thereafter, the
ATS sent the said Oath (Baith) alongwith all other documents to the
CFSL, Hyderabad on 28th September 2016. The said letter is at page
28 of the appeal memo. It appears that the CFSL, Hyderabad, vide
letter dated 25th January 2017, sent its report to the Special IGP, ATS,
Mumbai, stating therein that the writing marked “Q” purported to be
written in Arabic script alongwith some English writings has been
compared with the corresponding specimen writings of the three
suspects i.e. accused No. 1-Naser, the appellant and accused No. 3-
Iqbal Ahmed, however, all the writing habits as occurring in the
disputed writing marked “Q” could not be collectively accounted for,
from any of the specimen writings of the said three persons.
Accordingly, the Director of the CFSL, Hyderabad, opined that it was
not possible to express any opinion regarding its authorship or
otherwise. The Director requested for further specimen writings in
English from each of the said persons and request was made for
repeatedly dictating the entire content of the disputed writing
appearing in English, and thereafter sending it for further examination
to the said Lab. Thus, no definitive opinion was given by the said Lab.
It is pertinent to note that this report dated 25 th January 2017 was not
placed before the Court during the course of the hearing of the
aforesaid appeal. It is pertinent to note that the aforesaid appeal came
up for hearing before this Court on 14 th June 2019, when the
following order was passed :
“1] Learned counsel for the Appellant seeks leave to
place on record some documents from the charge-sheet.
Leave as prayed is granted.
2]     Learned counsel for Respondent No.1 to inform
this Court status of hand-writing expert report in respect
of documents seized pursuant to confessional statement of
accused No.1, which is at Page No.55 of the paper book.
Stand over to 17th June, 2019.”
On 17th June 2019, this Court passed the following order :
“1       Heard the learned Counsel for the respective
parties.
2        The prosecution is placing reliance on a chit
recovered during the course of inquiry, the copy of which is
at page 55 of the paper book. The same is in Arabic
language. It is seen that the said chit has been forwarded to
the Director, Government Examiner of Questioned
Directorate of Forensics Science Services Ministry of Home
Affairs, Government of India India by the Special Inspector
General of Police, Anti Terrorist Squad, Mumbai on
30/09/2016. The learned prosecutor appearing for
respondent/National Investigating Agency informed to this
Court that as yet the report of handwriting expert is not
received from the said Forensic Science Laboratory.
3        In this view of the matter, we direct the Director,
Government Examiner of Questioned Documents, Central
Forensic Science Laboratory, Directorate of Forensics
Science Services, Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of
India to furnish report of handwriting expert within a
period of two weeks from today to the concerned
Investigating Officer of the NIA. The respondent/NIA is
directed to provide that report on the next date of hearing
before this Court.
4        The Registry is requested to inform this Order to
the concerned Forensic Science Laboratory. Investigating
Officer of the NIA is also directed to communicate this
Order to the concerned Forensic Science Laboratory and
steps for getting the report within the prescribed period.
5        Stand over to 4th July 2019.
6        All parties to act on authenticated copy of this
Thereafter, the matter appeared before this Court on 4 th July
2019. This Court, on 4th July 2019 passed the following order:
“1      This court vide order dated 17th June 2019 had
directed respondent/National Investigation Agency to
produce report from the Director, Government Examiner
of Questioned Documents, Central Forensic Science
Laboratory, Directorate of Forensic Science Services
Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India, to this
court today i.e. on 4th July 2019. It is seen that the said
report is not yet produced before this court. The learned
Special Public Prosecutor submits that the National
Investigation Agency has received the report from the
Forensic Science Laboratory, Pune, after examining the
questioned documents.
respondent/National Investigation Agency to produce
reports from the Forensic Science Laboratory at
Hyderabad, so also the reports received from such
laboratory at Pune, along with affidavit of the concerned
Officer by the next date.
3       Two weeks time, as prayed for, is granted. In the
meanwhile, copy of reply affidavit be served on the learned
counsel for the petitioner on or before 15th July 2019.
Matter be listed on 18th July 2019.”
24         It is pertinent to note that though the report of the CFSL,
Hyderabad dated 25th January 2017 was available with the
prosecution, the same was not pointed out when the matter was heard
by this Court on 17th June 2019. Instead, it appears that after the
order of 17th June 2019 was passed, the NIA sent the very same
documents which were sent to the CFSL, Hyderabad i.e. the Oath
(Baith) and the specimen writings/signatures of three accused to the
CFSL, Pune, vide letter dated 18 th June 2019 and within two weeks,
CFSL, Pune, gave its opinion stating therein, that the Oath (Baith) in
question, matched the specimen writing of the appellant. The said
report given by the CFSL, Pune dated 1 st July 2019 is on page 38 of
the appeal memo.
25          Be that as it may, there is variance in the opinion given by
the two Forensic Labs, on the said document in question.              It is
pertinent to note, that the Hyderabad Lab could not give a definitive
opinion based on specimen writings sent and sought more specimen
writings, however, the NIA sent the same documents of which no
opinion was given to the CFSL, Pune, who opined that the writing on
the Oath was that of the appellant. Be that as it may, even a perusal of
the Oath (Baith) allegedly written by the appellant, at the highest,
appears to be a declaration of the acceptance of one Abi Bakar Al
Baghdadi Al Hussaini Al Quraishi as the `Caliph’ of the Muslims.
Prima-facie, a perusal of the said Oath (Baith) does not appear to be
incriminating.
26          Thus, considering the material on record, we are prima
facie of the opinion that the said circumstances relied upon by the
prosecution, do not appear to be of such a nature so as to sustain a
reasonable belief that the accusations against the appellant are prima
facie true and hence, having regard to the same, the bar under Section
43-D(5) of the UAPA       will not apply.   We have very closely and
meticulously gone through the statements of prosecution witnesses and
have also given our findings as to their nature and contents thereof.
Totality of the material gathered by the investigation agency qua
appellant-accused and presented before us does not prima facie point
out the involvement of the appellant-accused in the aforesaid offences.
27          This Court, whilst granting bail to the accused No. 3-Iqbal
Ahmed, vide order dated 13 th August 2021, has, in detail, considered
the statements of witnesses, the recovery of an IED soldered and the
Oath (Baith) recovered from the residence of accused No. 3-Iqbal
Ahmed and as such, after considering the said material, enlarged the
said accused on bail. We are informed that the NIA had challenged the
said order before the Apex Court and the Apex Court vide order dated
11th February 2022 declined to disturb the order of the High Court
and disposed of the Special Leave to Appeal (Cri.) Nos. 9957/2021 of
the respondent-NIA.
28          Having perused the evidence on record, we also find that
the role of the appellant is similar to that of accused No. 3-Iqbal
Ahmed against whom there are statements similar to that of the
appellant.  Infact, a  soldered IED as well as an Oath (Baith) was
recovered from accused No.3-Iqbal Ahmed’s residence. It is not in
dispute that the appellant is in custody since his arrest on 14 th July
2016, for almost 7 years. Charge was framed in the said case on 17 th
March 2021. We are informed that 550 witnesses have been cited in
the said case, however, learned Spl. P.P. submitted that the prosecution
would now examine a lesser number, considering that two of the co-
accused have pleaded guilty.
29          Learned counsel for the appellant relied on the judgments
of the Apex Court in Shaheen Welfare Association vs. Union of
India2 and Union of India vs. K.A. Najeeb 3 in support of his
submission that it is a right of the accused for a speedy trial
which flows from right to life under Article 21 of the
Constitution.     The     Apex    Court      in    Shaheen      Welfare
Association (supra), after considering the conflicting claims
of personal liberty emanating from Article 21 and protection
of society from the terrorist acts, which the Terrorist and
Disruptive Activities (Prevention) Act, 1987 professed to
achieve, reconciled the conflicting claims of individual liberty
and the interest of the community by issuing directions for
release of the under-trial prisoners, who had suffered long
incarceration, depending upon the gravity of the charges. In
this context, it would be apposite to reproduce the observations of the
Apex Court in paras 9 to 11, 13 and 14 of the said judgment.
“9.     The petition thus poses the
problem of reconciling conflicting claims of
individual liberty      versus     t he   right of the
community and the nation to safety and
protection from terrorism and disruptive
activities. While it is essential that innocent
people should be protected from terrorists and
disruptionists, it is equally necessary that
terrorists and disruptionists are speedily tried
and punished. In fact the protection to innocent
civilians is dependent on such speedy trial and
punishment. The conflict is generated on
account of the gross delay in the trial of such
persons. This delay may contribute to absence of
proper evidence at the trial so that the really
guilty may have to be ultimately acquitted. It also
causes irreparable damage to innocent persons
who may have been wrongly accused of the
crime and are ultimately acquitted, but who
remain in jail for a long period pending trial
because of the stringent provisions regarding bail
under TADA. They suffer severe hardship and
their families may be ruined.
10.      Bearing in mind the nature of the crime
and the need to protect the society and the
nation, TADA has prescribed in Section 20(8)
stringent provisions for granting bail. Such
stringent provisions can be justified looking to
the nature of the crime, as was held in Kartar
Singh V. State Of Punjab – (1994) 3 SCC 569, on
the presumption that the trial of the accused will
take place without undue delay. No one can
justify gross delay in disposal of cases when
under-trials perforce remain in jail, giving rise to
possible situations that may justify invocation of
11.        These competing claims can be reconciled
by taking a pragmatic approach.
13.     For the purpose of grant of bail to TADA
detenues, we divide the under- trials into three
(sic four) classes, namely, (a) hardcore     under-
trials whose release would prejudice the
prosecution case and whose liberty may prove to
be a menace to society in general arid to the
complainant and prosecution witnesses in
particular; (b) other under-trials whose overt acts
or involvement directly attract Sections 3 and/or
4 of the TADA Act; (c) under-trials who are
roped in, not because of any activity directly
attracting Sections 3 and 4, but by virtue of
Section 120B or 14, IPC, and; (d) those under-
trials who were found possessing incriminating
articles in notified areas & are booked under
Section 5 of TADA.
provisions of Sections 20(8) and 20(9) of TADA
would apply to all the aforesaid classes. But while
adopting a pragmatic and just approach, no one
can dispute the fact that all of them cannot be
dealt with by the same yardstick. Different
approaches would be justified on the basis of the
gravity or the charges. Adopting this approach we
are of the opinion that under-trials falling
within group (a) cannot receive liberal treatment.
Cases of under-trials falling in group (b) would
have to be differently dealt with, in that, if they
have been in prison for five years or more and their
trial is not likely to be completed within the next
six months, they can be released on bail unless the
court comes to the conclusion that their
antecedents are such that releasing them may be
harmful to the lives of the complainant, the family
members of the complainant, or witnesses. Cases
of under-trials falling in groups (c) and (d) can be
dealt with leniently and they can be released if they
have been in jail for three years and two years
respectively ………...”
30          It is pertinent to note that the said judgment was referred
with approval by the Apex Court in K A. Najeeb (supra). Paras 16 and
18 of the said judgment are reproduced hereinunder :
“16.        This Court has clarified in
numerous judgments that the liberty guaranteed by
Part III of the Constitution would cover within
its protective ambit not only due procedure and
fairness but also access to justice and a speedy trial.
Representing Undertrial Prisoners v. Union of
India – (1994) 6 SCC 731, it was held that
undertrials cannot indefinitely be detained pending
trial. Ideally, no person ought to suffer adverse
consequences of his acts unless the same is
established before a neutral arbiter. However,
owing to the practicalities of real life where to
secure an effective trial and to ameliorate the risk
to society in case a potential criminal is left at large
pending trial, Courts are tasked with deciding
whether       an individual ought to be released
pending trial or not. Once it is obvious that a
timely trial would not be possible and the accused
has suffered incarceration for         a    significant
period of time, Courts would ordinarily be
obligated to enlarge them on bail.
18.        It is thus clear to us that the presence of
statutory restrictions like Section 43-D(5) of UAPA
per se does not oust the ability of Constitutional
Courts to grant bail on grounds of violation of Part
III of the Constitution. Indeed, both the
restrictions under a Statue as well as the powers
exercisable under Constitutional Jurisdiction can
be well harmonised. Whereas at commencement
of proceedings, Courts are expected to appreciate
the legislative policy against grant of bail but the
rigours of such provisions will melt down where
there is no likelihood of trial being completed
within a reasonable time and the period of
incarceration already undergone has exceeded a
substantial part of the prescribed sentence. Such
an approach would safeguard against the possibility
of provisions like Section 43-D(5) of UAPA being
used as the sole metric for denial of bail or for
wholesale breach of constitutional right to speedy
trial.”
31           It is thus evident that the statutory embargo under section
43- D(5) of the UAPA per se does not act as an impediment on the
powers of the Constitutional Court to grant bail, if a case of
infringement of the constitutional guarantee for protection of life and
personal liberty is made out. In such a situation, the prayer for bail on
account of prolonged delay in conclusion of trial needs to be
considered in the background of the period of incarceration, the
prospect of completion of trial within a reasonable time, the gravity of
the charge and other attending circumstances.
32           As noted above, charge was framed on 17 th March 2021
and the appellant is in custody since his arrest on 14 th July 2016 i.e. for
almost 7 years. Considering the number of witnesses to be examined,
it is unlikely that the trial would conclude within a reasonable time.
We have, in detail, considered the evidence on record qua the
appellant, the gravity of the charges against the appellant and the
period already undergone by the appellant as well as the minimum
term of imprisonment prescribed for the offences punishable under
Sections 16, 18 and 18B of the UAPA, ultimately if the appellant is
convicted.
33           In this view of the matter, having regard to what is stated
aforesaid, we are satisfied that the appellant has made out a case for
grant of bail. Hence, we pass the following order.
(i)         The appeal stands allowed;
(ii)        The impugned order dated 31st January 2019
passed by the learned Special Court in BA (Exhibit
124) in NIA Special Case No. 3/2018, stands quashed
(iii)       The     appellant-      Mohammad          Raisuddin
Mohammad Siddique be released on bail on furnishing
a P.R bond in the sum of Rs. 1,00,000/- (Rupees
One Lakh) with one or two solvent sureties in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the learned Judge, NIA
(iv)        The appellant shall report to the Office of the
NIA., Mumbai Branch, Mumbai, twice every week on
Tuesday and Friday, between 10:00 a.m to 12:00 noon,
for a period of one month from the date of his release.
Thereafter, the appellant shall report the said Office on
every Tuesday between 10:00 a.m to 12:00 noon for
the next two months. Thereafter, the appellant shall
report to the said Office on first Tuesday of every
month between 10:00 a.m to 12:00 noon, till
conclusion of the trial;
(v)        The appellant shall attend the NIA Court on
every date of the proceeding, unless exempted;
(vi)       The appellant shall not leave the jurisdiction
of the NIA Court, i.e. Greater Mumbai, till the
conclusion of the trial, without the prior permission
(vii)      The appellant shall surrender his passport, if
any (if not already surrendered). If the appellant does
not hold the passport, he shall f i l e an a f f i d a v i t to
that effect before the NIA Court;
(viii)     The appellant shall not, either himself or
through any other person, tamper with the prosecution
evidence and give threats or inducement to any of
prosecution witnesses;
(ix)       The appellant shall not indulge in any
activities similar to the activities on the basis of which
the appellant stands prosecuted;
(x)        The appellant shall not try to establish
communication with the co-accused or any other
person involved directly or indirectly in similar
activities, through any mode of communication;
(xi)       The appellant shall co-operate in expeditious
disposal of the trial and in case delay is caused due to
him, then his bail would be liable to be cancelled;
(xii)      In the event, the appellant violates any of the
aforesaid conditions, the relief of bail granted by this
Court will be liable to be cancelled;
(xiii)     After release of appellant on bail, he shall file
undertaking within two weeks before the NIA Court
stating therein, that he will strictly abide by the
conditions No. (iv) to (x) mentioned hereinabove.
34        Rule is made absolute in the above terms. Appeal is
accordingly disposed of.
35        It is made clear that the observations made in this
judgment are limited to the consideration of the question of
grant of bail to the appellant and they shall not be construed
as an expression of opinion on the merits of the case. The
learned Special Judge shall proceed with the trial against the
appellant     and   the   co-accused   uninfluenced     by    the
observations made hereinabove.
36       All concerned to act on the authenticated copy of
this judgment.
37       At this stage, after the order was pronounced,
learned Spl. P.P sought stay of this judgment.
38       For the reasons recorded in the aforesaid judgment,
the prayer for stay is rejected.