1.     Through the medium of present writ petition, the petitioner, inter
alia, seeks a writ of certiorari quashing the action of the
respondents in illegally disconnecting the electricity supply to the
petitioner-school in flagrant violation to the provisions of the J&K
Electricity Act, 2010 and Rules framed thereunder and without
providing 15 days notice in writing as per the provisions of
Section 50(1) of the J&K Electricity Act, 2010.
2.     The facts leading to the filing of this petition are that the
petitioner-School has been established by Mrs. Rajni Gupta to
provide and impart quality education to the students, who have
been admitted to the petitioner-school. The JK Montessori School
was taken over by the petitioner in the year 2002 and since then
the same is being run strictly in consonance with the provisions of
law. According to the petitioner, at the time when the school was
taken over by the petitioner, all electricity dues were cleared by
the erstwhile owner of the school and there was nothing
outstanding on account of electricity charges against the said
school. It is submitted that the respondents after assessing the
consumption of electricity in the petitioner-school, sanctioned 7.5
KW load and a modern digital electronic meter has also been
installed by the respondents in the premises of the school. It is
averred that the digital electricity meter installed cannot, under
any circumstances, be tempered or fiddled and if any attempt is
made in this regard, the meter stops working. According to the
petitioner, the petitioner was regularly paying the electricity bill
and never committed any default in making payment of the
electricity bill. It is submitted that on 15.05.2012, a team of
officers including respondent No.5 had visited the petitioner-
school and found the digital meter installed in the premises intact.
The said team left the premises of the school without asking or
saying anything to the petitioner. It has further been submitted by
the petitioner that after few hours of inspection, the respondents
have sent, Electricity bill-cum-pay-in-slip dated 15.05.2012
endorsing     thereupon    excess   load   penalty     amounting to
Rs.3,84,805/-, to the petitioner. On the said electricity bill-cum-
pay-in-slip a notice has also been endorsed that if the payment is
not made on due date, the petitioner shall be liable for electricity
disconnection after expiry of seven days of the due date.
3.  It is the case of the petitioner that after receipt of the aforesaid
electricity bill-cum-pay-in-slip, petitioner rushed to the office of
respondent Nos. 4 and 5 to enquire about the details on which
such a huge amount of Rs.3,84,805/- as excess load penalty has
been imposed and on enquiry, nothing has been disclosed by the
respondents to the petitioner and instead in an arbitrary and illegal
manner disconnected the electricity connection thereby causing
severe harassment not only to the petitioner but also to the
students and the teachers and other staff engaged by the petitioner
for running the school. The petitioner is aggrieved of the action of
respondents in demanding Rs.3,84,805/- from the petitioner as
excess load penalty and illegal disconnection of the electricity
connection primarily on the following grounds:-
i)  The action of respondents in disconnecting electric connection of
the petitioner is per se illegal, arbitrary and violates the
fundamental rights of the petitioner.
ii) The action of respondents in demanding an amount of
Rs.3,84,805/- from the petitioner as excess loan penalty is illegal
and arbitrary, inasmuch as no reason has been disclosed by the
respondents for imposing such a huge penalty.
iii) That on impugned electricity bill-cum-pay-in-slip, a notice has
been appended whereby seven days time has been provided to the
petitioner in terms of Section 24(1) of the J&K Electricity Act
Samvat 1997 to deposit the said amount failing which electric
connection shall be liable for disconnection; the impugned bill-
cum-pay-in-slip was issued on 15.05.2012 and without waiting for
a period of seven days, the respondents in a totally illegal and
arbitrary manner disconnected the electricity connection of the
petitioner. It is submitted by the petitioner that J&K Electricity
Act, Samvat 1997 stands already repealed by promulgation of
J&K Electricity Act, 2010 and as per Section 50(1) of the J&K
Electricity Act, 2010, fifteen days time has been provided for
deposit of electricity dues.
4.   On the other hand, the respondents have contested the writ petition
by stating that petitioner-school is existing/functioning in two
premises having one metered connection and another without
meter and inspection of the petitioner-school (both premises) was
conducted and it was found that 2nd phase namely, JK Millennium
International School was using electricity illegally through
hooking and in terms of Clause 11.8, 11.9 and 11.10 of Tariff
Order, an amount of Rs.3,84,805/- was assessed/calculated as
penalty on account of illegal usage of electricity/unmetered excess
load charges for previous six months and the said amount was
required to be deposited in the existing I.D. As per the
respondents, the petitioner/owner of the said premises deposited
Rs.64,134/- only as electric charges for additional load for a
period of two months and also assured that she will apply for
separate fresh connection for the premises. The petitioner applied
for issuance of fresh connection for the aforementioned
another/additional premises namely, JK Millennium International
School. It is further the case of respondents that subsequent to the
inspection so conducted by the respondents and imposition of
penalty, under Voluntary Disclosure Scheme (VLDS), the
petitioner has applied for the enhancement of the load.
Submissions of the Petitioner:
5.  Learned counsel for the petitioner has assailed the action of the
respondents in imposing excess load penalty and disconnection of
the electric connection on the ground that the same is in violation
of the principles of natural justice. Learned counsel further
submits that the action of the respondents is totally bad in the eyes
of law as no reason for excess load penalty has been disclosed.
Submission of the Respondents:
6.  On the contrary, Mr. Amit Gupta, learned counsel for the
respondents submits that the present writ petition is not
maintainable as disputed questions of fact have been raised in this
petition. Learned counsel has further submitted that the petitioner
has not approached this Court with clean hands, as such, the writ
petition deserves to be dismissed. It is submitted that huge theft of
power was going on in the petitioner‟s premises/school for which
penalty amounting to Rs.3,84,805/- was imposed for un-
metered/hooking, which is payable to the state exchequer and the
said penalty is strictly in terms of J&K SERC Tariff Order for the
financial year 2012-13.
7.   Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on
record.
8.   The issue whether the petitioner-school is functioning in two
premises and the petitioner has obtained one connection for the
two premises or the connection has been installed only in one
premises and in the other premises petitioner was using electricity
illegally by hooking falls within the realm of disputed questions of
fact which cannot be gone into by this Court in its extraordinary
writ jurisdiction.
9.   Section 86 of the Electricity Act, 2010 deals with the Assessment.
For facility of reference Section 86 of the Act is reproduced
“86. Assessment.––(1) If on an inspection of any place or
premises or after inspection of the equipments, gadgets,
machines, devices found connected or used, or after
inspection of records maintained by any person, the
assessing officer comes to the conclusion that such person
is indulging in unauthorized use of electricity, he shall
provisionally assess to the best of his judgment the
electricity charges payable by such person or by any other
person benefited by such use.
(2) The order of provisional assessment shall be ser
ved upon the person in occupation or possession or in
charge of the place or premises in such manner as may be
(3) The person, on whom an order has been served
under subsection (2), shall be entitled to file objections, if
any, against the provisional assessment before the assessing
officer, who may, after affording a reasonable opportunity
of hearing to such person, pass a final order of assessment
within 30 days from the date of service of such order of
provisional assessment, of the electricity charges payable
by such person.
(4) Any person served with the order of provisional
assessment may, accept such assessment and deposit the
assessed amount with the licensee within seven days of
service of such provisional assessment order upon him.
(5) If the assessing officer reaches to the conclusion
that unauthorized use of electricity has taken place, the
assessment shall be made for the entire period during which
such un-authorised use of electricity has taken place, and if,
however, the period during which such un-authorised use of
electricity has taken place cannot be ascertained, such
period shall be limited to a period of twelve months
immediately preceding the date of inspection.
(6) The assessment under this section shall be made
at a rate equal to twice the tariff applicable for the relevant
category of services specified in sub-section (5).
Explanation: –– For purposes of this section,––
(a) “Assessing Officer” means an officer of the
Government or licensee, as the case may be,
(b) “Unauthorised use of electricity” means the
usage of electricity: ––
(ii) by a means not authorised by the concerned
person or authority or licensee ; or
(iv) for the purpose other than for which the usage
of electricity was authorised ; or
(v) for the premises or areas other than those for
which the supply of electricity was authorised.”
10. From a perusal of Section 86, it becomes evident that if on an
inspection of any place or premises or after inspection of the
equipments, gadgets, machines, devices found connected or used,
or after inspection of records maintained by any person, the
assessing officer comes to the conclusion that such person is
indulging in unauthorized use of electricity, he shall provisionally
assess the electricity charges payable by such person or by any
other person benefited by such use. The order of provisional
assessment would be served upon the person in occupation or
possession or in charge of the place or premises in such manner as
may be prescribed. The person on whom order of assessment has
been served shall be entitled to file objections, if any, against the
provisional assessment before the assessing officer, who may,
after affording reasonable opportunity of hearing pass a final order
of assessment within thirty days from the date of service of such
order of provisional assessment. Any person served with the
provisional assessment may accept such assessment and deposit
the assessed amount within seven days of service of such
provisional assessment order. It is also provided that if the
assessing officer reaches to the conclusion that unauthorized use
of electricity has taken place, the assessment shall be made for the
entire period during which such unauthorized use of electricity has
taken place and if the period during which unauthorized use of
electricity has taken place cannot be ascertained, such period shall
be limited for a period of twelve months immediately preceding
the date of inspection. It is further provided that assessment shall
be made at a rate equal to twice the tariff applicable for the
relevant category. Explanation appended to Section 86 defines
„unauthorized use of electricity” as under:-
i)     by an artificial means; or
ii)    by means not authorized by the concerned person or
authority or licensee; or
iv)    for the purpose other than for which the usage of electricity
v)     for the premises or areas other than those for which the use
of electricity was authorized.
11. The case of the petitioner is covered by explanation (v) because as
per the respondents, only, one electricity connection has been
installed in the premises of the petitioner and in the other
premises, the electricity was being used without authorization by
the petitioner. Therefore, in terms of Section 86 of the Electricity
Act, 2010 after inspection, provisional assessment has been made.
In terms of Section 86(3), the petitioner is entitled to file
objections, if any, against the provisional assessment before the
assessing officer, who after affording reasonable opportunity of
hearing to such person, was required to pass final assessment
order. It seems that the petitioner has not chosen to file any
objection to the assessment so made and straightway come to the
High Court through the medium of present writ petition.
Provisions of Section 86 would be applicable to the cases where
electricity is being consumed in violation of the terms and
conditions of supply leading to malpractices which may squarely
fall within the expression „unauthorized use of electricity‟. The
assessment/proceedings would commence with the inspection of
the premises by an assessing officer and recording of a finding
that such consumer is indulging in an „unauthorized use of
electricity.
12. Section 87 of the Act provides for appeal to the Appellate
Authority. In terms of Section 87, any person aggrieved by the
final order made under Section 86, within thirty days of the said
order, prefer an appeal in such form, verified in such manner and
be accompanied by such fee as may be specified by the
Commission, to an Appellate Authority as may be prescribed.
Section 87 of the Act reads thus:-
“87.  Appeal to Appellate Authority.––(1) Any person aggrieved by
the final order made under section 86 may, within thirty days of the
said order, prefer an appeal in such form, verified in such manner
and be accompanied by such fee as may be specified by the
Commission, to an Appellate Authority as may be prescribed.
(2) No appeal against an order of assessment under sub-
section (1) shall be entertained unless an amount equal to one-third
of the assessed amount is deposited in cash or by way of bank draft
with the licensee and documentary evidence of such deposit has
been enclosed along with the appeal.
(3) The Appellate Authority referred to in sub-
section (1) shall dispose of the appeal after hearing the parties and
pass appropriate order and send copy of the order to the assessing
officer and the appellant.
(4) The order of the Appellate Authority referred to in sub-
section (1) passed under sub-section (3) shall be final.
(5) No appeal     shall lie to the Appellate Authority     referred to in
subsection (1) against the final order made with the consent of the
parties.
(6) When a person defaults in making payment of assessed amount,
he, in addition to the assessed amount shall be liable to pay, on the
expiry of thirty days from the date of order of assessment, an
amount of interest at the rate of sixteen per cent per annum
compounded every six months.
13. When Section 87 in clear terms provides for an appeal against the
final order of assessment, writ petition cannot be held
maintainable in view of the availability of alternate remedy
provided under the Act itself. Learned counsel for the respondents
has also submitted that now Internal Grievance Redressal (IGR)
Cell for Jammu Power Distribution Corporation Limited (JPDCL),
Jammu to record and redress grievances in a timely manner is in
place and the petitioner can very well approach the Internal
Grievance Redressal Cell against the excess load penalty imposed
upon her.
14. The Supreme Court in a recent judgment in the case of Radha
Krishan Industries v. State of Himachal Pradesh and others,
2021 SCC Online SC 334                after considering the principles
that have been crystallized in Whirpool Corporation v.
Registrar of Trademarks, Mumbai, (1998) 8 SCC 1 and
Harbanslal Sahni v. Indian Oil Corporation Limited,(2003) 2
SCC 107 summarized the principles governing the exercise of
writ jurisdiction by the High Court in the presence of an
alternative remedy, which reads as under:-
“28.The principles of law which emerge are that :
(i) The power under Article 226 of the Constitution to issue
writs can be exercised not only for the enforcement of
fundamental rights, but for any other purpose as well;
(ii) The High Court has the discretion not to entertain a writ
petition. One of the restrictions placed on the power of the High
Court is where an effective alternate remedy is available to the
(iii) Exceptions to the rule of alternate remedy arise where (a)
the writ petition has been filed for the enforcement of a
fundamental right protected by Part III of the Constitution; (b)
there has been a violation of the principles of natural justice; (c)
the order or proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction; or (d)
the vires of a legislation is challenged;
(iv) An alternate remedy by itself does not divest the High Court
of its powers under Article 226 of the Constitution in an
appropriate case though ordinarily, a writ petition should not be
entertained when an efficacious alternate remedy is provided by
(v) When a right is created by a statute, which itself prescribes
the remedy or procedure for enforcing the right or liability,
resort must be had to that particular statutory remedy before
invoking the discretionary remedy under Article 226 of the
Constitution. This rule of exhaustion of statutory remedies is a
rule of policy, convenience and discretion; and
(vi) In cases where there are disputed questions of fact, the High
Court may decide to decline jurisdiction in a writ petition.
However, if the High Court is objectively of the view that the
nature of the controversy requires the exercise of its writ
jurisdiction, such a view would not readily be interfered with.”
15. I have carefully gone through the grounds urged in the writ
petition and also the arguments advanced by the learned counsel
for the petitioner, I don‟t find it a case, which is covered by the
exceptions to the general rules that in the face of alternate and
efficacious remedy, the Constitutional Court would entertain the
present writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
The case of the petitioner does not fall within exceptions carved
out to the general principle that in the face of alternate and
efficacious remedy, the writ petition can be maintained. The writ
petition as such, is not maintainable.
16. The law in this regard is well settled that when statutory and
equally efficacious remedy is available, writ petition should not be
entertained and the party concerned should be relegated to such
alternative remedy. There is no whisper in the writ petition which
is filed by the petitioner that she has availed alternate and
efficacious remedy provided under statute nor any averment that
case of the petitioner falls within the exceptional clause to give a
right to the petitioner to bypass the alternate efficacious remedy
by approaching this Court straight way.
17. It is trite law that ordinarily relief under Article 226 of the
constitution of India is not available, if efficacious alternative
remedy is available to any aggrieved person. Where statuary
remedy is created by law, the writ petition should not be
entertained ignoring the statutory dispensation. It is also a well
recognized principle of law that where a right or liability is created
by a statute, which provides for speedy remedy for enforcing it,
the remedy provided by the said statute alone should be availed of.
Undoubtedly, it is equally well settled that this canon of law is not
free of exceptions and alterative remedy is not a bar to the
entertaining of writ petition filed for enforcement of any of the
fundamental rights or where there has been violation of principles
of natural justice or where the order under challenge wholly
without jurisdiction or vires of the statute providing for alternative
remedy is otherwise under challenge. As such, when the statutory
remedy of appeal is available to the petitioner, this writ petition is
not maintainable, I have carefully perused the grounds urged in
the writ petition, I do not find it a case, which is covered by the
exceptions to the general rules that in the face of alternate remedy,
the Constitutional Court would not entertain the writ petition
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
18. Since the petitioner has admittedly raised questions which are
disputed by the respondents, as such, in terms of the principles
summarized by the Supreme Court in Radha Krishan Industries
(supra), the present writ petition is not maintainable. Further the
nature of controversy raised by the petitioner is not the one which
justifies exercise of writ jurisdiction by this Court.
19. A Coordinate Bench of this Court in the case of Abid Hussain
Ansari v. State and others, 2014(1) JKJ[HC] 287, held that in
terms of Sub Section (1) of Section 50 of the Jammu and Kashmir
Electricity Act, 2010, the petitioner has to pay the amount
demanded from him under protest and is at liberty to bring a suit
in the civil court to contest his liability for refund of the amount
not due from him, therefore, the writ is not a remedy.
20. Furthermore, the respondents have refuted the claim of the
petitioner and have tried to justify the imposition of excess load
penalty by pleading that the petitioner school is functioning in two
premises having one metered connection and another without
meter, which fact has never been denied by the petitioner. This
fact has also been admitted by the petitioner by applying for fresh
electricity connection in the name of JK Millennium International
School. The person seeking relief under discretionary writ
jurisdiction must come to the court with clean hands. It is a settled
principle of law that one who demands equity must do equity. On
this count also the writ petition is not maintainable as the
petitioner has not pleaded correct facts.
21. Hon‟ble the Supreme Court in the case in Vijay Syal & Anr. v.
State of Punjab & Ors., (2003) 9 SCC 401; has stated;
"In order to sustain and maintain sanctity and
solemnity of the proceedings in law courts it is
necessary that parties should not make false or
knowingly, inaccurate statements or misrepresentation
and/or should not conceal material facts with a design
to gain some advantage or benefit at the hands of the
court, when a court is considered as a place where
truth and justice are the solemn pursuits. If any party
attempts to pollute such a place by adopting recourse
to make misrepresentation and is concealing material
facts it does so at its risk and cost. Such party must be
ready to take consequences that follow on account of
its own making. At times lenient or liberal or generous
treatment by courts in dealing with such matters are
either mistaken or lightly taken instead of learning
proper lesson. Hence there is a compelling need to
take serious view in such matters to ensure expected
purity and grace in the administration of justice".
22. In yet another case titled K.D.Sharma v. Steel Authority of
India, (2008) 12 SCC 481, Hon‟ble the Supreme has observed as
“The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 32 and of
the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution is
extraordinary, equitable and discretionary. Prerogative writs
mentioned therein are issued for doing substantial justice. It is,
therefore, of utmost necessity that the petitioner approaching
the Writ Court must come with clean hands, put forward all the
facts before the Court without concealing or suppressing
anything and seek an appropriate relief. If there is no candid
disclosure of relevant and material facts or the petitioner is
guilty of misleading the Court, his petition may be dismissed at
the threshold without considering the merits of the claim.”
23.    In view of settled legal propositions and what has been discussed
herein above, this writ petition is devoid of any merits, hence
dismissed along with connected application, if any.
24.     However, having regard to the fact that petitioner has been
pursuing its claim before this court by filing this writ petition
under Article 226 of the Constitution, as such, if the petitioner
would wish to avail the remedy of statutory appeal as per the Act,
supra, the Appellate Authority shall consider the same without
making reference to the period of limitation and, till then, no
punitive action/recovery will be taken against/from the petitioner.