appeal filed by the appellant who is original-plaintiff,
came to be dismissed               and the judgment             and decree
passed      by    the   learned     Senior      Civil   Judge,      Surat           in
Regular Civil Suit No.385 of 2012 came to be confirmed.
2.    The        appellant    is    the      original-plaintiff      and          the
respondent is the original-defendant before the learned
Trial Court.         For    the     brevity      and    convenience,              the
parties are referred to in this Judgment as per the
status assigned to them before the Trial Court.
3.    The plaintiff has filed the suit for declaration to the
effect that his son, Jitendrasingh Mansingh Devdhara
was missing from Surat since 31.01.1984 and could not
found till the date of filing of the suit.                    It is alleged
that necessary janvajog entry dated 05.02.1984 came to
be given by Takhatsingh M. Devdhara before the Rander
Police Station and the public notice in daily newspaper
regarding        missing   of    Jitendrasingh        was    published             on
07.02.1984.        According to the plaintiff, since the date of
missing of his son, he has not heard any news about his
missing son and about                   his aliveness. Therefore, the
plaintiff has filed suit for declaration that his son has
died and necessary entry to that effect may be made by
the Surat, Nagarpalika in its record and for passing
decree in his favour.
4.    It appears that no written statement has been filed
by the defendant in the Trial Court.                   The Trial Court
has framed issues at Exh. 21 in vernacular language,
which on translation would read as under :
(i)    Whether the plaintiff proves that his son
Jitendrasingh     Mansingh Devdhara is missing
from 31.06.1984 and he could not be found?
(ii)   Whether the suit is barred by the law of
(iii) Whether the plaintiff is          entitled         for the
relief      sought for?
5.    On the basis of the oral and documentary evidence
on record and after hearing the learned advocate for the
parties,      the   learned   Trial    Court    has     answered             Issue
Nos.1 and 2 in Affirmative and Issue No.3 in Negative
and ultimately dismissed the suit only on the ground of
delay,     vide      judgment   and       decree     dated      27.10.2016.
Against       that    judgment   and       decree,   the    plaintiff           has
preferred Regular Civil Appeal No.53 of 2018 before the
District Court Surat, which has ultimately dismissed the
appeal on the ground of delay.
6.     The main contention of the plaintiff is that the
both the Courts below have committed serious error of
law     in     dismissing    the   suit      only    on   the     ground            of
limitation.          It  is   contended        that    the    plaintiff          has
successfully proved his case by adducing evidence to the
effect that plaintiff’s son after leaving from home on
31.01.1984 for the purpose of attending college, never
returned. That the plaintiff has produced the evidence
with regard          to the information of missing report being
given      to    the   concerned    police      station   and     thereafter,
taking follow-up action for the same.
6.1.    It    is   also  contended      that     Police    Machinery             has
miserably failed to take appropriate steps and ultimately
the plaintiff having lost a young son was left with no
other option to approach the learned civil court seeking
declaration with a view to see that no illegitimate claims
are made relating to his properties after such a long
6.2. It is contended that the view taken by both the
Courts below regarding limitation is wrong applicability
of law of limitation. The Plaintiff has raised several
questions of law in this appeal.              However, this appeal
has been admitted only on the following questions of
“In the facts and circumstances of the case,
whether the Courts below are justified in dismissing
the suit only on the ground of limitation?”
7.    Heard learned advocate Mr. D.M. Popat for the
plaintiff–appellant       and   learned      AGP    Mr.      Adityasinh
Jadeja for the respondent-State. Perused the material
placed on record and decisions cited as bar.
8.    My findings on the above question, for the reason
given below, is as under :
9.    Learned         advocate Mr. D.M. Popat for the plaintiff
– appellant has submitted that both the Courts below
have committed serious error of law in dismissing the
suit and appeal only on the ground of law of limitation.
He has submitted that plaintiff was awaiting for return
of his son for a long time as he could not have any clue
of his aliving           and Police could not               find out him.
Ultimately,        the  plaintiff    has       filed   the   said       suit         for
declaration,        which   has     not       been     contested         by         the
9.1. He has submitted that considering the facts and
circumstances of the case, the law of limitation is not
applicable and therefore, the impugned judgment and
decree of both the Courts below needs to be set aside
and necessary decree in favour of the plaintiff needs to
be passed.
9.2. Mr. Popat has relied upon the decisions rendered in
the case of LIC OF INDIA v. ANURADHA reported in
10.   Learned         AGP    Mr.      Adityasinh          Jadeja        for         the
respondent - defendant has submitted that considering
the   facts       and  circumstances         of    the   case,     appropriate
order may be passed.
11. Having considered the averments made on behalf of
the both the sides coupled with the material placed on
record, it clearly transpires that the plaintiff has filed
the suit for declaration to the effect that his son viz.
Jitendrasingh is missing since 31.01.1984.                 It is pertinent
to note that the pleading of the plaintiff has not been
denied by the defendant by filing any written statement.
On perusal of the material placed on record, it is clearly
found that during the trial, the plaintiff has produced
necessary documentary evidence showing that necessary
Report of missing Jitendrasingh has been made to the
concerned Rander Police Station on 05.02.1984 and on
public advertisement was issued in the Newspaper dated
07.02.1984. It also reveals that the evidence of plaintiff
has not been controverted by the other-side.                             It also
reveals that the plaintiff has approached Police under
R.T.I. Act and got reply from the                Rander Police Station
to the effect that due to flood in the year 2006 all
documents of 1981 to 2001 was destroyed in the flood.
Therefore, no other relevant documents pertaining to the
report of his missing son is available.                The plaintiff has
waited for returning of his son since he could not return
back      and      even    Police    could       not    find      him            out.
Ultimately, he has filed the suit for declaration.
12.   It     appears    from    the    impugned       judgment            of      the
Courts below that they have relied upon Section 108 of
the Evidence Act for their observations that the suit is
barred      by    law   of  limitation.       At  this    juncture,           it    is
worthwhile to reproduce Section 108 of the Evidence Act:
“108. Burden of proving that person is alive who
has not been heard of for seven years.—1[Provided
that when] the question is whether a man is alive
or dead, and it is proved that he has not been
heard of for seven years by those who would
naturally have heard of him if he had been alive,
the burden of proving that he is alive is 2[shifted
to] the person who affirms it.—1[Provided that
when] the question is whether a man is alive or
dead, and it is proved that he has not been heard
of for seven years by those who would naturally
have heard of him if he had been alive, the burden
of proving that he is alive is 2[shifted to] the
person who affirms it."
13.   Section 108 of the Evidence Act clearly provides
only for raising presumption. It is a limited presumption
confined only to presume the factum of death of the
person who's life or death is in issue. There is no
presumption as to the facts and circumstances under
which the persons may have died.                     The only inference
permissible to be drawn and based on the presumption
is  that      the   man    was   dead        at  the    time      when            the
question       arose,   subject  to     a     period    of    seven           years
absence, and being unheard of having elapsed before that
time.     At what point of time the person was dead is not
a matter of presumption, but of evidence, factual or
circumstantial, and the onus of proving that the death
had taken place at any given point of time or date since
the disappearance or within the period of seven years
lies     on       the  person   who       stakes     the     claim,            the
establishment of which will depend on proof of the date
or time of death.
14.      Recourse to the provision of Section 108 cannot be
made for deciding starting of point of cause of action,
as when any member of family is missing, for whatever
reasons, the other members of the family will definitely
waiting for return of such missing person.                 Such waiting
period may be ever for decades. There cannot be any
assumption or presumption that after certain period of
time, the family members would automatically consider
that the missing person has died on a particular date or
within a particular point of time. Therefore, if father is
waited for returning of his son before previous day of
filing of the suit, it cannot be held that limitation period
has started after seven years of date of missing of his
son.     The entire approach as adopted by both the Courts
below in deciding the question of limitation is completely
erroneous.         They have lost sight of the facts that it is a
human         tendency   to  wait   for     returning    of    a      missing
member of the family for many years. Therefore, in the
suit    for     declaration of   the       fact  that    the     person           be
declared as a dead since he is missing for many years
cannot be based upon the presumption or assumption
arose under Section 108 of the Evidence Act.
15.    Admittedly in the present case, the young son was
missing and appropriate information was provided to the
police and even by advertisement in the newspaper and
yet the Police could not find out him nor the missing
son     returned       back  to     the       family.       Under            these
circumstances, if the father has waited for many years
for returning of his son, his claim for declaration cannot
be turned down solely based upon the presumption under
Section 108 of the Indian Evidence Act.                     The cause of
action for declaration of death of such missing son would
arose, as and when, it is admittedly believed by the
father and the family members that he might be dead.
Therefore, under the facts and circumstances of this case,
it clearly shows that the suit is not barred by the law
of limitation. The entire approach of the learned Trial
Court as well as the learned Appellate Court are not
sustainable in the eyes of law.               Therefore, the judgments
and decrees passed by both the Courts below need to be
set aside and the suit of the plaintiff deserves to be
allowed.           Therefore, I   have      decided    point      No.1          in
affirmative accordingly.
16.    In view of the above, I pass the following final
order in the interest of justice:-
The present Second Appeal is hereby allowed. The
judgment and decree passed by the learned 6                    Additional
District Judge Surat in Civil Appeal No. 53 of 2018 and
judgment and decree passed by the 9                 Additional Senior
Civil Judge, Surat in Regular Civil Suit N0.385 of 2012
are hereby quashed and set aside.
The suit of the plaintiff is allowed in toto and it is
declared that the plaintiff’s son Jitendrasingh Mansingh
Devdhara is deemed to have been died on 31.01.1984.
Necessary entry regarding his death to be made in the
relevant Register by the defendant.
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case,
the parties are directed to bear their respective costs of
all the proceedings.
Decree      to be   drawn     accordingly      in    the       Second
With the copy of this judgment and decree, R & P
be sent back to the learned Trial Court.