The  short  point  in  this     appeal, against the  order dated
15.01.2021, as passed by the High Court of Karnataka in Criminal
Revision Petition No.515 of 2020, is as to whether the High Court
was justified in providing that the deposit of fine amount shall be
a condition precedent even for entertaining the criminal revision
petition, preferred by the accused in terms of Section 397 read
with Section 401 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short
The relevant background aspects of the matter are that in the
complaint case instituted at the instance of the respondent, the
Trial Court, by its judgment and order dated 29.08.2019, convicted
the accused-appellant for the offence under Section 138 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 and sentenced her to fine in the
sum of Rs.6,00,000/- (Rupees Six lakhs only) with the stipulation
that in the event of default in payment of fine, she would undergo
simple imprisonment for six months. An amount of Rs.5,90,000/- was
directed to be paid to the complainant as compensation in terms of
Section 357 Cr.P.C. and the balance amount was to be remitted to
the State. The appeal taken by the accused-appellant was dismissed
by the Appellate Court on 12.06.2020, maintaining the order of the
Trial Court. Aggrieved, the appellant approached the High Court by
filing Criminal Revision Petition No.515 of 2020.
While dealing with the said criminal revision petition, the
learned  Single  Judge  of  the    High     Court  has  taken  note of  the
requirements of the order passed by the Trial Court, particularly
the deposit of fine amount by the accused-appellant and thereafter,
has  observed   that  unless   the     fine    amount  was  deposited,  the
appellant would not be entitled to press into service the hearing
of criminal revision petition filed under Section 397 read with
Section 401 Cr.P.C. Learned Single Judge has, inter alia, observed
in the impugned order dated 15.01.2021 thus:
“…..Unless the fine amount is deposited by           the
petitioner   herein,      the     petitioner    is   not
entitled to press into service the hearing            of
this petition which is filed under Section           397
read with Section 401 of the Cr.P.C.”
Learned Single Judge has, therefore, ordered that the criminal
revision petition shall not be entertained unless the fine amount
is deposited by the appellant.
Challenging the order so passed by the learned Single Judge,
the  accused-appellant    has    approached       this  Court   and  it  is
essentially submitted that the High Court was not justified in
imposing a condition of pre-deposit of the fine amount for the
purpose of hearing the appellant’s petition.
Learned counsel for the respondent has attempted his best to
support the order passed by the High Court but could not dispute
the position that there is no such mandatory statutory requirement
of pre-deposit for the purpose of maintaining the revision petition
before the High Court.
Taking into account all the facts and circumstances of the
case as also the law applicable, we are clearly of the view that
the High Court could not have made the deposit of fine amount a
condition    precedent   for  the     purpose      of  hearing   the  revision
petition.   As  to  what   order   is    to    be  passed  ultimately    in  the
revision petition is a matter entirely different and that would
depend   on   the   examination     of    the     matter   in  terms    of   the
requirements    of   revisional      jurisdiction       but,   in   any    case,
depositing of fine amount could not have been made a condition
precedent for the purpose of even hearing of the revision petition
so filed by the appellant.
In view of the above, we are unable to approve the impugned
order passed by the High Court on 15.01.2021. The impugned order
is, therefore, set aside. It is left open for the parties to pursue
the matter in Criminal Revision Petition No.515 of 2020 before the
It goes without saying that we have not commented on merits of
the  case   either  way   and  all    the     aspects   relating  to  revision
petition are left open for consideration by the High Court. Having
regard to the circumstances of the case, we may also observe that
the High Court may assign a reasonable priority to the revision
petition and make an endeavour to take a final decision on the same
The appeal is allowed accordingly and to the extent indicated
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.)      No(s).   3794/2021
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 15-01-2021
in CRLRP No. 515/2020 passed by the High Court Of Karnataka At
Date : 04-08-2021 This matter was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Leave granted.
The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed order.
Pending    application(s),      if     any, stands    disposed    of
(Signed order is placed on the file)