1. Delay of 88 days in filing Petition seeking review of judgement/ order
dated 10th March 2015 passed in CIMA no.77/2014 titled National
Insurance Company Limited v. Mushtaq Ahmad Kutay and others , is
sought to be condoned.
2. Instant application has been filed on 8th July 2015. The delay is not such
as if it could be said or termed to be inordinate one. As rightly pointed
out by learned counsel for respondent no.3/review petitioner that the
Appeal (CIMA no.77/2014) was listed before a Bench of this Court on
10th March 2015 and was decided on the same day, although dismissed,
yet right of recovery was given against owner on the ground of
engaging a driver with licence not carrying “PSV” endorsement.
According to learned counsel, respondent no.3/review petitioner came
to know about passing of judgement/order dated 10th March 2015 only
when recovery petition was filed before the Tribunal and he was
summoned to appear before it and, accordingly, he applied for certified
copy of judgement dated 10th March 2015 and subsequently approached
this Court.
3. In view of above, there is sufficient cause shown by applicant for
consideration and, resultantly, the application is allowed and delay of
88 days in filing Review Petition is condoned.
4. Disposed of.
5. I have heard learned counsel for parties and considered the matter.
6. Review of judgement/order dated 10th March 2015 passed by a Bench
of this Court in an Appeal, bearing CIMA no.77/2014 titled as National
Insurance Company Limited v. Mushtaq Ahmad Kutay and others, is
sought for in the instant petition.
7. As is gatherable from perusal of the file, a claim petition was filed by
respondent no.1/claimant before the Tribunal on 27th February 2007,
averring therein that on 1st January 2004, he was traveling in offending
vehicle bearing Registration no.JK01B-3221, which was going from
Khanabal towards Srinagar, in connection with election rally and on
reaching Chechekoot, Awantipora National Highway, offending
vehicle turned turtle, resultantly passengers traveling in the vehicle got
serious injured and that petitioner also received multipole injuries on
various parts of his body particularly on head and had been rendered
disabled. Respondent no.1/claimant sought compensation in the
amount of Rs.40.00 Lakhs before the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal,
Anantnag (for short “Tribunal”)
8. Insurance Company resisted the claim petition before the Tribunal.
Their stand was that driver of offending vehicle was not holding valid
and effective driving licence and without PSV endorsement thereon.
9. The Tribunal, in view of pleadings of parties, framed following Issues
for determination, which are:
1)     Whether on 1st of January 2004, the petitioner while travelling in
motor vehicle No.3221-JK01B driven by respondent NO.1, while
reaching at the Checkekoot at NHW, was injured when the vehicle
turned turtle due to the rash and negligent driving of respondent
2)     Whether the petitioner is entitled to compensation for the injuries
suffered, to what extent and from whom? OPP
3)     Whether the driver was not holding an effective D/L with PSV
endorsement and the vehicle did not have valid R/P and R/C, hence
the respondent-insurance company is not liable to indemnify the
respondent No.2-owner? OPR3
10.Claimants in support of their claim before the Tribunal produced and
examined five witnesses. Insurance Company produced two witnesses
in support of its stand. By virtue of Award dated 24th February 2014,
the Tribunal found claimant entitled to compensation in the amount
Rs.4,13,000/- along with 6% interest per annum from the date of
institution of claim till realization.
11.Insurance Company filed Appeal, being CIMA no.77/2014, as it felt
aggrieved of the Tribunal Award dated 24th February 2014. A Bench of
this Court vide judgement/order dated 10th March 2015 allowed the
Appeal and gave right of recovery to Insurance Company. Review
thereof is sought here.
12.It is submission of learned counsel for review petitioner/respondent
no.3 that this Court while rendering the judgement, review of which is
sought, has not taken into consideration the Written Submission filed
by respondent no.3, in which it was stated that law on the subject was
settled and in this regard two judgements, rendered in the cases of
National Insurance Co. Ltd v. Smt. Tsering Dolma and others, 2005 (I)
SLJ 321, and M/s Bharat Transport Co. v. Kartar Chand and others,
2008 (II) SLJ 626, were also referred to and that those judgements have
binding precedence and, therefore, could not have been unnoticed by
this Court. Learned counsel has also stated that this Court while passing
the judgement under review has not looked into the fact that the
Tribunal had lucidly dealt with all aspects of the matter, including one
the driving licence inasmuch as the Tribunal had referred to law laid
down in National Insurance Co. Ltd v. Swaran Singh and others (2004)
3 SCC 297. He also asserts that since the judgement/order does not
effectively deal with and determine the important points as were
popping up in view of law laid down in the aforesaid judgements relied
upon by review petitioner and referred to by the Tribunal, the omission
appears on the face of the judgement/order, which would well be
reviewed.
13.On the other side, counsel for appellant-Insurance Company has stated
that this Court has rightly given the right to Insurance Company to
recover the award amount from owner of offending vehicle. He also
avers that driver of offending vehicle was not having effective driving
licence to drive mini passenger bus at the time of accident as there was
no PSV endorsement on his driving licence.
14.It is pertinent to mention here that while considering abovementioned
contentions, the scope and ambit of Section 114 read with Order XLVII
Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure is to be taken into consideration.
15.The grounds on which review can be sought are enumerated in Order
XLVII Rule 1 CPC, which reads as under:
“1. Application for review of judgment. - (1) Any person considering
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed, but from
which no appeal has been preferred,
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed, or
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes, and
who, from the discovery of new and important matter or evidence
which, after the exercise of due diligence, was not within his
knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time when the
decree was passed or order made, or on account of some mistake or
error apparent on the face of the record, or for any other sufficient
reason, desires to obtain a review of the decree passed or order made
against him, may apply for a review of judgment of the court which
passed the decree or made the order.”
16.An application for review would lie, among others, when an order/
judgement suffers from an error apparent on the face of record and
permitting the same to continue would lead to failure of justice.
Limitations on exercise of power of review are well settled. The first
and foremost requirement of entertaining a review petition is that the
judgement/order, review of which is sought, suffers from any error
apparent on the face of it and permitting the order to stand will lead to
failure of justice. In absence of any such error, finality attached to the
judgment/ order cannot be disturbed.
17.The power of review can also be exercised by the court in the event
discovery of new and important matter or evidence takes place that
despite exercise of due diligence was not within the knowledge of
applicant or could not be produced by him at the time when the order
was made. An application for review would also lie if the order has
been passed on account of some mistake.
18.What is erroneous on the face of the record cannot be defined precisely
or exhaustively there being an element of indefiniteness inherent in its
very nature and it is to be determined judicially on the facts of each
case. An error which does not require any extraneous matter to show its
incorrectness has been treated as being apparent. A case for review is
made out as soon as there is an error apparent on the face of the record.
The question as to how the error occurred is not relevant. Each case is
to be judged by itself and where the error of law is such that it is clearly
apparent on a perusal of the record, there is ground for granting a
review. Where a specific provision of law is not pointed out to the court
at the time of passing of the order such an order suffers from an error
apparent in the face of record so as to justify a review. It is well settled
that an error apparent on the face of the record should appear either in
the order itself or any other document which is incorporated in that
order.
19.Taking into account the submissions made by learned counsel for
parties and well settled law qua review, it would be apropos to first of
all discuss what law has been laid down by the Supreme Court and by
this Court concerning the subject-matter of instant review petition.
20.Paragraphs 16 and 17 of Tsering Dolma (supra), relied upon by learned
counsel for review petitioner, are important and pertinent to the instant
case and, thus, useful to be reproduced hereunder:
“16. Now coming to the questions, whether driver was having a valid
driving license at the time of accident?
I am of the considered view that Swaraj Mazda is a vehicle
which falls within the definition of Light Motors. It is profitable to
reproduce the definition of Light Motor Vehicles herein, which reads
“Light Motor vehicle, means a transport vehicle or omnibus
the gross vehicle weight of either of which or a motor car or
tractor or road-roller the unladen weight of any of which, does
not exceed (7500) kilograms;”
While going through this provision of law, it is crystal clear
that which vehicles are light motor vehicles. The question whether,
Swaraj Mazda is a vehicle falling under the definition of Light Motor
Vehicles or Heavy Motor Vehicle, this point stands set at rest by the
Apex Court in a judgment reported in AIR 1995 SC 3182. It is
profitable to reproduce para-10, 11 and 14 of the said judgment herein,
“10. Definition of “light motor vehicle” as given in clause (21)
of Section 2 of the Act can apply only to a “light goods
vehicle” or a “light transport vehicle”. A “light motor vehicle”
otherwise has to be covered by the definition of “motor
vehicle” or “vehicle” as given in clause (28) of Section 2 of
the Act. A light motor vehicle cannot always mean a light
goods carriage. Light motor vehicle can be non-transport
vehicle as well.
11. To reiterate, since a vehicle cannot be used as transport
vehicle on a public road unless there is a permit issued by the
Regional Transport Authority for that purpose, and since in the
instant case there is neither a pleading to that effect by any
party nor is there any permit on record, the vehicle in question,
would remain a light motor vehicle. The respondent also does
not say that any permit was granted to the appellant for plying
the vehicle as a transport vehicle under Section 66 of the Act.
Moreover, on the date of accident, the vehicle was not carrying
any goods, and thought it could be said to have been designed
to be used as a transport vehicle or goods carrier, it cannot be
so held on account of the statutory prohibition contained in
Section 66 of the Act.
14. Now the vehicle in the present case weighed 5,920
kilograms and the driver had the driving licence to drive a light
motor vehicle. It is not that, therefore, that insurance policy
covered a transport vehicle which meant a goods carriage. The
whole case of the insurer has been built on a. wrong premise.
It is itself the case of the insurer that in the case of a light motor
vehicle which is a non-transport vehicle, there was no statutory
requirement to have specific authorization on the licence of the
driver under Form 6 under the Rules. It had, therefore, to be
held that Jadhav was holding effective valid licence on the date
of accident to drive light motor vehicle bearing Registration
17. Thus, while going through this provision of law, it is hereby held
that Swaraj Mazda is a Light Motor Vehicle.
While going through the provisions of Motor Vehicles Act, it
is nowhere prescribed that the licence for driving light motor vehicle
should bear the endorsement that driver is competent to drive PSV
The Court, as is coming to fore from the afore-reproduced
relevant portion of judgement in Tsering Dolma (supra), has held that
Motor Vehicles Act does not prescribe bearing the endorsement of PSV
(Passenger Service Vehicle) on a licence for driving light motor
vehicle.
21.Paragraphs 08 and 09 of the case of Kartar Chand (supra), would also
be advantageous to be reproduced infra:
“8. The driver was competent to drive passenger vehicle as held by the
Supreme Court and even the endorsement of PSV was not required as
held by this court in case titled National Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Irfan Sidiq
Bhat, 2004 (II) SLJ 623. It is profitable to reproduce paras 13 and 17 of
“(13) A combined reading of the above provisions leaves no room
for doubt that by virtue of licence, about which there is no dispute,
both Showkat Ahmad and Zahoor Ahmad were competent in
terms of section 3 of the Motor Vehicles Act to drive a public
service vehicle without any PSV endorsement and express
authorisation in terms of Rule 4(1)(a) of the State Rules. In other
words, the requirement of the State Rules stood satisfied…
(17) In the case of Mohammad Aslam Khan, C.I.M.A No. 87 of
2002, Peer-zada Noor-ud-Din appearing as witness on behalf of
Regional Transport Officer did say on recall for further
examination that PSV endorsement on the licence of Zahoor
Ahmad was fake. In our opinion, the fact that the PSV
endorsement on the licence was fake is not at all material, for, even
if the claim is considered on the premise that there was no PSV
endorsement on the licence, for the reasons stated above, it would
not materially affect the claim. By virtue of ‘C to E’ licence,
Showkat Ahmad was competent to drive a passenger vehicle. In
fact, there is no separate definition of passenger vehicle or
passenger service vehicle in the Motor Vehicles Act. They come
within the ambit of public service vehicle under section 2(35). A
holder of driving licence with respect to “light motor vehicle” is
thus competent to drive any motor vehicle used or adapted to be
used for carriage of passengers, i.e, a public service vehicle.”
9. In the given circumstances of the case, I am of the considered view
that insurer has failed to prove that the owner has committed any wilful
breach. Further the Tribunal has also fallen in error while holding that
driver was not holding effective driving licence and was not competent
to drive LMV, LGV, LTV (sic LMV, HGV, HTV).”
From the above, it is derivable that a holder of driving licence
with respect to light motor vehicle is competent to drive any light motor
vehicle used or adapted to be used for carriage of passengers, i.e., a
public service vehicle.
22.It can also be seen from perusal of the Award of the Tribunal that
reference has been made to a judgement rendered in the case of
National Insurance Company Ltd v. Swaran Singh and others (2004) 3
SCC 297, in which it has been held by the Supreme Court insurance of
vehicles against third party risks, as provided under Chapter XI of the
Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, is a social welfare legislation to extend relief
by compensation to victims of accidents caused by use of motor
vehicles and that provisions of compulsory insurance coverage of all
vehicles are with this paramount object and the provisions of the Act
have to be so interpreted as to effectuate the said object. It has also been
held by the Supreme Court that the breach of policy conditions, e.g.,
disqualification of driver or invalid driving licence of driver, have to be
proved to have been committed by insured for avoiding liability by the
insurer and that mere absence, fake or invalid driving licence or
disqualification of driver to drive at the relevant time, are not in
themselves defences available to the insurer against either insured or
third parties, and to avoid liability towards insured, the insurer has to
prove that insured was guilty of negligence and failed to exercise
reasonable care int eh matter of fulfilling the condition of the policy
regarding use of vehicles by duly licenced driver or one who was not
disqualified to drive at the relevant time. It has also been made clear by
the Supreme Court that with a view to avoid their liability, the insurance
companies must not only establish the available defence(s) raised int eh
proceedings but must also establish breach on the part of owner of the
vehicle and that the burden of proof wherefore would be on them. Not
only this, the Supreme Court has said that even where the insurer is able
to prove breach on the part of insured as regards policy condition
concerning holding of a valid licence by driver or his qualification to
drive during relevant period, the insurer would not be allowed to avoid
its liability towards insured unless the said breach or breaches on the
condition of driving licence is/are so fundamental as are found to have
contributed to the cause of accident. After saying and holding so, the
Supreme Court said that where on adjudication of the claim, the
Tribunal arrived at a conclusion that insurer had satisfactorily proved
its defence, it can direct that the insurer was liable to be reimbursed by
insured for compensation and other amounts which it had been
compelled to pay to third party under the award of the tribunal and that
such determination of claim by tribunal would be enforceable and the
money found due to insurer from the insured will be recoverable.
23.Learned counsel for review petitioner has, during the course of
arguments, also made reference to and relied upon a judgement
rendered in the case of Mukund Dewangan v. Oriental Insurance
Company Limited reported in AIR 2017 SC 3668, in which the
controversy qua driving of transport vehicle by a driver holding licence
for driving light motor vehicle without endorsement of PSV, has been
set at rest. It has been held by the Supreme Court that a person holding
driving licence to drive light motor vehicle can ply the transport vehicle
as well of such class and no separate endorsement to that effect is
required. Pertinent excerpt thereof would be advantageous to be
“42. In Nagashetty (supra), the vehicle involved was a tractor which was
used for carrying goods. The goods were carried in a trailer attached to
it. It was held that if a driver was holding an effective licence to drive a
tractor, he could validly drive the tractor attached to a trailer. The
contention that it was a transport vehicle, as the tractor was attached to
a trailer and as such the driver was not holding a valid licence, was
rejected. This Court has laid down thus:
“9. Relying on these definitions, Mr. S.C. Sharda submitted that
admittedly the trailer was filled with stones. He submitted that once
a trailer was attached to the tractor the tractor became a transport
vehicle as it was used for carriage of goods. He submitted that
Section 10(2) of the Motor Vehicles Act provides for grant of
licences to drive specific types of vehicles. He submitted that the
driver only had a licence to drive a tractor. He submitted that the
driver did not have a licence to drive a transport vehicle. He
submitted that therefore it could not be said that the driver had an
effective and valid driving licence to drive a goods carriage or a
transport vehicle. He submitted that thus the driver did not have a
valid driving licence to drive the type of vehicle he was driving. He
submitted that as the driver did not have a valid driving licence to
drive a transport vehicle, the Insurance Co. could not be made liable.
He submitted that the High Court was right in so holding.
10. We are unable to accept the submissions of Mr. S.C. Sharda.
It is an admitted fact that the driver had a valid and effective licence
to drive a tractor. Undoubtedly Under Section 10, a licence is
granted to drive specific categories of motor vehicles. The question
is whether merely because a trailer was attached to the tractor and
the tractor was used for carrying goods, the licence to drive a tractor
becomes ineffective. If the argument of Mr. S.C. Sharda is to be
accepted, then every time an owner of a private car, who has a
licence to drive a light motor vehicle, attaches a roof carrier to his
car or a trailer to his car and carries goods thereon, the light motor
vehicle would become a transport vehicle and the owner would be
deemed to have no licence to drive that vehicle. It would lead to
absurd results. Merely because a trailer is added either to a tractor
or to a motor vehicle by itself does not make that tractor or motor
vehicle a transport vehicle. The tractor or motor vehicle remains a
tractor or motor vehicle. If a person has a valid driving licence to
drive a tractor or a motor vehicle, he continues to have a valid
licence to drive that tractor or motor vehicle even if a trailer is
attached to it and some goods are carried in it. In other words, a
person having a valid driving licence to drive a particular category
of vehicle does not become disabled to drive that vehicle merely
because a trailer is added to that vehicle.
11. In this case, we find that the Insurance Company when
issuing the insurance policy, had also so understood. The insurance
policy has been issued for a tractor. In this insurance policy, an
additional premium of Rs. 12 has been taken for a trailer. Therefore
the insurance policy covers not just the tractor but also a trailer
attached to the tractor. The insurance policy provides as follows for
the "persons or classes of persons entitled to drive":
'Persons or classes of persons entitled to drive - Any person
including insured provided that the person driving holds an effective
driving licence at the time of the accident and is not disqualified
from holding or obtaining such a licence: Provided also that the
person holding an effective learner’s licence may also drive the
vehicle when not used for the transport of goods at the time of the
accident and that such a person satisfies the requirements of Rule 3
of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, limitations as to use.'
12. The policy is for a tractor. The “effective driving licence” is
thus for a tractor. The restriction on a learner driving the tractor
when used for transporting goods shows that the policy itself
contemplates that the tractor could be used for carriage of goods.
The tractor by itself could not carry goods. The goods would be
carried in a trailer attached to it. That is why the extra premium for
a trailer. The restriction placed on a person holding a learner's
licence i.e. not to drive when goods are being carried is not there for
a permanent licence-holder. Thus a permanent licence-holder
having an effective/valid licence to drive a tractor can drive even
when the tractor is used for carrying goods. When the policy itself
so permits, the High Court was wrong in coming to the conclusion
that a person having a valid driving licence to drive a tractor would
become disqualified to drive the tractor if a trailer was attached to
45. Transport vehicle has been defined in section 2(47) of the Act, to
mean a public service vehicle, a goods carriage, an educational
institution bus or a private service vehicle. Public service vehicle has
been defined in section 2(35) to mean any motor vehicle used or adapted
to be used for the carriage of passengers for hire or reward and includes
a maxicab, a motor cab, contract carriage, and stage carriage. Goods
carriage which is also a transport vehicle is defined in section 2(14) to
mean a motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use solely for the
carriage of goods, or any motor vehicle not so constructed or adapted
when used for the carriage of goods.
It was rightly submitted that a person holding licence to drive light
motor vehicle registered for private use, who is driving a similar vehicle
which is registered or insured, for the purpose of carrying passengers
for hire or reward, would not require an endorsement as to drive a
transport vehicle, as the same is not contemplated by the provisions of
the Act. It was also rightly contended that there are several vehicles
which can be used for private use as well as for carrying passengers for
hire or reward. When a driver is authorised to drive a vehicle, he can
drive it irrespective of the fact whether it is used for a private purpose
or for purpose of hire or reward or for carrying the goods in the said
vehicle. It is what is intended by the provision of the Act, and the
46. Section 10 of the Act requires a driver to hold a licence with respect
to the class of vehicles and not with respect to the type of vehicles. In
one class of vehicles, there may be different kinds of vehicles. If they
fall in the same class of vehicles, no separate endorsement is required to
drive such vehicles. As light motor vehicle includes transport vehicle
also, a holder of light motor vehicle licence can drive all the vehicles of
the class including transport vehicles. It was pre-amended position as
well the post-amended position of Form 4 as amended on 28.3.2001.
Any other interpretation would be repugnant to the definition of "light
motor vehicle" in section 2(21) and the provisions of section 10(2)(d),
Rule 8 of the Rules of 1989, other provisions and also the forms which
are in tune with the provisions.
Even otherwise the forms never intended to exclude transport vehicles
from the category of 'light motor vehicles' and for light motor vehicle,
the validity period of such licence hold good and apply for the transport
vehicle of such class also and the expression in Section 59 10(2)(e) of
the Act 'Transport Vehicle' would include medium goods vehicle,
medium passenger motor vehicle, heavy goods vehicle, heavy passenger
motor vehicle which earlier found place in section 10(2)(e) to (h) and
our conclusion is fortified by the syllabus and rules which we have
discussed. Thus we answer the questions which are referred to us thus:
(i) 'Light motor vehicle' as defined in section 2(21) of the Act would
include a transport vehicle as per the weight prescribed in section 2(21)
read with section 2(15) and 2(48). Such transport vehicles are not
excluded from the definition of the light motor vehicle by virtue of
(ii) A transport vehicle and omnibus, the gross vehicle weight of either
of which does not exceed 7500 kg. would be a light motor vehicle and
also motor car or tractor or a road roller, 'unladen weight' of which does
not exceed 7500 kg. and holder of a driving licence to drive class of
"light motor vehicle" as provided in section 10(2)(d) is competent to
drive a transport vehicle or omnibus, the gross vehicle weight of which
does not exceed 7500 kg. or a motor car or tractor or road-roller, the
"unladen weight" of which does not exceed 7500 kg. That is to say, no
separate endorsement on the licence is required to drive a transport
vehicle of 60 light motor vehicle class as enumerated above. A licence
issued under section 10(2)(d) continues to be valid after Amendment
Act 54/1994 and 28.3.2001 in the form.
(iii) The effect of the amendment made by virtue of Act No.54/1994
w.e.f. 14.11.1994 while substituting clauses (e) to (h) of section 10(2)
which contained "medium goods vehicle" in section 10(2)(e), medium
passenger motor vehicle in section 10(2)(f), heavy goods vehicle in
section 10(2)(g) and "heavy passenger motor vehicle" in section
10(2)(h) with expression 'transport vehicle' as substituted in section
10(2)(e) related only to the aforesaid substituted classes only. It does
not exclude transport vehicle, from the purview of section 10(2)(d) and
section 2(41) of the Act i.e. light motor vehicle.
(iv) The effect of amendment of Form 4 by insertion of "transport
vehicle" is related only to the categories which were substituted in the
year 1994 and the procedure to obtain driving licence for transport
vehicle of class of "light motor vehicle" continues to be the same as it
was and has not been changed and there is no requirement to obtain
separate endorsement to drive transport vehicle, and if a driver is
holding licence to drive light motor vehicle, he can drive transport
vehicle of such class without any endorsement to that effect.
The Supreme Court held that ‘light motor vehicle’ would include
a transport vehicle and that transport vehicles are not excluded from the
definition of light motor vehicle in view of Amendment Act NO.54 of
1994. It has also been held by the Supreme Court that the effect of
amendment of Form 4 by insertion of “transport vehicle” is related only
to the categories which were substituted in the year 1994 and the
procedure to obtain driving licence for transport vehicle of class of
“light motor vehicle” continues to be the same as it was and has not
been changed and there is no requirement to obtain separate
endorsement to drive transport vehicle, and that if a driver holds licence
to drive light motor vehicle, he can drive transport vehicle of such class
without any endorsement to that effect.
24.So, from above discussion it is manifest that a person holding driving
licence to drive light motor vehicle can also drive transport vehicle of
such class that too without any endorsement to that effect in his driving
licence.
If that being the position, then review petitioner is right in
seeking review of the judgement dated 10th March 2015 as perusal
thereof reveals that it suffers from error apparent on the face of it and
permitting the judgement/order to stand will lead to failure of justice.
25.For all what has been discussed above, the instant review petition is
allowed and judgement/order dated 10th March 2015 passed in CIMA
no.77/2014 titled National Insurance Company Limited v. Mushtaq
Ahmad Kutay and others, is reviewed and recalled. And as a corollary
thereof, the Appeal, being CIMA no.77/2014, is dismissed and the right
thereby given to Insurance Company to recover the compensation from
the owner shall also stand deleted from the judgement dated 10 th March
2015, and the Award dated 24th February 2014, rendered by Motor
Accident Claims Tribunal, Anantnag, in claim petition, bearing File
no.71/Claim titled Musthaq Ahmad Kuttay v. Farooq Ahmad Mantoo
and others, is upheld.