2.                  Rule. Rule made returnable forthwith. Heard finally with
the assistance of learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioner
and for the Corporation.
3.                  We have carefully gone through the impugned order and
also order passed by the Supreme Court on 12 th July 2022, quashing
and setting aside the judgment and order passed by this Court dated
8th January 2018 and remanding the matter back to this Court for
decision afresh.
4.                  The project of Floatel (floating hotel) proposed by the
petitioner comprises four parts, namely, waiting area, floating jetty,
parking area and floatel itself. The waiting area consists of a seating
lounge, pantry along with service area, ticketing area, security check
facilities and toilets/wash rooms. The floating jetty consists of
Gangway and has length of about 22 metres and width of about 1.2
metres and main walkway has length of about 100 metres and width of
about 4 metres and the parking area of about 5000 sq.metres
approximately. The floating hotel is going to be located in deep sea
about 2 nautical miles from the shore line.
5.                  It is the contention of the petitioner that none of these four
parts of the entire project is situated anywhere near or on the Marine
Drive promenade and that these parts are situated beyond a point
which is the end of the Marine Drive promenade. He submits that this
aspect of the matter was not considered in any way by the Three
Member Committee, which took the impugned decision dated 24 th May
6.                  Learned senior counsel for the Corporation submits that the
Three Member Committee took the decision in accordance with the
3-WP-2591-2017-2nd order.doc
directions issued by the High Court in Public Interest Litigation
(Lodging) No. 96 of 2015, in which, by the order passed on 6 th August
2015, the High Court, having regard to the unique nature of Marine
Drive promenade and its proximity to Marine Drive Heritage Precincts,
directed that the decision in any matter pertaining to Marine Drive
promenade has to be taken by the Municipal Corporation for Greater
Mumbai only after the committee constituted by the Court considers
the application for grant of permission and recommends granting of
such permission. He further points out that, by the same order, the
High Court constituted Three Member Committee, as mentioned in
Paragraph 3 of the order dated 6 th August 2015. Therefore, according
to him, no fault should be found with the findings recorded by the
Three Member Committee regarding it having jurisdiction in the
7.                  Considering the situation of each of these four parts of the
entire project of Floatel, we find substance in the submission of learned
senior Advocate for the petitioner. As pointed out by learned senior
Advocate for the petitioner, none of these parts appear to be, prima
facie, forming part of Marine Drive promenade and this can be seen
from the admitted position on the situation of the areas covering the
project, as for example, parking area comprising about 5000 sq.metres
has already been allotted by the MMRDA to the petitioner and it is not
part of the promenade. It appears that starting point of floating jetty is
from the land bearing Survey No. 220/A not forming part of the
promenade and even the proposed waiting area appears to be on piece
3-WP-2591-2017-2nd order.doc
of land, which is not forming part of the Marine Drive promenade.
8.                  In these circumstances, it would be necessary for the
Commissioner of Mumbai Municipal Corporation to first take decision
as to whether he has exclusive jurisdiction to decide the application of
the petitioner for grant of NOC or not and if he decides that he has
such jurisdiction in the matter, he would have to go ahead to consider
the application of the petitioner on its own merits, without being
influenced by the order passed by this Court and also order passed by
the Three Member Committee on 24 th May 2017. However, if the
Commissioner comes to the conclusion that he has no exclusive
jurisdiction in the matter, he would have to act upon the
recommendation of the Three Member Committee and then in that
case, he would have to refer the matter to the Three Member
Committee for its consideration and appropriate recommendations.
Recording of finding on the question of jurisdiction is important for the
reason that it goes to the root of the whole dispute.
9.                  In this view of the matter, we find that the impugned order
dated 24th May 2017 will not stand to the scrutiny of law and will have
to be quashed and set aside.
10.                 As regards, the other impugned order 30th January 2017,
whereby NOC was refused by the Deputy Commissioner of Police,
Zone-I, Mumbai, which has been challenged here, we find that this
order contradicts the order passed earlier by the Deputy Commissioner
of Police, Harbour Zone, Mumbai dated 13th April 2011. The
3-WP-2591-2017-2nd order.doc
order/communication dated 30th January 2017 is based upon the
objection taken by the Senior Police Inspector, Marine Drive Police
Station and also Assistant Commissioner of Police, Colaba Division,
Mumbai. We are of the view that neither Senior P.I., Marine Drive
Police Station, nor Assistant Commissioner of Police, Colaba Division,
Mumbai had any jurisdiction in the matter. The project involved in the
petition had already received green signal from the police authorities
having            the        jurisdiction   and     therefore       the        impugned
order/communication dated 30th January 2017, based upon the
objection taken by the authority having no jurisdiction in the matter,
cannot be sustained in law. The authority which is having jurisdiction
in the matter, i.e. Deputy Commissioner of Police, Mumbai had already
granted permission for the subject project vide its communication
dated 13th April 2011. There is another communication dated 9 th June
2016 of the Deputy Commissioner of Police, Head Office-1, MCGM
granting permission for implementing the Floatel project and carrying
out incidental activities. This permission, granted on 9 th June 2016,
would in particular, nullify the subsequent objection taken by the
subordinate officer of the Commissioner of Mumbai Police. Therefore,
the impugned order/communication dated 30st January 2017 also
deserves to be quashed and set aside.
11.                 In the result, the petition is allowed. Impugned order dated
24th May 2017 and impugned communication dated 30th January 2017,
both are hereby quashed and set aside. The matter is remanded back
to the respondent no.1 with a direction to the Commissioner of
3-WP-2591-2017-2nd order.doc
Mumbai Municipal Corporation that he shall take his decision first on
the question of having jurisdiction in the matter. If he finds that he has
jurisdiction in the matter, he shall consider the application of the
petitioner for grant of necessary permission in accordance with law
and, if required, he may call for the NOC from the respondent.
12.                 In case the Commissioner has no exclusive jurisdiction in
the matter, he shall refer the application of the petitioner for grant of
permission to Three Member Committee constituted in terms of order
of the High Court dated 6th August 2015 in Public Interest Litigation
(lodging) No. 95 of 2015 for its due consideration and appropriate
recommendations in the matter.
13.                 We further direct that the Commissioner of Municipal
Corporation shall take his final decision in the matter in accordance
with law within a period of four weeks from the date of his decision
having exclusive jurisdiction or receipt of recommendations from the
Three Member Committee, as the case may be.
14.                 We also direct the petitioner to submit to the Commissioner
of Municipal Corporation a complete set of documents and
comprehensive representations and necessary documents within a
period of two weeks from the date of the order.
15.                 The entire process shall be completed by the Commissioner
of Municipal Corporation within a period of eight weeks from the date
of receipt of complete set of documents and comprehensive
3-WP-2591-2017-2nd order.doc
16.                 Rule is made absolute accordingly. The petition is disposed
of with the above terms.
17.                 Interim application is disposed of as per final order.