Through: Mr. Jayant Mehta, Sr. Adv. with Mr.
1.      This hearing has been done through hybrid mode.
2.      The present petition has been filed by the Petitioner- Mr. Vijender
Gupta, who is a sitting MLA of the Delhi Legislative Assembly (hereinafter
‘DLA’), challenging the suspension order which was imposed on him during
the proceedings of the DLA on 21st March, 2023.
3.      Since there is no specific order which has been passed by the Hon’ble
Speaker and the suspension is to be gleaned from the “summary of
proceedings” which took place in the DLA on that day, it is deemed
appropriate to extract the said summary herein below:-
“I. 11.07 AM The Chair informed the House that for
the first time in the history of the House, Annual
Budget (2023-24) would not be presented as per
schedule: The Chair termed it as an unfortunate,
unconstitutional and extraordinary incident and
requested Shri Kailash Gahlot, Hon'ble Minister of
Finance to make a statement in this regard.
started arguing with the Chair and demanded that
Notice of Privilege given by him against Shri Kailash
Gahlot and Shri Gopal Rai, Hon'ble Ministers be taken
The Chair requested the Hon'ble Member to allow Shri
Kailash Gahlot, Hon'ble Minister to make a statement.
continued to argue with the Chair and disrupted the
proceedings of the House.
On the directions of the Chair, the Marshalls escorted
Shri Vijender Gupta, Hon'ble Member out of the
of Opposition and Other Members of Opposition
walked out in the protest.
of Finance made a brief statement and apprised the
House regarding the circumstances for not being able
to present the Budget today i.e. scheduled date due to
lack of approval from Ministry of Home Affairs
4. 11.23 AM Shri Sanjeev Jha, Hon'ble Member also
expressed his concerns.
The Members of the Ruling Party entered the well of
the House and started shouting slogans.
The Chair requested the Members to resume their
seats.
However, the Members of Ruling Party continued to
indulge in sloganeering.
5. 11.24 AM The Chair adjourned the House till
7. 12.04 PM The Chair gave a Ruling on the Notice of
Breach of Privilege against Shri Kailash Gahlot and
Shri Gopal Rail, Hon'ble Ministers given by Sliri
Vijender Gupta, Hon'ble Member and informed the
House that it was received at 10:59 AM, whereas per
Rules it should be submitted at least 03 (three) hours
before the commencement of sitting on that day. He
stated that the Notice mentioned leak of contents of
Outcome Budget, already presented on 20/03/2023,
and did not relate to the Annual Budget. He also stated
that it was obvious that sole motive of Shri Vijender
Gupta, Hon'ble Member was to disrupt the proceedings
of the House and waste precious time of the House.
The Chair also warned Shri Vijender Gupta, Hon'ble
Member to be careful in future and not waste the time
of the House by such frivolous Notice which was also
against the Rules.
made a brief statement condemning the irresponsible
behaviour of Shri Vijender Gupta, Hon'ble Member for
disrupting the proceedings of the House.
Whip also drew the attention of the Chair on the
Notice of Privilege given by Shri Vijender Gupta,
Hon'ble Member with a malafide intent and requested
the Chair to refer the matter to Committee on Ethics.
10. 12.14 PM The Members of Ruling Party again
entered the well of the House and started shouting
slogans and created rucks.
The Chair requested the members to resume their
seats. However, the Members continued to indulge in
sloganeering and disrupted the proceedings of the
11. 12.16 PM The Chair adjourned the House till
again raised the issue of Notice of Privilege given by
The Chair informed Hon'ble Member that he had given
a Ruling in the matter. However, Hon'ble Member
continued to argue with the Chairand entered the well
of the House and continuously disrupted the
proceedings of the House.
moved a Motion that Shri Vijender Gupta, Hon'ble
Member be suspended for one year for repeatedly
interrupting the proceedings and wasting the time of
the House.
The Motion was put to vote and adopted by voice-vote.
The Chair informed the House that Shri Vijender
Gupta, Hon'ble Member has been suspended from
the sittings of the House for one year i.e. till the next
As the Hon'ble Member refused to leave the House
voluntarily, he was escorted out of the House by the
Marshalls on the directions of the Chair.”
4.      The said suspension is stated to have come into effect on 21 st March,
2023 itself and has continued till date i.e., 24th March 2023. The submission
of Mr. Jayant Mehta, ld. Sr. Counsel appearing for the Petitioner is that in
terms of Rule 277 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in the
Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi (hereinafter
‘Rules’) which govern the proceedings in the Legislative Assembly of NCT
of Delhi, the suspension is in a graded manner.
5.      On the basis of Rule 277 extracted above, it is his submission that in
any case, on the first occasion, the suspension can only be for a period of
three sittings. On the second occasion, the suspension can be for seven
sittings and on the subsequent occasions the MLA can be suspended for the
remainder of the session. However, in the present case, the Petitioner has
been suspended for a period of one year, till the next Budget session. He
further submits that the entire debate arose due to a privilege motion which
was moved by the Petitioner in respect of alleged selected publication of
part of the budget which was yet to be presented, in the social media, by
senior functionaries of the GNCTD.
6.      Mr. Jayant Mehta, ld. Sr. Counsel relies upon the judgment of the
Supreme Court in Ashish Shelar v. The Maharashtra Legislative Assembly
AIR 2022 SC 721 - Paras 63, 64,73 to argue that the graded suspension
alone can be followed.
7.      Mr. Sameer Vashisht, ld. Counsel for the Respondents, on the other
hand, relies upon Section 37 of the Government of NCT of Delhi Act, 1991
read with section 18 of the said Act to argue that such suspensions are not to
be enquired into by any Court. He further submits that in the present case,
the suspension is by the House itself and not by the Hon’ble Speaker.
Therefore, the House is fully empowered to issue punishment of a higher
nature than what is prescribed under Rule 277. He relies upon Rule 77 of the
Rules. The said rule is extracted as under:
recommendation of the Committee of Privileges may
inflict the following punishments:
(f) imprisonment the term whereof is at the
pleasure of the House but cannot extend beyond
prorogation or dissolution; and
(g) any other punishment which the House
may deem proper and subject to the provisions of
(2) The members suspended from the Service of
the House shall stand debarred from entering into the
precincts of the House and from taking part in the
proceedings of the House and the Committees, but the
Speaker may, on a request being made to that effect,
allow a suspended member to enter into the precincts
of the House for any particular purpose.
(3) The House may, on a motion being made,
order that any punishment of suspension or the
unfinished part thereof may be rescinded.”
8.      Mr. Vashisht further submits that the Leader of Opposition has
approached the Hon’ble Speaker who is still considering the matter and
hence the matter may be adjourned to 28th March 2023. On a query as to till
when the Budget session is to continue, the Court was informed that the
Budget session as of now is only till 27th March 2023, subject to any
extensions.
9.      Heard. First, the request for adjourning the matter to 28th March 2023
would be a futile exercise as the Budget Session itself is coming to an end
on Monday 27th March 2023. Thus, the matter would require consideration.
10.     Rule 277 of the Rules reads:
“277. Peace and Order in the house.
(1) The Speaker shall preserve order and may
direct any member whose conduct in his opinion is
disorderly or is defiant to the Speaker to withdraw
immediately from the House and the member so
ordered to withdraw shall withdraw forthwith and
shall absent himself during the remainder of the day’s
sitting.
(2)    The Speaker may name a member in the
following cases:
(a) if a member on being ordered by the
Speaker under sub-rule (1) to withdraw does not obey
(b) if the Speaker considers the power
conferred under sub-rule (1) to be inadequate, or
(c) if a member wilfully and persistently
obstructs the proceedings of the House in a disorderly
(d) if action under this rule becomes
necessary against him on successive occasions in the
same session.
(3)       (a) As soon as a member is named, the
Leader of the House or the Minister for
Parliamentary Affairs or in his absence any other
member shall forthwith make a motion to the effect
that the member so named be suspended from the
service of the House and the question on such motion
shall be put before the House without any
amendment, debate or adjournment proceeding.
(b) On a member being so suspended, the period of
suspension shall be for the first occasion for 3 sittings,
for the second occasion for 7 sittings and on
subsequent occasions unless otherwise decided by the
House, for the remainder of the session.
Provided that any period of suspension
shall in no case be       longer than the remainder of
the session.
(c) The member suspended by the House
shall forthwith withdraw from the precincts of the
House. But on his not doing so and on the attention
of the House being drawn by the Speaker to the fact
that recourse to force has become necessary, the
suspended member shall stand suspended for the
remainder of the session without any further action.
(d) The member suspended from the service
of the house shall stand debarred from entering the
precincts of the House and from taking part in the
proceedings of the House and the Committees.
Provided that the Speaker may allow a
suspended member to enter the precincts of the House
for any particular purpose on a request being made to
that effect.
(4) The House may at any time, on a motion
being made order that any punishment of suspension
under sub-rule (3) aforesaid or the unfinished part
thereof may be rescinded.
(5)     The Speaker shall have full authority to
carry out his order or the decisions of the house and
may employ, or authorise the employment of, necessary
force, at any stage of the proceedings.
(6)     The Speaker may, in the case of grave
disorder arising in the House, suspend a sitting for a
time to be determined by him.”
11.     The Supreme Court had the occasion to consider a similar situation in
Ashish Shelar (supra), In the said case relating to the Maharashtra
Legislative Assembly, the suspension was also for a period of 1 year. In the
said decision the Supreme Court while considering similar Rules governing
the Maharashtra Assembly held as under:
“45. A priori, if the resolution passed by the House
was to provide for suspension beyond the period
prescribed under the stated Rule, it would be
substantively illegal, irrational and unconstitutional.
In that, the graded (rational and objective standard)
approach predicated in Rule 53 is the benchmark to be
observed by the Speaker to enable him to ensure
smooth working of the House, without any obstruction
or impediment and for keeping the recalcitrant member
away from the House for a period maximum up to the
remainder of the entire Session.
46. Inflicting suspension for a period "beyond the
period necessary" than to ensure smooth
working/functioning of the House during the Session
"by itself"; and also, as per the underlying objective
standard specified in Rule 53, indubitably, suffer from
the vice of being grossly irrational measure adopted
against the erring member and also substantively
illegal and unconstitutional.
48. Be it noted that suspension beyond the remainder
period of the ongoing Session would not only be
grossly irrational measure, but also violative of basic
democratic values owing to unessential deprivation of
the member concerned and more importantly, the
constituency would remain unrepresented in the
Assembly. It would also impact the democratic setup
as a whole by permitting the thin majority Government
(coalition Government) of the day to manipulate the
numbers of the Opposition Party in the House in an
undemocratic manner. Not only that, the Opposition
will not be able to effectively participate in the
discussion/debate in the House owing to the constant
fear of its members being suspended for longer period.
There would be no purposeful or meaningful debates
but one in terrorem and as per the whims of the
majority. That would not be healthy for the democracy
as a whole.
51. As aforementioned, it is not a case of procedural
irregularity as such. Whereas, the decision taken by
the House in this case, is one of substantive illegality
in directing suspension beyond the period of
remainder of the Session in which the motion was
presented. We say so because, the period of suspension
in excess of the period essential to do so much less in a
graded manner including on principle underlying Rule
53, would be antithesis to rational or objective
standard approach for ensuring orderly functioning of
the House during the ongoing Session.
56. Suffice it to observe that one-year suspension is
worse than "expulsion", "disqualification" or
"resignation"--insofar as the right of the
constituency to be represented before the
House/Assembly is concerned. In that, long
suspension is bound to affect the rights harsher than
expulsion wherein a mid-term election is held within
the specified time in terms of Section 151A of the 1951
Act, not later than six months. Thus, the impugned
resolution is unreasonable, irrational, and arbitrary
and liable to be set aside.”
12.     A perusal of the Rules as also the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Ashish Shelar (supra), clearly shows that in Rule 277, the suspension is
graded. Under Rule 277(1), the Hon’ble Speaker can direct any MLA to be
suspended for the remainder of the day’s sitting if the conduct is disorderly.
Rule 277(3)(b) clearly requires that, on the first occasion, the suspension can
only be for three sittings. On the second occasion the suspension can be for
seven sittings and thereafter for the remainder of the session, unless
otherwise directed by the House. In terms of judgment of the Supreme Court
in Ashish Shelar (supra), the suspension beyond the remainder of the
session would be contrary to law.
13.     The Budget Session of the Delhi Legislative Assembly is currently
ongoing and the Petitioner has already remained suspended for four days i.e.
21st March, 2023; 22nd March, 2023; 23rd March, 2023 and 24th March,
2023 in view of the impugned suspension order.
14.     A perusal of the summary of proceedings extracted above shows that
there was disturbance caused during the sitting of the House both by the
Petitioner, as also by ruling party members. There is no gainsaying that the
Members of the Legislative Assembly or any other elected house have to
maintain dignity of the house in order to play a positive role owing to the
mandate of the people.
15.     The record of the proceedings shows that this was the first suspension
which was meted out to the Petitioner. Accordingly, in terms of Rule
227(3)(b), the suspension could have only to be for a period of three days
which the Petitioner has already served in effect.
16.     In view of the above discussion, the suspension period, being of one
year deserves to be set aside. It is accordingly directed that the Petitioner
would be permitted to attend the DLA from Monday i.e., 27th March, 2023
till the remainder of the current Session. The writ petition is allowed in the
above terms.
17.     The questions of law raised in respect of Rule 77 and 277, by Mr.
Vashisht, ld. Counsel, are left open to be decided in an appropriate case.
18.     Needless to add that the Petitioner shall also maintain the dignity of
the House. This Court has not examined the merits of the suspension.
19.     With these above observations, the present petition along with all
pending applications, if any, is disposed of.
20.     Copy of this order be given dasti under signature of the Court Master.
21.     The digitally signed copy of this order, duly uploaded on the official
website of the Delhi High Court, www.delhihighcourt.nic.in, shall be treated
as the certified copy of the order for the purpose of ensuring compliance. No
physical copy of orders shall be insisted by any authority/entity or litigant.