This  is   a  case   where    a  poor    father,  whose   son  has   been
killed/alleged                to   be   murdered     has   approached   this   Court   for
appropriate               order   directing    the    (H&B)  CID,  Bengaluru-Respondent
No.5 herein to transfer the further investigation in Crime Case No.
65 of 2014 registered with Panambur P.S. Mangaluru, Karnataka to
the Central Bureau of Investigation [CBI] Bengaluru, Karnataka.
Pursuant   to   the  earlier    order    passed  by   this  Court   dated
which              was  directed     to   further    investigate    in   the  matter   has
submitted the status report.
From the report, it appears that except again obtaining the
further Expert opinion from the Department of Forensic Medicine and
Toxicology,               Bangalore     Medical    College    and  Research    Institute,
Bangalore, there is no further investigation carried out.
On the contrary, an abated charge-sheet has been filed against
the deceased for the offence under Sections 279, 304(A) IPC read
Digitally signed by
with Section 185 of the Motor Vehicles Act. It is unheard of that
an abated charge-sheet can be filed against the deceased who is
alleged to have been murdered/killed.             Even otherwise, on prima
facie  consideration      of  the   relevant     material   on   record,   more
particularly,    the    photographs      produced    along   with    the   writ
petition, it appears prima facie that it is not a case of simple
accident as opined by the Investigating Agency.
We are not at all satisfied with the further investigation
carried out by the Investigating Agency-CID, Bengaluru.              The truth
must  come   out   after   thorough    and   proper    investigation    by  the
In the present case, the Investigating Agency – CID, Bengaluru
has failed to perform its duty by not thoroughly investigating the
case and tried to find out the truth.
Under   the   circumstances,     this   a  fit   case  to   exercise   the
powers under Article 32 of the Constitution and to transfer the
investigation of the case to the CBI, Bengaluru.
In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, the
present Writ Petition stands allowed.          The Investigating Agency HNB
– CID, Bengaluru is hereby directed to transfer the investigation
in   Crime    Case    No.    65   of    2014    registered     with    Panambur
P.S.,  Mangaluru    to  the   CBI,   Bengaluru,     Karnataka   and   the  CBI,
Bengaluru,   Karnataka    is   hereby   directed    to  conduct   the   further
The CBI is, hereby, directed to submit the periodical status
report  before    the  High    Court   every   two   months  on   the   further
investigation    carried    out.     The    CBI,   Bengaluru,    Karnataka   is
expected   to   conclude    the   investigation     as   early   as  possible,
considering   the   fact  that  the     incident   is   of  2014   and  the
petitioner-father of the deceased is waiting for justice.
The present Investigating Agency is directed to handover the
entire records of the case to the CBI, Bengaluru within a period of
two  weeks  from   today,   after   getting    the   same  back   from  the
Having been satisfied that there is no proper investigation on
the allegation of murder and/or the deceased being killed, we set
aside the abated charge-sheet filed against the deceased for the
offence under Sections 279, 304(A) IPC read with Section 185 of the
Motor  Vehicles   Act.    However,   at   the   same  time,  whatever   the
material    is     collected    during       the     investigation/further
investigation   be  transferred   to   the  CBI,   Bengaluru,   as  ordered
The Writ Petition is, accordingly, allowed with costs, which
is quantified at Rs.1,00,000/- to be paid by the CID, Bengaluru to
be paid to the petitioner within a period of four weeks from today.
(FOR ADMISSION and IA No.130070/2022-EX-PARTE STAY)
Date : 03-11-2022 This petition was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
The Writ Petition is allowed with costs, which is quantified
at Rs.1,00,000/- to be paid by the CID, Bengaluru to be paid to the
petitioner within a period of four weeks from today in terms of the
signed order.
Pending application stands disposed of.
(Signed order is placed on the file)