Counsel for Applicant :- Nadeem Murtaza
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Govt. Advocate,Ajit Shukla,Amrendra
1. By way of this application under Section 482 CrPC, the applicants
have prayed for quashing of the order dated 19.08.2017 passed by the
learned Sessions Judge, Court No. 5, Pratapgarh in Criminal Revision
No.192 of 2016 (Visharjan Singh Yadav and others Vs. State of U.P.
and others).
By means of the impugned order the learned Sessions Judge has
dismissed the revision filed by the applicants against the order dated
12.01.2015 passed by the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Pratapgarh in Case No.732 of 2014 (Vidhyabhan Singh Vs. Visharjan
Singh Yadav and others) and Case No.761 of 2014 (Indirakar Misra
Vs. Visharjan Singh Yadav and others) whereby the applicants were
summoned to face trial under Sections 323, 325, 379, 427, 452 and
Further prayer has been made for quashing of the entire proceedings
of Case No.732 of 2014 (Vidhyabhan Singh Vs. Visharjan Singh
Yadav and others) and Case No.761 of 2014 (Indirakar Misra Vs.
Visharjan Singh Yadav and others), pending in the Court of Additional
2. On the date of incident i.e. 21.05.2014 all the applicants were
posted in the District Police Pratapgarh. Applicant no. 1 was posted as
Sub-Inspector at Police Station Kotwali Nagar, District Pratapgarh,
applicant no. 2 was posted as Chowki In-charge at Police Station
Kotwali City, applicant no. 3 was posted as Additional Superintendent
of Police, District Pratapgarh, while applicant no. 4 was posted as
3. District Court, Pratapgarh comes within the jurisdiction of Police
4. On 21.05.2014, the police received an information through Dial-
100 of Police Service that a conflict between advocates of the District
Court, Pratapgarh and Pradeshik Armed Constabulary (for short
'PAC') personnel, deployed in the premises of Civil Courts,
Pratapgarh, was taking place. Information was also given that a PAC
personnel had fired upon one lawyer, who had sustained firearm
injuries. Soon after receiving the information, to maintain peace and
to prevent any further untoward incident, the applicants and many
other police personnel rushed towards the Civil Courts compound
Pratapgarh to control the situation and maintain peace. The advocates,
present in the Courts compound, were highly agitated and, it appears
that in the skirmishes, between the police personnel and the advocates,
the applicants suffered injuries. The police also used mild force to
control the situation and, it took almost entire day for the District
Administration to control the situation and bring normalcy in the
District Courts compound and city of Pratapgarh.
5. The respondent nos. 2 and 3 filed two complaints before the Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Pratapgarh on 24.05.2014 against the applicants
and 8-10 other police personnel, alleging therein that on 21.05.2014
the police personnel, named in the complaints, assaulted and abused
the advocates. The advocates suffered injuries. The police personnel
also damaged property of the advocates and snatched their mobile-
phones etc.
6. After recording statement of the complainants under Section 200
CrPC and witness under Section 202 CrPC, the learned Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Pratapgarh vide order dated 15.07.2014 directed merging
of both the complaints.
7. After merging of the two complaints, statement of Mr. Ramchandra
Yadav was recorded under Section 202 CrPC on 04.08.2015 and
statement of Mr. Anil Yadav was recorded under Section 202 CrPC on
30.08.2014. Learned Magistrate thereafter passed order, summoning
the applicants vide order dated 12.01.2015 under Sections 323, 325,
379, 427, 452, 504 and 506 IPC.
8. Heard Nadeem Murtaza, learned counsel for the applicants, Mr.
Amrendra Nath Tripathi, learned counsel for respondent nos. 2 and 3,
as well as learned Additional Government Advocate, representing
respondent no. 1-State.
9. On behalf of the applicants, it has been submitted that the
applicants were discharging official/public duty when the alleged
incident took place for which two complaints came to be filed and the
applicants had been summoned as accused; mandatory provision of
sanction by the competent authority under Section 197 Criminal
Procedure Code, 1973 (for short 'CrPC') could not have been ignored
by the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate before taking cognizance and
summoning the applicants as accused; the information received on
Dial-100 through Mr. Anvar Khan, Advocate was recorded in the G.D.
dated 21.05.2014. In the G.D. dated 22.05.2014 the extract of incident
was also recorded. The police personnel, after receiving information,
which got recorded in the G.D., reached to the District Court to
control the situation in discharge of their official/public duty.
10. On behalf of the applicants, it has also been submitted that if the
police personnel, including the applicants, would not have reached at
the Court's compound to control the situation, there would have been
much more damage to lives and properties, which might have
included public property as well; the impugned proceedings, in
absence of sanction by the competent authority for prosecution of the
applicants, are non-est and, are liable to be quashed as the same are
without jurisdiction.
11. On behalf of the applicants, it has also been submitted that the
learned Magistrate has exceeded its jurisdiction to take cognizance
and summon the applicants as there was no proper sanction by the
competent authority.
12. On behalf of the respondents, it has been submitted that assaulting
the lawyers, destroying their properties and taking away their cell-
phones etc. cannot be said to be a part of official duty of the
applicants. The offence committed by the applicants cannot be said to
be a part of the official duty and, therefore, no sanction was required
for prosecuting them for the offences committed by them and the
same did not come within the performance of the public/official duty;
the police personnel, including the applicants, reached to the Court's
compound without prior permission from the District Judge and,
therefore, their action was wholly illegal and not in performance of
public/official duty. Their acts/crimes are not protected by the
provision of Section 197 CrPC. It has been further submitted that the
present application has no merit and is liable to be dismissed.
13. I have considered the submissions advanced by the learned
counsel for the parties and gone through the record.
14. Section 197 in The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 is extracted
herein below for convenience:-
"197. Prosecution of Judges and public servants.-(1) When
any person who is or was a Judge or Magistrate or a public
servant not removable from his office save by or with the
sanction of the Government is accused of any offence alleged to
have been committed by him while acting or purporting to act
in the discharge of his official duty, no Court shall take
cognizance of such offence except with the previous sanction-
(a) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may
be, was at the time of commission of the alleged offence
employed, in connection with the affairs of the Union, of the
(b) in the case of a person who is employed or, as the case may
be, was at the time of commission of the alleged offence
employed, in connection with the affairs of a State, of the State
Notification No. 1841 (3)/VI-538-71 dated 30th January, 1975 reads
(3)/VI-538-71, dated January 30, 1975:-
In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (3) of
Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Act No.
2 of 1974), the Governor is pleased to direct that the provisions
of sub-section (2) of the aforesaid section shall apply to all
members of the following forces of the State, charged with the
maintenance of public order wherever they may be serving,
15. The object of sanction for prosecution under Section 197 CrPC is
to protect the public servants discharging official/public functions
from harassment by initiation of mala-fide/frivolous/retaliatory
criminal proceedings. A Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in
the case of Matajog Dobey Vs. H.C. Bhari, AIR 1956 SC 44,
delineating importance of sanction for prosecution of public servants
"15.The minor contentions may be disposed of at the outset.
Even if there was anything sound and substantial in the
constitutional point about the vires of Section 5(1) of the Act,
we declined to go into it as it was not raised before the High
Court or in the grounds of the petition for special leave to
appeal. Article 14 does not render Section 197 of the Criminal
Procedure Code ultra vires as the discrimination is based upon
a rational classification. Public servants have to be protected
from harassment in the discharge of official duties while
ordinary citizens not so engaged do not require this safeguard.
It was argued that Section 197 of the Criminal Procedure Code
vested an absolutely arbitrary power in the Government to
grant or withhold sanction at their sweet-will and pleasure, and
the legislature did not lay down or even indicate any guiding
principles to control the exercise of the discretion. There is no
question of any discrimination between one person and another
in the matter of taking proceedings against a public servant for
an act done or purporting to be done by the public servant in
the discharge of his official duties. No one can take such
proceedings without such sanction. If the Government gives
sanction against one public servant but declines to do so
against another, then the government servant against whom
sanction is given may possibly complain of discrimination. But
the petitioners who are complainants cannot be heard to say so,
for there is no discrimination as against any complainant. It
has to be borne in mind that a discretionary power is not
necessarily a discriminatory power and that abuse of power is
not to be easily assumed where the discretion is vested in the
government and not in a minor official. Further, we are not now
concerned with any such question. We have merely to see
whether the court could take cognisance of the case without
previous sanction and for this purpose the court has to find out
if the act complained against was committed by the accused
while acting or purporting to act in the discharge of official
duty. Once this is settled, the case proceeds or is thrown out.
Whether sanction is to be accorded or not is a matter for the
government to consider. The absolute power to accord or
withhold sanction conferred on the government is irrelevant
and foreign to the duty cast on the court, which is the
ascertainment of the true nature of the act."
16. The intention behind protection under Section 197 CrPC is to
protect the public servant from being unnecessarily harassed by
launching a criminal proceeding against him for an offence allegedly
committed while performing official/public duty. If the offence is in
respect of an act done or purported to be done in discharge of official/
public duty, the public servant has protection under Section 197 CrPC.
This protection under Section 197 CrPC has salutary object to prevent
harassment of public servants and protect them for mala fide and
motivated criminal prosecution. However, if the competent authority
finds that the act of commission/omission done by public servant was
not in performance of his public duty, he would sanction prosecution
of the public servant.
17. In 1973 (2) SCC 701 (Pukhraj Vs. State of Rajasthan and
another) the Supreme Court has held that the requirement of sanction
cannot be confined to only such an act done or purporting to be done
directly in discharge of his public office. This protection would be
available in cases where the act complained of is in excess of the duty
or under a mistaken belief as to the existence of such duty. Paragraph-
2 of Pukhraj Vs. State of Rajasthan and another case (supra) is
extracted hereinunder:-
"2. The law regarding the circumstances under which sanction
under Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is
necessary is by now well settled as a result of the decisions
from Hori Ram Singh's case [AIR 1939 FC 43 : 1939 FCR
159 : 40 Cri LJ 468] to the latest decision of this Court in
Bhagwan Prasad Srivastava v. N.P. Misra [(1970) 2 SCC 56 :
(1971) 1 SCR 317] . While the law is well settled the difficulty
really arises in applying the law to the facts of any particular
case. The intention behind the section is to prevent public
servants from being unnecessarily harassed. The section is not
restricted only to cases of anything purported to be done in
good faith, for a person who ostensibly acts in execution of his
duty still purports so to act, although he may have a dishonest
intention. Nor is it confined to cases where the act, which
constitutes the offence, is the official duty of the official
concerned. Such an interpretation would involve a
contradiction in terms, because an offence can never be an
official duty. The offence should have been committed when an
act is done in the execution of duty or when an act purports to
be done in execution of duty. The test appears to be not that the
offence is capable of being committed only by a public servant
and not by anyone else, but that it is committed by a public
servant in an act done or purporting to be done in the execution
of duty. The section cannot be confined to only such acts as are
done by a public servant directly in pursuance of his public
office, though in excess of the duty or under a mistaken belief
as to the existence of such duty. Nor need the act constituting
the offence be so inseparably connected with the official duty as
to form part and parcel of the same transaction. What is
necessary is that the offence must be in respect of an act done
or purported to be done in the discharge of an official duty. It
does not apply to acts done purely in a private capacity by a
public servant. Expressions such as the “capacity in which the
act is performed”, “cloak of office” and “professed exercise of
the office” may not always be appropriate to describe or
delimit the scope of section. An act merely because it was done
negligently does not cease to be one done or purporting to be
done in execution of a duty. In Hori Ram Singh case Sulaiman,
“The section cannot be confined to only such acts as are done
by a public servant directly in pursuance of his public office,
though in excess of the duty or under a mistaken belief as to the
existence of such duty. Nor is it necessary to go to the length of
saying that the act constituting the offence should be so
inseparably connected with the official duty as to form part and
parcel of the same transaction.”
In the same case Varadachariar, J. observed: “there must be
something in the nature of the act complained of that attaches it
to the official character of the person doing it”. In affirming
this view, the Judicial Committee ofthe Privy Council observed
in Gill [AIR 1948 PC 128 : 1948 LR 75 IA 41 : 49 Cri LJ 503]
“A public servant can only be said to act or purport to act in
the discharge of his official duty, if his act is such as to lie
within the scope of his official duty…. The test may well be
whether the public servant, if challenged, can reasonably claim
that, what he does in virtue of his office.”
In Matajog Dobey v. H.C. Bhari [AIR 1955 SC 44 : (1955) 2
SCR 925 : 1956 Cri LJ 140] the Court was of the view that the
test laid down that it must be established that the act
complained of was an official act unduly narrowed down the
scope of the protection afforded by Section 197. After referring
to the earlier cases the Court summed up the results as follows:
“There must be a reasonable connection between the act and
the discharge of official duty; the act must bear such relation to
the duty that the accused could lay a reasonable, but not a
pretended or fanciful claim, that he did it in the course of the
performance of his duty.”
Applying this test it is difficult to say that the acts complained
of i.e. of kicking the complainant and of abusing him, could be
said to have been done in the course of performance of the 2nd
respondent's duty. At this stage all that we are concerned with
is whether on the facts alleged in the complaint it could be said
that what the 2nd respondent is alleged to have done could be
said to be in purported exercise of his duty. Very clearly it is
not. We must make it clear, however, that we express no opinion
as to the truth or falsity of the allegations."
18. In (2020) 7 SCC 695 (D. Devraja Vs. Owais Sabeer Hussain) the
Supreme Court, after making survey of the case law on the question of
sanction in paragraphs-66, 67, 68, 69, 70 and 71 has held as under:-
66. Sanction of the Government, to prosecute a police officer,
for any act related to the discharge of an official duty, is
imperative to protect the police officer from facing harassive,
retaliatory, revengeful and frivolous proceedings. The
requirement of sanction from the Government, to prosecute
would give an upright police officer the confidence to discharge
his official duties efficiently, without fear of vindictive
retaliation by initiation of criminal action, from which he would
be protected under Section 197 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, read with Section 170 of the Karnataka Police Act.
At the same time, if the policeman has committed a wrong,
which constitutes a criminal offence and renders him liable for
prosecution, he can be prosecuted with sanction from the
67. Every offence committed by a police officer does not attract
Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure read with
Section 170 of the Karnataka Police Act. The protection given
under Section 197 of the Criminal Procedure Code read with
Section 170 of the Karnataka Police Act has its limitations. The
protection is available only when the alleged act done by the
public servant is reasonably connected with the discharge of his
official duty and official duty is not merely a cloak for the
objectionable act. An offence committed entirely outside the
scope of the duty of the police officer, would certainly not
require sanction. To cite an example, a policeman assaulting a
domestic help or indulging in domestic violence would
certainly not be entitled to protection. However, if an act is
connected to the discharge of official duty of investigation of a
recorded criminal case, the act is certainly under colour of
duty, no matter how illegal the act may be.
68. If in doing an official duty a policeman has acted in excess
of duty, but there is a reasonable connection between the act
and the performance of the official duty, the fact that the act
alleged is in excess of duty will not be ground enough to
deprive the policeman of the protection of the government
sanction for initiation of criminal action against him.
69. The language and tenor of Section 197 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure and Section 170 of the Karnataka Police
Act makes it absolutely clear that sanction is required not only
for acts done in discharge of official duty, it is also required for
an act purported to be done in discharge of official duty and/or
act done under colour of or in excess of such duty or authority.
70. To decide whether sanction is necessary, the test is whether
the act is totally unconnected with official duty or whether
there is a reasonable connection with the official duty. In the
case of an act of a policeman or any other public servant
unconnected with the official duty there can be no question of
sanction. However, if the act alleged against a policeman is
reasonably connected with discharge of his official duty, it does
not matter if the policeman has exceeded the scope of his
powers and/or acted beyond the four corners of law.
71. If the act alleged in a complaint purported to be filed
against the policeman is reasonably connected to discharge of
some official duty, cognizance thereof cannot be taken unless
requisite sanction of the appropriate Government is obtained
under Section 197 of the Code of Criminal Procedure and/or
Section 170 of the Karnataka Police Act."
19. It is also well settled that an application under Section 482 CrPC is
maintainable to quash the proceedings for want of sanction or if same
are frivolous or in abuse of process of the Court. If there is no
reasonable relationship with the official/public duty the protection
under Section 197 CrPC will not be available to such a public servant.
However, for the alleged offence committed by the police personnel,
which may be in excess of his official/public duty, without sanction
the Court is barred to take cognizance of the offence. The judgment
reported in (1987) 4 SCC 663 (Bakhshish Singh Brar Vs. Gurmej
Kaur and another) relied on by Mr. Amrendra Nath Tripathi, learned
counsel for the respondent nos. 2 and 3 is not applicable in the facts of
the present case inasmuch as in the said case the police officer was
accused of causing grievous injuries and death in conducting raid and
search and, therefore, the Court held that where the police officer,
while acting in purported discharge of official duty exceeded limits
(underline supplied) of his official capacity, would be a question
which can be decided after taking cognizance of offence and,
therefore, held that the trial need not be stayed for want of sanction in
the said case.
20. In the present case, it is not in dispute that there was unrest and the
atmosphere was highly changed. The applicants, along with other
police personnel, went to control the situation and maintain peace and
order. The police officials also had suffered injuries to control the
situation. To control the situation, if they had used force, and as a
result thereof, some lawyers had suffered injuries, it cannot be said
that the police officers were not acting in discharge of their official
duty. The question that the police personnel went there without
permission of the District Court has no relevance inasmuch as the
duty of the police is to maintain peace, law & order. It appears that
there was an emergent situation to deal with by the police and, they
could not have waited for the order to be passed by the District Judge
to enter the Court premises. On this ground that there was no order
passed by the District Judge for the police to enter the Court
compound, the action taken by the police officials cannot be said to be
not one towards discharge of the official/public duty. Even if the
police official had exceeded to some extent their authority in
discharge of their official/public duty, then also sanction would be
required for their prosecution. In absence of sanction, the criminal
proceedings against the applicants would be non-est and void and the
same are liable to be quashed.
21. In view thereof, the application is hereby allowed. Consequently,
the impugned proceedings are quashed.