2. With the consent of learned advocates for the
respective parties, the petitions are taken up for
final hearing.
3. By way of these petitions under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, the petitioners who were
initially appointed as Revenue Talatis on fixed wage
basis and got the benefit of inter district transfer
post their period of regular service after five years,
seek to challenge the resolutions dated 18.01.2017
and 20.01.2018.
4. The petitioners were appointed as Revenue Talatis in
the year 2010 on a fixed pay for a period of five
years.       For the purpose of considering the issue,
chronology of dates of service of petitioner no.1 are
considered. He was appointed on 03.04.2010 for a
period of five years. On completion of five years of
service, the petitioner was regularized in service
vide an order dated 11.04.2016.            A request of
transfer was made on he being regularized and by
an order dated 16.06.2016, the petitioner was
transferred from Valsad to range Deesa. The order
of transfer would indicate that on his transfer, the
incumbent     would   lose        his   seniority        and          an
undertaking was given by the petitioner that he had
no objection of losing such seniority. In other words,
for the purposes of reckoning his seniority since at
the relevant time there was no policy of the State for
considering the past period of five years of initial
appointment for regular benefits, the petitioner in
effect lost two years of his service on a regular basis
for the purposes of seniority.
5. Subsequent to the orders on which the petitioner
accepted the transfer, the State came up with a
resolution dated 18.01.2017 through the Finance
Department. The resolution provided for a policy of
considering    the  period        of  five    years         of       the
incumbents who were appointed on a fixed pay for
the purposes of seniority, promotion, higher pay
scale and terminal benefits from their initial date of
engagement     and   not       from the     date       of       their
regularization as in the case of the petitioner.
6. Mr.Gautam Joshi learned Senior Advocate would
emphasize on the language of the resolution to
indicate that the resolution was prospective and
should therefore be read as such.              The General
Administration Department by a resolution dated
20.01.2018    has   laid      down   the     yardstick              for
computing seniority in case of such fixed pay
employees who were granted the benefit of seniority
etc. as per the resolution dated 18.01.2017.                      The
resolution stipulated that those fixed pay employees
who were engaged after 18.01.2017 would get the
benefits of that initial date of appointment for all
purposes whereas the present petitioners who were
appointed prior to the resolution would in effect by
virtue of his transfer not only lose the two years of
their seniority but there will be no regard and the
benefit for other purposes even of the past five
years. The policy therefore is under challenge.
7. Alternatively, Mr.Joshi would rely on the decision of
the       Supreme      Court      in    case    of      State            of
Maharashtra v. Uttam Powar reported in (2008)
2 SCC 646 and submit that the Supreme Court
while considering the decision in the case of
Scientific       Advisor      to      Raksha      Mantri              and
Another v. V.M.Joseph reported in (1998) 5 SCC
305 opined that when person is transferred on his
own request his past service has to be counted for
the benefits while promotion on higher pay scale.
8. Reliance is also placed on the decision of this Court
in the case of M.U.Shah v. State of Gujarat
reported in 2016 SCC Online Guj 9932, wherein
the Court relying on the decision in case of Uttam
Vishnu Pawar (supra) held as under:
“5. Having considered the rival contentions and
the judicial pronouncements as above it is more
than clear that while on request transfer ex-
cadre one may lose seniority, the right to
higher grade pay scale is required to be
considered on altogether a different criteria
laid down in the relevant scheme. It is not the
case of the respondents that the Government
scheme specifically provides the loss or
forfeiture of right to claim higher grade pay
scale on forfeiture of seniority. Considering the
legal position as settled in paragraph No. 13 in
the case of Uttam Vishnu Pawar (supra) and in
paragraph No. 9 of V.A. Parekh (supra) both of
which are quoted for ready reference
hereunder, in the opinion of this court, there
was no reason with the respondents to
withdraw the first higher grade pay scale
granted to the petitioner by virtue of order
dated 9.11.1992.
“13. Therefore, in view of the consistent
approach of this court, it is no more res
integra that the incumbent on transfer to
the new department may not get the
seniority but his experience of the past
service rendered will be counted for the
purpose of other benefits like promotion
or for the higher pay scale as per the
Scheme of the Government.”
“9. At the outset, it is required to be
noted that the objection raised by the
respondent No. 3 that while granting
the benefit of higher pay scale on
completion         of        9               years
service/seniority prior to the request
transfer is not required to be counted
is not sustainable in view of the many
decisions of the Division Bench as
well as learned Single Judges of this
Court. Even, the controversy in
question is now not res integra in
view of the the decision of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Uttam Vishun Pawar (supra). All the
decisions have been considered by
this Court in the recent decision of
this Court in the case of Naynaben
Manubhai           Vyas     (supra)             dated
12.3.2009 in Special Civil Application
No. 1446 of 1994 and other allied
matters. In spite of the above
decisions of this Court, since long the
office of the respondent No. 3 is
raising same and similar objection
driving the employee to the Court
and to obtain the similar order. If, on
a particular point there is a decision
of this Court every authority of the
State Government is bound to follow
the same unless it is upset by the
higher forum. The authority has to
apply its mind before raising
objection and grant the benefit
accordingly and shall not compel the
employee to obtain similar order
from the Court. To raise the
objections again and again which are
overruled by the Court by decision
would not only compelling the
employee to incur the expenditure
towards the legal proceedings but it
will also increase the litigation and
burden to the Courts, which are
otherwise today heavy burdened due
to backlog of cases and Courts are
trying their best to get out of the
backlog. In the case of (Smt)
(supra) the learned Single Judge of
this Court as far as back in the year
1992      has       observed         that           the
employer. The model employer is one
who would not deny just claim of his
employee and employees on any
technical         ground.      Such           model
employer would not wait for any
direction to be given to accept just
claim of the employee/employees. It
is further observed that once it is
found that an employee is similarly
situated the benefits flowing from a
judgment in a case of other similarly
situated employee, it should be given
to other similarly situated employee
and employee should not be driven to
the Court for addressing just
grievances. Even in the case of
(Supra), the Full Bench of this Court
in para 9 and 10 has observed and
held as under:
“9. The legal position regarding the
binding nature of judgments delivered by
High Courts was clearly explained as far
back as 1962 by the Supreme Court. In
East India Commercial Co. Ltd. v.
Collector of Customs, Calcutta, A.I.R.
1962 S.C. 1893, Subba Rao. J. (as he then
was) speaking for himself and Mudholkar
J., has explained though A.K. Sarkar J.
who was the legal position, the legal
position in paragraph 29 of the report as
This raises the question whether an
administrative tribunal can ignore the law
declared by the highest court in the State
and initiate proceedings in direct violation
of the law so declared. Under Art. 215,
every High Court shall be a court of
record and shall have all the powers of
such a court including the power to punish
for contempt of itself. Under Art: 226, it
has a plenary power to issue orders or
writs for the enforcement of the
fundamental rights and for any other
purpose to_any person or authority,
including in appropriate cases any
Government,            within     its       territorial
jurisdiction. Under Art. 227 it has
jurisdiction over all courts and tribunals
throughout the territories in relation to
which it exercises jurisdiction. It would be
anomalous to suggest that a tribunal over
which        the         High        Court                has
superintendence can ignore the law
declared by that court and start
proceedings in direct violation of it. If a
tribunal can do so, all the subordinate
courts can equally do so, for there is no
specific provision, just like in the case of
Supreme Court, making the law declared
by the High Court binding on subordinate
courts. It is implicit in the power of
supervision conferred on a superior
tribunal that all the tribunals subject to its
supervision should conform to the law laid
down by it. Such obedience would also be
conducive to their smooth working:
otherwise, there would be confusion in the
administration of law and respect for law
would irretrievably suffer, We, therefore,
hold that the law declared by the highest
court in the State is binding on authorities
or tribunals under its superintendence,
and that they cannot ignore it either in
initiating a proceeding or deciding on the
rights involved in such a proceeding. If
that be so, the notice issued by the
authority, signifying the launching of
proceedings contrary to the law laid down
by the High Court would be invalid and
the proceedings themselves would be
without jurisdiction.”
The position was reiterated in Makhan Lal
v. State of Jammu and Kashmir, (1971) 1
SCC 749 : A.I.R. 1971 S.C. 2206. It was
the context of the law declared by the
Supreme Court that the decision laid
down to that effect so far as Article 141 of
the Constitution was concerned, but what
has been observed in paragraph 5 at page
2209 by Grover J. speaking for the
Supreme Court has equal application so
far as pronouncements by the High Courts
are concerned. Grover J. observed at page
“The Judgment which was delivered did
not merely declare the promotions
granted to the respondents in the writ
petition filed at the previous stage as
unconstitutional but also laid down in
clear and unequivocal terms that the
distribution of appointments, posts or
promotions made in implementation of the
communal policy was contrary to the
constitutional guarantee of Article 16. The
law so declared by this court was binding
on the respondent State and its officers
and they were bound to follow it whether
a majority of the present respondents
were parties or not to the previous
petition.”
It cannot, therefore, be contended by
anyone, that since Acharya, the petitioner
in Special Civil Application No. 2215 of
1979, was not a party to Special Civil
Application No. 806 of 1975, that the law
laid down by D.A. Desai, J. in his judgment
in that case on August 7, 1975 was not
applicable to the case of Acharya.
Whether the law is declared by the
Supreme Court or whether the law is
declared by the High Court, the legal
position as regards authorities and
tribunals subordinate to the Supreme
Court and High Courts respectively is the
same as pointed out by Subba Rao J. in
East India Commercial Co.s case (supra).
10. In Shri Baradakanta Mishtra v. Shri
1972 S.C. 2466, the legal position
regarding binding nature of the High
Court's decision was once again reiterated
by the Supreme Court and after quoting
the above passage which we have
extracted from the judgment of Subba Rao
J. in East India Commercial Co.'s case
(supra) in paragraphs 15 and 16 of the
judgment, Dwivedi J. speaking for the
Supreme Court observed at page 2169:
“The conduct of the appellant in following
the previous decision of the High Court is
calculated to create confusion in the
administration of law. It will undermine
respect for law laid down by the High
Court and impair the constitutional
authority of the High Court. His conduct is
therefore comprehended by the principles
underlying the law of contempt. The
analogy      of         the   inferior           court's
disobedience to the specific order of a
superior court also suggests that his
conduct falls within the purview of the law
of contempt. Just as the disobedience to a
specific order of the Court undermines the
authority and dignity of the court in a
particular case, similarly any deliberate
and mala fide conduct of not following the
law laid down in the previous decision
undermines the constitutional authority
and respect of the High Court. Indeed,
while     the         former      conduct                has
repercussions on an individual case and
on a limited number of persons, the latter
conduct has a much wider and more
disastrous impact. It is calculated not only
to undermine the constitutional authority
and respect of the High Court generally,
but is also likely to subvert the Rule of law
and engender harassing uncertainty and
confusion in the administration of law.”
In Hashmukhlal C. Shah v. State of
Gujarat, 19 G.L.R. 378, a Division Bench
of this High Court consisting of J.B. Mehta
and P.D. Desai JJ. after examining several
decisions on the point, observed: “… in a
Government which is ruled by laws, there
must be complete awareness to carry out
faithfully and honestly lawful orders
passed by a Court of law after impartial
adjudication. Then only will private
individuals, organizations and institutions
learn to respect the decisions of Court. In
absence of such attitude on the part of all
concerned, chaotic conditions might arise
and the function assigned to the Courts of
law under the Constitution might be
rendered a futile exercise.” From these
four decisions, the following propositions
(1). It is immaterial that in a previous
litigation the particular petitioner before
the Court was or was not a party, but if
law on a particular point has been laid
down by the High Court, it must be
followed by all authorities and tribunals in
the State.
(2). The law laid down by the High Court
must be followed by all authorities and
subordinate tribunals when it has been
declared by the highest Court in the State
and they cannot ignore it either in
initiating proceeding of deciding on the
rights involved in such a proceeding.
(3). If in spite of the earlier exposition of
law by the High Court having been
pointed out and attention being pointedly
drawn to that legal position in utter
disregard of that position proceedings are
initiated, it must be held to be a wilful
disregard of the law laid down by the High
Court and would amount to civil contempt
as defined in section 2(b) of the Contempt
Thus, even the Division Bench has held
that not following the law laid down by the
High Court and disregarding the same
would amount to Civil Contempt as
defined in Section 2(b) of the of the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971. However,
in view of the unconditional apology
tendered by the concerned officer, which
is accepted, no further order is passed.”
9.    In the case before the Supreme Court and of the
Division Bench of this Court, the Court held that if
the       petitioners    were        transferred       to      a       new
department, they may not get seniority but the past
experience        would     count       for  the     purposes              of
promotion and higher pay scale etc. In the case on
hand where the petitioners are concerned, in fact,
they have a better case inasmuch as they were
within the same department appointed on a fixed
10. Merely        because    by       resolutions       post           their
appointment i.e. on 18.01.2017 and 20.01.2018, the
benefit of the entire period of five years of fixed pay
services is being given to the petitioners, the loss of
seniority of two years will cumulatively damage the
case of the petitioners in the matters of promotion
etc., inasmuch as, by virtue of the resolutions and
the appointees post these two resolutions of 2017
and 2018, the petitioners will continue to stagnate
because the appointees post these resolutions will
steal a march over the petitioners. That could not
have been the intention of the undertaking when the
petitioners filed such undertakings in the year 2015
when they opted for transfer.
11. The case of Uttam Pawar (supra) relies on the
decision      in  case   of     Raksha    Mantri          (supra).
Considering the decision of the Supreme Court, the
Supreme Court held as under:
“7. The respondent herein was working as a
Telephone Operator in Irrigation Department of
the State of Maharashtra. Thereafter he made a
request for his transfer from Mumbai Zone to
Kolhapur Zone. The request of the respondent
was acceded to and he was transferred on his
own request from Mumbai Zone to Kolhapur
Zone and he lost his seniority in Mumbai Zone
and he joined in Kolhapur Zone on 14.6.1990 as
a Junior Clerk at zero seniority. Thereafter, the
State Government passed a Resolution dated
8.6.1995 giving a Time Bound Promotion to the
persons who are stagnated in the Group C and
D cadres for a long period. As per the said
Resolution those persons who have put in 12
years of service and who fulfill other conditions
laid down in the said Resolution were eligible
for the next higher scale of pay. We are not
concerned with the other conditions laid down
in the Resolution dated 8.6.1995. We are only
concerned with the limited question that
whether the respondent is entitled to count his
service rendered in the Mumbai Zone when he
was transferred to Kolhapur Zone for purposes
of computing 12 years of service so as to
enable him to get the benefit of this Resolution.
The Tribunal granted the benefit of past service
to the respondent and the same was affirmed
by the Division Bench of the High Court.”
12. Accordingly, the petition is allowed. The petitioners’
undertaking shall not count to their detriment for
the purposes of their seniority.     The undertaking
shall not operate and their seniority shall be counted
from the date of their initial appointment post the
period of five years in view of the resolutions dated
18.01.2017 and 20.01.2018.