1.      Accompanying writ petition has been filed challenging the order
dated 23rd June, 2022 passed by the Respondent No.2 in order No. 26/2022
and the notice dated 1st June, 2022. Petitioner also seeks to challenge
Section 171 of the CGST Act, Chapter XV of the CGST Rules, more
particularly, Rules 126, 127 & 133 of the CGST Rules as unconstitutional,
ultra vires and violative of Articles 14, 19(1)(g), 265 & 300A of the
Constitution of India.
2.      Learned senior counsel for the petitioner submitted that the National
Anti-Profiteering Authority (NAA) has no suo moto powers and therefore,
the application filed by the Secretary, NAA, to the Standing Committee
seeking initiation of proceedings under Section 171, is not a valid initiation
of proceedings against the petitioner for examining whether there is any
profiteering or not.
3.      He contended that NAA is not netting of the benefit of rate reduction
extended in some products as against those where the petitioner has not
extended the benefit of rate reduction qua the subject products, by way of
commensurate reduction in prices, and therefore, while it is being punished
for being a ‘bad boy’, it is not being rewarded for being a ‘good boy’.
4.      He stated that even though in some products they have not been able
to grant commensurate reduction in prices, yet they have tried to pass on the
benefit by way of increase in grammage of the product.
5.      He also stated that petitioner has given post sale discount (Ex.GST) to
the tune of Rs.73.59 crores, and therefore, this amount should be reduced
from the total profiteered sum.
Signing Date:07.10.2022     W.P.(C) 12557/2022                                                    Page 2 of 10
6.      Learned senior counsel for the petitioner further contended that
increase of customs duty on certain products should be excluded. In support
of this argument, he gave certain illustrations from which it could be seen
that when compared the invoices issued during the period 15th November,
2017 to 30th November, 2017 with the invoice raised in the month of March
2018, the actual sale price per unit including GST had remained same during
both periods. He also prayed that the profiteering on account of GST
collected by him, should be excluded.
7.      Per contra, learned counsel for NAA contended that Section 171 of
GST confers powers of wide amplitude upon the NAA to examine “any
supply of goods or services” by any registered person and to examine
whether the reduction in the tax rate or benefit of input tax credits have been
passed on to the recipient by way of commensurate reduction in prices or
not. He stated that even assuming that the rules provide for a mechanism by
which a recipient or any other interested party or a Commissioner, can make
a written application in a prescribed form which is required to be examined
by the Standing Committee and the Screening Committee, however, this
procedure in no way fetters the original power conferred upon the NAA by
Section 171, to examine whether input tax credits availed by any registered
person or the reduction in the rate of tax on any supply of goods or services,
have been passed on to the recipient by way of commensurate reduction in
prices or not. He submitted that whenever the word ‘any’ is used in a
statutory provision, it has to be given its broadest connotation and the
expression ‘any’ indicates ‘all’ or ‘every’. He submitted that the argument
that NAA has no suo moto powers to make an application or to initiate
investigation which would be in the larger consumer interest and public
Signing Date:07.10.2022     W.P.(C) 12557/2022                                                    Page 3 of 10
interest, deserves to be rejected.
8.      He pointed out that Section 172(2) read with Clause 9 of the
methodology and procedure states “(9) The Authority may inquire into any
alleged contravention of the provisions of Section 171 of the Central Goods
& Services Tax Act, 2017 on its own motion or on receipt of information
from any interested party as defined in the Rule 137(c), person, body
association or on a reference having been made to it by the Central
Government or the State Government”, clearly shows that NAA has suo
moto powers to initiate proceedings under Section 171(2) read with Rules
thereunder. He submitted that the language of Rule 127 of the CGST
indicates that duties of the NAA are broad enough to confer suo moto
127. Duties of the Authority.— It shall be the duty of the Authority, –
(ii)      to identify the registered person who has not passed on the
benefit of reduction in the rate of tax on supply of goods or services or
the benefit of input tax credit to the recipient by way of commensurate
(a) Reduction in prices;
(b) Return to the recipient, an amount equivalent to the amount not
passed on by way of commensurate reduction in prices along
with interest at the rate of eighteen per cent from the date of
collection of the higher amount till the date of the return of such
amount or recovery of the amount not returned, as the case may
be, in case the eligible person does not claim return of the
amount or is not identifiable, and depositing the same in the
Fund referred to in Section 57;
(c) Imposition of penalty as specified in the Act; and
(d) Cancellation of registration under the Act.
Signing Date:07.10.2022     W.P.(C) 12557/2022                                                      Page 4 of 10
9.      He stated that Section 171 which is an anti-profiteering measure,
must be seen from the prospective of every consumer who receives the
supply of goods or services and not from the prospective of registered
person or entity for the reason that the object of the Act is to ensure that the
sacrifices made by Governments by forgoing their share of taxes from the
public exchequer, must reach every consumer on every supply, and not
selectively, as per the whims and fancies of the suppliers.          Therefore,
according to him, the benefit of tax reduction has to be passed on at the
level of each supply of Stock Keeping Unit (SKU) to each buyer of such
SKU and in case it is passed on the profiteered amount has to be calculated
on each SKU. Further, according to him, the above Section mentions “any
supply” i.e. each taxable supply made to each recipient thereby clearly
indicating that netting off of the benefit of tax reduction by a supplier is not
allowed.
10.     He submitted that a taxing statute has several goals and collection of
taxes may not be the only goal. A taxing statute has many regulatory aspects
to it as well, and it would be apparent from Section 171 of the CGST Act
that the Governments intend to forego their share of taxes in favour of the
public, so that the common public, who bears the burden of the indirect tax,
directly benefits by way of commensurate reduction in the prices of the
product, and is able to enjoy the extra cash in its hand. Such a legislative
goal will get defeated if the petitioner’s argument is accepted that he can
pass on the benefit of tax rate reduction by way of extra or additional
grammage of the product.
11.     He further stated that the petitioner was only required to pass on the
benefit of tax reduction by not increasing his base prices on the date of
Signing Date:07.10.2022     W.P.(C) 12557/2022                                                   Page 5 of 10
reduction in the rate of tax w.e.f. 15th November, 2017 which he has not
done and has instead increased them, hence the argument of passing on the
benefit by discount is farfetched and not maintainable as no such discount
was required to be given by the petitioner.
12.     He stated that the petitioner has not only collected excess base prices
from his customers which they were not required to pay due to the reduction
in the rate of tax but he has also compelled them to pay additional GST on
these excess base prices which they should not have paid. He contended that
the petitioner has thus defeated the objective of both the Central and State
Governments to provide the benefit of rate reduction to the ordinary
customers by sacrificing their tax revenue. He contended that the petitioner
was legally not required to collect the excess GST and therefore, he has not
only violated the provisions of the CGST/SGST Acts, 2017, but has also
acted in contravention of the provisions of Section 171(1) of the above Acts
as he has denied the benefit of tax reduction to the ordinary buyers by
charging excess GST. He stated that had the supplier not charged the excess
GST, the customers would have paid less price while purchasing goods from
the petitioner and hence the above amount has rightly been included in the
profiteered amount as it denotes the amount of benefit denied by the above
petitioner. He emphasised that price includes GST also. Thus, according to
him, the profiteered amount cannot be paid from the GST deposited in the
amount of the Central and the State Governments by the petitioner as the
above amount is required to be deposited in the CWFs as per the provisions
of Rule 133(3)(a) of the CGST Rules, 2017 along with the interest. He stated
that even the DGAP had observed that: (i) though there has been an increase
in Customs Duty, actual selling price per unit has not undergone any change
Signing Date:07.10.2022     W.P.(C) 12557/2022                                                   Page 6 of 10
during the period November 2017 to March 2018, (ii) increase in the base
price could not have happened overnight to exactly coincide with the GST
rate reduction w.e.f. 15th November, 2017 and (iii) increase in the cost of
raw material/input services, if any, has no relevance in the context of GST
rate reduction w.e.f. 15th November, 2017 and Section 171 of the CGST Act,
2017 does not provide for any scope for adjustment of increase in cost
against the benefit of reduced tax rate. He further stated that it could be seen
from the illustrations that selling rates of the products have remained the
same during the month of November, 2017 and March, 2018. Consequently,
according to him, the Authority found that the petitioner had been
economical with the truth and had been submitting information and data
which is inadequate, unreliable and unsubstantiated.
13.     This Court is of the prima facie view that Section 171 is not a
charging or a taxing provision. On the contrary, it is an incidental provision
in the CGST/SGST Acts, for the purpose of ensuring that the object of these
Acts, namely, eliminating the cascading effect of taxation on the consumer
is achieved and any benefit of rate reduction of taxes or input tax credit
benefit is passed on to the recipient without the middleman taking advantage
of the Governments forgoing their taxes for the end consumer. In that sense,
this provision is in the nature of a consumer welfare provision.
Consequently, the aforesaid provision would have to be liberally construed
and constructed in a manner which is directed towards furthering consumer
and public interest.
Signing Date:07.10.2022     W.P.(C) 12557/2022                                                    Page 7 of 10
14.     Rule 128 of the CGST Rules permits ‘a commissioner or any other
person’ to make a written application that the benefit of reduction in the rate
of tax, on any supply of goods or services or the benefit of input tax credit
has not been passed on to the recipient by way of commensurate reduction in
prices. The Rule nowhere prescribes that the applicant who is making the
written application/complaint must also be the recipient of the goods or
services, on which commensurate reduction in prices have not taken place.
Consequently, prima facie, the Secretary, NAA, would qualify to make an
application under Rule 128 which permits ‘any other person’ to make such
an application. Also, in the case of Patanjali Ayurveda Ltd. vs. Union of
India & Ors. W.P.(C) 4375/2020, the issue of suo moto powers of NAA
was raised, but even Patanjali was directed to deposit the entire profiteered
15.     Further, Section 171 of the CGST Act, 2017 casts an obligation of
every supplier of goods and services/registered person to pass on the benefit
of rate reduction of GST or the benefit of ITC on every supply and not on
some supplies. Consequently, prima facie, a supplier cannot claim that he
has passed on more benefit to one customer therefore he could pass less or
no benefit to another customer than the benefit which is actually due to that
customer.
16.     This Court is also of the prima facie view that the post-sale discount
has not been granted on account of GST rate reduction and therefore, does
not qualify as commensurate reduction in prices as required under Section
171 of the Act.
17.     The 35 Excel sheets placed on record qua customs duty do not have
any heading of bills of entry number, date, value, duty, description of goods,
Signing Date:07.10.2022     W.P.(C) 12557/2022                                                  Page 8 of 10
etc. In addition, it is not clear as to whether the imported goods were raw
material or finished goods. If the imported goods were raw material, they
must be going into the process of manufacture with other raw material
and/or ingredients. To work out the impact of the increase in Customs Duty,
one would need to examine whether any other raw material/ingredient or
other factor has shown increase in rate or decrease in rate and their
consumption/utilisation has to be supported by proper manufacturing
composition. Consequently, prima facie, any purported increase in Customs
Duty on certain raw material with effect from 01st December, 2018 cannot
be examined at this stage.
18.     Prima facie, this Court is also of the view that the under Section 171
any benefit of reduction in rate of taxes or benefit of input tax credit on any
supply of goods or services can only be by way of commensurate reduction
in prices. When a statute clearly provides for a manner in which something
is to be done, and a duty is cast upon the supplier to extend the benefit of
rate reduction by way of commensurate reduction in prices, the supplier
cannot insist that instead of reducing prices, he will give extra grammage of
the product.
19.     Keeping in view the aforesaid as well as the orders passed by this
Court in Phillips India Limited Vs. Union of India & Ors. [W.P.(C)
No.3737/2020] as well as M/s Samsonite South Asia Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Union of
India & Ors. [W.P.(C) No.4131/2020] and M/s Patanjali Ayurved Ltd. Vs.
Union of India & Ors. [W.P.(C) No.4375/2020], this Court directs the
petitioner to deposit the principal profiteered amount after deducting the
GST imposed on the net profiteered amount (which has already been
deposited by the petitioner with the Department) in six equated instalments
Signing Date:07.10.2022     W.P.(C) 12557/2022                                                   Page 9 of 10
commencing 10th October, 2022. The interest amount directed to be paid by
the respondents as well as the penalty proceedings and further investigation
by NAA in respect of other products sold by the petitioner are stayed till
further orders. At the cost of repetition, it is emphasised that the views in the
present order are prima facie and shall not prejudice either of the parties at
the final hearing of the present case.
20.     Learned counsel for the parties are also directed to complete the
pleadings before the next date of hearing.
Signing Date:07.10.2022     W.P.(C) 12557/2022                                                     Page 10 of 10