Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. WRIT PETITION No. - 3697 of
Counsel for Petitioner :- Mohd. Kumail Haider
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.
Heard Shri Mohd. Kumail Haider, learned counsel for the
petitioner, Shri Santosh Kumar Mishra, learned A.G.A. for the
State/respondents no.1 to 4 and perused the impugned F.I.R. as
well as material brought on record.
This writ petition has been filed by the petitioner- Mohammed
Zubair for the following reliefs:-
"I. to issue a writ, order, or direction in the nature of certiorari
quashing the impugned F.I.R. dated 01.06.2022 registered
against the petitioner as Case Crime No.0226 of 2022, under
Sections 295-A of the Indian Penal Code and Section 67 of the
Information Technology Act, 2000 at Police Station Khairabad,
District Sitapur, contained in Annexure No.1 to the writ
II. to issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus
commanding the respondent no.2 to 4 not to proceed,
prosecute, or arrest the petitioner on the basis of the impugned
F.I.R. dated 01.06.2022, registered against the petitioner as
Case Crime No.0226 of 2022, under sections 295-A of the
Indian Penal Code and section 67 of the Information
Technology Act, 2000 at Police Station Khairabad, District
Sitapur, contained in Anneure no.1 to the writ petition;
III. to issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of
mandamus commanding the respondent no.1 to awrd
compensatin to the petitioner for the harassment and stress
suffered by him and the threat on his life and safety arising out
of the impugned malicious F.I.R."
The allegations in the impugned F.I.R., which has been lodged
by respondent no.5 against the petitioner are that on
27.05.2022, the informant saw a tweet posted by the petitioner
on his social media handle "twitter" on which, he used hate
offensive term "hate mongers" against the respected manager of
revered religious place Badi Sanghat, P.S. Khairabad and
National Patron of National Hindu Sher Sena, Mahant Bajrang
Muni Ji. Petitioner also insulted Hindu Yati Narasimha Nar
Saraswati and Swami Anand Swaroop on his twitter.
Learned counsel for petitioner submits that petitioner through
his tweet had not insulted or attempted to insult a religious
belief of a class by his tweet and the impugned F.I.R. has been
lodged against the petitioner just for harassment with oblique
motive, hence the present F.I.R. is liable to be quashed.
Learned A.G.A., on the other hand, opposed the prayer for
quashing of the F.I.R. and submitted that the petitioner is a
habitual offender and earlier also he has been involved in
making offensive tweets for which four cases have been
registered against him, which is also mentioned in paragraph 34
of the writ petition, viz. Case Crime No. 194 of 2020 under
Sections 67, 67-A of the Information Technology Act, Police
Station Delhi Special Cell; Case Crime No. 131 of 2020 under
Section 67 of the Information Technology Act and Section 509-
B I.P.C. and Section 12 of the POCSO Act, 2012, Police Station
Pandri, District Raipur, Chattisgarh; Case Crime No. 0199 of
2021 under Sections 192, 504, 506 I.P.C., Police Station
Charthawal, District Muzaffarnagar; and Case Crime No. 502
of 2021, under Sections 153, 153-A, 295-A, 505, 120-B, 34
further argued that the impugned F.I.R. discloses a cognizable
offence against the petitioner. Hence, the present writ petition is
liable to be dismissed. In reply to the criminal antecedents of
the petitioner, the learned counsel for the petitioner states that
he has been granted interim relief in some cases and in other
released on bail.
Having heard learned Counsel for the parties and gone through
record, it transpires that the entire matter is only at a premature
stage and the investigation is not yet proceeded with except
some preliminary effort taken on the date of the registration of
the case, that is on 01.06.2022. The evidence has to be gathered
after a thorough investigation and placed before the Court
concerned on the basis of which alone the Court concerned can
come to a conclusion one way or the other on the allegations
levelled by the petitioner. If the allegations are bereft of truth
and made maliciously, the investigation will say so.
The Supreme Court in the case of Neeharika Infrastructure
Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of Maharashtra and others : 2021 SCC
Online SC 315, has observed that the power of quashing should
be exercised sparingly with circumspection in the rarest of rare
cases. While examining an FIR/complaint, quashing of which is
sought, the court cannot inquire about the reliability,
genuineness, or otherwise of the allegations made in the
FIR/complaint. The power under Section 482 Cr. P. C. is very
wide, but conferment of wide power requires the court to be
cautious. The Supreme Court has emphasised that though the
court has the power to quash the FIR in suitable cases, the
court, when it exercises power under Section 482 Cr.P.C., only
has to consider whether or not the allegations in the FIR
disclose the commission of a cognizable offence and is not
required to consider the case on merit.
Keeping in view the aforesaid law and considering the
submissions raised by learned counsel for the parties, this Court
is of the considered view that the submissions advanced by the
learned Counsel for the petitioner call for determination on
questions of fact which may be adequately discerned either
through proper investigation or which may be adjudicated upon
only by the trial court and even the submissions made on points
of law can also be more appropriately gone into only by the trial
Court in case a charge sheet is submitted in this case. The
perusal of the record makes out, prima facie, offences at this
stage and there appears to be sufficient ground for investigation
in the case.
In view of the aforesaid, the instant writ petition lacks merit and
is, accordingly, dismissed.