23/3137/10 KVA DTR and MGVCL/Proc/CPP/22-23/3138/5 to 500
(D) pending hearing and final disposal of the present Special Civil
Application prohibit the Respondent from issuing any Letter of
Acceptance (LOA) / Acceptance of Tender (AT) in favour of any
bidders for Tender Nos. MGVCL/Proc/CPP/22 -23/3137/ 10 KVA
DTR and MGVCL/Proc/CPP/22-23/3138/5 to 500 KVA DTR:
(E)   to grant ex-parte ad-interim interim relief in terms of paragraphs
7(C) and (D) hereinabove:
(F)   to provide for costs of the present Special Civil Application;
(G) to pass such other and further orders as this Hon'ble Courts
deems fit and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case.
2.     The case of the petitioners is that petitioner No. 1 has been
a registered vendor/manufacturer to GUVNL, MAHA DISCOM
since the past many years and last registration which was
renewed with the respondent was on 13.5.2021. Respondent
herein floated a tender No.3137 calling upon the registered
manufacture of India having GST registration on behalf of
DISCOMS (viz. DGVCL, MGVCL, UGVCL and PGVCL) under the
Centralized Procurement Process ("CPP"). The said tender was
for procuring 11/0.433 KV, three phase 10KVA (Aluminium would)
CRGO/Amorphous           Core    distribution    transformers         with       BIS
marking and certification. Total quantity originally required by
the respondent was 83593 transformers. But, later on, by way of
a corrigendum, the quantity required was enhanced to 88693
transformers. The last date for submission of online bid
prescribed in the tender document was 4.1.2022 which was
revised to 14.2.2022. Whereas the tentative date of opening the
technical and price bid in online mode was 14.1.2022, but the
petitioners were not informed about the new date for opening
the technical and price bids of the bidders by the authority.
3.     It is the case of the petitioners that similarly, the
respondent also floated tender No.3138 for procuring 11/0.250kV
single phase 5KVA (Copper wound) Level-2, 11/0.433kV three
phase 16kVA to 200KVA (Aluminium would) and three phase 500
KVA (Copper would) Level-2/Star- rated CRGO/Amorphous Core
distribution transformers. Here, also, total quantity required by
the respondent of different categories of KVAs was 74450
transformers and in the same manner, by way of corrigendum,
said quantity was enhanced to 76773/- transformers. The last
date of this tender No.3138 was 6.1.2022, which was again
revised to 15.2.2022. Whereas, the tentative date for opening
the technical and price bid in online mode was 17.1.2022. Here
also, the petitioner was not informed about the new date of
opening the technical and price bids and to the best knowledge
of the petitioners, till date (i.e till 8:00 PM on 29/03/2022) for
tender No.3138, the price bids have not been opened.
4.     By annexing the afore-mentioned tender documents,
petitioner has contended that under these two tenders,
procurement process consisted of three parts, namely (i)
Preliminary Stage, (ii) Technical bid and (iii) Price bid. According
to the petitioners, it has filled in the bid for tender Nos.3137 and
3138 and submitted it online on 14.2.2022 and 15.2.2022
respectively and respondent is stated to have uploaded on the
online n-procure portal on 28.2.2022 the list of the bidders who
qualified in the preliminary stage. Petitioner No.1 is said to have
been duly qualified in the said preliminary stage/scrutiny.
Screen-shot of the online portal is annexed to the petition to
indicate that petitioner No.1 has cleared at preliminary stage.
5.      It is the case of the petitioners that on 23.3.2022,
petitioner No.1 had received a communication indicating that
petitioner No.1’s bid for tender Nos.3137 and 3138 cannot be
considered as it has violated clause 1.3.6 of the tender notice
and clause No.2.3.6 of the Purchase Policy and as such
respondent had disqualified the petitioner No.1 from both the
tenders. In view of the vendor registration application dated
3.4.2021, petitioner had submitted NSIC certificate, factory
license, GST certificate consisting of names of the Directors, i.e.
Mr. Sureshchandra Ambalal Vyas and Smt. Ansuyaben Vyas and
during scrutiny, it was found from the documents submitted
along with the two tenders, names of the Directors were (i) Kinjal
Uchit Patwa (ii) Mili Suchikumar Pawar and (iii) Shraddhaben
Hirenkumar Patwa with effect from 12.7.2021 and petitioner had
not informed the office of the respondent about such change and
scrutiny of documents also indicated that NSIC certificate was
not yet uploaded and names of the new Directors were not
mentioned therein.
6.      Having received such impugned communication dated
23.3.2022,         petitioners, on    that     day  itself    forwarded           a
communication to the respondent mentioning clearly that by
virtue of earlier email dated 19.8.2021, change of the Directors
was already communicated forthwith with all supporting
documents and it was also informed that such change was
brought to the notice of the respondent authority within 37 days
from the date of change of the Directors of petitioner No.1
company. Even petitioners submitted a latest GST certificate,
factory license, BIS license in compliance with the tender terms
and conditions and petitioner had also applied to NSIC way back
on 1.10.2021, but on account of some internal issue at their end,
same had not been modified, which is beyond the control of the
petitioner. On the very next day, i.e. on 24.3.2022, respondent
by its email acknowledged the fact that it was in receipt of such
earlier intimation dated 19.8.2021 indicating the change of
Directors, but to cover up, respondent had created a new theory
by indicating that due to inadequate documents attached with
email/ communication dated 19.8.2021, petitioner No.1 was
telephonically guided by informing to submit all required
documents. It is emphatically submitted by the petitioner that
such telephonic conversation has not taken place nor any
telephonic call is received from the office of the respondent, but
the authority with a view to cover up the issue, created a story of
such telephonic guidance.
7.     It has further been submitted that petitioner has responded
to the letter of authority dated 24.3.2022 on the very next, i.e.
on 25.3.2022, inter alia indicating that petitioner had never
received any telephonic call and further that clause 2.3.6 of the
Purchase Policy and Annexure-III to clause 1.3.6 were never
supplied to the petitioner either prior to tendering the bid or
thereafter and same according to the petitioner were not forming
part of even the tender notice and as such, even on that count
also, it was not possible to be supplied. Petitioner by way of this
communication requested the respondent authority to reconsider
the decision and also sought for urgent appointment with the
Managing Director so as to resolve the issue amicably. The
respondent according to the petitioner, considered the same by
giving an appointment to the petitioner on 28.3.2022 and in the
meantime, on 12.3.2022, respondent sought some technical
clarification on the aspect of 10 KVA DTR transformers and later
on, petitioner addressed a letter in detail on 26.3.2022 prior to
appointment, which was given to the petitioner. Despite
repeated requests, the price bids for tender Nos.3137 were
opened late in the evening on 25.3.2022 and as per the
information available on the n-procure portal, petitioner No.1
would have been L-1 bidder in regular category since it has
quoted the rate as Rs.47,275/-, whereas the price of other lower
bidder who was disqualified was Rs.49,485/- and on account of
such price variation, if petitioner’s bid price is not considered,
there would be possibility of loss to the public exchequer
approximately to the extent of Rs.23 crores. It was brought to
the notice of the authority about all the issues, but the authority
was not in a mood to reconsider.
8.      Further, petitioner No.1 is currently undertaking the work of
supplying of transformers to the very respondent arising from
Acceptance of Tender/ Letter of Acceptance (LoA) dated
28.7.2021, under which also, the agreement has been executed
for this work between the petitioner and the respondent under
the authority of these new Directors of petitioner company itself,
this respondent was quite aware and as such, authority's action
being apparently arbitrary, illegal and perverse, petitioners have
filed this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
challenging disqualification of petitioner No.1 in respect of tender
No.3137 and 3138 communicated vide communication dated
9.     This Court after hearing learned advocate for the
petitioners and learned senior advocate Mr. Shalin Mehta,
assisted by learned advocate Mr. Anal Shah, who was on caveat,
passed an order on 31.3.2022 and granted interim prayer as
prayed for in paragraph 7(D) till next date of hearing, which
“pending hearing and final disposal of the present Special Civil
Application prohibit the Respondent from issuing any Letter of
Acceptance (LOA) / Acceptance of Tender (AT) in favour of any
bidders for Tender Nos. MGVCL/Proc/CPP/22 -23/3137/ 10 KVA
DTR and MGVCL/Proc/CPP/22-23/3138/5 to 500 KVA DTR:”
After completion of the pleadings, as per the request of
learned advocates appearing for both the sides, the
Court heard the matter.
10. Learned advocate Mr. Ajay R. Mehta appearing with Mr.
Anmol A. Mehta for the petitioners has vehemently contended
that the impugned communication and the decision of declaring
petitioner No.1 firm as disqualified for tender Nos.3137 and 3138
respectively is absolutely arbitrary, unreasonable, irrational and
beyond the scope of clauses which have been tried to be relied
upon. Mr. Mehta has submitted that impugned decision is taken
so as to see that the person of their choice can be placed into
zone of consideration for tender work. It is submitted that the
reason which has been assigned in the impugned communication
dated 23.3.2022, reflecting on page 254 of the petition
compilation, is that the discrepancy is found by the authority in
respect of names of Directors during technical scrutiny stage and
has submitted that present Directors, three in numbers, as
indicated in the communication in paragraph 3 were not found in
NSIC certificate No.135, dated 12.8.2021 and said change of
director/ ownership of the firm though has been effected since
12.7.2021, not communicated or informed to the office and
thereby the authority found that there is a violation of Purchase
Policy clause 2.3.6 a guideline for vendor registration/ re-
registration mentioned in tender notice as Appendix-1 clause
1.3.6 and according to the respondent authority, in case of
change in the name or ownership or control of the firm of
registered vendor, having valid registration shall be informed in
writing along with separate document within 90 days of such
change and according to the respondent authority, this having
not been observed by the petitioners, the petitioner firm is
stated to be not a registered vendor as per the Purchase Policy
and as such, petitioner’s bid is not considered for tender process.
Mr. Mehta has submitted that this was the sole reason to oust
the petitioner from the tender process in the second stage,
whereas on the basis of the very same material and the names,
preliminary stage was already cleared by the respondent
authority and as such, this action is an afterthought, just with a
view to keep the petitioners out of the process of tender in
11. Leaned         advocate Mr.    Ajay    Mehta    has     vehemently
contended that this reason is also not available for the
respondent authority to justify their action of disqualification of
petitioner for the simple reason that authority has forgotten
rather has not applied its mind to the specific communication
dated 19.8.2021, whereby the change of Directors has been
specifically communicated along with the Board’s resolution
dated 31.7.2021 and Company Master data as per MCA. By
referring to page 259 of the petition compilation, it has been
submitted that this was well within the knowledge of the
respondent authority and yet without application of mind, in an
absolutely arbitrary manner, despite having specific knowledge,
the authority has declared the petitioner as disqualified and as
such, action of respondent being erroneous, deserves to be
quashed and set aside.
12. Learned advocate Mr. Ajay Mehta has further submitted
that just with a view to give an eyewash to come out from the
said knowledge of change, right from 19.8.2021, a lame excuse
is tried to be projected that the petitioners were telephonically
guided to submit all relevant documents duly stamped and
signed, but same has not been submitted and as such, has
violated the Purchase Policy clause 2.3.6 (Annexure-III). To this
communication       reflecting  on     page 264    of    the       petition
compilation, a clear assertion on oath has been made by the
petitioners that such telephonic conversion has not been made
by the respondent authority at any time nor petitioner had
received any call from the office of the respondent, on the
contrary, this appears to be a lame excuse, to shield their
irregularity otherwise, on 19.8.2021 itself, with all necessary
documents, change has been intimated to the office.
13. Learned advocate Mr. Ajay Mehta has also submitted that
the reason which has been assigned is not palatable for a further
reason that on the basis of this very change of Directors,
petitioner No.1 was already undertaking ongoing work of
supplying transformers in connection with LoA dated 28.7.2021
and hence, under which circumstance, the petitioner is declared
as disqualified and as such, according to Mr. Ajay Mehta, this is
nothing       but   a clear arbitrariness   and   unreasonableness,
irrationality on the part of the respondent authority, aimed only
to oust the petitioner from the tender process.
14. Additionally, learned advocate Mr. Mehta has further
submitted that clauses which have been relied upon are also not
at all applicable in view of the fact that apparent reading of
clause 2.3.6 is dealing with name or ownership or control of the
firm of registered vendor. Mere change in the name of Director
has not altered either name or ownership or control of the firm
and furthermore, even assuming that such change is required to
be informed within 90 days, then also here, the petitioner had
already informed the respondent on 19.8.2021, i.e. within a
period of almost 37 days only, and as such also, decision taken
by the authority to disqualify petitioner is quite perverse and
arbitrary which deserves to be interfered with as same is not
15. Learned advocate Mr. Mehta has further drawn attention of
this Court to Annexure-III, which, according to him, relates to
another tender clause No.1.3.6 relied upon by the authority while
passing the impugned communication and has reiterated that
neither name or ownership of the firm of the registered vendor
has taken place nor the control and such mere change of
Directors is already communicated within 37 days. Now, in the
context of clause 1.3.6 related Annexure-III, referred to in this
clause, if to be seen, annexed to the petition compilation at page
347, a bare reading of the same would indicate that as and when
change in the name of the company or firm is taking place, said
change will have to be informed to the authority and according
to Mr. Ajay Mehta, both clauses which have been relied upon
while communicating the impugned decision are not possible to
be pressed into service by the authority in any case and as such,
the action being violative of principles of fair-play and apparent
arbitrary act, deserves to be corrected by this Hon’ble Court.
16. Learned advocate Mr. Mehta has submitted that an
agreement with this respondent authority in connection with the
other ongoing work came to be executed and same has been
signed by the authorized signatories and reference is made to
such agreement from Page 274 and Board’s resolution at Page
280 and as such, Mr. Mehta has submitted that authority has
apparently remained arbitrary and unreasonable. Mr. Mehta has
submitted that price bid, if to be looked into, what has been
offered by petitioner No.1 was Rs,.47,275/-, whereas the price of
other lowest bidders who were not disqualified was Rs.49,485/-
and as such, there is sizable difference of Rs.2210/- in price
quoted by the petitioners and the price quoted by current regular
L-1 bidder and if 18% GST is to be added to the difference, same
would come to aggregate amount of Rs.23 crores, a clear loss to
public exchequer only in respect of tender No.3137 and same
according to Mr. Mehta is also almost similar in another tender
No.3138 and as such, when such a huge and massive loss would
be suffered by the respondent authority, Hon’ble Court’s
interference is desirable irrespective of the other circumstances
as well. Mr. Mehta has submitted that jurisdiction under Article
226 of the Constitution of India is not that much circumscribed
whereby authorities such apparent arbitrary action sustaining
huge loss to public exchequer be allowed at the whims of the
authority of respondent. Hence, he prays for quashing of the
impugned communication by granting the consequential reliefs
as prayed for in the petition.
17. To substantiate the contention about financial possible loss
to the public exchequer, Mr. Mehta has drawn the attention of
this Court to few documents attached to the compilation on page
270 and 369 as also the assertions made in paragraph 19 of the
affidavit-in-reply filed by the respondent authority dated
9.3.2021, reflecting on page 306 and on overall consideration of
his submission on the basis of the relevant record, Mr. Mehta has
reiterated his prayer for grant of the relief as prayed for in the
petition. No other submissions have been made.
18. As against this, learned senior advocate Mr. Shalin Mehta,
appearing with learned advocate Mr. Anal S. Shah for respondent
No.1 has vehemently opposed the petition mainly on the ground
that in respect of contractual matters, extraordinary jurisdiction
may not be exercised in view of the settled position of law and as
such, looking to the proposition of law laid down in respect of
judicial review, in contractual matters, Hon’ble Court may not
entertain the petition. In addition to this, it has been submitted
by Mr. Shalin Mehta that petitioner having participated in the
process, was well aware about the terms and conditions of the
tender and was also aware about the disqualification clause and
as such, cannot raise a grievance about non-assigning of reason
as the petitioner itself was aware about its own situation and as
such, though a clear reason is assigned in the impugned
communication, non-assigning of detailed reason is of no
consequence and as such, it is not open for the petitioner to
raise grievance in that regard.
19. While contending this, Mr. Shalin Mehta has referred to the
impugned communication dated 24.3.2022, reflecting on page
264, and has submitted that inadequate documents were
attached and though telephonically guided to supply the same,
petitioner did not supply and in view of the Purchase Policy
clause, such infirmity dis-entitles the petitioner to participate
further and this fact petitioner was well aware of it from the
beginning. Apart from this, Mr. Shalin Mehta has further drawn
attention of this Court to clause 2.3.6 of the Purchase Policy,
relevant page is 316 of the petition compilation, in which,
petitioner was under an obligation to inform the respondent
authority about any change which is taking place in the firm. The
wordings of this clause 2.3.6 are sufficient enough to indicate
that in view of this clause, petitioner could not be treated as
having valid vendor registration and that being so, petitioner has
been rightly held to be dis-entitled to participate any further in
the tender process. After referring to clause 2.3.6, Mr. Shalin
Mehta has also drawn our attention to page 347, which is
indicating the form to be filled in by petitioner as a part of tender
condition as Annexure-III, consisting of list of documents required
for change of name. By referring to related clause on this very
page in the form of ‘Undertaking’, petitioner was required to
disclose about any change, which is taking place in the firm and
even if there is no change, then also, it was obligatory on the
part of petitioner to fill in Annexure-III and such undertaking
undisputely having not been filled in, the authority has rightly
taken decision which is impugned in the petition.
20. Learned senior advocate Mr. Shalin Mehta has further
submitted that change of Directors which has taken place is
certainly changing the control of the firm of registered vendor as
well and even if there is no change in the name of the firm, at
least, this change which has substantially altered the control of
the firm ought to have been brought to notice of respondent.
That having not been done by petitioner by filing an undertaking,
as required, no equitable jurisdiction be exercised in favour of
petitioner. This form is a mandatory requirement of the terms of
tender document and that having not been observed, it is not
open for petitioner to raise any grievance.
21. Further, learned senior advocate Mr. Shalin Mehta has
contended that there is a clear admission on the part of
petitioner, which is reflecting from their own documents,
reflecting on page 381 dated 26.3.2022 and there is a clear
assertion in this communication that undertaking as per
Annexure-A is not provided as there is no change in name of the
firm. Hence, a plain reading of the terms of undertaking would
clearly indicate that it was an obligation of the petitioner to fill in
as a part of mandatory requirement and as such, having not
done so, the authority has rightly treated the petitioner as not
having any valid registration. Since this situation is very much
apparent, the other grievances need not be gone into and even
apart from that, this aspect is not cogently explained by
petitioner. Hence, in view of this peculiar background of the fact,
there is hardly any substance in the plea raised by petitioner.
Additionally, Mr. Shalin Mehta has submitted that even clause
1.3.6 of the tender document, reflecting on page 56, contained in
Chapter of the Guidelines for vendor registration/ re-registration,
has clearly indicated that the firm shall have to confirm that
there is neither change in infrastructure facilities nor in the
product/ items and that change is only in the name/ ownership/
control of the firm and that has to be submitted as a part of proof
and this legitimate requirement having not been observed by
petitioner, hardly any case is made out to call for any
22. Learned Senior advocate Mr. Shalin Mehta has submitted
that there is no apparent arbitrariness of any nature, nor there is
any favouritism nor there is any malafide attributed. Hence, in
absence of these elements, extraordinary jurisdiction may not be
exercised in view of the settled position of law. No other
submissions have been made.
23. Having heard learned advocates appearing for the parties
and having gone         through the material on           record, few
circumstances which are apparent from the record are worth to
be considered while coming to an ultimate conclusion:
(1)      Petitioner has communicated clearly to the respondent
authority on 19.8.2021, about the change of names of
Directors and said change has taken place on account of
retirement of old Directors Shri Sureshchandra Ambalal
Vyas and Smt. Ansuyaben Vyas and in their place, new
Directors have been inserted by virtue of specific
resolution dated 31.7.2021. Said resolution has been
effected in various documents, including Company Master
Data as per M.C.A.. This email dated 19.8.2021 is in
respect of such change of Directors and said letter has
been attached with Board’s resolution and the other
Master Data, as indicated.
(2)      In a further communication dated 24.3.2022, on page 264,
respondent authority has written a letter to petitioner
indicating that though change of Directors intimation is
given, but due to inadequate documents attached with
said email dated 19.8.2021, telephonically petitioner was
informed to supply duly stamped and signed documents
but till date, it has not been submitted. In response to this,
it appears that on        very date, on 25.3.2022, by Most
Urgent communication, it has been clearly asserted by
petitioner that change of Directors has been informed well
within 37 days only and there was no telephonic guidance
received from the authority and informed also that
Annexure-III is with respect to change of name of the
company but not relating to Directors and vendor
registration is already continuing and as such, there was a
clear valid vendor registration and that is the reason why
preliminary stage has been cleared. On the contrary, at no
point of time, it has been guided nor received any
telephonic conversation with regard to this and in any
case, even if assuming that there is a change, which is
required to be brought to notice, same has been
undisputely informed by petitioner and acknowledged by
authority about such intimation vide communication dated
19.8.2021 and said communication was attached with
Board’s resolution and Company Master Data as per
M.C.A. and further, it has been clearly informed that
petitioner is a small MSME Vadodra based,                    whose
livelihood is depending upon the decision of GUVNL orders
and hence, it is an undisputed position that change of
Directors intimation had already reached the respondent
well within time, which is even acknowledged by the
authority. Only thing is that same has not been informed
in format, otherwise, intimation is clearly received.
(3)      Further, it also appears that petitioners are dealing with
this very respondent authority since long and in an
ongoing contract, the very respondent and petitioner No.1
have entered into an agreement on 28.7.2021 under the
authority    of  current   Directors. Said    agreement             is,
reflecting on page 274, with very respondent authority,
signed on 31.8.2021 by one Jeetu K. Barwal (Sales
Manager), authorized by these very current Directors
which change of Directors is already acknowledged by the
respondent authority. Delegation of signing power to Mr.
Jeetu Barwal was by Board’s resolution reflecting on page
280 and same is by current Directors. This aspect is also
not in dispute which is very much reflecting from the
record and as such, on one hand, the respondent
authority is not considering the bid of the petitioner under
the guise of such change having not been informed,
whereas on the other hand, in the ongoing contract, very
respondent is entering into an agreement with the
petitioner company with present Directors.
(4)      Further, by communication dated 26.3.2022, reflecting on
page 381 of the petition compilation, a clear intimation is
given to the respondent authority by petitioner which is in
furtherance of earlier intimation dated 19.8.2021, even
renewed factory license, Memorandum of Article of
Association, List of Directors and documentary evidence
about change of name of the Directors were again
supplied in addition to earlier intimation, as referred to,
and it has been clearly mentioned that undertaking as per
Annexure-A is not provided as there is no change in the
name of the firm. This is immediately informed to the
respondent which fact is also not in dispute, and as such,
undisputed position is that within the prescribed period,
by way of specific communications dated 19.8.2021,
change has already been intimated with all necessary
documents and receipt of such is not in dispute and that
being so, the stand taken by the respondent authority
despite having such specific knowledge appears to be
arbitrary, irrational and hyper-technical in nature.
(5)      Further, ongoing contract has been executed as indicated
above with this very petitioner through changed Directors
and as such, neither there is any change in the name of
the company nor there is any material change of
ownership or control of the firm. The reason assigned by
the respondent authority while discarding the petitioner
from the tender process appears to be apparently
arbitrary.
(6)      No-doubt, the Constitutional Courts are not expected to
interpret the terms of the tender nor are expected to
substitute or modify the terms of tender but on the basis
of material on record, if decision making process is found
to be somewhat unfair, reflects clear arbitrariness and
unreasonableness, then Court cannot shut its eyes to such
apparent irregular decision making process at the whims
of officers or authority especially when the work relates to
pubic importance.
(7)      A perusal of clause 1.3.6 is indicating that if there is
change in the name, ownership or control of the firm of
registered vendor, having valid registration, such firm
would be required to inform the respondent in writing with
supporting     documents       within 90   days      and       about
unchanged situation also, the firm is expected to intimate.
Clause 2.3.6 is also almost similar in line, which is
contained in the Purchase Policy. A perusal of this clause
even if technically be applied, then also, undisputed
position reflects that well within 90 days, petitioner firm
has already informed the respondent with all necessary
documents and said receipt of communication is also
clearly admitted by virtue of communication dated
24.3.2022. Only infirmity which even if taken as it is, is
that it might be not in the format as per Annexure-A.
Nonetheless, effect of change is already well within the
knowledge of the respondent authority and necessary
renewed factory license, Memorandum of Article of
Association and other all relevant documents are also
undisputedly received by the respondent authority and
hence when on the basis of the very same change, if on
one hand, the respondent authority is executing an
ongoing contract by specific execution of agreement on
31.8.2021, there is hardly any justifiable reason for
discarding the petitioner from present process of tender,
particularly  when    petitioner    has   been      cleared         in
preliminary stage and Court sees no justification in the
stand taken by the respondent authority.
(8)      Apart from that, there appears to be a possible
circumstance that the undertaking Annexure-A might not
have been provided as there was no change in the name
of the firm or company as was aware about the fact of
change, but this disputed version, the Court is not inclined
to dwell much in view of the fact that there is a clear
admission about receipt of the intimation of change dated
19.8.2021. Hence, the case appears to have been clearly
made out by petitioner which may fall within the
parameters prescribed by the Hon’ble Apex Court.
Accordingly, we are of the considered opinion that too
technical view appears to have been taken by the
authority just to oust the petitioner from the ongoing
tender process.
(9)      Additionally, we see that this is a huge contract of public
importance floated by tender notice, as such, when there
is a huge difference between the bid of petitioner and
other lowest bidders, we are not inclined to permit the
respondent authority to ignore such impact on public
exchequer on the basis of such hyper-technicality or
whims of the officers of the respondent authority. It has
been clearly asserted and fact remains that a tabular
chart which has been provided is clearly indicating that
there is a sizable difference between the quotes of
petitioner and other bidders. Petitioner appears to have
quoted the rates of Rs.47,275/-, whereas, the price
opened of regular L-1 is Rs.49,485/- and looking to
quantity of supply, apparently, there appears to be a huge
difference and there would be an apparent loss to public
exchequer, running into crores. It may be that petitioner
has made out a case of difference of approximately Rs.23
crores which might go upto Rs.34 crores, as indicated in a
chart on page 369. But, nonetheless, there appears to be
some huge difference likely and as such, the Court cannot
ignore such material aspect especially when the decision
appears to be clearly arbitrary, irrational and hyper-
technical. The authority appears to be acting on some
irrelevant considerations and trying to take disadvantage
on hyper-technicality and as such, we see that a case is
made out by petitioner which can fall within the
parameters of exercising the judicial review even in these
contractual matters.
(10)     We have further found that decision making process is not
germane to law, same is based upon non-consideration of
relevant material and on account of some irrelevant
reasons and considerations. Hence, we deem it proper to
interfere in exercise of our extraordinary jurisdiction.
24. On the basis of the aforesaid apparent situation which is
prevailing on record, while coming to conclusion, we are having
the assistance of the proposition of law laid down by the Hon’ble
Apex Court prescribing the parameters in which the Courts can
25. It is no-doubt true that normally, Court would be loath to
interfere in contractual matters unless a clear-cut case of
arbitrariness or malafides or bias or irrationality is made out and
Court must realize their limitations and the havoc which needless
interference in commercial matters can cause. But, at the same
time, it is also the proposition of law that Constitutional Court
being the guardian of the fundamental rights, is duty bound to
interfere when there is arbitrariness, irrationality, malafides and
bias and as such, a duty is cast upon the Court in such
circumstances that whenever any specific arbitrariness or
irrationality is visible in public interest, Court can exercise
powers of judicial review. It is true that Court must not interfere
where such interference will cause unnecessary loss to public
exchequer. But at the same time, here in the case on hand,
situation appears to be other way round that non-consideration
of the relief may not be in the interest of public exchequer as
well. Of-course, we are not definitely opining on this issue, but
apparent figures which are indicating there appears to be huge
and substantial difference in the amount between the petitioner
and L-1, as indicated from the pleadings, and as such, we see
valid reason to exercise our judicial review on the decision
making process of the respondent authority.
26. At this juncture, we may quote hereunder the observations
contained in paragraph 19 of the decision of Hon’ble Supreme
Court      delivered      in  the    case        of  Silppi     Constructions
Contractors Vs. Union of India and Another reported in
19.   This Court being the guardian of fundamental rights is duty bound to
interfere when there is arbitrariness, irrationality, mala fides and
bias. However, this Court in all the aforesaid decisions has cautioned
time and again that courts should exercise a lot of 12 2019 (6)
SCALE 70 restraint while exercising their powers of judicial review in
contractual or commercial matters. This Court is normally loathe to
interfere in contractual matters unless a clear−cut case of
arbitrariness or mala fides or bias or irrationality is made out. One
must remember that today many public sector undertakings
compete with the private industry. The contracts entered into
between private parties are not subject to scrutiny under writ
jurisdiction. No doubt, the bodies which are State within the
meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution are bound to act fairly and
are amenable to the writ jurisdiction of superior courts but this
discretionary power must be exercised with a great deal of restraint
and caution. The Courts must realise their limitations and the havoc
which needless interference in commercial matters can cause. In
contracts involving technical issues the courts should be even more
reluctant because most of us in judges robes do not have the
necessary expertise to adjudicate upon technical issues beyond our
domain. As laid down in the judgments cited above the courts
should not use a magnifying glass while scanning the tenders and
make every small mistake appear like a big blunder. In fact, the
courts must give fair play in the joints to the government and public
sector undertakings in matters of contract. Courts must also not
interfere where such interference will cause unnecessary loss to the
public exchequer.
27. Yet, anther proposition of a very recent time propounded
by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of Uflex Limited Vs.
Government of Tamil Nadu and others reported in (2022)1
SCC 165, wherein also, few observations contained in relevant
paragraphs, we may deem it fit to quote hereunder:-
1.    The enlarged role of the Government in economic activity and its
corresponding ability to give economic largesse was the bedrock of
creating what is commonly called the tender jurisdiction. The
objective was to have greater transparency and the consequent
right of an aggrieved party to invoke the jurisdiction of the High
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India (hereinafter
referred to as the Reason: Constitution), beyond the issue of strict
enforcement of contractual rights under the civil jurisdiction.
However, the ground reality today is that almost no tender remains
unchallenged. Unsuccessful parties or parties not even participating
in the tender seek to invoke the jurisdiction of the High Court under
Article 226 of the Constitution. The Public Interest Litigation (PIL)
jurisdiction is also invoked towards the same objective, an aspect
normally deterred by the Court because this causes proxy litigation
in purely contractual matters.
4.    In a sense the Wednesbury principle is imported to the concept, i.e.,
the decision is so arbitrary and irrational that it can never be that
any responsible authority acting reasonably and in accordance with
law would have reached such a decision. One other aspect which
would always be kept in mind is that the public interest is not
affected. In the conspectus of the aforesaid principles, it was
observed in Michigan Rubber v. State of Karnataka3 as under:
23. From the above decisions, the following principles emerge:
(a)        the basic requirement of Article 14 is fairness in action by
the State, and non-arbitrariness in essence and substance is the
heartbeat of fair play. These actions are amenable to the judicial
review only to the extent that the State must act validly for a
discernible reason and not whimsically for any ulterior purpose. If
the State acts within the bounds of reasonableness, it would be
legitimate to take into consideration the national priorities;
(b)        fixation of a value of the tender is entirely within the
purview of the executive and courts hardly have any role to play in
this process except for striking down such action of the executive as
is Id. (2012) 8 SCC 216 [3] proved to be arbitrary or unreasonable. If
the Government acts in conformity with certain healthy standards
and norms such as awarding of contracts by inviting tenders, in
those circumstances, the interference by Courts is very limited;
(c)        In the matter of formulating conditions of a tender
document and awarding a contract, greater latitude is required to be
conceded to the State authorities unless the action of tendering
authority is found to be malicious and a misuse of its statutory
powers, interference by Courts is not warranted;
(d)        Certain preconditions or qualifications for tenders have to
be laid down to ensure that the contractor has the capacity and the
resources to successfully execute the work; and
(e)        If the State or its instrumentalities act reasonably, fairly
and in public interest in awarding contract, here again, interference
by Court is very restrictive since no person can claim fundamental
right to carry on business with the Government.
28. On the basis of the aforesaid proposition of law laid down
by the Hon’ble Apex Court on the issue of exercise of powers of
judicial review, we are of the opinion that case on hand this
Court deems it proper to interfere in the peculiar background of
facts which are analyzed herein-above. Accordingly, we are
inclined to accept the stand of the petitioner.
Hence, we proceed to pass the following order:-
(1) Special Civil Application is ALLOWED and impugned
communication          dated        23.3.2022     (Annexure-5)             is
quashed and we hereby direct the respondent authority
to consider first petitioner’s bid for further consideration
in the tender process in respect of the tender
Nos.MGVCL/Proc/CPP/22-23/3137/10             KVA      DTR         and
MGVCL/Proc/CPP/22-23/3138/5 to 500              KVA DTR and
take appropriate decision at the earliest.
(2) However, we make it clear that since the direction is
issued for further consideration in the aforesaid tenders
process, we make it clear that we have not expressed
any opinion with regard to merits AND it is clarified that
while carrying out further process, the respondent
authority is at liberty to take decision on merits and we
are leaving it open to the respondent authority to take
independent appropriate decision in accordance with
law as per terms stipulated under subject tender.
(3) No order as to costs.