This Criminal Original Petition has been filed to call for the
records relating to the C.C.No.2309 of 2016 for the offence under
Sections 143, 145 r/w 149 of IPC and Sec.7(1) (a) Criminal Law
Amendment Act, 1932 and 41 Cp Act 1988 on the file of the
Metropolitan Magistrate Court No.VII, George Town, Chennai and to
quash the same.
2. The crux of the case of the prosecution is that on 17.03.2014,
the petitioners who are studying in a Law College along with their
friends without obtaining permission have gathered opposite to Chennai
Ambedkar Government Law College and raised a slogan against
"Srilankan Government, demanding their Tamil Ealam issues" and
blocked the road besides they have also wrongfully restrained movement
of the public and thereby committed the offence under aforesaid sections.
3. The learned counsel for the petitioners submitted that the
petitioners have gathered and raised slogans against Srilankan
Governmnet, demanding their Tamil Ealam Issues and they have also
sought justification in International Court against the President of the
neighbouring country. Except the present case no other allegation before
made against these petitioners and they made such protest in a
democratic way and even when the entire prosecution case taken as a
face value, the same would not constitute any offence and continuing the
prosecution is nothing but abuse of process of law. Therefore, submitted
that the same may be quashed.
4. The learned Government Advocate [Criminal Side] submitted
that the accused illegally assembled and caused disruption to the public,
thereby they have been prosecuted.
5. It is to be noted that while exercising the power under Section
482 of Cr.P.C., the Court should be slow, at the same time, if the Court
finds that from the entire materials collected by the prosecution taken as
a whole, would not constitute any offence, in such situation, directing the
parties to undergo ordeal of trial will be a futile exercise and it will
infringe the right of the persons and in this regard, the Apex Court in
State of Haryana and others Vs. Bhajan Lal and Others reported in 1992
Supp (1) Supreme Court Cases 335, has been held as follows :
'........ (a) where the allegations made in the First
Information Report or the complaint, even if they are taken at
their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima
facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the
accused; (b) where the allegations in the First Information
Report and other materials, if any, accompanying the F.I.R. do
not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by
police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under
an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2)
of the Code; (c) where the uncontroverted allegations made in
the FIR or 'complaint and the evidence collected in support of
the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and
make out a case against the accused; (d) where the allegations
in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but constitute
only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by
a police officer without an order of a Magistrate as
contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code; (e) where the
allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and
inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent person
can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground
for proceeding against the accused; (f) where there is an
express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code
or the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is
instituted) to the institution and continuance of the proceedings
and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the
concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance
of the aggrieved party; (g) where a criminal proceeding is
manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding
is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking
vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to
private and personal grudge.’
6. It is also relevant to note the definition of Unlawful Assembly:
'Unlawful Assembly : An assembly of five or more
persons is designated an “unlawful assembly”, if the common
object of the persons composing that assembly is - (i) to
overawe by criminal force, or show of criminal force, the
Central or any State Government or Parliament or the
Legislature of any State, or any public servant in the exercise of
the lawful power of such public servant; or
(ii) to resist the execution of any law, or of any legal
(iii) to commit any mischief or criminal trespass, or
(iv) by means of criminal force, or show of criminal
force, to any person to take or obtain possession of any
property, or to deprive any person of the enjoyment of a right of
way, or of the use of water or other incorporeal right of which
he is in possession or enjoyment, or to enforce any right or
supposed right; or
(v) by means of criminal force, or show of criminal
force, to compel any person to do what he is not legally bound
to do, or to omit to do what he is legally entitled to do.'
7. Only when the assembly fit into any of the above circumstances,
it could be construed as unlawful. The materials collected by the
prosecution do not show that the accused had shown any criminal force
to commit any mischief, crime or any offence or by way of criminal force
or tried to take possession of the property or right to use of incorporeal
right which is in possession of enjoyment of others or rights.
8. In this case also, the petitioners have not unlawfully assembled
to commit any offence. Of course, they have democratically raised
protest for the inaction on the part of the police for not taking action and
such gathering cannot be said to be unlawful assembly. At any event,
mere gathering of more than 5 persons will not amount to any offence,
unless the action of such persons fit into any of the provision found in
Section 141 to constitute such assembly as unlawful assembly. In such
view of the matter, this Court is of the view that continuation of
prosecution is nothing but an abuse of process of law.
9. Accordingly, this Criminal Original Petition is allowed and the
final report filed against the petitioners pending on the file of the learned
Metropolitan Magistrate No.VII, George Town, Chennai in C.C.No.2309
of 2016 for the offences under sections 143, 145 r/w 149 of IPC and
Sec.7(1) (a) Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1932 and 41 Cp Act 1988
has been quashed. Consequently, connected miscellaneous petitions are
closed.