Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 54178 of 2021
Counsel for Applicant :- Prashant Kumar Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Heard       Sri Prashant Kumar Singh,learned counsel for
the applicant and Shri Rajesh Mishra, learned A.G.A for
The instant bail application has been filed on behalf of
the applicant, Deepak @ Deep Prakash @ Deepu, with a
prayer to release him on bail in Case Crime No. 323 of
2020,        under       Sections         419,420       IPC        Police      Station
Chaubeypur, District- Kanpur Nagar, during pendency of
There is allegation of cheating against the applicant
and other co-accused persons in the First Information
Report. Applicant has been implicated on the allegation
that he was found using mobile number 9794772642,
which was registered in the name of Daya Shankar
Agnihotri.There is allegation against him that he was using
mobile phone with intention to commit crime.
Learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that
applicant has been falsely implicated in this case since he
is brother of the criminal Late Vikas Dubey.He had criminal
history of nine cases registered against him from 1998 to
2004 which has been explained in paragraph-19                                   of the
affidavit filed in support of the bail application. He has
been acquitted in six cases, convicted in one case and two
cases are under the Gangsters Act. After Late Vikas Dubey
was arrested in July 2021 he has been falsely implicated
by the police in four cases after gap of 16 years. There is
no allegation against the applicant that applicant has used
mobile phone number in commission of any crime nor any
complaint was lodged by real owner of the mobile phone ,
Daya Shankar Agnihotri against him. The offence is triable
by the Magistrate. The applicant is in jail since 12.1.2021.
There is no possibility of early conclusion of trial.
Shri Rajesh Mishra, learned A.G.A.        appearing on
behalf of the State has filed counter affidavit and has
vehemently     opposed     the   bail  application.   He has
submitted that the aforesaid mobile number belong to the
servant of late Vikas Dubey.It was being misused by the
applicant    in aiding    escape of Vikas Dubey.The First
Information Report was lodged on the basis of detailed
report submitted by the Special Investigating Team based
on the statement of Daya Shankar Agnihotri.The rules of
Telecom Regulatory Authority       do not permit the change
of subscriber. He has submitted that applicant is not
entitled to be enlarged on bail. The court below has taken
into account the conduct of the applicant and rightly
rejected his bail application,
Keeping in view the nature of the offence, argument
advanced on behalf of the parties,       evidence on record
regarding complicity of the accused, larger mandate of the
Article 21 of the Constitution of India and the dictum of
Apex Court in the case of Dataram Singh Vs. State of
U.P. and another reported in (2018)3 SCC 22 and
recent judgement dated 11.7.2022 of the Apex Court
in the case of Satendra Kumar Antil Vs. C.B.I.,
passed in S.L.P. (CRL.) No. 5191 of 2021 and without
expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, the
Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a
case for bail. The bail application is allowed.
Let the applicant be released on bail on his furnishing
a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount
to the satisfaction of the court concerned subject to
following conditions. Further, before issuing the release
order, the sureties be verified.
1.   The   applicant   shall   not   tamper   with   the
prosecution evidence by intimidating/ pressurizing the
witnesses, during the investigation or trial.
2. The applicant shall cooperate in the trial sincerely
without seeking any adjournment.
3. The applicant shall not indulge in any criminal
activity or commission of any crime after being released
on bail.
4. That the applicant shall not, directly or indirectly,
make any inducement, threat or promise to any person
acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade
him from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police
5. The applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect
that he shall not seek any adjournment on the dates fixed
for evidence and the witnesses are present in court. In
case of default of this condition, it shall be open for the
trial court to treat it as abuse of liberty of bail and pass
orders in accordance with law to ensure presence of the
applicant.
6. The applicant shall remain present, in person,
before the trial court on the dates fixed for (i) opening of
the case, (ii) framing of charge and (iii) recording of
statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of
the trial court default of this condition is deliberate or
without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the trial
court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of his bail
and proceed against him in accordance with law.
In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it
shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Location: High Court of Judicature at