The Delhi High Court has granted interim injunction in favour of Star India Pvt. Ltd., restraining certain 'rogue websites' from streaming, broadcasting or sharing through the internet the ICC Men's T20 World Cup 2021.Star India claims to have acquired exclusive global media rights for various ICC events from the International Cricket Council for a duration of eight years i.e.,...
The Delhi High Court has granted interim injunction in favour of Star India Pvt. Ltd., restraining certain 'rogue websites' from streaming, broadcasting or sharing through the internet the ICC Men's T20 World Cup 2021.
Star India claims to have acquired exclusive global media rights for various ICC events from the International Cricket Council for a duration of eight years i.e., from 2015–2023.
It has filed a suit to seeking to permanently restrain the Defendants from infringing its exclusive rights and broadcasting reproduction rights, rendition of accounts, damages etc.
Observing that a prima facie case is made out in Star India's favour, Justice Sanjeev Narula directed the Internet Service Providers to block access to the seven websites within 72 hours and also directed Department of Telecommunications and Ministry of Electronics and Information and Technology to issue notification calling upon the internet and telecom service providers to block access to said websites.
The seven rogue websites as mentioned by the media company are filmyclub.wapkiz.com, ipl.hitcric.tv, doratv-ipl.wapkiz.com, tamilblasters.win, thdtvworld.xyz, uptomovie.xyz and zolhdtv.com.
During the course of hearing, Senior Advocate Amit Sibal appearing for the plaintiffs submitted that the defendants had earlier also infringed their exclusive rights for 'Vivo IPL 2021'.
It was the apprehension of the plaintiffs that the defendants will continue infringing their exclusive rights with respect to the ICC Men's T20 World Cup 2021 that commenced from 17th October, 2021.
Screenshots of one of the "rogue websites" were also annexed with the plaint to demonstrate that it mentions various sporting events to be held/ streamed on the website, including ICC Men's CWC.
It was argued by the plaintiffs that the information regarding the defendant-websites was completely masked and that they were not aware of the owners of the websites as they were either anonymous or had incorrect addresses.
"..prima facie, sufficient material has been placed on record by the Plaintiffs, this Court finds a prima facie case in favour of the Plaintiffs. The balance of convenience also lies in favour of the Plaintiffs and in case an ex-parte ad- interim injunction is not granted, an irreparable loss will be inflicted upon the Plaintiffs. Consequently, till the next date of hearing before this Court, interim injunction is granted in favour of the Plaintiffs and against the Defendants," the Court ordered.
The matter will now be heard on 28th February, 2022.
Case Title: STAR INDIA PVT. LTD. AND ANR. v. FILMYCLUB.WAPKIZ.COM AND ORS.


