I.A. 13529/2021 (under Section 80 r/w Section151 CPC, 1908)
1.     For the grounds and reasons stated therein, the application is allowed.
I.A. 13528/2021 (exempt the Plaintiffs from filing certified/ clearer/
proper/ translated copies of documents with proper margins)
2.     Exemption is granted, subject to just exceptions.
3.     The Plaintiffs shall file certified copies of documents, which are in its
possession, within two weeks from today.
4.     The Plaintiffs shall file legible copies of any document which is dim/
illegible has proper margins, which they may seek to place reliance, at least
one week prior to the next date of hearing.
5.     The application stands disposed of.
I.A. 13530/2021 (u/O. XI R.1(4) of the Commercial Courts Act, 2015 r/w
Section 151 CPC seeking leave to file additional documents)
6.     This is an application seeking leave to file additional documents under
7.     The Plaintiffs, if they wish to file additional documents at a later
stage, shall do so strictly as per the provisions of the Commercial Courts
8.     Accordingly, the application stands disposed of.
I.A. 13531/2021 (exemption from filing pre-suit mediation in the present
suit under Section 12A of the Commercial Court Act, 2015)
9.     Allowed, subject to all just exceptions.
10.    Accordingly, the application stands disposed of.
11.    Let the plaint be registered as a suit.
12.    Upon filing of process fee, issue summons to the Defendant by all
permissible modes. Summons shall state that the written statement shall be
filed by the Defendant within 30 days from the date of receipt of summons.
Along with the written statement, the Defendant shall also file an affidavit of
admission/ denial of the documents of the Plaintiffs, without which the
written statement shall not be taken on record.
13.    Liberty is given to the Plaintiffs to file a replication within 15 days of
the receipt of the written statement. Along with the replication, if any, filed
by the Plaintiffs, an affidavit of admission/ denial of documents of the
Defendant, be filed by the Plaintiff, without which the replication shall not
be taken on record. If any of the parties wish to seek inspection of any
documents, the same shall be sought and given within the timelines.
14.     List before the Joint Registrar for marking of exhibits on 20th
December, 2021. It is made clear that any party unjustifiably denying
documents would be liable to be burdened with costs.
15.     List before Court for framing of issues thereafter.
I.A. 13527/2021 (under Order 39 Rules 1 and 2 seeking restraint on
infringement of broadcasting rights of the Plaintiffs)
16.     The present suit is being filed by the Plaintiffs on account of the
infringement of the Plaintiffs’ broadcasting reproduction rights arising from
the ICC Men’s T20 World Cup 2021 of which the Plaintiffs have exclusive
rights. The suit seeks permanent injunction restrainingthe Defendants from
infringing the Plaintiffs’ exclusive rights and broadcasting reproduction
rights, rendition of accounts, damages etc.
17.     This is an interim application seeking restrain of infringement of
broadcasting reproduction rights of the Plaintiffs. The Plaintiffs has acquired
exclusive global media rights – including television rights, digital rights
(internet as well as mobile) and certain ancillary rights for various ICC
events inter alia the ICC Men's T20 World Cup from the International
Cricket Council for a duration of eight years i.e., from 2015–2023 for a
substantial consideration vide a ‘Media Rights Agreement’ dated 20th
November 2014. In exercise of the rights granted vide the said agreement,
the Plaintiffs are exploiting the exclusive rights directly and through its
affiliated companies.
18.    Mr. Amit Sibal, Senior Counsel for the Plaintiffs, submits that the
Plaintiffs have observed that the exclusive rights in the sporting events inter-
alia ‘Vivo IPL 2021’– have also been earlier infringed by Defendants Nos. 1
to 17. These rights include the live, delayed, highlights, clips and repeat
exhibition of various sporting events, over which the Plaintiffs have digital
rights, through various digital transmission platforms for viewing on various
devices such as televisions, computers, laptops, mobile phones, tablets, etc.
The Plaintiffs have observed that Defendants Nos. 1 to 7 are “rogue
websites” – which continue to infringe Plaintiffs’ rights – including its
exclusive rights with respect to Vivo IPL 2021.The list of “rogue websites”
19.    The Plaintiffs apprehend that the said Defendants will continue
infringing the Plaintiffs’ exclusive rights with respect to the ICC Men's T20
World Cup 2021– scheduled to commence from 17th October, 2021. These
rights also include the exclusive right to use the ICC Men's T20 World Cup
2021 logos, the logos of the Star Channels and any other marks associated
with the Men’s T20 World Cup event or the Plaintiffs’ abovementioned
rights – which are being confirmed by the ICC vide letter dated 16th May,
20.    Defendant Nos. 8 to 16 are Internet Service Providers
Nos. 17 and 18 are the Department of Telecommunications
referred to as “DoT”]] and Ministry of Electronics and Information
Technology, respectively.
21.    Further, screenshots of the “rogue websites” have also been annexed
with the plaint to demonstrate that the Plaintiffs’ apprehension is a genuine
one. By way of illustration, Mr. Sibal has drawn the attention of this Court
to the screenshots of website of Defendant No. 7 – which mentions various
sporting events to be held/ streamed on their website, including ICC Men’s
22.     Mr. Sibal submits that the information pertaining to these websites is
completely masked – as is evident from the information publicly available
on the ‘WhoIs Database’. The Plaintiffs are not aware of the owners of these
websites as they are either anonymous or have incorrect addresses.
23.     Mr. Sibal drew the attention of the Court to the orders passed by other
co-ordinate benches, wherein this Court had granted injunctions against
“rogue websites”,1 not only immediately known to the Plaintiff, but also to
other websites of a similar nature – which the Plaintiffs apprehend would
“spring up at the time of the telecasting/ broadcasting of the events” and
would continue to infringe the Plaintiffs’ rights. In these orders, the Court
had subsequently, appreciated the apprehensions of the Plaintiff(s) and
extending the injunctions by permitting the Plaintiff(s) therein to approach
the DoT in the event, the existence of similar websites (likely to infringe
their broadcasting reproduction rights) come to their knowledge.
24.     Mr. Sibal submits that the said directions did not serve the purpose of
protecting their rights; since ‘take-down’ requests made to the DoT would
ordinarily take three to seven days to be given effect to. He submits that
considering the brief duration of the sporting events viz. the T20 World Cup
matches, the Court may consider passing an omnibus direction in futuro –
even before any websitesare identified or affidavits are filed, thereby
protecting the interests of the Plaintiff.
CS (COMM) 394/2020 dated 23rd March, 2020 and CS (COMM) 181/2021 dated 16th April, 2021.
25.    Having considered the submissions of Mr. Sibal, and considering the
nature of violations by the Defendant Nos. 1 to 7 forwhich, prima facie,
sufficient material has been placed on record by the Plaintiffs, this Court
finds a prima facie case in favour of the Plaintiffs. The balance of
convenience also lies in favour of the Plaintiffs and in case an ex-parte ad-
interim injunction is not granted, an irreparable loss will be inflicted upon
the Plaintiffs. Consequently, till the next date of hearing before this Court,
interim injunction is granted in favour of the Plaintiffs and against the
i.  Defendants Nos. 1 to 7 (and such other websites and entities which
are discovered during the course of the proceedings to have been
engaging in infringing the Plaintiffs’ exclusive rights and disclosed on
affidavit before this Court) are restrained from, in any manner,
communicating to the public, hosting, reproducing, streaming,
broadcasting, re-broadcasting, retransmitting, exhibiting, and/ or
making available for viewing and downloading, providing access to
and/ or communicating to the public, displaying, uploading,
modifying, publishing, updating and/ or sharing (including to its
subscribers and users) through the internet, or any other manner
whatsoever, the ICC Men’s T20 World Cup 2021, and the content
related thereto, so as to not infringe the Plaintiff’s broadcasting
reproduction rights as broadcast/ contained in Star Channels and
ii.  Defendant Nos. 8 to 16, their Directors, Proprietors, Officers,
Affiliates are directed to block access to the websites impleaded as
Defendant Nos. 1 to 7, or such other websites as may be notified by
the Plaintiffs on affidavit, within 72 hours of receipt of this order;
iii.  Defendant Nos. 17 and 18 are directed to issue notification calling
upon the internet and telecom service providers registered under them,
to block access to websites impleaded as Defendant Nos. 1 to 7;
iv.  In the event, the Plaintiffs come across any such infringing activity in
relation to the cause of action pleaded in the present suit, the Plaintiffs
would file an affidavit before this Court enclosing therewith
screenshots to indicate that the infringing content is being broadcasted
on such websites, and on the affidavit so filed, the directions as issued
from Serial Nos. (i) to (iii) of the order above, would apply to the said
website(s) as well, and in the event the Plaintiffs’ affidavit is found to
be false, the consequence in law will follow.
26. Compliance under Order XXXIX, Rule 3 CPC, be done in one week.
27. List before the Court on 28th February, 2022.