This Civil Revision Petition has been filed as against the fair
and decreetal order dated 28.08.2019, passed by the learned Subordinate
Judge, Udumalpet, in I.A.No.10 of 2019 in H.M.O.P.No.22 of 2018, thereby
dismissing the petition filed for rejection of divorce petition on the ground of
res-judicata.
2. The petitioner is the wife and the respondent is the husband.
Originally, the respondent filed petition for divorce in H.M.O.P.No.875 of
2005 on the ground of cruelty as against the petitioner herein. At the same
time, the petitioner also filed petition in H.M.O.P.No.77 of 2005 for
restitution of conjugal rights. The Family Court allowed the petition for
restitution petition and dismissed the divorce petition. Aggrieved by the
same, the respondent preferred an appeal in C.M.A.Nos.46 & 45 of 2007 on
the file of the Fast Track Court, Salem. The Appellate Court allowed both
the appeals and granted divorce and also dismissed the restitution of
conjugal rights petition. Aggrieved by the same, the petitioner herein filed
Civil Miscellaneous Second Appeal before this Court in C.M.S.A.Nos.38 &
39 of 2008 respectively, and this Court reversed the findings of the first
appellate Court and dismissed the divorce petition and allowed the
restitution of conjugal rights petition.
3. Thereafter, on fresh cause of action and on different set of
grounds viz., desertion and continuous cruelty with regard to subsequent
events, the respondent filed another petition for divorce in H.M.O.P.No.22
of 2018. While pending the divorce petition, the petitioner filed the petition
under Section 11 of C.P.C., to dismiss the petition on the ground of res-
judicata. The Court below dismissed the said petition and as against which,
the petitioner filed this present Civil Revision Petition.
4. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that
the application for divorce is clear abuse of process of law and the principle
of res-judicata is clearly applies to the case on hand, since already the
respondent filed divorce petition on the ground of cruelty and the same was
dismissed and confirmed by this Court. Subsequently, the petitioner also
filed maintenance case and the same was also allowed and directed the
respondent to pay a sum of Rs.2,500/-. However, the respondent did not
comply the said order passed in the maintenance case by the Court below.
The respondent also lodged complaint in D.V.O.P.No.2 of 2013 on the file
of the learned Judicial Magistrate No.I, Udumalaipet, and it is pending.
Hence, he prayed to allow the present Civil Revision Petition.
5. The learned counsel appearing for the respondent submitted
that after dismissal of the earlier divorce petition, the petitioner filed so many
petitions under the Domestic Violence Act and also lodged complaint as
against the respondent and his family members. Therefore, there was
continuous harassment made by the petitioner and as such the respondent
was constrained to file another divorce petition on the ground of continuous
cruelty and also deserted for long period. Hence, the trial Court rightly
dismissed the rejection petition and prayed to dismiss the petition.
6. Heard Mr.R.Nalliyappan, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner and Mr.I.Calvin Jones, learned counsel appearing for the
respondent.
7. The only contention raised by the petitioner is that the second
petition for divorce is hit by res-judicata, since the respondent already filed
divorce petition and the same was dismissed. On a perusal of divorce
petition revealed that the cause of action is different and as such the present
divorce petition is very much maintainable and the principle of res-judicate
is not applied. Admittedly, the respondent raised the ground of cruelty once
again and filed the petition for dissolution of marriage in H.M.O.P.No.22 of
2019 on the file of the Subordinate Court, Udumalpet. Even, if same
grounds are taken in the subsequent proceeding for divorce, no bar of res
judicate could apply as long as the cause of action for the subsequent
proceedings remains to be different.
8. Insofar as the ground of dissolution of matrimonial matters are
concerned, they are of continuing or recurring nature. The petition for
dissolution of marriage on the ground of cruelty, desertion and adultery is
not precluded from suing again for dissolution on the same grounds,
provided the relief is founded on new facts. The cause of action means a
bundle of facts constituting the right of a party which he has to establish in
order to obtain a relief from a Court. The facts which constitute the grounds
of cruelty, desertion or adultery as the case may be, are likely to vary giving
rise to different causes of action depending on the facts and circumstances of
each cases. When cause of action is of continuing and recurring nature, the
subsequent litigation of divorce brought on same grounds disregarding the
dismissal of former O.P. will not be barred by res-judicata.
9.  Therefore, the Court below rightly dismissed the petition and
this Court finds no infirmity or illegality in the order passed by the Court
below. Since the divorce petition is of the year 2018, the trial Court viz.,
Subordinate Judge, Udumalpet, is directed to dispose the divorce petition
within a period of six months from the date of receipt of a copy of this
10. Accordingly, the Civil Revision Petition stands dismissed.
Consequently, connected miscellaneous petition is closed. There shall be no
order as to costs.