A glossary of defined terms used in the judgment has been provided below:
Development Guidelines          Guidelines for encouraging Competition
in Development of Transmission Projects
MERC/ first respondent          Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory
MSETCL / fourth respondent Maharashtra State Electricity Regulatory
Guidelines for Transmission Service
This judgment has been divided into the following sections to facilitate analysis:
B. Proceedings before the MERC and APTEL .................................................................... 27
D.2 Policy framework....................................................................................................... 42
E. 1 Section 63: The dominant route or the alternative route ........................................... 49
E. 1.1. The value of TBCB Guidelines prescribed under Section 63 ............................. 54
E. 2 General Regulatory Power of the Appropriate Commission ...................................... 56
E.2.1 The nature of NTP- binding or a material consideration ...................................... 61
E. 3 Value of GoM GR ..................................................................................................... 72
E. 3. 2 Relevance of GoM GR for MERC’s Decision .................................................... 80
E. 3. 3 Relevance of GoM GR vis-à-vis MSETCL’s decision ........................................ 83
1.     APTEL, by its judgment dated 18 February 2022, dismissed an appeal
under Section 111 of the Act instituted by the appellant against a decision of
MERC dated 21 March 2021.
2.       On 21 March 2021, MERC granted a transmission licence to AEMIL under
Sections 14 and 15 of the Act for setting up a 1000 MW HVDC (VSC based) link
between 400 kV MSETCL Kudus and 220 kV AEML Aarey EHV Station.
3.     The appellant challenged MERC’s order before APTEL, inter alia, on the
ground that the grant of the licence was not preceded by a TBCB process. TPC-T
contended that the failure to adhere to a TBCB process pursuant to Section 63
was contrary to public interest and statutory mandate. APTEL dismissed the
appeal. This has given rise to a statutory appeal under Section 125 of the Act.
4.     On 12 November 2007, MSETCL issued a communication to CEA stating,
inter alia, that it was difficult to lay overhead AC lines to bring power from the new
400kV sub-station, which was required to meet Mumbai’s growing demand of
power, to Mumbai’s load centres due to constraints. Hence, it was proposed that
VSC based HVDC technology may be utilised to connect the new sub-station
with major load centres in Mumbai through DC cables. In that context, the letter
“M/s. Reliance energy (REL) and M/s. TATA Power Co. Ltd.
(TPC) has carried out necessary survey and accordingly
M/s. REL has proposed to connect Mumbai new location to
Ghodbunder partly by overhead line and partly by
underground cables. Further, M/s. REL also proposed to
connect Mumbai New Location to Aarey by HVDC (VSC
based technology).
M/s. TPC has planned to establish a 220 kV substation at
Vikhroli and have existing Salset, Dharavi and Trombay
substations. These substations will be fed from 400 kV
proposed substation at Ghatkopar.
Thus the major load centres in Mumbai will be fed as below.
Colaba area will be fed by 220KV Dharavi S/S (Tata)
Andheri area will be fed by 220KV Versova & Aarey S/S
Bandra area will be fed by 220KV Aarey S/S
has also proposed to connect 400KV Mumbai New Location
with 400KV New Mumbai (Panvel) for system strengthening.
State Transmission Utility (STU) office would appoint a
Consultant who is having sufficient knowledge in VSC based
HVDC technology for finalizing the scheme, subject to M/s
REL agreeing to bear the cost of the same.”
REL envisaged a transmission project by deploying HVDC (VSC) based
technology, where the load/evacuation point for the power to be received into
Mumbai city was at Aarey. Both REL and TPC-T were to participate in identifiable
segments for bringing power to Mumbai’s load centres.
5.     On 5 May 2009, MSETCL notified a five-year plan for the period 2009-10
to 2013-14. The plan included the Nagothane-Aarey HVDC link. Likewise, details
of the on-going and new schemes of TPC-T were also provided. In terms of the
plan, REL was to execute the Nagothane - Aarey transmission project.
6.     In November 2010, Mumbai experienced a partial grid disturbance. A
Committee chaired by Professor Dr SA Khaparde of IIT Mumbai was constituted
to study the situation. The Committee recommended adopting the HVDC
technology as a long-term solution for ensuring the reliability of power supply for
Mumbai for the proposed transmission project with a 2 x 350 MW HVDC voltage
source converter based transmission link for Mumbai. This was identified as a
critical bulk power injection scheme.
7.      On 13 May 2011, RInfra submitted an application under the provisions of
Section 14 and 15 of the Act for the grant of a transmission licence for the entire
State of Maharashtra. By an order dated 11 August 2011, MERC observed that
R-Infra cannot be granted a transmission licence for the entire State of
Maharashtra as paragraph 5.1 read with 7.1.6 of NTP 2016 mandated TBCB for
transmission services. Instead, MERC granted RInfra a transmission licence to
establish and operate specific transmission lines for a period of twenty-five years.
The transmission lines in respect of which the licence was granted to R-Infra
were specified in the communication dated 11 August 2011.
8.      On 2 November 2012, the report of the HVDC sub-committee for
finalization of the consultant noted the reasons for adopting HVDC (VSC) based
technology to meet the power demand for Mumbai. The following extract
indicates that after exploring various operations it was found that connectivity at
Nagothane was suitable. On the other hand, Aarey being a major load centre was
a “suitable sink point for connection”:
“The First Meeting of the Sub-Committee was held on
28.08.2012, where in following as discussed and agreed
Following requirements were discussed & considered:
i.   Classic HVDC has limited capability of Active / Reactive
Power control, whereas VSC HVDC has dynamic control of
ii. Classic HVDC has no Blackstart facility; whereas VSC
HVDC has blackstart facility which can be a major support to
revive Grid failures.
iii. Classic HVDC requires more footprints. VSC HVDC
being compact and modular in design hence it requires only
30% footprint area to setup a converter station
iv. Short Circuit levels are increasing, hence HVDC link to
To meet the above, it is concluded that, 2x500 MW HVDC
Voltage Source Converter (VSC) based technology for
Mumbai is essential.
For connectivity with the grid, various options were explored
and it is concluded that electrical connectivity at Nagothane
is suitable. Similarly Aarey, being the major load centre, it is
concluded that Aarey is the suitable sink point for
connection.”
9.     On 1 February 2013, RInfra submitted a DPR to MERC for the
appointment of a consultant for its proposed 2 x 500 MW HVDC (VSC) based
transmission line from MSETCL’s 400 kV Nagothane station to the 220 kV Aarey
sub-station.
10.     On 5 April 2013, MERC addressed a letter to R-Infra, granting it in-
principle clearance for hiring a consultant for the Nagothane-Aarey HVDC
Scheme to study the system and assist in the selection and design of the
technology and bidding process of the DPR. However, it was noted that the ‘in-
principle’ clearance should not be construed as a final approval for the purposes
of the Annual Recurring Revenue and the scheme would be open to scrutiny
during the tariff determination process, particularly in the context of actual cost
incurred, scope and objective achieved. MERC approved the hiring of the
consultant for the implementation of R-Infra’s transmission projects. R-Infra was
directed to submit quarterly progress reports on the transmission projects based
on HVDC technology.
11.     The five-year plan is submitted by MSETCL in terms of Section 39 of the
Act and Regulation 8 of the MERC (State Grid Code) Regulations 2006. On 7
March 2013, MSETCL in a communication to MERC confirmed that the following
scheme was being considered in the five-year plan for 2013-14 to 2017-18 for the
Mumbai Metropolitan region:
1.   2x500 MW HVDC IGBT (VSC) based          2016-17             Implementation
Aarey – Nagothane Link (120 Ckt km)                         utility RInfra-T
with Bays.
12.      On 19 March 2013, RInfra submitted an application to MSETCL seeking
grid connectivity for the Nagothane-Aarey HVDC Scheme. This was allowed on
21 August 2013 by MSETCL. The letter detailed out the scope of the work to be
carried out by R-Infra and specified the conditions for compliance.
13.      On 20 November 2013, a meeting was held between MSETCL and R-
Infra to discuss and review the HVDC connectivity to the Aarey sub-station. In the
meeting, MSETCL proposed availing of connectivity from the 400kV Kudus
substation instead of the 400kV substation at Nagothane. The reason for the
change in the point of connectivity being sought from Nagothane as originally
envisaged to Kudus was as follows:
•    Director (Operations) suggested that R-Infra can avail
connectivity from 400 KV Kudus (MSETCL) Substation
which is much near to Aarey Substation (R-Infra) as
compared to 400 KV Nagothane (MSETCL) substation (125
km). Proposed 400 KV Kudus (MSETCL) Substation will be
commissioned within 2 years. 400 KV Kudus S/S will have
strong source of 765 KV Kudus (PG) and other 400 KV
network from Vapl(PG) 400 Bubheswar MSETCL), 400 KV
Bolsar (PG) compared to 400 KV Nagothane (MSETCL) S/S.
Therefore 400 KV Kudus Substation is a better option for
HVDC connectivity. The route cable linkage cost will be
considerably lower.
•    Chief Engineer (STU) submitted that when original plan
was made for R-Infra HVDC project, the 400 KV Kudus s/s
(MSETCL) was not in the STU plan but now it has been
included I STU plan. Therefore it should be examined
positively for HVDC connection with Aarey. The cost of the
project will be reduced considerably.”
Evidently, R-Infra had reservations about revising the point for HVDC connectivity
from Nagothane to Kudus. The Minutes of the Meeting of 20 November 2013
indicate those concerns:
“R-infra expressed their concern to consider the revision of
scope of connectivity which was decided by standing
committee. R-infra already initiated procurement of land near
Nagothane (MSETCL) and detail survey. All required
clearance proposals are initiated by R-Infra for which
approvals are in a pipeline and at this stage it is very difficult
to consider the new proposal.”
The Director (Operations) of MSETCL advised R-Infra, while agreeing to its
concerns, to nonetheless examine the suggested proposal and submit its
comments.
14.     On 14 February 2014, R-Infra submitted a DPR for the transmission link
between Nagothane and Aarey under the HVDC (VSC) project. On 10 April 2014,
MERC granted in-principle clearance to R-Infra for the Nagothane-Aarey HVDC
Scheme. R-Infra was intimated that the in-principle approval was subject to it
filing a petition for the amendment of its transmission licence. It was also
mentioned that the in-principle clearance should not be construed as a final
approval for Annual Recurring Revenue purposes and that the scheme will be
open for scrutiny during tariff determination:
“5. Please note that this in-principle clearance should not
be construed as final approval for ARR purpose and the
scheme will be open for scrutiny during tariff
determination process/ARR review, particularly in the
context of actual cost incurred, scope and objective
achieved etc. ex-post after implementation of the
scheme. RInfra-T will be required to submit the status of
implementation of the scheme with cost incurred till date
along with their ARR Petition or during the tariff
determination process at the appropriate time.
7. Immediately after the completion/commissioning of the
scheme, R-Infra-T should communicate to the
Commission, the date of completion of the scheme,
actual cost incurred, escalation in cost, if any with
reasons, the scope and objectives of the scheme and to
what extent they have been achieved, etc. so as to
facilitate a comparison between the in-principle clearance
and the actual.”
15.     On 5 January 2015, MSETCL proposed a revised scheme for
strengthening Mumbai’s transmission system to MERC. MSETCL proposed that it
would establish a 400kV Kudus – Aarey HVAC scheme. The reason for
substituting the HVDC project to be executed by R-Infra with MSETCL’s HVAC
transmission link from Kudus to Aarey was clarified in paragraph 9 of the letter
which has been extracted below:
“9) In view of above, the HVDC project of R-Infra T is
reviewed considering uncertainties in source generation and
upcoming strong source of 400 KV Kudus at much shorter
distance (approx. 80km) than 400 KV Nagothane S/s.
Therefore, considering the above changes in network
configuration, it is proposed to establish 400 KV substation
in Mumbai for the enhancement of Transmission corridor
capacity to Mumbai system through 400 KV D/C Quad line
from 400 KV Kudus (MSETCL) substation. This will enhance
the transmission capacity by 1500-2000 MW.”
The scope of the scheme proposed by MSECTL was delineated in paragraph 11
of the communication which is extracted below:
“11) The scope of proposed scheme for above purpose is as
i)    400 KV Kudus (MSETCL)-400 KV Aarey (MSETCL)
D/C quad line-80 km.
iii) 200 KV Interconnection between 400/220 KV Aarey and
proposed 200 KV Goregaon Film city with bays.
iv) 6x200 KV bays for 220 KV interconnection with TPC
and R Infra (T) lines.
v) 400 KV spare bays for interconnection with 400 KV
vi) 400/220 KV, 2x500 MVA ICTS for future expansion.
The scheme of establishment of 400 KV Aarey (MSETCL)
Mumbai will be included in five year STU Pan 2015-16 to
2019-20 for commissioning during 2017-18. The HVDC
project stands cancelled for the reasons as mentioned
above. Necessary DPR of the scheme will be submitted to
Hon’ble Commission in due course of time for in-principle
clearance.”
In other words, instead of R-Infra developing a transmission link between
Nagothane and Aarey using the HVDC technology, MSECTL proposed to
establish the link between Kudus and Aarey itself using HVAC technology by
including it in the five-year plan for 2015-16 to 2019-20.
16.        On 23 January 2015, R-Infra addressed a communication to MSETCL
responding to the communication dated 5 January 2015. R-Infra responded to the
proposal of the substitution of the HVDC (VSC based) scheme from Nagothane
to Aarey with an overhead transmission line from Kudus to Aarey to be executed
by MSETCL. The letter noted that:
(i)     The approved HVDC Scheme had been recommended by the Standing
committee appointed by MERC;
(ii)    The HVDC project which was envisaged with VSC based technology
had significant technological advantages over the HVAC technology
proposed by MSETCL; and
(iii)   In the past, Power Grid Corporation of India Limited and MSETCL had
cancelled proposed HVAC transmission lines for bringing power into
Mumbai or terminated them outside Mumbai on account of severe right-
of-way constraints in and around Mumbai.
R-Infra therefore reiterated that the HVDC – VSC based scheme as approved
should be continued. However, R-Infra indicated that the injection point could be
relocated to Kudus while retaining the HVDC Scheme for bulk power injection to
17.      On 2 May 2016, MERC cancelled the in-principle approval accorded to R-
Infra’s HVDC Scheme. The letter of cancellation is extracted below:
“This has reference to review report of approved capex
Schemes submitted by RInfra-T vide letter dated 5 April
1) RInfra – T has submitted the review of 7 schemes, as inspite
of having been approved by the Commission long back, the
work against the schemes are yet to be initiated for various
reasons.
a) 3 Schemes (EHV Scheme for 220KV Golibar S/s, 220 kV
Dahisar Housing S/s & 220 kV Airport S/s) amounting to
Rs.600.51 Crore will be submitted for revised approval
after allocation of land.
Scheme) amounting to Rs.7103.99 Crore are kept on
hold as the STU reply is awaited.
c) I Scheme (Land DPR) amounting to Rs.232.55 Crore is
withdrawn as the approved land cost is already
considered in the respective DPR schemes.
d) Regarding the Scheme of establishment of Nagri-Niwara
substation amounting to Rs.460.59 Crore, RInfra has
submitted that it has executed a part, i.e., the cable laying
portion between RInfra Aarey and MSETCL Borivali
stations, as MSETCL has proposed EHV station in the
same area catering to RInfra-D & MSEDCL load and the
substation portion is proposed for withdrawal.
3) Due to change in scope of work of RInfra-T (i.e. establishing
cable connectivity between RInfra-T Aarey & MSETCL
Borivali without installing Nagri-Niwara substation), Rinfra-T
is required to take revised approval of the scheme along with
STU recommendation for such change.
4) In view of the above, I am directed to communicate that in
principle approvals given to DPRs submitted by R Infra-T for
EHV Scheme for 220 kV Golibar S/s, 220kV Dahisar
Housing S/s, 220 kV Airport S/s, Land DPR, HVDC
consultancy, HVDC Line & substation portion of Nagri-
Niwara scheme stand cancelled.”
18.     On 22 December 2016, MSETCL submitted its five-year plan for FY 2016-
17 to 2021-22 wherein the HVDC Scheme was removed. The HVDC Scheme
was not included in the 5-year plan submitted for the FY 2017-18 to 2022-23. On
29 August 2018, AEML acquired R-Infra.
19.     At this stage, it is material to note that the appellant, TPC-T, had submitted
a DPR for commissioning a 400kV receiving station at Vikhroli which was
approved by MERC on 2 June 2011 with a capital cost of Rs 846.19 crores. In
terms of the DPR, the work was to be completed in March 2015. TPC-T proposed
revised timelines for the completion of the scheme in financial year 2017-18 on
the ground that the approval required for it including clearances from Ministry of
Environment, Forest and Climate Change and the Airport Authority of India were
at various stages and the land required was in the final stage of being taken into
possession. By its order dated 12 September 2018, MERC noted that TPC-T has
submitted a revised DPR twice, pursuant to which it had approved the extension
of the target plan date to March 2017 and later, March 2019. TPC-T proposed a
revised completion date of March 2022. Noting the absence of any progress in
the scheme of TPC-T, MERC closed the scheme. It observed:
“7.12.1 As regards, 400 kV Receiving station at Vikhroli, the
Commission notes that TPC-T had submitted its DPR for
commissioning of 400 kV Receiving Station at Vikhroli and
the Commission has approved the same oa2 June, 2011
with capital cost of Rs. 846.19 Cr. In the DPR, TPC-T had
submitted that the work shall be completed in March, 2015.”
“7.12.8 Based on TPC-T's submissions in the present
Petition, the Commission further notes, TPC-T had
envisaged imminent load requirement and exponential
increase in the power requirement due to large scale
development in residential and commercial properties
(especially in Godrej area) at Vikhroli and around area. In
actual, the predicted load growth has not come up in the
area.”
“7.12.9 Considering above, the Commission noted that STU
has observed that there is an inordinate delay in completion
of this scheme and suggested to take up this scheme under
Tariff Based Competitive Bidding (TBCB) route. The
Commission is concerned about the approach adopted by
TPC-T for execution of the scheme. This scheme is being
treated as deemed closed by the Commission and the
Commission directs STU to take a review of such critical
schemes and propose a way forward. STU is directed to
submit its report to the Commission on review of TPC-T's
proposed 400 kV Vikhroli Receiving Station within a month.”
The Vikhroli transmission scheme which envisaged the setting up of a 400kV
receiving station by the appellant was hence deemed to be closed by MERC on
the ground of TPC-Ts inordinate delay in completion. The project was instead
suggested to be allotted through the TBCB route.
20.     On 23 November 2018, AEML submitted a proposal to MSETCL indicating
that in view of the severe constraints on the construction of overhead lines in and
around Mumbai, the 400kV Aarey – Kudus overhead transmission scheme of
MSETCL “never took off”. Hence AEML proposed the development of a 2 x 500
MW HVDC (VSC) based link between Kudus and Aarey and the inclusion of the
project in the transmission licence of AEML. AEML submitted a revised
‘connection application’ for carrying bulk power from the state grid to Mumbai; an
amendment to the earlier application over which grid connectivity for the
Nagothane-Aarey HVDC project was granted by MSETCL on 21 August 2013;
and for the grant of connectivity and implementation of the 2 x 500 MW HVDC
(VSC) link.
21.     TPC-T sought a review of the order dated 12 September 2018 by MERC
cancelling its licence for the Vikhroli transmission scheme. On 29 January 2019,
the review petition was dismissed by MERC reiterating its earlier reasoning that
TPC-T had substantially delayed the project and noting that there was no defect
or error apparent on the face of the record.
22.     On 28 May 2019, MSETCL submitted its five-year plan for 2018-19 to
2023-24 to MERC under which the HVDC Scheme was included as an additional
scheme within the scope of AEML-T. The plan included the Aarey-Kudus HVDC
Scheme by AEML-T and was made available on the website of MSETCL.
23.     AEML-T sought the suggestion of CEA on a VSC based underground
cable system for bulk power injection into the existing network of Mumbai. CEA in
its communication dated 13 June 2019 stated that it had held meetings on 8 May
2019 and 31 May 2019 with MSETCL, AEML-T and TPC-T besides the central
transmission utility. The communication noted that in those meetings there was a
consensus for planning a transmission scheme of feeding power to the Mumbai
region in the time frame of 2025-26 and 2030 based on studies. AEML-T and
TPC-T were requested to provide substation wise load data with any additional
transmission element which was planned in the above time frames. In response,
both AEML-T and TPC-T furnished sub-station wise load for 2024-25 and details
of the transmission schemes planned during 2024-25. Load flow studies were
also carried out for 2024-25 conditions considering all schemes planned by
AEML-T and TPC-T till 2024-25 and schemes of the STU until 2021-22. The
primary findings which were recorded by the CEA were in the following terms:
“1.0 Transmission elements which are not N-1
i)       Borivali – Array 220 kV D/c line ( caters to MMR load)
ii)      Kalwa – Mulund 220 kV S/c line (2 ckts) ( caters to load of
Mulund and Bhandup which are outside MMR)
2.0 High loadings on transmission elements ( 400/220 kV ICTs
and 220 kV lines) with N-1 contingency criteria
i)       400/220 kV ICTs at Kalwa S/s
4.0 With provision of 1000 MW feed from Kudus to Array it is
i)       All transmission elements are N-I compliant (except for
Kalwa-Mulund 220 kV S/C lines – 2nos. This can be
overcome by LILO of either Kalwa-Trombay 220kV S/C line
or Kalwa-Borivali 220 kV S/C line at Mulund or by shifting of
LILO at Bhandup from Mulund – Borivali 220 kV line to
Kalwa-Borivali 220 kV line
ii)      The loadings on transmission elements are reduced.”
24.     CEA, in view of above findings found that the Kudus-Aarey 1000MW
HVDC link will provide ‘in feed’ to Mumbai and increase reliability. Moreover,
since the link was based on VSC technology it would help in voltage regulation.
Keeping the power requirements in consideration, CEA proposed that the
possibility for another 1000 MW may be explored along with the Kudus to Aarey
HVDC link. Based on the study report of CEA, MSETCL by a letter dated 27 June
2019 confirmed that the Kudus-Aarey 1000MW HVDC link may be required for
pushing additional power into Mumbai as the link creates a separate and
additional transmission corridor.
25.     On 28 June 2019, MERC issued a letter to MSETCL directing it to take
necessary steps for the expeditious execution of Kudus-Aarey 1000 MW HVDC
link by AEML-T according to the five-year transmission plan of the STU dated 28
May 2019. MERC’s letter took note of the fact that based on the study report of
CEA which recommended the Kudus-Aarey 1000MW HVDC based transmission
project for increasing reliability and voltage regulation, MSETCL would take
necessary steps for expeditious execution of the project in terms of the five-year
“5. Considering the STU Plan of incorporating 2 x 500 MW
Kudus-Aarey HVDC link, CEA’s load flow study
recommending 1000 MW Kudus-Aarey HVDC link for
Mumbai region, and STU’s confirmation vide its letter dated
27.06.2019, the Commission directs MSETCL/STU to take
all necessary steps for expeditious execution of Kudus-
Aarey 1000 MW HVDC link by AEML-T as per 5 Year
Transmission Plan of STU dated 28.05.2019 communicated
to Commission. The Commission further directs
MSETCL/STU to take similar steps for expeditious execution
of the other Mumbai Transmission schemes proposed in its
STU plan with the likely modifications as referred in the letter
of STU dated 27 June 2019 under reference at sl.no. 7
above.”
26.     On 23 September 2019, TPC-T instituted an appeal before APTEL against
MERC’s order dated 12 September 2018 providing for a deemed closure of its
Vikhroli scheme. In its order dated 23 September 2019, APTEL noted that there
was an inordinate delay of eight years on the part of TPC-T as a consequence of
which the project was directed to be placed under the TBCB route. APTEL held
that TPC-T had not taken adequate steps since 2011 to ensure the completion of
the project, which was envisaged in the interest of the consumers of Mumbai:
“77. The contention of the Appellant that if the
implementation of scheme under TBCB is allowed, it would
further delay the scheme in question is not acceptable to us,
since in the TBCB process the scheme has to be executed
on timely basis, which also optimises the cost of the project
thereby reducing the financial burden on the consumers. The
Appellant, right from 2011 till date, has not taken any active
steps to achieve the completion of the project, which helps
the consumers of Mumbai. Now, at this stage, the Appellant
claims that it has put in lot of efforts and is ready to complete
the project. The Appellant was also permitted to participate
in the TBCB process. Therefore, the observation of the
Commission pertaining to delay in implementing the scheme
in question by 8 years cannot be found fault with. In the
above paragraphs several observations on facts are made
how the Appellant moved at snail’s pace to start and
implement the project. The TBCB process is in conformity
with the tariff policy notified by the Ministry of Power,
Government of India. As far as the so called efforts and the
expenditure made, if any, by the Appellant, the Respondent-
Commission has made observations that’ the said amount
spent/claimed by the Appellant has to be refunded to the
Appellant since it is part of conditions of the bid in question.”
27.      On 2 December 2019, AEML-T filed a petition seeking to amend its licence
so as to include the HVDC project since the licence issued to AEML-T was line
specific, which means that it authorized AEML-T to create, operate and maintain
assets that were specifically identified in the license. TPC-T filed its objections in
response to a public notice issued by AEML-T, on the ground that the HVDC
Scheme should be executed under the TBCB route in terms of GoM’s GR dated
4 January 2019. On 15 January 2020, MERC sought the recommendations of the
STU on the amendment application made by AEML-T. On 22 January 2020, the
STU indicated that the HVDC project was proposed in the agenda in a
forthcoming EC meeting for being considered under the TBCB route.
28.      On 30 March 2020, MERC issued its multi-year tariff order in case No 297
of 2019 filed by AEML-T stating that:
(i) The HVDC project was referred to the EC whose decision was awaited;
(ii) The decision on implementing the HVDC project was to be taken in the
amendment application or in any other proceedings. The relevant
observations are extracted below:
“2.1.21       Further, AEML-T has already filed its Petition in
Case No. 195 of 2019 seeking of its Transmission Licence
which also includes the proposed HVDC scheme. The
Petition for Transmission Licence amendment is under
consideration with the Commission.
2.1.22       As regards the project to be undertaken under
TBCB, the STU vide its letter dated 22 January, 2020 has
submitted that the 1000 MW HVDC Kudus-Aarey schemes
has been referred to the Empowered Committee formed by
the Govt. of Maharashtra and the decision of Empowered
Committee is awaited.
2.1.23        In view of the above, the Commission will
decide regarding the HVDC scheme during proposed
Transmission Licence Amendment of AEML-T in Case No.
195 of 2019 or any other proceedings as deemed
29.        In paragraph 5.3.12 of its order, MERC noted that the HVDC Scheme was
critical for strengthening the Mumbai transmission corridor and observed:
“5.3.12       In continuation to the above, the Commission,
as discussed in Paras 2.1.19 to 2.1.23 of this Order
considers the timely implementation of the schemes
pertaining to the strengthening of the Mumbai transmission
corridor viz. Interconnection Point at Vikhroli and HVDC
scheme, as very critical. The HVDC scheme is already part
of the STU Five Year Plan (FY 2018-19 to FY 2023-24) and
as per the plan, the scheme is envisaged to be executed by
AEML-T in the year 2023-24. In this regard, AEML-T has
already approached the Commission with a Petition to
amend its existing Transmission License in Case No. 195 of
2019 to include the proposed HVDC scheme along with
other proposed amendments which is under consideration
with the Commission. Also, in order to assess its
reasonability of the cost, AEML-T has recently submitted its
DPR for in-principle approval of the Commission.
Considering the critical nature of these schemes and time
required for obtaining the necessary regulatory approvals,
the Commission directs the STU and AEML-T to initiate all
the necessary steps for implementing the critical schemes
within the timeframe envisaged in the STU Five Year Plan.
However, the implementation of the scheme would be
subject to necessary Regulatory approvals.”
30.     On 30 May 2020, the EC of GoM conducted its fourth meeting at which it
opined that the HVDC Scheme which was a part of the earlier five-year plan for
2018-19 to 2023-24 was not a part of the plan for 2019-20 to 2024-25. The
members of the EC opined that the HVDC Scheme, not being a part of the five-
year plan, need not be considered for TBCB at that point and deferred the
decision. The STU was directed to send its plan for 2019-20 to 2024-25 to
31.     On 3 September 2020, MSETCL submitted its five-year plan for financial
years 2019-20 to 2024-25 before MERC. The plan included the HVDC project in
FY 2024-25, subject to comments from CEA. The plan envisaged 1000 MW
HDVC terminal stations at Kudus to Aarey for 2024-25. The note appended to the
foot of the tabulated statement is in the following terms:
** 1000 MW HVDC Terminal Stations at Kudus & Aarey and HVDC Link
Two HVDC schemes were part of STU plan 2018-19 to 2023-24 with a note that consolidated detail
study will be carried out considering all Mumbai related schemes separately. Subsequent STU study
indicated that with inclusion of 400kV Velgaon, 400 kV Kalwa Switching, 400 kV Kalwa-Padghe
M/Cline ect., these HVDC schemes will not be required. However, in view of earlier CEA study in this
regard and as HVAS schemes were not referred to CEA, the STU study including these HVDC
schemes has been referred to CEA for their comments. Hence 1000 MW Kudus-Aarey HVDC link is
included in the year 2024-25 of this STU five year plan (2019-20 to 2024-25) is subject to averse
comments if any by CEA in the matter may lead to deletion of the scheme from STU five year plan.
32.     On 21 September 2020, AEML-T filed an application in Case 195 of 2019
before MERC proposing to amend its licence and sought permission to delete the
HVDC Scheme in its entirety from the scheme proposed in the petition on the
ground that the scheme is proposed to be executed by its subsidiary company,
AEMIL. On the same day, AEMIL and AEML-T filed a joint petition bearing Case
No 190 of 2020 before MERC for a line specific transmission licence for the
proposed HVDC project in the name of AEMIL. AEMIL and AEML-T stated that in
view of the transmission constraints and time period involved in the
commissioning of bulk power schemes, the need for an HVDC Scheme was
discussed during the first meeting of the Standing Committee chaired by the
Secretary, Energy, GoM on 29 January 2018 for strengthening the electricity
supply system to Mumbai city. Moreover, the HVAC scheme which was proposed
by MSETCL had not progressed beyond the stage of a route survey despite the
passage of three years. The above amendment, this Court is informed, was in
order to drop the transmission project which was based on HVDC technology
from AEML -T’s scope of work. Instead, a fresh transmission licence was sought
in the name of AEML-T’s subsidiary, AEMIL. It was stated that the amendment
was necessitated because:
(i)     With a four to five year execution period, the scheme was capital
intensive, requiring finance from multiple financial institutions;
(ii)    In view of the substantial financial investment which was required,
financial institutions required identified target funds which could be
strictly monitored and controlled; and
(iii)   There was a need to ensure timely inclusion and financial closure.
33.        On 12 October 2020, MSETCL filed its reply stating that it does not
recommend the grant of a transmission licence for the HVDC project to AEMIL on
the grounds that: (a) In the transmission licence granted to AEML-T on 11 August
2011 to R-Infra, there is no mention of transfer of a part of the licence to another
company; (b) AEMIL is a separate legal entity and would have to make a fresh
application to MERC for a transmission licence under Sections 14 and 15 of the
Act; and (c) If AEMIL satisfies the requirements under Section 14 and 15 of the
Act, the licence shall be granted at the discretion of MERC.
34.      On 23 October 2020, a communication was addressed by CEA to
MSETCL recording that:
“iii. It may be noted that considering the need for availability
of power supply in the Mumbai area and ROW problem in
constructing overhead transmission lines to Mumbai, CEA
on the request of AEML has already suggested a scheme for
bulk power injection to Mumbai i.e. 1000 MW VSC based
HVDC from Kudus to Array along with future for another
1000 MW. This suggestion was made based on the studies
carried out for 2024-25 conditions. Requisite land provision
in AEML S/S at Kudus and Array is available for construction
of the VSC HVDC S/S. This system would provide the
required reliability of additional independent feed to Mumbai
area when the generation sources in TATA system is likely
to do down.”
The need for implementing the HVDC Scheme as proposed was highlighted in
the following extracts of the letter:
“iv. Recent blackout incidence (12.10.2020) of Mumbai also
the need for immediate implementation of the 1000 MW VSC
based HVDC from Kudus to Aaray system so that the
increasing load of MMR can be met reliably. The multiple
feeding points i.e. Kudus Aaray VSC link and under
implementation Phadge-New Mumbai-Khargar 400 kV link
would provide additional feeding point and enhance the
reliability of Mumbai system.
v. Considering the fact that the present power demand of
Mumbai to be around 3700-3800 MW and the maximum
embedded generation available in TATA area is about 1349
MW against generation capacity of 1627 MW. In Adani area
generation about 350 MW against 500 MW is available. So
presently under best generation availability condition, more
than 50% power demand of MMR is required to be imported
from 400 kV Pune, Phadge, Boiser link. Since the link from
Pune and Phadge are old and with moose conductor so in
case of outage of any link serious transmission constraint for
import of power into Mumbai area is observed. This further
get aggravated when the generation in TATA system is low.
It is also a known fact that the machines in TATA and Adani
area are going to be phased out gradually. Under that
circumstances the whole of power demand of MMR has to
be met through import only.”
In this backdrop, the letter stated that an additional infeed to the Mumbai area
from sources such as the 1000MV VSC based HVDC from Kudus to Aarey as
suggested by CEA was required to be implemented on a priority basis.
35.        On 24 December 2020, the EC conducted its fifth meeting. In Agenda item
3 pertaining to the threshold limit (according to NTP 2016) for development of
intra state transmission projects through the TBCB route, the EC decided that:
(i)     All projects in the STU plan costing Rs 500 crore or more would be
referred to the EC for execution under the TBCB route;
(ii)    If the STU proposed a project costing over 500 crore would not be
taken under the TBCB route “for reasons peculiar to the project” and
would be executed under any other mechanism, the justification would
be placed before the EC for its consideration”;
(iii)   The threshold limit of Rs 500 crore would be reviewed annually; and
(iv)    Once the EC decides to recommend the project under TBCB route or
otherwise, the STU is to petition MERC for final approval “of fresh
transmission licence or for extending existing transmission licence by
following due process of law”.
Apart from the above decisions, the applicability of the limit of Rs 500 crore to
“new / old projects” was discussed and it was decided that:
“i. All the projects that are already part of license of a
licensee as decided by MERC and MERC has already
allotted the work for execution to the licensee, will not be
forwarded for further consideration to the committee.
ii. Projects that are under active consideration of MERC
where STU has already recommended execution under a
particular mechanism and where MERC has initiated
substantially the process of inclusion of the project in scope
of any existing or new transmission license on the basis of
this recommendation, may not be put to committee for fresh
consideration. Any further recommendation, if asked of STU
by MERC or any other legal forum, STU may agitate the
committee for the same as per the threshold limit decided
above.”
36.     Agenda Item No 4 of the same meeting dealt with the 1000MW HVDC
Kudus- Aarey project. On this aspect, it was decided that STU must place its
recommendation on the tariff determination of the 1000MW HVDC Kudus- Aarey
project based on the decision in Agenda 3. The relevant extract from the Minutes
of the Meeting is extracted below:
“Agenda Item 4: Appraisal of inclusion of 1000 MW HVDC
Kudus-Aarey project in the STU five Year plan
(2019-20 – 2024-25) referred to Empowered Committee in
last meeting.
The Agenda “1000 MW HVDC project of Kudus – Aarey to
be taken under TBCB” was discussed in 4th Empowered
Committee meeting on 30th May 2020.”
At that time the HVDC project was not part of STU five-year
plan.
Hence the agenda item was deferred. Now the Empowered
Committee has been apprised about inclusion of 1000 MW
HVDC project of Kudus – Aarey in the STU Five-year plan.
Post appraisal of inclusion, the Committee informed STU
that they should proceed as per the decision given by the
Empowered Committee vide Agenda No.3.”
37.     On 29 December 2020, the appellant filed objections before MERC
objecting to the transmission application filed by AEMIL and AEML-T. In their
response dated 31 December 2020, AEMIL and AEML-T stated that the approval
of the DPR was cancelled by MERC only due to the proposal of MSETCL that the
technology be altered from HVDC to HVAC. However, the overhead HVAC
scheme which was proposed by MSETCL was not implemented. Hence, the
HVDC Scheme as a bulk power injection scheme for Mumbai was deliberated
which resulted in reconsideration of the transmission project based on HVDC
technology which had already been approved earlier.
38.       In its additional submission dated 20 January 2021 filed before MERC,
MSETCL adverted to the CEA report and stated that it would proceed in
accordance with the decision of the EC. On 27 January 2021, MSETCL filed
submissions indicating that:
(i)       A 1000MW HVDC link between Kudus and Aarey for which a licence
had been sought was part of the five-year transmission plan prepared
(ii)      The HVDC Scheme was under consideration for several years and was
recommended by several committees;
(iii)     The bulk power transmission scheme was essential for meeting the
requirement of Mumbai’s transmission system;
(iv)      While other alternatives had been explored including HVAC technology,
the HVDC Scheme was found to be more reliable by the CEA in its
letter dated 23 October 2020 which emphasised the need to implement
it on a priority basis;
(vi)      The threshold limit which was decided by the EC on 24 December 2020
is yet to be approved by MERC.
In this backdrop, MSETCL stated that following the TBCB route would take
between one to two years as was the experience in other MERC projects.
However, it was indicated that MERC may suggest a suitable strategy for cost
competitiveness which would benefit the consumers in Maharashtra.
B.        Proceedings before MERC and APTEL
39.        On 21 March 2021, MERC issued an order granting AEMIL the
transmission licence to develop the Aarey-Kudus transmission project based on
HVDC technology where tariff was to be determined through the RTM approach
under Section 62 of the Act. The Commission observed that:
(i)      The Kudus-Aarey project is essential for strengthening Mumbai’s
transmission system, and should be undertaken for execution on an
immediate basis as planned by STU;
(ii)     The Supreme Court in Energy Watchdog v. Central Electricity
Regulatory Commission 1 held that NTP 2016 is a ‘statutory policy’
and has the ‘effect of law’. NTP 2016 mandates that the State
Commissions’ must notify a threshold limit to determine the projects
that will have to be taken through the TBCB route. MERC has not
notified the threshold yet;
(iii)    GoM’s GR is an executive decision under Section 63 and not
subordinate legislation under Section 180 of the Act. The relevant date
for determining if a project is a ‘new’ or an ‘existing’ project under the
GR is 4 January 2019, that is the date of notification of the GR forming
the EC. As on 4 January 2019, the HVDC project was an ‘existing’
project for the following reasons:
(a) The cancellation of the DPR by the Commission in May 2016 was
specific to the ‘technology’. The need for the bulk power injection for
Mumbai was never cancelled or withdrawn. The scope of the old
approved HVDC Scheme was changed by STU and not by AEML-T
(b) Once the approval of a scheme is cancelled, it ceases to exist for
consideration. However, the Kudus- Aarey HVDC Scheme was
proposed in November 2018, before the GoM’s GR was notified.
Planning and preparatory work such as technical studies, cost
estimation, identification of land, and preparation of DPR had also
been initiated.
(iv) Multiple transmission licenses in the State of Maharashtra have been
granted under capital expenditure schemes under Section 62 of the Act
after the NTP 2016 was notified. If the argument that projects cannot be
undertaken under the Section 62 route after the GR is notified is
accepted, it would mean that none of the other projects could have
been notified through the RTM route as well.
(v)  Even if the GR is held to be applicable which would give the EC
statutory force for identification of projects under the TBCB route, the
HVDC Kudus-Aarey project is still not mandated to be allotted through
(a) Merely because STU has listed the HVDC Scheme in the agenda
for the EC Meeting, it does not mean that the scheme has been
chosen for TBCB. STU has only sought the opinion of the EC.
Further, the EC has not recommended that the HVDC Scheme is to
be undertaken under the TBCB route;
(b) The EC in its meeting held on 24 December 2020 recommended
that all the projects in the STU plan that cost more than 500 Crore
must be referred to EC for consideration for execution under the
TBCB route. However, it was decided that it would only be
applicable to new projects. It was recommended that projects that
are under active consideration of MERC where the STU has already
recommended execution under a certain mechanism and where
MERC has substantially initiated the process of inclusion of the
project in the scope of any existing or new transmission licensee on
the basis of its recommendation shall not be put to the EC for fresh
consideration. The HVDC project is under active consideration of
MERC as the project has been included in STU’s five-year plan and
the project has been allotted to AEML-T. Since the HVDC project
falls under the exception, the EC has not recommended that the
HVDC Scheme must be allotted through the TBCB route since it is
an existing project and not a ‘new’ project.
(vi) The GoM’s GR is not applicable to the Aarey-Kudus HVDC project, and
even if applicable, it does not qualify as a ‘new’ project in view of the
exceptions laid down by the EC. Thus, MERC has the discretion to
choose from either the Section 62 or the Section 63 route. MERC must
choose the most appropriate route for undertaking the project,
considering the need for the scheme, the urgency associated with the
scheme, the historical background, and the peculiarities of the scheme.
The HVDC Scheme according to the STU Plan 2019-20 to 2024-25
should be undertaken under Section 62 because:
(a) The cost- benefits of the project if awarded under the TBCB route
cannot be assessed since there is no precedent of a completed
HVDC Scheme being awarded through the TBCB route;
(b) HVDC Scheme is a high-cost project with high end technology with
limited international suppliers. It has relatively limited scope for cost
reduction when compared to HVAC schemes;
(c) AEMIL has already taken steps to procure land at Aarey and Kudus
for the HVDC Scheme. It will facilitate the timely completion of the
(d) STU has expressed reservations regarding undertaking the HVDC
Scheme through the competitive bidding route since the competitive
bidding process would take an additional two years for completion.
Two transmission projects that were decided to be undertaken
under the TBCB route have still not seen any progress even after
the completion of almost 3 years; and
(e) Projects undertaken under Section 62 of the Act can be more
closely monitored on aspects such as timely execution and cost
escalation.
40.     The summary of the conclusions drawn in the order of the MERC are
a) There is no right or wrong approach for undertaking this
HVDC Bulk Power Injection Scheme for Mumbai, in terms of
whether the Scheme is decided to be undertaken under
Section 62 (RTM) or Section 63 (TBCB) route, as both RTM
and TBCB route can be justified for its implementation;
b) This is a case where the most appropriate route for
undertaking the Project has to be selected, considering the
need for this Scheme, the urgency associated with the
Scheme, the historical background, and the peculiarities of
c) This Project is being considered by the Commission
because it is part of the STU Plan FY 2019-20 to FY 2024-
25, wherein this Scheme is allocated to AEML;
d) The cost benefits in case the Project is awarded under
the TBCB route cannot be assessed, as there is no
precedent of any completed HVDC Scheme with UG cabling
being awarded through the TBCB route;
e) HVDC Scheme is a high-cost project with high-end
technology with limited international suppliers, and hence,
has relatively limited scope for cost reduction as compared
f)     Steps already taken by the Petitioners for procuring
land at Aarey and Kudus for HVDC terminal station will
facilitate timely completion of the Project;
g) The Commission has asked IIT Bombay to evaluate the
Scope, design aspects, reasonability of cost, alternatives,
etc., of the Scheme to ensure a technically appropriate and
cost-effective solution for mitigating Mumbai’s transmission
h) The contracting for the Project would be through
international competitive bidding as a pre-condition of the
Licence, and hence, the least cost is likely to be achieved.
Further, the cost incurred on the Scheme could be verified
through experts after completion of the Scheme before
allowing recovery through ARR;
i)     The Commission allows recovery of capital cost for
Section 62 Projects only after prudence check based on
detailed scrutiny, so that only justified and reasonable cost is
recovered through tariff;
j)     The STU has expressed reservations regarding
undertaking the HVDC Scheme through the competitive
bidding route, and has stated that additional time of 1-2
years may be required for completion of the competitive
k) The two Transmission Schemes in Maharashtra that
have been decided to be undertaken under TBCB route,
other than Kharghar Vikhroli Transmission Project, have not
seen any progress at all, even after passage of almost 3
l)     It will be in no one’s interest if the Scheme is awarded
under TBCB route especially when the planning and
feasibility of the Scheme is at final stage, even if it is at a
lower cost than that estimated by AEMIL, if it either does not
come up at all or does not come up within the desired
m) The rationale adopted at the Central level to undertake
HVDC Projects on RTM basis despite the high cost of such
Schemes, has been the intention of compressing the
execution time schedule, which is equally applicable to the
present Mumbai transmission system;
n) Section 62 Projects can be closely and regularly
monitored by the Commission for aspects such as timely
execution, cost escalation, etc., unlike Section 63 Projects
where the Bidders are bound by the conditions and
responsibilities stipulated in the TSA, and on which the
Commission has a limited regulatory oversight;
o)      The Commission has already constituted the
Maharashtra Transmission Committee (MTC) in accordance
with the MEGC, under the aegis of the Grid Coordination
Committee (GCC), which shall be responsible for planning
and monitoring timely execution of transmission projects in
Maharashtra including Mumbai area. Considering the
importance of HVDC Scheme for strengthening the Mumbai
Transmission system, the Commission will separately notify
a Committee for closely monitoring the progress of this
Project to ensure strict adherence to the planned timelines
for its identified milestones;
p) The Scheme has to be undertaken at the earliest in a
time-bound manner in the interest of strengthening Mumbai’s
transmission system, especially since almost 10 years have
passed since the HVDC Bulk Power Injection Scheme was
first proposed for Mumbai;
q) The early and timely completion of the HVDC Bulk
Power Injection Scheme for Mumbai will provide access to
alternative power procurement sources as compared to the
embedded generating units; while there is no guarantee that
power procurement through competitive bidding will discover
rates lower than that of the embedded generating units, at
least the option will be available to the Mumbai Distribution
Licensees and Commission’s approval, and the lower power
procurement costs can be passed on to the consumers
through reduction in tariff;
r)     Considering the expected retirement of the embedded
generation capacity and Transmission constraints, import of
potentially cheaper power into Mumbai through competitive
bidding will be facilitated by implementation of the HVDC
Scheme, which is likely to reduce the cost of power for the
MERC therefore concluded that the HVDC Scheme in terms of the STU plan for
2019-20 to 2024-25 would be undertaken by AEMIL under Section 62 with the
safeguards stipulated in the order.
41.        The appellant instituted proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution
before the High Court of Judicature at Bombay. However, it withdrew those
proceedings with liberty to move APTEL under Section 111 of the Act. TPC-T
filed an appeal under Section 111 of the Act before APTEL. APTEL, by its order
dated 18 February 2022 dismissed the appeal with the following findings:
(i)      The argument that the TBCB route under Section 63 is the dominant
route is premised on a flawed reading of the Act. RTM under Section 62
is recognized under the Act and it cannot be considered to be in a
position subservient or inferior to the TBCB route;
(ii)     There was no infirmity in MERC’s order granting a transmission licence
as the HVDC Project was an old/existing project in terms of the GoM’s
GR dated 1 January 2019. The earlier cancellation by MERC of the in-
principle approval did not render the project a new scheme since the
STU changed its stance due to its objections on the technology. The
change in route from Nagothane to Kudus was similar to modifications
that are common to all transmission projects and the project cannot be
considered as a new project merely due to change of connection point;
(iii)    That while the change of stance of the STU is not proper and a decisive
and timely approach is instead expected, the same cannot be a ground
to vitiate the decision taken by MERC;
(iv)     That the grant of licence was not contrary to Section 15 which requires
the publication of a notice for suggestions and objections before
granting a licence. MERC had issued a public notice and the
Section 15 cannot be conducted de hors the entity which has to
implement the project; and
(v)      That even though there may be reasons justifying the adoption of the
option under Section 63, this is not reason enough for the Tribunal to sit
in appeal and supplant the views of the Commission. Furthermore, in
light of the criticality of the project for the region, interference by the
tribunal would be improper, considering the progress that has already
been made.
42.       The appeal has been instituted under Section 125 of the Act for
challenging the judgment of APTEL.
43.       Mr Shyam Divan, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellants has urged the following submissions:
(i)      For all transmission projects, the rule for the award of transmission
licences is competitive bidding, subject to certain exceptions;
(ii)     The rule of competitive bidding is based on statute, statutory policy, and
guidelines of the and State Governments ;
(iii)    Two methods have been statutorily prescribed for tariff determination in
Sections 62 and 63. However, in the facts and circumstances, the
TBCB route under Section 63 of the Act was required to be followed;
(iv)    There were no exceptional circumstances warranting a departure from
(v)     The present project must be considered as a new project, adopting 4
January 2019      the date on which the government of Maharashtra
issued a GR in consonance with the NTP 2016 as the cut-off date for
determining as to whether the project in question is old or new; and
(vi)    APTEL has misconstrued the scope of Section 110 by disregarding the
legal position that the provision envisages a full appeal on facts and law
to a specialised body.
44.       On the other hand, Dr Abhishek Manu Singhvi and Mr Vikas Singh,
learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the AEML-T and AEMIL have
urged the following submissions:
(i)     On a proper construction of the provisions of Sections 61, 62 and 63,
the legal position is that Sections 62 and 63 stand on an equal footing
and it would be incorrect to postulate that Section 63 has a dominant
(ii)    The concepts of the historicity of a project, the criticality of a scheme
and its urgency are factors that are embodied in Section 61;
(iii)   Irrespective of the interpretation of Sections 62 and 63, the application
of the above test must render the award of the contract to AEML-T
(iv)    MERC was correct in entering a finding of fact that the appellant is only
interested in delaying the project. The Vikhroli transmission project was
abandoned by the appellant and was eventually secured by the second
respondent. The award of the HVDC project would inject much needed
(v)    TPC-T has not challenged the multi-year tariff order dated 30 March
2020 issued by MERC which was a product of a detailed consideration
where considering the critical nature of the schemes and the time
required for obtaining regulatory approvals, MERC directed STU and
initiate the necessary steps to implement the scheme. The impugned
order granting a transmission licence is only consequential;
(vi)   It was envisaged that from 2007 that AEML-T would obtain the HVDC
line. The HVDC project was delayed only because MSETCL proposed
that it would implement an overhead transmission project from Kudus to
Aarey, which never took off. Between 2007 and 2019 there was no
objection to the project which was envisaged to be executed by R-infra
(vii)  Even as of date, no threshold limit has been prescribed by MERC for
adopting the TBCB route for the award of a licence for an intra-state
transmission project; and
(viii) Both MERC and APTEL are statutory expert bodies at the primary and
appellate level and have taken a concurrent view. Save and except in
the case of perversity, the interference of this Court is not warranted.
45.       Before proceeding to analyse the issues that fall for determination, it is
important that we lay out the regulatory framework on determination of tariff with
reference to the provisions of the Electricity Act, and the policies framed by the
Central Government and the State of Maharashtra under the provisions of the
46.       Before the enactment of the Electricity Act 2003, the Indian electricity
sector was governed by the Indian Electricity Act 1910, the Electricity (Supply)
Act 1948 and the Electricity Regulatory Commission Act 1998. The Indian
Electricity Act 1910 created a basic framework for the electricity supply industry in
India. The Electricity (Supply) Act 1948 mandated the creation of State Electricity
Boards, which had the responsibility of facilitating supply of electricity within the
State. However, the State Electricity Boards were unable to use their power to fix
tariffs judiciously. It was noted that the State Governments were in practice fixing
tariffs. To distance the State Governments from the exercise of tariff fixation, the
Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act 1998 was enacted.
47.       Parliament enacted the Electricity Act 2003 to consolidate the laws relating
to generation, transmission, distribution, trading and use of electricity; to develop
the electricity industry; and to promote competition. The Electricity Act 2003 was
enacted with the objective of encouraging the participation of the private sector in
the generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity, and to harmonise and
consolidate the provisions into a self-contained code:
“With the policy of encouraging private sector
participation in generation, transmission and distribution
and the objectives of distancing the regulatory
responsibilities from the Government to the Regulatory
Commissions, the need for harmonising and rationalising
the provisions of the Electricity Act 1910, the Electricity
(Supply) Act 1948 and the Electricity Regulatory
Commissions Act 1948 in a new self-contained
48.      The long title to the Act indicates that its object is to consolidate the laws
relating to generation, transmission, distribution, trading, and use of electricity
and to take measures conducive to the development of the electricity industry;
promote competition and protect the interest of consumers; ensure the supply of
electricity to all areas; rationalise electricity tariffs and ensure transparent
policies. The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Act states that “it gives
the States enough flexibility to develop their power sector in the manner they
consider appropriate.”
49.     Section 3 provides for the formulation of a National Electricity Policy and
“Section 3. (National Electricity Policy and Plan) --- (1)
The Central Government shall, from time to time, prepare the
National Electricity Policy and tariff policy, in consultation with
the State Governments and the Authority for development of
the power system based on optimal utilisation of resources
such as coal, natural gas, nuclear substances or materials,
hydro and renewable sources of energy.
(2) The Central Government shall publish National Electricity
Policy and tariff policy from time to time.
(3) The Central Government may, from time to time, in
consultation with the State Governments and the Authority,
review or revise, the National Electricity Policy and tariff policy
referred to in sub-section (1) .
(4) The Authority shall prepare a National Electricity Plan in
accordance with the National Electricity Policy and notify such
plan once in five years:
Provided that the Authority while preparing the National
Electricity Plan shall publish the draft National Electricity Plan
and invite suggestions and objections thereon from licensees,
generating companies and the public within such time as may
Provided further that the Authority shall - (a) notify the plan
after obtaining the approval of the Central Government; (b)
revise the plan incorporating therein the directions, if any,
given by the Central Government while granting approval
under clause (a).
(5) The Authority may review or revise the National Electricity
Plan in accordance with the National Electricity Policy.”
In terms of the above provision, the Union Government has to formulate the NEP
and NTP in consultation with the State Governments and the CEA.
50.       Part III of the Act deals with the generation of the electricity; Part IV deals
with licensing; Part V with transmission; Part VI with distribution and Part VII with
tariff.
51.       Section 38 provides that the Central Government may notify any
government company as the CTU. The CTU is statutorily empowered to
undertake the transmission of electricity through inter-state transmission systems.
The CTU has to also discharge functions of planning and coordination relating to
inter-state transmission systems. For this purpose, the CTU is required to
coordinate with the STU, Central and State Governments, generating companies,
authorities and licensees.
52.       Section 39 stipulates that the State Government may notify the Board or
any government company as the STU. The STU shall undertake transmission of
electricity through the intra-state transmission system and discharge functions
relating to the planning and coordination of the intra-state transmission system.
While discharging its functions, the STU is required to reflect the planning
initiatives of intra-state transmission system by publishing a five-year plan
periodically.
53.       Sections 76 and 82 constitute the Central Regulatory Commission and
State Regulatory Commissions respectively. The Central and State Regulatory
Commissions shall among other functions, determine and regulate the tariff for
inter-state transmission of electricity and intra-state transmission of electricity
respectively. Sections 79(3) and 86(3) stipulate that the Central and State
Commissions shall while discharging their functions ensure transparency, and
‘shall be guided’ by the NEP, NTP and National Electricity Plan. The Central and
the State Commissions also discharge advisory functions, where they shall
advise the Central Government and State Government respectively on, inter alia,
promotion of competition in activities related to the electricity industry and in
matters concerning generation, transmission, and distribution of electricity.
Section 25 states that the Central Government may make a region-wise
demarcation of the country for the purpose of integrated transmission of
electricity to facilitate inter-state, regional and inter-regional transmission of
electricity. Section 30 provides that the State Commission shall facilitate and
promote transmission, wheeling, and inter-connection arrangements within its
territorial jurisdiction for the transmission of electricity.
54.      Section 14 envisages that the Appropriate Commission, defined in Section
2(4) to mean the Central or as the case may be the State Regulatory
Commission, may grant a licence to any person:
(a) To transmit electricity as a transmission licensee;
(b) To distribute electricity as a distribution licensee; and
(c) To undertake trading and electricity in any area specified in the licence.
55.      Section 15 prescribes the procedure to be followed for the grant of
licences. The application for a licence under Section 14 has to be filed in the
manner prescribed by the Appropriate Commission. The person who has applied
for the grant of a licence must publish a notice of the application. The licence
shall not be granted by the Appropriate Commission until the objection(s), if any
received, are considered by the Commission. The application shall also be
forwarded to the CTU or the STU, as the case may be. The CTU or STU must
send its recommendation to the Appropriate Commission. The recommendation
of the CTU or the STU is however, not binding on the Commission. The
Appropriate Commission is also required to publish a notice of the application if it
proposes to issue the licence. The Commission has to consider the objections
and the recommendations of the Transmission Utility before granting the licence.
56.      In enacting the above provisions of law, Parliament has made a clear
demarcation between intra-state and inter-state transmission of electricity. While
the CTU, Central Government and the Central Regulatory Commission are
responsible for the facilitation of inter-state transmission of electricity, the State
Commission and the STU have been granted full autonomy with respect to intra-
state transmission of electricity.
57.      Part VII deals with tariffs. Part VII comprises of Section 61(tariff
regulations), Section 62 (determination of tariff), Section 63 (determination of
tariff by bidding process), Section 64 (procedure for tariff order), Section 65
(provision of subsidy by the state government) and Section 66 (development of
market). In terms of Section 61, the Appropriate Commission is entrusted, subject
to the provisions of the Act, to specify the terms and conditions for the
determination of tariffs. While specifying the terms and conditions, the
Appropriate Commission shall be guided by the requirements specified in clauses
(a) to (i). Amongst them, in clause (i) is the NEP and tariff policy, while clause (c)
emphasizes the need to encourage competition, efficiency, economical use of
resources, good performance and optimum investment. Section 62(1) empowers
the Appropriate Commission to determine the tariff “in accordance with the
provisions of this Act” for :
a. Supply of electricity by a generating company to a distributing licensee;
b. Transmission of electricity;
Section 63 provides that notwithstanding the provisions of Section 62, the
Commission shall adopt the tariff determined through the bidding process if the
tariff has been determined through a transparent process in accordance with the
guidelines issued by the Central Government.
58.      The Central Government has under the provisions of the Act issued
resolutions and framed policies. In order for us to understand the gamut of the
issues before us, it is necessary that we refer to the policies notified by the
Central Government and the State Government of Maharashtra.
59.     On 6 January 2006, the Ministry of Power notified the NTP 2006 in
exercise of its power under Section 3 of the Act. The NTP 2006, inter alia,
emphasizes the need for transparency and competition in the power sector and
the need to ensure the availability of electricity to consumers at reasonable and
competitive rates.
60.     Clause 5.1 states that one of the key features of the Act is that it
introduced competition in different segments of the electricity industry. The policy
deals with transmission in clause 7. Clause 7.1(6) deals with transmission pricing
where it is emphasised that “investment of transmission developer other than
CTU/STU would be invited through competitive bids”. Clause 7.1(6) inter alia
“(6) Investment by transmission developer other than CTU-
STU would be invited through competitive bids. The Central
Government will issue guidelines in three months for bidding
process for developing transmission capacities. The tariff of
the projects to be developed by CTU-STU after the period of
five years or when the Regulatory Commission is satisfied
that the situation is right to introduce such competition (as
referred to in para 5.1) would also be determined on the
basis of competitive bidding.”
61.     Clause 7.1(7) stipulates that after implementing the framework for inter-
state transmission, a similar approach shall be implemented by SERCs for intra-
state transmission within two years after considering factors like voltage,
distance, direction and quantum of flow. However, Clause 5.1 dealing with the
General Approach to Tariff notes that even for public sector projects, tariff for new
projects must be determined through the TBCB route after five years or when the
Regulatory Commission deems it fit. The relevant clause is extracted below:
“5.1 […] Even for the Public Sector projects, tariff of all new
generation and transmission projects should be decided on
the basis of competitive bidding after a period of five years or
when the Regulatory Commission is satisfied that the
situation is ripe to introduce such competition.”
62.      On 13 April 2006, the Union MoP notified Tariff Based Competitive
Guidelines for Transmission Services under Section 63 of the Act to promote
competitive procurement of transmission services and encourage private
investment in the development of transmission lines. The objects for making the
•   Promote competitive procurement of transmission services.
•   Encourage private investment in transmission lines.
•   Facilitate transparency and fairness in procurement
processes.
•   Facilitate reduction of information asymmetries for various
bidders.
•   Protect consumer interests by facilitating competitive
conditions in procurement of transmission services of
electricity.
•   Enhance standardization and reduce ambiguity and hence
time for materialization of projects;
•   Ensure compliance with standards, norms and codes for
transmission lines while allowing flexibility in operation to the
transmission service providers.”
63.      On 13 April 2006, the MoP notified Guidelines for Encouraging
Competition in Development of Transmission Projects. In terms of Clause 13, an
Empowered Committee was constituted to identify projects to be developed
under the scheme. In terms of Clause 19, the selection of the developer for
identified projects would be through TBCB for transmission services according to
the guidelines issued by the MoP under Section 63. However, for intra-state
projects the guidelines provide that the States shall have the discretion to adopt
the guidelines. Clause 24 noted as follows:
24. As far as intra state projects are concerned the state
governments may adopt these guidelines and may constitute
similar committees for facilitation of transmission projects
within the state.
64.     On 28 January 2016, MoP issued the NTP 2016. Paragraph 5 of the policy
spells out the “general approach to tariff”. Paragraph 5.1 indicates:
“5.1 Introducing competition in different segments of the
electricity industry is one of the key features of the Electricity
Act 2003. Competition will lead to significant benefits to
consumers through reduction in capital costs and also
efficiency of operations. It will also facilitate the price to be
determined competitively. The Central Government has
already issued detailed guidelines for tariff based bidding
process for procurement of electricity by distribution
licensees.”
In a similar vein, paragraph 5.3 specifies that:
“5.3 The tariff of all new generation and transmission
projects of company owned or controlled by the Central
Government shall continue to be determined on the basis of
competitive bidding as per the Tariff Policy notified on 6th
January, 2006 unless otherwise specified by the Central
Government on case-to-case basis.
Further, intra-state transmission projects shall be developed
by State Government through competitive bidding process
for projects costing above a threshold limit which shall be
decided by the SERCs.”
65.     Paragraph 5.3 which has been extracted above envisages that a
competitive bidding process should be followed for intra-state transmission
projects developed by the State government where the project cost is above a
threshold limit that is to be prescribed by the SERCs.
66.     On 22 September 2017, the Forum of Regulators in its 61st Meeting, while
reiterating the NTP 2016, urged all members to determine the threshold limits for
their respective intra-state transmission projects above which the TBCB route
would be followed. The relevant portion of the Minutes of Meeting is extracted
“Agenda Item No. 5 (i) Action to be taken by States to define
a framework (including setting a threshold limit) for
developing intra-State transmission projects on competitive
basis.
The FoR Secretariat updated the Forum that as per
provisions of the revised Tariff Policy notified by the Central
Government, development of intra-State transmission
projects is to be carried out by the State Government
through competitive bidding process for projects costing
above a threshold limit decided by the SERCs. In this
regard, it was placed before the Forum that in some States,
development of State-level transmission projects was carried
out through tariff based competitive bidding (TBCB) route
and in some States, the conventional route of EPC based
contracting is reportedly followed. Further, SERCs have not
determined the threshold limit of the projects to be
considered under TBCB route.
transparency and efficiency in project costs, threshold limit
for intra-State transmission projects is required to be
determined by the SERCs as provided for in the Tariff Policy.
Therefore, the Forum urged the Members to determine the
threshold limit for their respective State-level transmission
projects, while taking all relevant parameters of their State
into consideration.”
67.     On 15 March 2021, the MoP addressed a communication to the States and
Union Territories recording that the NEP 2005 and the NTP 2006 had laid down
the framework for ensuring optimal development of transmission networks to
promote efficient utilisation of generation and transmission assets, attract
investment in the transmission sector and provide adequate returns. It noted that
(i) A lower tariff as compared to cost plus; and
(ii) Risk sharing.
In the above backdrop, the communication stated that:
“7. As intra-state transmission system has major share in the
transmission sector in the country, adoption of Tariff Based
Competitive Bidding (TBCB) in development of intra-state
transmission system can effectively reduce burden on State
Governments’ finances as well as reduce tariff of intra-State
transmission system leading to consumers’ benefit. The
matter was also discussed in a meeting taken by Hon’ble
Union Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Power and
New and Renewable Energy on 03.02.2021 and it was
decided to request the State/UT Governments to adopt
TBCB in development of intra-State transmission
system.”
The communication urged that in the larger interest of consumers, it was strongly
recommended that TBCB may be adopted also for the development of the intra-
state transmission system.
68.      On 4 January 2019, the GoM notified a government resolution with the
object of setting up new transmission projects through TBCB in line with MoP’s
guidelines dated 13 April 2006, as subsequently modified. While notifying the
guidelines, the object of the GR was spelt out in the following terms:
“It would be possible to use state-of-the-art technology for
transmission projects if Tariff Based Competitive Bidding is
adopted for transmission projects in the state. Since this
process is transparent, it will help in improving the standard
and efficiency of the project. Thus, transmission projects can
be established quickly. Since investment for establishing
these projects is to be done by the developers on external
basis, it will ease the financial burden on the state.
Therefore, the government was considering constitution of
committees like Empowered Committee, Bid Evaluation
committee in accordance with the above-mentioned
guidelines                       of                     Central
government for undertaking transmission projects in the
state through Tariff Based Competitive Bidding.”
“For establishing new Transmission Projects, after
considering the guidelines issued by the Central
Government the State Government has decided to
implement Tariff Based Competitive Bidding-TBCB process
for new Projects….”
In terms of the GR, an Empowered Committee was to be set up to undertake
transmission projects in accordance with the guidelines of the Central
Government. The functions of the Committee were:
A) To provide impetus to new transmission projects in the
state through this plan.
B) Selection of transmission projects according to
recommendations of State Transmission Undertaking.
C) Helping in evaluation of received tenders as well as
formation of Bid Empowered Committee.”
The Empowered Committee was required to appoint a Bid Process Coordinator
in terms of paragraph 3 of the GR to co-ordinate the bidding process as per
Central Government’s guidelines. The GR also envisaged setting up of a Bid
Empowerment Committee inter alia for the examination of technical bids and the
fulfilment of the technical criteria prescribed in bid documents. We have already
laid out the decisions of the said Empowered Committee relevant to the current
proceedings in the earlier section.
69.      In the backdrop of the factual narration, the essential aspect that falls for
consideration is whether the decision of MERC to allow the joint licence petition
submitted by AEML-T and AEMIL, granting a transmission licence for the
1000MW Aarey- Kudus HVDC project is vitiated by the failure to follow the TBCB
route (the Section 63 route). In the course of answering this question, the
following issues fall for consideration:
(i)     Whether the Electricity Act 2003 envisages the TBCB route under
Section 63 as the dominant method to determine tariff;
(ii)    Whether the NTP framed under Section 3 of the Act is binding on the
State Regulatory Commissions, particularly in view of the observations
made by this Court in Energy Watchdog (supra);
(iii)   Whether the Regulatory Commissions have the power to prescribe the
modalities to determine the tariff under the provisions of the Electricity
Act 2003 (and the regulations framed under it);
(iv)    Whether MERC was bound to decide the tariff for the HVDC Project
through TBCB under Section 63 in view of Government of
Maharashtra’s Resolution dated 04 January 2019 notifying the decision
to allocate new intra-state transmission projects through TBCB route
and setting up an Empowered Committee; and
(v)     Whether MSETCL’s decision to not refer the HVDC Project to the
Empowered Committee for holding bidding under the TBCB route is in
breach of the GR.
E. 1      Section 63: The dominant route or the alternative route
70.        Section 61 grants the Appropriate Commission the power, subject to the
provisions of the Act, to specify the terms and conditions for the determination of
tariff. The provision stipulates that in specifying the terms, the Commission shall
be guided by principles that are listed in the nine clauses of the provision. Of
particular importance are clauses (a), (c), and (i). Clause (a) provides that the
Appropriate Commission shall be guided by the principles and methodologies
specified by the Central Commission for determination of transmission tariff.
Clause (c) states that the factors that would encourage competition and efficiency
must be followed. Clause (i) provides that the Commission shall be guided by the
NEP and NTP. Section 61 reads as follows:
The Appropriate Commission shall, subject to the provisions
of this Act, specify the terms and conditions for the
determination of tariff, and in doing so, shall be guided
by the following, namely:-
(a) the principles and methodologies specified by the
Central Commission for determination of the tariff
applicable to generating companies and transmission
(b) the generation, transmission, distribution and supply of
electricity are conducted on commercial principles;
(c) the factors which would encourage competition,
efficiency, economical use of the resources, good
performance and optimum investments;
(d) safeguarding of consumers' interest and at the same
time, recovery of the cost of electricity in a reasonable
(e) the principles rewarding efficiency in performance;
(f) multi year tariff principles;
(g) that the tariff progressively reflects the cost of supply of
electricity and also, reduces cross-subsidies in the manner
specified by the Appropriate Commission;]
(h) the promotion of co-generation and generation of
electricity from renewable sources of energy;
(i) the National Electricity Policy and tariff policy:
Provided that the terms and conditions for determination of
tariff under the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948, the Electricity
Regulatory Commission Act, 1998 and the enactments
specified in the Schedule as they stood immediately before
the appointed date, shall continue to apply for a period of
one year or until the terms and conditions for tariff are
specified under this section, whichever is earlier.”
71.      Section 62 grants the Appropriate Commission the power to determine the
tariff for the (i) supply of electricity by a generating company to a distribution
licensee; (ii) transmission of electricity; (iii) wheeling of electricity; and (iv) retail
sale of electricity. While Section 61 stipulates the principles that shall guide the
determination of tariff, Section 62 grants the Commission the discretion to
determine the tariff. Clause (3) of Section 62 fetters the discretion of the
Commission in determining tariff. Section 62(3) provides that the Commission
while exercising its discretion to determine the tariff, shall not ‘show undue
preference to any customer of electricity but may differentiate according to the
customer’s load factor, power factor, voltage….’. Section 62(3) reads as follows:
“(3) The Appropriate Commission shall not, while
determining the tariff under this Act, show undue preference
to any consumer of electricity but may differentiate according
to the consumer's load factor, power factor, voltage, total
consumption of electricity during any specified period or the
time at which the supply is required or the geographical
position of any area, the nature of supply and the purpose
for which the supply is required.”
This method of tariff determination is commonly referred to as the Regulated
72.      Section 63 provides that notwithstanding anything contained in Section 62,
the Appropriate Commission shall adopt the tariff determined through bidding:
“63. Determination of tariff by bidding process -
Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 62, the
Appropriate Commission shall adopt the tariff if such tariff
has been determined through transparent process of bidding
in accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central
73.      Section 63 has five significant features: (i) Section 63 begins with a non-
obstante clause. The non-obstante provision overrides Section 62 alone and not
all the provisions of the Act; (ii) as opposed to Section 62 where the Commission
is granted the power to determine the tariff, under the Section 63 route, the
bidding process determines the tariff; (iii) the Commission is mandated to adopt
such tariff that is determined by the bidding process; (iv) the Commission has the
discretion to not adopt the tariff determined through the bidding process only if
the twin conditions as mentioned in the provision are not fulfilled; and (v) the twin
conditions are that (a) the bidding process must have been transparent; (b) the
bidding process must have complied with the guidelines issued by the Central
74.     Section 63 indicates that the provision would be invoked after the tariff has
been determined by the bidding process. There is nothing in Sections 62 or 63
that could lead us to interpret that Section 63 is the dominant route for
determination of tariff. Both the provisions provide alternative modalities through
which tariff can be determined. The non-obstante clause in Section 63 must be
read in the context of Sections 61 and 62. Section 62 bestows the Commission
with wide discretion to determine tariff. Section 63 seeks to curtail this discretion
where a bidding process for tariff determination has already been conducted.
Section 63 contemplates that in such situations where the tariff has been
determined through the bidding process, the Commission cannot by falling back
on the discretion provided under Section 62 negate the tariff determined through
bidding. This interpretation of Section 63 is fortified by the use of the phrase
‘such’ in Section 63 - the Commission is bound to ‘adopt’ ‘such’ tariff determined
through bidding.
75.     The Commission under Section 61 of the Act must frame guidelines for
deciding the modality to determine tariff. This is evidenced from a reading of
Section 61(a) which provides that the Appropriate Commission while specifying
the terms and conditions for the determination of tariff shall be guided by the
principles and ‘methodologies’ specified by the Central Commission for the
determination of tariff applicable to transmission licensees.
76.       In this backdrop, it is necessary to advert to the judgment of this Court in
Energy Watchdog (supra). A two-Judge Bench of this Court analysed the
provisions of Section 63 and its interplay with Section 62. The relevant
observations are extracted below.
“19…. It may be noticed that Section 63 begins with a non
obstante clause, but it is a non obstante clause covering only
Section 62. Secondly, unlike Section 62 read with Sections 61
and 64, the appropriate Commission does not “determine”
tariff but only “adopts” tariff already determined under Section
63. Thirdly, such “adoption” is only if such tariff has been
determined through a transparent process of bidding, and,
fourthly, this transparent process of bidding must be in
accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central
Government. What has been argued before us is that Section
63 is a standalone provision and has to be construed on its
own terms, and that, therefore, in the case of transparent
bidding nothing can be looked at except the bid itself which
must accord with guidelines issued by the Central
Government. One thing is immediately clear, that the
appropriate Commission does not act as a mere post
office under Section 63. It must adopt the tariff which has
been determined through a transparent process of
bidding, but this can only be done in accordance with the
guidelines issued by the Central Government. Guidelines
have been issued under this section on 19-1-2005, which
guidelines have been amended from time to time. Clause 4,
in particular, deals with tariff and the appropriate Commission
certainly has the jurisdiction to look into whether the tariff
determined through the process of bidding accords with
The observations of this Court in Energy Watchdog (supra) are summarised below:
(i) The Appropriate Commission while ‘adopting’ the tariff determined through
bidding is not a mere ‘post office’; and
(ii) The Commission is mandated by Section 63 to adopt the tariff determined
through bidding only if the bidding process was transparent, and such a
process has been held in accordance with the guidelines issued by the
Central Government under Section 63. If the bidding process does not satisfy
the two checks, then the Commission shall determine the tariff through the
RTM route under Section 62.
77.      Thus, the Appropriate Commission is not mandated to adopt the tariff
determined through the bidding process irrespective of the fulfilment of the
statutory requirements. The Commission can reject the tariff determined through
the bid if the tariff process is not (i) transparent; and (ii) in accordance with the
guidelines issued by the Central Government. Thus, if the Commission does not
adopt the tariff determined through bidding, and if the decision is challenged, the
bidding process can be reviewed substantively (on the ground of transparency)
and procedurally (on the ground of compliance with Central Government
guidelines) to determine if the Commission could have exercised its discretion to
determine the tariff under Section 62 while rejecting the tariff determined under
Section 63. Therefore, Section 63 can only be invoked after the tariff has been
determined through bidding. The terms and conditions notified by the Appropriate
Commission under Section 61 will have to be referred for the purpose of
choosing the modality of tariff determination that the Commission should
undertake. In view of the above discussion, the argument of the appellant that a
reading of Section 61, 62 and 63 indicates that the TBCB route is the dominant
route of tariff determination does not hold merit.
E. 1.1. The value of TBCB Guidelines prescribed under Section 63
78.      Section 63 of the Act does not prescribe bidding as the dominant route of
tariff determination. The Guidelines framed by the Central Government under
Section 63 prescribe the mechanism and procedure for bidding. The Guidelines
framed under Section 63 of the Act cannot be used to determine whether the
RTM route or the TBCB route ought to be followed.
79.      On 13 April 2006, the MoP framed the TBCB Guidelines under Section 63
of the Act. Clause 2.2 of the Guidelines states that it shall apply for the
procurement of transmission services through competitive bidding according to
the mechanism described in the notification. The clause reads as follows:
“2.2. The guidelines shall apply for procurement of
transmission services for transmission of electricity through
tariff based competitive bidding, through the mechanism
described in this notification and to select transmission
service provider for a new transmission line and to build,
own, maintain and operate the specified transmission
system elements.”
Clause 2.4 states that the procurement of transmission services would include
HVDC terminal stations and HVDC transmission lines:
“2.4 Procurement of transmission services would include all
activities related to survey, detailed project report formulation
[…] and/or HVDC links including terminal stations and HVDC
transmission line […].”
80.      A reading of the above clauses indicates that the TBCB Guidelines shall
apply for (i) procurement of transmission services, which would include HVDC
links; and (ii) selecting the transmission provider for a new transmission line. The
TBCB Guidelines also advert to the appointment of a Bid Process Coordinator
who would be responsible for coordinating the bid process for procurement of
required transmission services. The TBCB Guidelines prescribe the procedure for
conducting bids for procurement of, among other services, transmission services.
Clause 3.3 states that for the procurement of transmission services required for
intra-state transmission, the State Government may notify the organisation or the
State Public Sector Undertaking to be the Bid Process Coordinator. A reading of
clauses 2.2 and 2.4 does not indicate that that the tariff for all new transmission
projects shall be determined by competitive bidding. It notifies the procedural
mechanism for competitive bidding. As observed earlier, the reference in Section
63 to the Guidelines framed by the Central Government is made to the limited
extent of determining whether the procedure of bidding was in accordance to the
Guidelines framed thereunder, which is the TBCB Guidelines.
E. 2    General Regulatory Power of the Appropriate Commission
81.      Since the guidelines framed under Section 63 only prescribe the procedure
for conducting the bidding, reference has to be made to the general regulatory
power of the Appropriate Commission under the provisions of the Act.
82.      Section 181 of the Act stipulates that the State Commission(s) may by
notification, make regulations consistent with the Act and the rules framed by the
State Government under Section 180 of the Act to carry out the provisions of the
Act. Clause (zd) of Section 181 stipulates that the State Commission may make
regulations on the ‘terms and conditions for determination of tariff under Section
61.’ The relevant portion of Section 181 is extracted below:
“181. Powers of State Commissions to make
regulations.- (1) The State Commissions may, by
notification, make regulations consistent with this Act and
rules generally to carry out the provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the
power contained in sub-section (1), such regulations may
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:-
(zc) the terms and conditions for determination of tariff under
However, as on the date when MERC granted AEMIL the licence for the HVDC
project from Kudus- Aarey, MERC had not framed any regulation under Section
181(zc) of the Act for the determination of Tariff.
83.      At this juncture, it is necessary to refer to Section 86 of the Act. Section 86
lists the functions of the State Commission. Section 86(a) states that the State
Commission shall discharge the function of determining the tariff for transmission.
Section 86(c) stipulates that the State Commissions shall facilitate intra-state
transmission of electricity. Section 86(4) provides that in the discharge of its
functions, which includes the determination of tariff for the transmission of
electricity under clause (a), the State Commission shall be guided by the NEP,
National Electricity Plan and NTP notified under Section 3 of the Act. The
relevant portion of Section 86 is extracted below:
“86. Functions of State Commission - (1) The State
Commission shall discharge the following functions, namely:-
(a) Determine the tariff for generation, supply, transmission
and wheeling of electricity, wholesale, bulk or retail, as the
case may be, within the State.
(c) facilitate intra-State transmission and wheeling of
(3) The State Commission shall ensure transparency while
exercising its powers and discharging its functions.
(4) In discharge of its functions, the State Commission shall
be guided by the National Electricity Policy, National
Electricity Plan and Tariff Policy published under section 3.”
84.      In Energy Watchdog (supra), this Court opined that the Central
Commission shall determine the tariff under the guidelines issued by the Central
Government under Section 63 of the Act. It is only in a situation where no
guidelines are framed or where the guidelines do not address a specific situation
that the Central Commission’s repository of power under Section 79 is invoked.
The relevant observations of the judgment are extracted below:
“20… The reason why Section 62 alone has been put out of
the way is that determination of tariff can take place in one of
two ways — either under Section 62, where the Commission
itself determines the tariff in accordance with the provisions
of the Act (after laying down the terms and conditions for
determination of tariff mentioned in Section 61) or under
Section 63 where the Commission adopts tariff that is
already determined by a transparent process of bidding. In
either case, the general regulatory power of the Commission
under Section 79(1)(b) is the source of the power to
regulate, which includes the power to determine or adopt
tariff. In fact, Sections 62 and 63 deal with “determination” of
tariff, which is part of “regulating” tariff. Whereas
“determining” tariff for inter-State transmission of electricity is
dealt with by Section 79(1)(d), Section 79(1)(b) is a wider
source of power to “regulate” tariff. It is clear that in a
situation where the guidelines issued by the Central
Government under Section 63 cover the situation, the
Central Commission is bound by those guidelines and must
exercise its regulatory functions, albeit under Section
79(1)(b), only in accordance with those guidelines. As has
been stated above, it is only in a situation where there are no
guidelines framed at all or where the guidelines do not deal
with a given situation that the Commission's general
regulatory powers under Section 79(1)(b) can then be used.”
85.     Thus, in the case of intra-state transmission of electricity, the State
Commission would be bound by the guidelines issued under Section 63. In
addition to the guidelines under Section 63 of the Act, the State Commission shall
also be bound by the regulations framed by it under Section 181(zd) read with
Section 61 while it discharges its function of determining the tariff under Section
86 of the Act. However, if the guidelines issued under Section 63 or the
regulations framed under Section 181(zd) of the Act have not been notified or if
the guidelines do not deal with a given situation, then the Commission shall
exercise its general regulatory power under Section 86(1)(a) of the Act to
regulate tariff.
86.      In PTC India Ltd. v. Central Electricity Regulatory Commission,2 a
Constitution Bench of this Court referred to Section 79 and observed that the
Appropriate Commission is both a regulation-making authority and a decision-
making authority. It was observed that the Regulatory Commission while
exercising its functions must conform to the regulations that the Commission has
formulated under Section 178 (the corresponding provision for the State
Commission’s power to frame Regulations in Section 181). However, it was held
that the Commission would not be precluded from exercising its function under
Section 79 merely because there is no regulation framed by the Commission. In
the context of tariff determination, it was observed that even in the absence of
Tariff Regulations, it would be open to the Commission to frame the terms and
conditions of tariff determination under Section 61 of the Act:
53. Applying the abovementioned tests to the scheme of the
2003 Act, we find that under the Act, the Central
Commission is a decision-making as well as regulation-
making authority, simultaneously. Section 79 delineates
the functions of the Central Commission broadly into two
categories —mandatory functions and advisory functions.
Tariff regulation, licensing (including inter-State trading
licensing), adjudication upon disputes involving generating
companies or transmission licensees fall under the head
“mandatory functions” whereas advising the Central
Government on formulation of National Electricity Policy and
tariff policy would fall under the head “advisory functions”. In
this sense, the Central Commission is the decision-making
authority. Such decision-making under Section 79(1) is not
dependent upon making of regulations under Section 178 by
the Central Commission. Therefore, functions of the Central
Commission enumerated in Section 79 are separate and
distinct from functions of the Central Commission under
Section 178. The former are administrative/adjudicatory
functions whereas the latter are legislative.
The following observations were made on the general regulatory power of the
54. […] On reading Sections 76(1) and 79(1) one finds that
the Central Commission is empowered to take
measures/steps in discharge of the functions enumerated in
Section 79(1) like to regulate the tariff of generating
companies, to regulate the inter-State transmission of
electricity, to determine tariff for inter-State transmission of
electricity, to issue licences, to adjudicate upon disputes, to
levy fees, to specify the Grid Code, to fix the trading margin
in inter-State trading of electricity, if considered necessary,
etc. These measures, which the Central Commission is
empowered to take, have got to be in conformity with
the regulations under Section 178, wherever such
regulations are applicable. Measures under Section
79(1), therefore, have got to be in conformity with the
regulations under Section 178.
55. To regulate is an exercise which is different from making
of the regulations. However, making of a regulation under
Section 178 is not a precondition to the Central
Commission taking any steps/measures under Section
79(1). As stated, if there is a regulation, then the measure
under Section 79(1) has to be in conformity with such
regulation under Section 178. This principle flows from
various judgments of this Court which we have discussed
hereinafter. For example, under Section 79(1)(g) the Central
Commission is required to levy fees for the purpose of the
2003 Act. An order imposing regulatory fees could be
passed even in the absence of a regulation under Section
178. If the levy is unreasonable, it could be the subject-
matter of challenge before the appellate authority under
Section 111 as the levy is imposed by an order/decision-
making process. Making of a regulation under Section
178 is not a precondition to passing of an order levying
a regulatory fee under Section 79(1)(g). However, if there
is a regulation under Section 178 in that regard then the
order levying fees under Section 79(1)(g) has to be in
consonance with such regulation.
56. Similarly, while exercising the power to frame the terms
and conditions for determination of tariff under Section 178,
the Commission has to be guided by the factors specified in
Section 61. It is open to the Central Commission to
specify terms and conditions for determination of tariff
even in the absence of the regulations under Section
178. However, if a regulation is made under Section 178,
then, in that event, framing of terms and conditions for
determination of tariff under Section 61 has to be in
consonance with the regulations under Section 178.
87.      The TBCB Guidelines issued by the Central Government under Section
63 of the Act prescribe the mechanism of the bidding process and do not lay
down the criteria or guidelines for choosing between the alternative routes under
Section 62 and 63 of the Act. MERC has neither notified any Regulations under
Section 181 nor has it notified the terms and conditions under Section 61 of the
Act. That being the case, the Commission could choose the modality of tariff
determination by taking recourse to the general regulatory power under Section
E.2.1 The nature of NTP- binding or a material consideration
88.      Even in the absence of guidelines under Section 61 or Regulations under
Section 181 (zd), the Commission does not possess unbridled power or
discretion while choosing the modality to determine tariff. Sub-Sections (3) and
(4) of Section 86 provide that the State Commission while discharging its
functions must ensure transparency and ‘shall be guided’ by the NTP and NEP.
89.     Before proceeding to interpret the phrase ‘shall be guided’, it is necessary
that we refer to the prominent features of the NTP 2006 and NTP 2016 vis-à-vis
modalities of tariff determination. A comparative chart of the relevant provisions
of NTP 2006 and NTP 2016 is set out below:
I Tariff must be determined through          I Tariff must be determined through
bidding for all new projects.                bidding for all new projects.
All future requirement of power must be      All future requirement of power should
procured competitively. (Paragraph 5.1)      continue to be procured competitively.
II Bidding route is not compulsorily         II Bidding route is applicable to
applicable to public sector projects         government owned projects
The tariff for public sector projects need   Tariff for projects owned or controlled
not be determined by bidding.                by the Central Government shall be
However, it must be decided in five          determined       by    bidding,    unless
years or when the Regulatory                 otherwise specified by the Central
Commission is satisfied that the             Government on a case to case basis.
situation is ripe for competition to be      (Paragraph 5.3)
introduced. (Paragraph 5.1 and 7.6)
III Timeline for implementation by           III    Implementation        by     State
After the implementation of the              A     similar    approach     shall    be
framework for inter-state transmission,      implemented by State Commissions.
a similar approach should               be   (Paragraph 7(8)
implemented by State Commissions in          Intra-State transmission projects shall
the next two years for Intra-State           be developed by State Governments
transmission. (Paragraph 7.7)                through competitive bidding for projects
costing above a threshold limit. The
90.      Both NTP 2006 and NTP 2016 as a general rule prescribe competitive
bidding for determination of tariff for all ‘new projects’. There are two prominent
differences between NTP 2006 and NTP 2016. Firstly, the projects owned or
controlled by the Government were exempted from bidding under NTP 2006.
However, according to NTP 2016, the tariff for government owned projects is also
to be determined by bidding, unless otherwise specified. Secondly, NTP 2016
introduced the threshold limit rule. State Commissions are required to notify the
threshold limit. If the cost of the project exceeds the threshold limit, then the
Commission is mandated to follow the bidding process for the determination of
tariff.
91.      NTP 2016, by providing that state owned projects are not exempted from
the TBCB process, has implemented the object of the Act, which is to create a
fine balance between promoting competition and protecting the interests of the
consumers. NTP 2006 was formulated with the objective of enhancing the
participation of private players in the generation, transmission and distribution of
electricity. The Central Government adopted a policy decision to introduce the
bidding process for the determination of the tariff for all new transmission projects
in 2006 but excluded its application to State projects. However, the distinction
between State and private parties for the purpose of tariff determination through
bidding was removed in NTP 2016. This transition between NTP 2006 and NTP
2016 depicts the intention of the Government to rationalise the tariff policy and to
transfer the benefits of the rationalised tariff to the consumers.
92.      According to NTP 2016, the tariff for all new electricity transmission
projects that cost above the threshold amount notified by the State Commission
shall be determined through bidding. However, the MERC had not notified the
threshold limit as on the date when it passed the order granting transmission
licence to AEML-T. MERC notified the Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory
Commission (Multi Year Tariff) Regulations 2019 under Section 181 of the Act.
The MERC MYT Regulations does not provide the guidelines or the criteria for
the choosing the modality of tariff determination. The guidelines for choosing the
modalities are sought to be introduced by the Maharashtra Electricity Regulatory
circulated the draft of the MERC MYT Amendment Regulations on 19 August
2022 for comments, suggestions and objections. The preamble of the MERC
MYT Amendment Regulations reads as follows:
“The State Electricity Regulatory Commission has been
vested with the responsibility to determine the tariff for
generation, supply, transmission and wheeling of electricity,
wholesale, bulk or retail, as the case may be, within the
State under Section 86 of the Electricity Act 2003. The tariff
for intra-State Transmission System can be decided under
Section 62 or Section 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003. Section
63 provides for adoption of the tariff determined through
transparent process of bidding. Clause 5.3 of the Tariff
Policy 2016 as regards development of intra-State
Transmission System stipulates that the same shall be
executed through competitive bidding route provided for
projects costing above a threshold limit, which shall be
decided by the State Electricity regulatory Commission.
Year Tariff) (First Amendment) Regulations 2022 specifies
such threshold limit and other conditions for intra-State
Transmission Projects to be developed through a Tariff
The MERC MYT Amendment Regulations seeks to amend Regulation 56 of the
MERC MYT Regulations by adding Regulation 56.3. Regulation 56.3 states that
‘all new’ intra-state transmission systems costing above a threshold limit shall be
developed through the Section 63 route, provided all other conditions stipulated
in Annexure IV are also fulfilled. Regulation 56.3 reads as follows:
“56.3 All the new intra-State transmission systems
costing above a Threshold Limit and meeting other
conditions as laid down in Annexure IV, shall be
developed through Tariff Based Competitive Bidding in
accordance with the guidelines issued by the Central
Government under Section 63 of the Act.”
According to Annexure IV, which is proposed to be added to the MERC MYT
Regulations, the threshold was determined at 200 Crores. The relevant extract of
the MERC MYT Amendment Regulations is as follows:
“1. The Commission hereby determines the Threshold Limit
of Rupees Two Hundred (200) Crore.
2. All new Intra-State Transmission Systems costing Rupees
Two Hundred (200) Crore or more shall be implemented by
STU through Tariff Based Competitive Bidding in
accordance with the competitive bidding guidelines notified
by the Central Government from time to time.”
The Annexure also states that the threshold limit shall be applied to all new Intra-
State Transmission projects for which approval is yet to be accorded by the
Commission or where the Commission’s approval is not valid or where the
approval has been cancelled. The relevant portion is extracted below:
“3. This Threshold Limit shall be applicable for all new Intra-
State Transmission Systems (Projects) for which approval is
yet to be accorded by the Commission (excluding the
projects for which application for in-principle approval is
already submitted to the Commission and the same is under
consideration by the Commission) or Commission’s approval
is not valid or approval cancelled by the Commission as the
case may be.”
93.     However, the MERC MYT Amendment Regulations are yet to be notified.
When the application seeking licence for the HVDC Kudus- Aarey transmission
project was filed, and when it was granted by MERC, the threshold limit as
required to be provided by NTP 2016 was not notified by MERC. Thus, the
question is whether in the absence of any notification of the threshold by MERC,
would MERC still be mandated to determine tariff for the transmission project
through the TBCB route in view of NTP 2016.
94.      The answer to this question turns on the interpretation of the phrase ‘shall
be guided’ in Section 86(3) of the Act. This Court has previously had the
opportunity to interpret the phrase ‘shall be guided by’ as it finds place in the Act.
A two-Judge Bench of this Court in Reliance Infrastructure Limited v. State of
Maharashtra 3 interpreted the phrase with reference to Section 61 of the Act. This
Court observed that ‘shall be guided by’ comprises of two elements, ‘shall’ and
‘guided’ which would mean that the guiding factors provide considerations which
are material to the determination of tariffs by the appropriate Commission:
“29. Section 181 empowers the State Commissions to make
regulations consistent with the Act and the Rules to carry out
the provisions of the Act. Among the matters for which the
regulations may provide are “the terms and conditions for the
determination of tariff under Section 61” [Section 181(2)(zd)]
. In specifying the terms and conditions for the determination
of tariff, the appropriate Commission (as Section 61
provides) “shall be guided” by the factors which are set out in
clauses (a) to (i). The expression “shall be guided”
comprises of two elements : the “shall” and, the “guidance”.
Clauses (a) to (i) provide guidance to the Commission in
specifying the terms and conditions for the determination of
tariff. The expression “shall” indicates that the factors which
are specified in clauses (a) to (i) have to be borne in mind by
the appropriate Commission. As guiding factors, they
provide considerations which are material to the
determination of tariffs by the appropriate Commission.
32. The Tariff Policy provides guidance to the appropriate
Commission when it frames regulations. The power to frame
regulations is legislative in nature. It is conferred upon the
appropriate Commission. The Commission weighs
numerous factors. Its discretion in carrying out a complex
exercise cannot be constrained. The delegate of the
legislature is therefore under a mandate to bring about a
fair and equitable balance between competing
considerations. Standing at the forefront of those
considerations is above all the need to ensure efficiency
and to protect the interests of consumers. The
submission which has been urged on behalf of the appellant
would reduce tariff fixation to a rather simplistic process of
bringing about equality between generating units which have
the same design and manufacturing origin. Such an
approach overlooks the complex factors which have to be
borne in mind in the determination of tariffs.
This Court held that the principles prescribed in Section 61 are all material
considerations that must guide the Appropriate Commission while it prescribes
the terms and conditions for determining the tariff. It was held that it was the
responsibility of the Commission to ensure a delicate balance of the principles
prescribed under Section 61. Thus, while the NTP which is prescribed as one of
the principles under Section 61 shall be a material consideration, it cannot be
interpreted to mean that it is the ‘only’ material consideration. This interpretation
of ‘shall be guided’ is equally applicable to the use of the phrase in Section 86(3).
95.     The counsel for the appellants has relied on observations made by a two-
Judge Bench of this Court in Energy Watchdog (supra) that the NTP 2016 is a
‘statutory document being issued under Section 3 of the Act and has the force of
law’ to argue that the NTP is binding on the Commission. In Energy Watchdog
(supra), Adani Enterprises Consortium submitted its bid for the proposed project
and it was selected as the successful bidder. However, the law in Indonesia had
changed in 2010 and 2011 which aligned the export price of coal from Indonesia
to international market prices instead of the price that was prevalent in the last
forty years. Adani Power filed a petition before CERC seeking relief due to the
impact of the Indonesian Regulation to either discharge them from the
performance of the Power Purchase Agreement on account of frustration, or to
evolve a mechanism to restore the petitioners to the same economic condition
prior to the occurrence of the change in law. Clause 4.7 of the Guidelines for
determination of Tariff by Bidding Process which was included through an
amendment stipulates that:
“any change in law impacting cost or revenue from the
business of selling electricity to the procurer with respect to
the law applicable on the date which is 7 days before the last
date for bid submission shall be adjusted separately. In case
of any dispute regarding the impact of any change in law, the
decision of the appropriate Commission shall apply.”
In this context, this Court held that ‘law’ means all laws including electricity laws
in force in India, and that electricity laws means the Electricity Act, rules and
regulations made thereunder and ‘any other law’ pertaining to electricity. It was in
this context that it was observed that the NTP is ‘law’. However, to understand
the context of the observations, a brief historical background of the amendment
to the guidelines will have to be noted. CERC issued a statutory advice under
Section 79(2) of the Act to the Central Government on the impact of domestic
coal non-availability and the additional cost of imported coal on tariff. CERC
advised that suitable amendments would have to be made to the TBCB
Guidelines that were issued under Section 63, the NEP, and NTP. The
amendments allow the Appropriate Commissions to take care of the situations
arising out of the ‘change in policy of the Sovereign Government.’ In view of the
advice of CERC under Section 79(2), the MoP issued an advisory on 31 July
2013 stating that in view of the shortfall of domestic supply of coal, the cost of
imported coal shall be considered for being made a pass through by the
Appropriate Commission. Subsequently, in pursuance of the advisory issued by
the MoP, the NTP 2016 was amended to include Clause 6.1 providing relief as
mentioned in the advisory. The relevant extract is as under:
“6.1 Procurement of power
As stipulated in Para 5.1, power procurement for future
requirements should be through a transparent competitive
bidding mechanism using the guidelines issued by the
Central Government from time to time. These guidelines
provide for procurement of electricity separately for base
loan requirements and for peak loan requirements. This
would facilitate setting up of generation capacities
specifically for meeting such requirements.
However, some of the competitively bid projects as per the
guidelines dated 19-1-2005 have experienced difficulties in
getting the required quantity of coal from Coal India Limited
(CIL). In case of reduced quantity of domestic coal supplied
by CIL, vis-à-vis the assured quantity or quantity indicated in
letter of assurance/FSA the cost of imported market based
e-auction coal procured for making up the shortfall, shall be
considered for being made a pass through by appropriate
Commission on a case-to-case basis, as per advisory issued
by Ministry of Power vide OM No. FU-12/2011-IPC (Vol-III)
dated 31-7-2013.”
96.     It is pertinent to note that this Court in Energy Watchdog (supra) did not
interpret the phrase ‘shall be guided’ as it finds place in the Act. This Court dealt
with the interpretation of the phrase ‘change in law’. It was held that the
amendment in the NTP 2016 taking cognizance of the domestic coal shortage
was a ‘change in law’ since it is a statutory policy. There is no doubt that NEP
and NTP are statutory policies since they were framed under the provisions of the
Act. However, the observation in Energy Watchdog (supra) that the NTP is ‘law’
cannot be held to bind the interpretation of the phrase ‘shall be guided’. Further, it
must also be noted that this Court in Energy Watchdog (supra) was dealing
specifically with changes due to coal procurement and the amendments in the
policies were recommended to be made by the Central Regulatory Commission.
97.     A reading of the judgment of this Court in PTC India (supra) and the
provisions of the Act indicates that the determination of tariff and framing
regulations for the determination of tariff fall within the exclusive domain of the
Appropriate Commission. Section 61 stipulates that the Appropriate Commission
shall ‘specify the terms and conditions’ for the determination of tariff. Section 86
provides that one of the functions of the State Commission is to determine tariff
for transmission. Section 181 states that the Commission shall make regulations
on the terms and conditions for the determination of tariff. Thus, the regulation
and determination of tariff is the function of the Appropriate Commission.
98.     While the determination and regulation of tariff falls within the exclusive
domain of the Regulatory Commission, it is crucial to note that Sections 61 and
86 stipulate that the Commission shall be guided by the NTP while specifying
terms and conditions for determining tariff. The State Commission while
exercising its power to make regulations under Section 181(2)(zd) on the terms
and conditions for determination of tariff under Section 61 must conform to the
provisions of the Act. Thus, while framing regulations under Section 181(2)(zd),
the Commission must be guided by the principles mentioned in Section 61, which
includes the NEP and NTP.
99.      This Court in Reliance Infrastructure (supra) has already held that the
NTP is one of the material considerations. The NTP is one of the many guidelines
that the Commission must necessarily consider while regulating tariff. The State
and the Central Government only have an advisory role in the regulation of tariff.
The Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act 1998, which was consolidated with
other statutes on electricity while enacting the Electricity Act 2003, was enacted
to distance the governments from the determination of tariffs. Further, the Act
does not seek to centralise the power to regulate tariff with the Centre. One of the
objectives of the Act was to provide the “states enough flexibility to develop their
power sector in the manner they consider appropriate.” Thus, since the
Appropriate Commissions possess full autonomy in the determination and
regulation of tariff, and the States have been provided flexibility to develop their
power systems for intra-state transmission of electricity, the NTP 2016 shall be
one of the material considerations. Further, even in the letter dated 15 March
2021, the MoP only ‘strongly recommended’ that the states adopt TBCB for the
development of intra-state transmission systems.
100.     In view of the above discussion, merely because the threshold limit is not
notified, it would not mean that MERC only had to determine tariff through the
RTM route. It is open to MERC to determine the tariff through either the Section
63 or the Section 62 route. When MERC is exercising its general regulatory
power under Section 86 to determine tariff, the NTP is a material consideration.
Thus, the absence of a threshold limit would not affect the power that MERC
holds to determine tariff (and its modalities). Since MERC has the power to
regulate and determine tariff for the intra-state transmission of electricity, the
guidelines and regulations issued by MERC, if any, must be analysed to
determine if MERC was mandated to choose one of the two routes for the
determination of tariff or whether it could exercise its discretion to choose the
modality.
101.     As already noted above, on the date when MERC determined the tariff for
the HVDC transmission project, it had neither notified Regulations under Section
181(2)(zd) nor the terms and conditions under Section 61 of the Act. On 4
January 2019, the Government of Maharashtra passed a resolution ‘Regarding
Adoption of new Tariff Based Competitive Bidding Process in the State’. The
resolution states that it has been issued in pursuance of the guidelines on
competitive bidding that were issued by the MoP by Gazette Notification No.
11/5/2005-PG(I) dated 13 April 2006 which indicated that the ‘State Government
may adopt these guidelines for intra-state transmission projects or having
considered these guiding principles may constitute similar committees for
facilitating establishment of state transmission projects in the State.” The
resolution further notes that the Government has decided to constitute
committees such as the Empowered Committee and Bid Evaluation Committee
for undertaking transmission projects through TBCB. The resolution notes that
the State Government has decided to implement TBCB for new intra-state
projects. The constitution of the Empowered Committee and Bid Evaluation
Committee are traced to the constitution of similar committees under the TBCB
Guidelines and Development Guidelines. The resolution notes that the
Empowered Committee is being constituted in accordance with the Central
Government’s guidelines. Paragraph 3 of the notification notes that the Bid
Process Coordinator will be appointed by the Empowered Committee to
coordinate the bid process and that the functions of the Bid Process Coordinator
would be according to the Central Government’s guidelines.
102.      The GoM’s GR raises two separate issues for consideration:
a) the relevance of the GoM’s GR for MERC’s decision on the application for
licence filed by AEML-T; and
b) the relevance of the GoM’s GR in terms of the decision of the MSETCL to
not hold bidding for the HVDC project.
103.     However, before venturing into these two issues, it would be important to
discuss the applicability of the GoM GR to the HVDC project. The GoM GR was
notified on 4 January 2019. The GR mandates that tariff shall be determined
through the TBCB route under Section 63 for all ‘new projects’. Therefore, we
need to analyse whether as on 4 January 2019, the HVDC Kudus-Aarey project
could be considered as a ‘new project’.
104.     The GoM’s GR does not provide any clarity on the term ‘new’ project
leaving it open to MERC to interpret the phrase. MERC by its order dated 21
March 2021 granted a licence for the HVDC Kudus-Aarey transmission project
under Section 62 of the Act to AEML-T holding that it was an ‘existing’ project as
on the date the GoM’s GR was notified, that is 4 January 2019. For arriving at
this conclusion, MERC referred to the application for grid connectivity for the
Kudus- Aarey HVDC project filed by AEML-T on 23 November 2018. By its letter
dated 23 November 2018, AEML-T sought an amendment to the letter issued by
MERC granting grid connectivity to the 2 x 500 HVDC (VSC based) scheme from
Nagothane to Aarey. The amendment sought by AEML-T to the letter issued by
MERC must be read in the context of a meeting that was held between MSETCL
and AEML-T where MSETCL suggested that the HVDC project be considered
from Kudus substation as opposed to Nagothane substation since it is closer to
the Aarey substation. However, MSETCL did a turn-around and on 5 January
2015 cancelled the Nagothane- Aarey project of R-Infra and instead proposed a
Kudus-Aarey HVAC project by itself. By the proposal dated 5 January 2015,
MSETCL altered the point from Nagothane to Kudus, and the technology from
HVDC to HVAC. Accordingly, MERC cancelled the in-principle approval granted
to AEML-T for the HVDC Nagothane - Aarey scheme. However, due to right of
way issues in the construction of the overhead line, the 400KV Aarey to Kudus
HVAC scheme never took off.
105.      MERC held that the cancellation of the in-principle approval would
generally amount to closure of the project. However, MERC took into account the
unique historical background of the HVDC project when the Kudus-Aarey project
was proposed by AEML-T in November 2018. The relevant extract from the order
of MERC is set out below:
However, the proposed HVDC Scheme, with the same
configuration, has historical background from November
2018. The 1000 MW HVDC VSC based link between
MSETCL Kudus and AEML Aarey was proposed by AEML-
T, vide its application for grid connectivity, on 23 November,
2018. The said application thus, pre-dates the GoM GR
dated 4 January, 2019. Certain planning and preparatory
work such as technical studies, cost estimation, cable route
survey, identification of land, preparation of DPR along with
feasibility studies were also initiated. This fresh Connectivity
Application also addresses TPC-T’s contention that a fresh
Connectivity Application has to be made when there is a
change in the network configuration. Hence, the proposed
HVDC Scheme is a new Scheme qua the earlier approved
Scheme, but the fresh Connectivity Application for this
HVDC Scheme was filed before the notification of the GoM
In its judgment dismissing the appeal against the order of MERC, APTEL
concurred with the observation made by MERC that the HVDC Scheme is an
‘existing scheme’. APTEL observed that the cancellation of the in-principle
approval cannot render it a new scheme since it was the STU which took an
about-turn on its objections to the HVDC technology:
“149. The cancellation of the in-principle approval earlier
accorded cannot render it a new scheme since the STU itself
later took an about-turn on its objections as to the
technology for which reason the cancellation had been
earlier commended and so acted upon by the Commission.
The scheme has remained the same, the prime change
being with regard to modified route (to save distance and
costs) the HVDC technology being the one initially proposed
and now eventually accepted by the STU upon endorsement
by CEA. The effect of the confusion caused by the flip-flop or
re-think more than once by the STU is being discussed by us
in the section that follows (under the caption “Shifting stand
of STU on HVDC project”) and dwelling upon it here will
make the discourse repetitive. Suffice it to say here that
such confusion for reasons attributable to the
indecisiveness of the STU cannot divest the scheme of
its “old” character because, with some hiatus (again on
account of doubts over HVDC as compared to HVAC),
the Scheme has consistently and throughout remained,
since FY 2013-14, part of the five- year plans of the STU,
as a project entrusted to the proponent R-Infra (now
AEML-T or its SPV), the GR of GoM having come in
150. We, thus, do not find any error, infirmity or impropriety
in the conclusions reached by the Commission on the
captioned issue. The arguments of the appellant to the
contrary are rejected.”
“159. […] There was virtually no resistance on the
suggestion for change of route (Kudus rather than
Nagothane being one end) as the proponent readily agreed
to it. The flip-flop vis-à-vis the appropriate technology (HVDC
versus HVAC) is where the progress came stuck for a
prolonged period. We do not find merit in the explanation of
STU about exclusion from its published plans for a few years
in-between. […] The temporary uncertainty in the mind of the
STU, which had only a recommendatory role, has only
delayed the decision-making process. It, however, cannot
vitiate the decision taken by MERC in whose hands the
jurisdiction is placed by the law to take a call on grant of
license.”
106.      In view of the above discussion, the 1000MW Aarey-Kudus HVDC project
by AEMIL is an ‘existing’ or an ‘old’ project with reference to the GoM GR for the
106.1 Firstly, the GR does not provide or explain the meaning of the phrase ‘new’
projects. Hence, MERC has the discretion to formulate its understanding
of the phrase ‘new’ projects so long as it is reasonable and does not rely
on factors extraneous to the decision making process. In view of the
decisions of this Court discussed above and the provisions of the Act,
MERC has the power to regulate tariff determination. MERC has not
defined the phrase ‘new’ projects through the regulations. In this situation,
MERC has the discretion to interpret the phrase ‘new’ projects which it did
in the course of its judgment granting AEMIL the transmission license.
MERC held that generally the cancellation of approval would amount to the
closure of the project, unless the peculiar nature of the facts leads to an
alternative conclusion (as in this case);
106.2 Secondly, on applying the facts to the interpretation of the phrase ‘new’
project, MERC observed that the HVDC Kudus-Aarey project is not a new
project. APTEL, on appeal, upheld the observations of MERC that it is an
‘existing project’. The appeal against the judgment of APTEL before this
Court under Section 125 of the Act can only be on the grounds mentioned
in Section 100 of CPC. Section 125 reads as under:
“125. Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the
Appellate Tribunal, may, file an appeal to the Supreme Court
within sixty days from the date of communication of the
decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal, to him, on any
one or more of the grounds specified in section 100 of
the Code of Civil Procedure,1908.
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that
the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing
the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a
further period not exceeding sixty days.”
Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908 stipulates that a second appeal
shall lie only if the court (in this case the Supreme Court) is satisfied that the case
involves a substantial question of law. It is settled law that concurrent findings of
fact recorded by the fora below (MERC and APTEL) cannot be interfered with by
this Court. In DSR (Steel) Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Rajasthan4, a two Judge Bench
of this Court observed that findings of fact by the Regulatory Commission and the
Tribunal cannot be reopened by this Court on appeal under Section 125 of the
14. An appeal under Section 125 of the Electricity Act, 2003
is maintainable before this Court only on the grounds
specified in Section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedure.
Section 100 CPC in turn permits filing of an appeal only if the
case involves a substantial question of law. Findings of fact
recorded by the courts below, which would in the
present case, imply the Regulatory Commission as the
court of first instance and the Appellate Tribunal as the
court hearing the first appeal, cannot be reopened
before this Court in an appeal under Section 125 of the
Electricity Act, 2003. Just as the High Court cannot
interfere with the concurrent findings of fact recorded by the
courts below in a second appeal under Section 100 of the
Code of Civil Procedure, so also this Court would be loath to
entertain any challenge to the concurrent findings of fact
recorded by the Regulatory Commission and the Appellate
Tribunal. The decisions of this Court on the point are a
legion. Reference to Govindaraju v. Mariamman [(2005) 2
SCC 500 : AIR 2005 SC 1008] , Hari Singh v. Kanhaiya
Kalingaryar v. Mathayan Padayachi [1992 Supp (1) SCC 712
: AIR 1992 SC 115] , Kehar Singh v. Yash Pal [AIR 1990 SC
2212] and Bismillah Begum v. Rahmatullah Khan [(1998) 2
SCC 226 : AIR 1998 SC 970] should, however, suffice.
Since both APTEL and MERC have recorded concurrent findings that the HVDC
Aarey- Kudus project is an existing project, it would not be open to this Court in
an appeal under Section 125 of the Act to reopen the findings..
Thirdly, even otherwise, we are in agreement with the findings of MERC and
APTEL that the 1000MV HVDC Scheme from Aarey to Kudus is an old project
considering the following factual position:
106.2.1 On 12 November 2007, MSETCL issued a communication to CEA setting
out the steps proposed to meet the growing demand of power for Mumbai’s
load centres. The communication stated that TPC had proposed the setting
up of overhead lines and underground cables while REL had proposed
connections to Aarey by using the HVDC (VSC based) technology.
MSETCL notified a five-year plan for 2009-10 to 2013-14 envisaging the
use of the HVDC technology. The plan specifically provided for the ongoing
schemes of R-infra together with new schemes including the HVDC based
link between Nagothane and Aarey. Similar details were provided in
relation to TPC’s ongoing and new schemes. Both TPC and R-infra were in
the fray from the inception. While TPC was primarily in the overhead
transmission line segment, R-infra had proposed the setting up of
transmission lines on the HVDC technology.
106.2.2 The criticality of the HVDC technology assumes importance after the grid
failure which Mumbai experienced in November 2010. The committee
chaired by a Professor of IIT recommended the HVDC technology as a
long-term solution for ensuring reliability of power supply for Mumbai.
MERC granted a transmission licence to R-infra on 11 August 2011. R-
infra submitted a DPR to MERC for the appointment of a consultant for
the transmission line from Nagothane to Aarey on 1 February 2013. On 7
March 2013, MSETCL confirmed that the Nagothane -Aarey project was
a part of the STU five-year plan for FY 2013-14 to 2017-18. MERC
approved the hiring of the consultant on 5 April 2013. The application for
the grant of grid connectivity for the proposed HVDC project was allowed
on 21 August 2013. When matters were thus progressing, in November
2013 MSETCL had in a meeting with R-Infra proposed that R-Infra can
avail of connectivity from the Kudus sub-station which was closer to the
Aarey sub-station as compared to the sub-station at Nagothane. R-infra
expressed its concern over the proposed revision on the point of
connectivity. On 10 April 2014, MERC granted an in-principle clearance
for the HVDC Scheme. In January 2015, MSETCL proposed a revised
scheme for where the 400KV Kudus-Aarey HVAC scheme was proposed
by MSETCL. On 2 May 2016, the in-principle clearance granted to the
Nagothane-Aarey HVDC Scheme was cancelled by MERC.
106.2.3 However, since the HVAC scheme of MSETCL did not take off, AEML-T
submitted an application for HVDC Scheme between Aarey to Kudus on
23 November 2018 where an amendment to the letter issued by MERC
granting grid connectivity to the 2 x 500 HVDC (VSC based) scheme from
Nagothane to Aarey was sought.
106.2.4 The narration of facts indicates that AEML-T(or its predecessor in
interest) has been involved in the execution of the HVDC Scheme since
the inception of the scheme. The cancellation of the in-principle approval
accorded to AEML-T by MERC cannot be held to terminate the project in
view of the peculiar background of this case. It is due to the
indecisiveness of MSETCL on the HVDC and HVAC technologies that
AEML-T’s clearance was cancelled. The HVDC Scheme was attributed to
R-Infra or, as the case may be, AEML-T since 2009. In the electricity
regulatory sector, where the State Regulatory Commissions and STUs’
have been functioning in an ad-hoc manner running in many loops, the
question of whether the project is an old or a new project must be
determined through a holistic purview of the factual background. In view
of the above factual narration, it is evident that the HVDC Scheme is an
old project and the change in the location of the injection point from
Nagothane to Kudus would not lead to the closure of the old project.
107.    Regardless, we deem it appropriate to also decide upon the issues before
us for consideration in terms of the relevance of the GoM GR in the decision
making of MERC and holding of the bidding process by MSETCL.
E.3.2 Relevance of GoM GR for MERC’s Decision
108.    The GR does not carry any reference to the provision of the Act under
which it was notified. The introduction of the resolution states the following:
“With the objective of setting up New Transmission Projects
with Tariff Based Competitive Bidding, the Ministry of Power,
Government of India has issued guidelines vide Gazette
Notification No. 11/5/2005-PG(I) dated 13.04.2006. In
addition, modifications were made vide Gazette Notifications
on 04.07.2007 and 10.10.2008. Additionally, the revised
directives dated 02.05.2012 indicate, that the State
Government may adopt these guidelines for intra-state
transmission projects or having considered these guiding
principles may constitute similar committees for facilitating
establishment of state transmission projects in the State.
Therefore, the government was considering constitution of
committees like Empowered Committees, Bid Evaluation
Committee in accordance with the above-mentioned
guidelines of central government for undertaking
transmission projects in the state through Tariff Based
Competitive Bidding. The government has, after thorough
discussion, taken the following decision in this regard.”
The GoI Guidelines referred to above are the TBCB Guidelines and the
Development Guidelines. Paragraph 3.3 of the TBCB Guidelines states that for
the procurement of transmission services for intra-state transmission, the
appropriate State Government may notify any organization or state public sector
undertaking especially engaged for bidding to be the Bidding Process
Coordinator. Paragraph 24 of the Development Guidelines stipulates that the
State Governments may adopt these guidelines and may constitute similar
committees for facilitation of intra-state transmission projects. The Guidelines
stipulate that the States ‘may’ adopt these guidelines for intra-state projects.
109.     While the State Government has used the central guidelines to formulate
its own guidelines on competitive bidding, it does note that the Empowered
Committee being constituted will undertake transmission projects “in accordance
with Central Government’s guidelines”. Therefore, to the extent that the GoM GR
deals with setting up of certain bodies for conducting bidding to allocate projects
under the TBCB route in line with the Central Government’s TBCB Guidelines, it
can be said to be in furtherance of the guidelines referred under Section 63 of the
Act. However, the same is limited to committees being set up for the procedural
aspects of the bidding process dealt by the Central Government’s guidelines.
110.     Another contentious aspect of the GoM GR is the portion wherein it notified
that the State Government “has decided to implement Tariff Based Competitive
Bidding-TBCB process for new Projects.” The GR did not define the term ‘new
projects.’ The appellant has argued that the GR notified by the State Government
being binding on MERC, MERC had no option but to determine tariff through the
bidding process for all ‘new’ projects, and if the HVDC project is a ‘new project’
then tariff could not have been determined through the Section 62 route. While
we have already held that the HVDC project was an existing project in terms of
the GoM GR, we also clarify the aspect of the binding value of GoM GR upon
111.     As discussed above, the fixation of tariff falls within the independent
statutory domain of the Regulatory Commission. The State Government has the
power to issue directions to the State Commission in matters of 'policy involving
public interest’ under Section 108 of the Act. While stating that the State
Government may issue directions in matters of policy involving public interest,
Section 108(2) states that if any question arises as to whether such direction
relates to matters of policy involving public interest, the decision of the State
Government on it shall be final. The provision further states that the State
Commission shall be guided by the directions of the State Government in
discharge of its functions. Section 108 is extracted below:
“108. Direction by State Government.- (1) In the discharge
of its functions, the State Commission shall be guided by
such directions in matters of policy involving public interest
as the State Government may give to it in writing.
(2) If any question arises as to whether any such direction
related to a matter of policy involving public interest, the
decision of the State Government thereon shall be final.”
112.     Section 108 deals with “directions in matters of policy involving public
interest as the State Government may give to it in writing.” In the provision, the
term ‘it’ refers to the State Commission. The GoM’s GR does not mention the
State Commission and has not been issued as a direction to the MERC as
envisaged in Section 108. Therefore, the HVDC Project is, firstly, an existing
project in terms of the GoM GR, and secondly, the GoM GR has not been issued
in terms of Section 108 as a direction to the State Commission.
E.3.3 Relevance of GoM GR vis-à-vis MSETCL’s decision
113.     The GoM GR provides that all new projects would be allotted under the
TBCB route. Accordingly, the question arises whether MSETCL was bound to
refer the HVDC Project to the Empowered Committee for the bidding to be held
and the tariff determined through bidding to be thereafter referred to MERC under
114.      MSETCL or any STU performs the following functions in terms of Section
39 of the Electricity Act:
“(2) The functions of the State Transmission Utility shall be–
(a) to undertake transmission of electricity through intra-
State transmission system;
(b) to discharge all functions of planning and co-ordination
relating to intra-State transmission system with–
(vii) any other person notified by the State Government in
(c) to ensure development of an efficient, co-ordinated and
economical system of intra-State transmission lines for
smooth flow of electricity from a generating station to the
115.       The Act clearly lays out the importance of the STU’s role in terms of
planning, development and co-ordination of intra-state transmission systems of
any State. This role is carried out in co-ordination with the other stakeholders
listed in sub-clause (b) of Section 39(2). In Maharashtra, MSETCL has been
notifying five-year plans which reflect the upcoming projects and planning
initiatives regarding intra-state transmission system. The requirement for
MSETCL to publish the five-year plans has also been captured in the MERC
116.       Paragraph    24    of   the   Development    Guidelines     allows the  State
Governments to adopt the guidelines and constitute similar committees for
facilitation of intra-state transmission projects. In terms of the Development
Guidelines, the Empowered Committee has been set up which will perform its
functions in line with the Guidelines. The GoM’s GR has also notified that the
Empowered Committee shall appoint the Bid Process Coordinator and the Bid
117.       The functions of the Empowered Committee include “to identify projects to
be developed under this Scheme.” Further, it is this Empowered Committee
which facilitates preparation of bid documents, evaluation of bids as well as
finalization of Transmission Service Agreements between the developer and the
concerned utilities.
118.       Some of the relevant provisions of the Development Guidelines, including
the functions to be performed by the Empowered Committee, are reproduced
"14. The functions of the Empowered Committee will be the
a) To identify projects to be developed under this Scheme.
b) To facilitate preparation of bid documents and invitation of
bid through a suitable agency.
d) To facilitate finalization and signing of Transmission
Service Agreement (TSA) between the developer and the
concerned utilities.
e) To facilitate development of projects under this Scheme.
17. Once the Perspective Plan, covering three five year
plans, the Short Term Plan and the Network Plan have been
prepared; some of these projects will be identified as
projects to be covered under this Scheme for competitive
bidding. In order to attract private investment in the
transmission sector it is very important to be able to make
available all the information to the stakeholders, regarding
new projects and their technical and other specifications.
These identified projects would then need to be formulated
with adequate details to enable competitive bidding to take
place. Detailed Project Report (DPR) for these projects shall
be prepared….
19. The selection of developer for identified projects would
be through tariff based bidding for transmission services
according to the guidelines issued by the Ministry Of Power
under section 63 of the Electricity Act, 2003. CTU/STUs and
Joint Venture Companies will also be eligible to bid, so that
there is sufficient competition among the bidders.
20. Along with the recommendation of selection by the
Empowered Committee, the selected developer shall
approach the Appropriate Commission, within a period of 30
days, for grant of transmission license. If it fails to apply for
license within thirty days then it will be liable for cancellation
of its selection. Cancellation of selection as provided above
will be done by the Empowered Committee only after giving
the selected private company an opportunity to be heard.
119.      In line with paragraph 17 of the Development Guidelines, it shall be the
Empowered Committee which shall identify projects from the transmission utility’s
network plan for being covered under the competitive bidding process. In terms of
paragraph 19 of the Development Guidelines, the relevant STU will itself be
eligible to be a participant in the bid.
120.      Accordingly, it is clear from a reading of these Development Guidelines
read with the functions of the State Utility in terms of Section 39(2) of the Act that
while the State Transmission Utility shall be the apex authority for planning of
intra-state transmission projects, the Empowered Committee is to identify
projects to be undertaken under the TBCB route.
121.      However, as we have already noted above, the HVDC Project was an
existing/old project in terms of the GoM’s GR. Furthermore, this is also brought
out in terms of the Empowered Committee’s deliberations recorded in its Minutes
of Meetings.
122.     Once the Empowered Committee was constituted, MSETCL referred the
HVDC Project to it in terms of the GoM’s GR. The Minutes of the 4th Empowered
Committee Meeting dated 30 May 2020, record Agenda No. 3 as the HVDC
Project. The Empowered Committee was apprised of the developments regarding
this as well as the objection from TPC that it should be allotted through TBCB.
The Empowered Committee did not take a decision in the said meeting.
123.     In the 5th Empowered Committee meeting held on 24 December 2020,
both the issue of the threshold limit for development of intra-state transmission
projects through TBCB as well as the HVDC Project were once again discussed.
124.     The Empowered Committee laid out the limit of Rs 500 crores as the
threshold and decided upon the issue of “new/old” projects under Agenda Item 3.
Further, it once again took into consideration the HVDC Project and decided that
MSETCL shall proceed with the project in terms of the recommendation in
“Agenda Item 4: Appraisal of inclusion of 1000 MW HVDC
Kudus-Aarey project in the STU five Year plan
(2019-20 – 2024-25) referred to Empowered Committee in
last meeting.
The Agenda “1000 MW HVDC project of Kudus – Aarey to
be taken under TBCB” was discussed in 4th Empowered
Committee meeting on 30th May 2020.”
At that time the HVDC project was not part of STU five-year
plan.
Hence the agenda item was deferred. Now the Empowered
Committee has been apprised about inclusion of 1000 MW
HVDC project of Kudus – Aarey in the STU Five-year plan.
Post appraisal of inclusion, the Committee informed STU
that they should proceed as per the decision given by the
Empowered Committee vide Agenda No.3.”
125.     Based on the above decision, in its additional submission dated 20
January 2021 filed before MERC, MSETCL after adverting to the aforementioned
minutes of meeting of the EC stated that it would proceed in accordance with the
decision of the EC. Clarifying the same in its written submission dated 08
February 2021 filed before the MERC, it stated that this implied that the HVDC
Project being an old project, it would not be required to go through the TBCB
9. It is submitted that present HVDC Scheme was informed
to Empowered Committee Members during 4th Empowered
Committee meeting (as also recorded in MoM dated
30.05.2020) in line with the Government of Maharashtra GR
dt. 04.01.2019. Earlier Nagothane-Aarey HVDC project was
submitted by erstwhile Rinfra-T and was included in STU
plan 2014-15 to 2018-19. This project was approved by
Hon'ble MERC to be implemented by Rinfra-T. Subsequently
HVAC Kudus - Aarey scheme was submitted by MSETCL
and was included in STU plan of 2015-16 to 2019-20. This
project was approved by Hon'ble Commission to be
implemented by MSETCL. However this HVAC project was
subsequently cancelled. Further, M/s. AEML-T has again
submitted VSC based 1000 MW Kudus to Aarey HVDC
Scheme to STU on dated 23/11/2018 and the same was
included in STU five-year plan of 2018-19 to 2022-23 but
later it was deleted as other HVAC schemes viz 400 kV
Velgaon, 400 kV Kalwa 11 & 400 kV Kalwa - Padghe M/C
line were explored as alternative to HVDC Scheme.
Subsequently after CEA recommendation the scheme was
again reinstated as submitted by AEML-T in STU plan of
2019-20 to 2024-25. Hence it is seen that the said HVDC
project is old project.
10. One of the most critical factors for timely execution of a
Transmission scheme is the availability of land for
substations. AEML EHV substation land utilization at Aarey
can be optimized to house the Inverter Terminal of the
11. It is further submitted that in the 5th Empowered
Committee meeting, Empowered Committee decided the
threshold to be applied to the new schemes that can be
referred to Empowered Committee. HVDC being the scheme
perceived since many years; already recommended as
submitted by AEML-T and also directed by Hon'ble MERC to
STU and AEML to implement the scheme expeditiously.
12. As is seen from above deliberations it is seen that
HVDC project is old project. Moreover, the threshold limit
as decided by Empowered Committee in its meeting dated
24/12/2020 has not yet been approved by Hon'ble
Commission. However as per Clause 6 (ii) this HVDC project
can be considered as old project and where MERC has
initiated substantially the process of inclusion of this project
in scope of petitioner.
Notably, the EC too did not raise any objections to MSETCL’s interpretation.
126.    Furthermore, it is also important to note that the threshold limit which was
mentioned by the EC was merely a recommendation in response to the request
of MERC so it could accordingly notify the limit in line with the NTP 2016. The
threshold limit has not yet been notified by MERC.
127.     Accordingly, it is clear that the MSETCL’s decision regarding the HVDC
Project not being referred under the TBCB route was in line with the Empowered
Committee’s directions which have been set up in terms of the GoM GR and
which has been granted the power to select projects to be taken up under the
TBCB route.
128.       Based on the above discussion, we have reached the following
(i) The Electricity Act 2003 provides the States sufficient flexibility to regulate
the intra-state transmission systems, wherein the Appropriate State
Commissions possess the power to determine and regulate tariff. The
Electricity Act 2003 seeks to distance the State Governments from the
determination and regulation of tariff, placing such power completely within
the ambit of the Appropriate Commissions;
(ii) The provisions of the Electricity Act 2003 do not prescribe one dominant
method to determine tariff. Section 63 operates after the bidding process
has been conducted. Where the tariff has already been determined
through bidding, the Appropriate Commission has to adopt such tariff that
has been determined. The Appropriate Commission cannot negate such
tariff determined through bidding by using its powers under Section 62.
The tariff determined through the bidding process may not be adopted by
the Appropriate Commission only if the bidding process was not
transparent (undertaking a substantive review) or the procedure prescribed
by the Central Government guidelines under Section 63 was not followed
(undertaking a procedural review);
(iii) Sections 62 and 63 stipulate the modalities of tariff determination. The
non-obstante clause in Section 63 cannot be interpreted to mean that
Section 63 would take precedence over Section 62 at the stage of
choosing the modality to determine tariff. The criteria or guidelines for the
determination of the modality of tariff determination ought to be notified by
the Appropriate State Commission either through regulations under
Section 181 of the Act or guidelines under Section 61 of the Act;
(iv) MERC has neither framed regulations nor notified guidelines prescribing
the criteria or guidelines for choosing the modalities to determine tariff.
Thus, MERC shall determine the tariff by exercising its general regulatory
powers under Section 86(1)(a) of the Act;
(v) MERC while exercising its general regulatory powers under Section
86(1)(a) shall be guided by the NTP 2016, which shall be a material
consideration.     Accordingly, while    NTP    2016    requires   intra-state
transmission projects above the threshold limit to be allotted through TBCB
route, this constitutes a material consideration to be taken into account.
The threshold value in the case of Maharashtra has not yet been notified
(vi) The threshold limit not having been notified by MERC, it was open to
MERC to allot the HVDC project either under the RTM or the TBCB route;
(vii) MERC and APTEL have arrived at concurrent findings that the 1000MW
HVDC Aarey-Kudus project is an ‘existing project’ for the purpose of the
applicability of the GoM’s GR 2019. This Court deciding a statutory appeal
under Section 125 of the Act cannot interfere with the concurrent findings
on a question of fact. Nonetheless, even on an independent assessment of
the facts, the HVDC project is an existing project;
(viii) Even if the HVDC Project were to be considered a ‘new project’ in terms of
the GoM’s GR, the same not having been issued in terms of Section 108 as
a direction to the State Commission, MERC’s decision cannot be challenged
for failing to comply with the same as MERC is an independent body with
statutory powers to determine and regulate tariff; and
(ix) MSETCL has acted in terms of the GoM’s GR as it has referred the HVDC
project to the Empowered Committee and the decision to not refer the
HVDC project under the TBCB route was in line with the Empowered
Committee’s directions. The Empowered Committee has the power to select
projects to be taken up under the TBCB route under the GoM’s GR.
129.        The Electricity Act 2003 or the policy framework, particularly NTP 2016
read with the GoM GR dated 4 January 2019, did not make it binding upon
MERC to allot the HVDC project only through the TBCB route. For the reasons
mentioned above, the Regulatory Commission’s decision to grant the HVDC
project under Section 62 was within a reasonable exercise of its powers.
130.        This case has brought the ad-hoc nature of the functioning of the STU to
the notice of this Court. MSETCL has been changing its stance on the HVDC
technology without following any due procedure. The flip-flops by MSETCL have
led to the loss of time and investment while the demand in the electricity sector
has been increasing exponentially. We are cognizant of the fact that in matters
dealing with electricity regulation, the regulatory commissions and the
transmission utilities are usually bogged down by factors such as technological
uncertainty, requirement of heavy investment and issues of right of way. The ad-
hoc functioning of the transmission utilities is also attributable to the lacunae in
the regulations guiding the exercise of their functions. The Electricity Act 2003
was enacted with the objective of providing the States with sufficient flexibility to
regulate the intra-state electricity system and simultaneously provided the
regulatory commissions with the power to determine tariffs. Though the
Government, both at the Centre and in the States, have framed statutory policies
and guidelines regulating the electricity sector, we have noticed that the
Regulatory Commissions have not framed the necessary regulations to put into
effect the principles prescribed under the Act.
131.      We direct all State Regulatory Commissions to frame Regulations under
Section 181 of the Act on the terms and conditions for determination of tariff
within three months from the date of this judgment. While framing these
guidelines on determination of tariff, the Appropriate Commission shall be guided
by the principles prescribed in Section 61, which also includes the NEP and NTP.
Where the Appropriate Commission(s) has already framed regulations, they shall
be amended to include provisions on the criteria for choosing the modalities to
determine the tariff, in case they have not been already included. The
Commissions while being guided by the principles contained in Section 61 shall
effectuate a balance that would create a sustainable model of electricity
regulation in the States. The Regulatory Commission shall curate to the specific
needs of the State while framing these regulations. Further, the regulations
framed must be in consonance with the objective of the Electricity Act 2003,
which is to enhance the investment of private stakeholders in the electricity
regulatory sector so as to create a sustainable and effective system of tariff
determination that is cost efficient so that such benefits percolate to the end
consumers.
132.   For the reasons mentioned above, the appeal is dismissed.
133.   Pending application(s), if any, are disposed of.