These  appeals   arise   out   of   the  same  FIR  dated
18.08.2020 lodged under Section 302 of the IPC for the
murder   of    the   brother    of    the    complainant.   The
complainant  has   filed  these    appeals.    The  respondents
were arrested after nearly six months of the incident.
The  Trial    Court   rejected     their    bail   application.
However, the High Court has granted the bail to the
respondents in the appeals by the impugned orders, which
are under challenge in these appeals.
We have heard learned counsel for the appellant as
have also heard Mr. Ajay Kumar Misra, learned AAG for
the State, who has supported the case of the appellant
and perused the material placed on record.
On  perusal    of   the    impugned    orders,   what  is
noteworthy is that in the impugned orders passed by the
High Court no reason has been given for grant of bail.
In the case of murder (under Section 302 IPC), it is
expected that at least some reason would be given while
reversing  the   order   of   the   Trial   Court,   which  had
rejected the bail application by a reasoned order. What
we notice is that in the impugned orders the High Court,
while granting bail, has only stated that “Keeping in
view the nature of offence, evidence, complicity of the
accused,  severity    of  the    punishment,    submissions  of
learned counsel for the parties and without expressing
any opinion on the merits of the case, this Court is of
the view that the applicant is entitled to be enlarged
on  bail  during   the   pendency    of  the   trial”.  In  the
present case, the nature of the offence is very grave
i.e. murder under Section 302 IPC and if such reasons
are to be accepted for granting bail, then probably in
all cases bail would be granted.
Since we find that no reasons have been given in
substance and there is only narration of facts in the
orders impugned, we are of the opinion that the orders
impugned deserve to be set aside.
Keeping  in   view  the    aforesaid,   the  appeals  are
allowed and impugned orders dated 02.08.2021, 20.07.2021
& 25.01.2021 are set aside. We, however, direct that the
Trial  Court   may  expedite   the  trial  and  make  every
endeavour to conclude it within eight months from the
receipt of a copy of this order. The appellants shall
not  seek  any  adjournment   before  the Trial  Court.  We
further observe that in case the trial is not concluded
within the aforesaid time, the respondents shall be at
liberty to file fresh application for bail before the
With the aforesaid observations, the appeals stand
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No(s).6941/2021
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 02-08-2021
in CRMBA No.10130/2021 passed by the High Court Of Judicature At
Date : 15-02-2022 These matters were called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Leave granted.
The appeals are allowed in terms of the signed order,
Pending application(s), if any, stands disposed of.
(signed order is placed on the file)