implementation of the impugned order passed by the
learned Judge, Special Court (Atrocity) and Additional
District and Sessions Judge, Kodinar below Exh.1 in
Criminal Inquiry No.1 of 2019 dated 12.01.2022:”
3.0. Brief facts of the case are as under
3.1. It is the case of the petitioner that at the relevant time
petitioner was Sarpanch of Navgan Gram Panchayat, Taluka:
Kodinar Dist. Gir Somnath.           It is further the case of the
petitioner that the petitioner made representations on 17.5.2017
and 10.2.2019 for installing transformer for fault in light due to
over loading , low power to the respondent authority. That on
17.5.2017        and  10.02.2019    the     petitioner   made         another
representations to the Social Welfare Department, Gandhinagar
as well as State and National Scheduled Caste Commission. It
the case of the petitioner that on 4.12.2019 the officers from the
Paschim Gujarat Vij Company Limited visited the house of the
petitioner for checking of the electricity meter and at that time
they used the abusive and filthy language and also insulted the
petitioner about her caste. It is the further case of the petitioner
that due to ailment of the petitioner, she had not gone to the
police station but her husband and witnesses gone to the
Kodinar Police Station, however accused are influential person,
complaint of the petitioner was not registered and on the
contrary      complaint  of  accused       no.1 was   lodged        against
petitioner and other three persons. That in view of the above,
the petitioner filed complaint before the Court, which came to be
registered as Inquiry Case No.1 of 2019. That the learned Court
below after perusal of the complaint vide order dated 12.12.2019
called for the report of the Deputy Commissioner of Police, SC St
Cell, Veraval and report to be submitted before the Court. That
the learned Court below also directed the complainant to remain
present before the Court for recording her statement on next
date. That upon receipt of the report from the concerned
authority and recording the statement of the complainant and
other witnesses, the learned trial Court rejected the complaint of
the petitioner vide its order dated 12.1.2022.
3.2. Being aggrieved and dissatisfied with the order dated
12.1.2022 passed by the learned Court below, the petitioner
preferred present Criminal Revision Application before this
4.0. Ms.Nasrin Shaikh, learned advocate for the petitioner has
submitted that learned trial Court has committed an error while
passing the impugned order. Ms. Shaikh further contended that
the learned trial Court has failed to appreciate that the incident
occurred on 4.12.2019 and prior thereto representations dated
17.5.2017 and 19.1.2019 were made by the petitioner against
the respondents accused. It was further contended that from the
report of the SC ST Cell, it is clear that on 4.12.2019 when she
was at her home along with family members, one Jasubhai
Barad from PGVCL and Ms. Bhumikaben had come along with
other staff and they were using abusive and filthy language
against caste of the the petitioner and learned trial Court has
not considered the aforesaid facts while passing the impugned
order. It was further contended that learned trial Court has not
properly appreciated the statement given by the witnesses while
passing the impugned order. It was further contended that from
perusal of report of the SC ST Cell, it appears that complaints
have been filed by the petitioner as a part of her duty as
Sarpanch. It was further contended that learned trial Court has
committed an error in not considering the deposition of the
complainant while passing the impugned order. It was further
contended that petitioner made representations for installation
of the Transformer due to low voltage and as the officer of the
PGVCL did not pay any heed, the petitioner wrote to the Higher
Officer, therefore, keeping grudge against the petitioner, false
complaint has been lodged against the petitioner. Making above
submissions, Ms. Shaikh, learned advocate for the petitioner
has contended that petition be allowed as prayed for.
5.0.    Per contra, Ms. Monali Bhatt, learned Additional Public
Prosecutor has opposed the present petition. Ms.Bhatt, learned
Additional Public Prosecutor for the respondent – State has
contended that the impugned order passed by the Trial Court is
just and proper and no interference is called for. Ms. Bhatt,
learned Additional Public Prosecutor further contended that as
per the affidavit of petitioner herself at Exh.9 wherein it is stated
by the complainant that no incident was happened in presence
of the witnesses and therefore, considering the affidavit of the
petitioner itself, no process was issued against the accused. It
was further contended that considering the video recording of
the concerned police station, no such incident was happened as
alleged by the petitioner. It was further contended that there is
total contradiction in the complaint filed by the petitioner and
the representation made before the concerned authority on
6.12.2019.        It was further contended on perusal of the report
submitted by the Deputy Commissioner of Police, SC ST Cell,
Veraval, no case was made out for alleged offence against the
officer of the PGVCL. It was further contended that petitioner
has filed the complaint before the learned trial Court as a
counterblast to the FIR lodged against the petitioner being CR
No. 196 of 2019 before the Kodinar Police Station. It was further
contended that as per documentary evidence produced by the
petitioner, on 30.07.2019 the PGVCL has issued bill of
Rs.54,457/- upon the petitioner with respect to the theft of
electricity bill. Making above submissions, Ms. Bhatt, learned
Additional Public Prosecutor contended that the present revision
being meritless and deserve no merits and same deserves to be
6.0. No other and further submissions/ contentions have been
made by the learned advocates for the respective parties.
7.0. Heard learned advocates appearing for the parties and
considered the submissions made by the learned advocates for
the respective parties and also perused the impugned judgment
and order passed by the learned trial Court. It is pertinent to
note here that it is the part of the duty of the Officers of the
PGVCL to check the electricity connection of the Customers.
That during the checking of electricity, theft of electricity was
found from the house of the petitioner and PGVCL has issued a
supplementary bill to the tune of Rs.54,457/-. It appears from
the aforesaid, it is found that as a counterblast, the petitioner
has filed complaint before concerned Court so as to avoid facing
criminal charge for the offence of theft of electricity. This Court
finds that the learned trial Court has rightly observed that as
per the affidavit of petitioner herself at Exh.9 wherein it is stated
by the complainant that no incident was happened in presence
of the witnesses and therefore, considering the affidavit of the
petitioner itself, no process was issued against the accused.
Therefore, as per the version of the petitioner herself at Exh.9,
no witnesses have present at the time of alleged incident.
Considering the aforesaid, learned trial Court has rightly
observed that no prima facie case is made out against the
officers of the PGVCL. This Court also finds that there is total
contradiction in the complaint filed by the petitioner and the
representation        made before    the    concerned    authority          on
6.12.2019. It further appears from the record that there is
sufficient piece of evidence, on the basis of which, the learned
trial Court has rightly quashed and set aside Inquiry Case No. 1
of 2019. This Court also finds that learned trial Court has
rightly    considered   the report      submitted   by     the      Deputy
Commissioner of Police, SC ST Cell, Gir Somnath. The learned
Trial Court also considered the video recording of the concerned
police station and has found that no such incident was
happened as alleged by the petitioner. It is pertinent to note
here that witnesses of the petitioner have not supported the case
of the petitioner and their statements are contradictory to the
alleged incident.
8.0. It is settled law that the revisional powers of the High
Court can only be exercised to prevent the abuse of the process
of law and to secure the ends of justice. The process of law can
be invoked by a principled and really aggrieved person who
approaches the court with clean hands. The process of law
cannot be allowed to be abused by a person who is facing trial
for theft of Electricity and who himself avers such facts in his
application under Section 156 (3) Cr.P.C., as indicate that he is
guilty of committing theft of Electricity; by making baseless
allegations against the officials of a PGVCL without any
supporting material or evidence. Apparently, the revisionist has
filed that complaint in order to put a counter pressure on the
officials for taking undue advantage in plural cases of theft of
electricity lodged against the complainant .Keeping in view the
facts and circumstances of the case, I am of the considered
opinion that the order passed by the learned Judge, Special
Court (Atrocity) and Additional District and Sessions Judge,
Kodinar below Exh.1 in Criminal Inquiry No.1 of 2019 dated
12.01.2022 does not suffer from any legal infirmity so as to
warrant interference by this Court in exercise of its discretionary
power of revision.
9.     Thus, in view of the above and for the reasons stated
above, the impugned order does not suffer from any illegality,
irregularity or impropriety and the Revision is liable to be
dismissed and is hereby dismissed.