The Court on its own Motion :
In re : UTP Dipak Joshi, lodged in Dum Dum
…for the High Court Admn.
Mr. Debasish Ghosh      …for the State.
Mr. Nazir Ahamed        …for the SLSA.
Mr. Subhrojyoti Ghosh …for the Relative of
…for the Consulate General of Nepal.
We have heard the parties on the basis of an
affidavit placed on record today by the Consulate
General of Nepal. The said affidavit sworn to on
8.3.2021 is taken on record.
We have assessed the factual situation of the
case. It reflects that the person of Nepali origin was
arrested about 41 years ago and since then, he is
under detention, may be on the basis of orders of
remand ; also awaiting reports of the appropriate
authority as regards his mental status because issues
appear to have arisen as to whether the said person is
fit to stand trial on a charge for having committed an
In the larger spectrum, what surges, is that the
person, who was arrested on 12.05.1980 going by the
material papers, has already undergone a period of
more     than   40   years   in  custody   even   if  life
imprisonment is to be ultimately handed down after a
trial which could happen only if the accused is found
to be one, who can stand trial in spite of his mental
capacity which is writ large in the materials before us.
The report of SLSA and the materials provided
by the High Court Administration as also the material
papers available with the Consulate General of Nepal
tend to indicate that this is a case where the person in
custody has the mindset of a child not more than 9-10
years of age.
While   the   Consulate   General   of  Nepal    is
benevolent to extend its limb of support and solace to
the said person by paving way by releasing him on bail
to be handed over to his near relative, who has also
filed an affidavit. We, on a deeper consideration, are of
the view that it needs to be examined whether it is
necessary to continue the prosecution at all against
him to secure the ends of justice or it is necessary in
the interest of justice and to secure the ends of justice
that the said prosecution itself be terminated through
a judicial order of the superior Court in exercise of
power under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure read with Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India, by this Court in this suo motu
We    have   requested   the   learned  Advocate
appearing for the SLSA, High Court Administration,
Consulate General of Nepal and also for the relative of
the person concerned to acclimatize themselves with
the appropriate legal aspects in this regard and make
further submissions when this matter would appear
on 15.3.2021 at 2 p.m. as a “Specially Fixed Matter”.