The present appeal is directed against the judgment of
conviction dated 30.11.2009 and order of sentence dated 19.12.2009 passed
by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Kurukshetra, whereby the
appellant has been convicted for the offences under Sections 376, 452 and
506 IPC and sentenced as under:-
376 IPC      To undergo life imprisonment along with fine of
Rs.50,000/-, in default of payment of fine to
further undergo simple imprisonment of one year;
452 IPC      To undergo rigorous imprisonment of five years
along with a fine of Rs.2,000/-, in default of
506 IPC      To undergo rigorous imprisonment of one year
along with a fine of Rs.1,000/-, in default of
We do not propose to mention the name of the victim in view
of Section 228-A of the Indian Penal Code, which makes the disclosure of
identity of victim of certain offences punishable. The Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the matter of State of Karnataka Vs. Putttaraja, 2004(1) RCR
(Crl.) 113 held that keeping in view the social object of preventing social
victimisation or ostracism of the victim of a sexual offence for which
Section 228-A IPC has been enacted, it would be appropriate that in the
judgments, be it of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, this Court or Lower Court,
the name of victim should not be indicated. Consequently, we have chosen
to describe her as “victim” in the judgment.
The prosecution story as unfolded during trial is that the FIR
(Ex. P-11) in the instant case was registered on the basis of the statement
made by PW-10 Ashok Kumar, father of the victim. PW-10 Ashok Kumar
stated that he was a labourer and had five children. The ‘victim’ is the
eldest daughter, who was aged about 12 years and was studying in 6th
standard in a Government School, Dhantori. On 19.08.2008, the ‘victim’
had gone for tuition after returning from the school. When she returned
back, at that time the complainant and his wife were not at home and had
gone to Kurukshetra for taking the medicines. When they returned in the
evening after taking the medicines, his daughter was lying on cot silently.
They enquired from the ‘victim’ as to what was the matter, but the victim
did not reply anything. On the next day, the complainant had gone to Bus
Stand, Dhantori for work and when he returned in the evening, his daughter,
that is the ‘victim’, was lying silently and fearfully on the cot. The
complainant and his wife Karmo Devi enquired from her gently, on which
she started weeping and told that on 19.08.2008, when the complainant and
his wife had gone to Kurukshetra for taking the medicines, her uncle
Chaman Lal @ Chimnu (appellant) had entered their house. The appellant
turned out her younger brothers and sisters and the ‘victim’ was forcibly
taken inside the room, after catching her from her arms. The accused bolted
the room from inside and had put her on a cot. When the victim tried to raise
noise, he had put his hand on her mouth and had committed rape upon her
after removing her Salwar forcibly. After committing the crime, he went
away and threatened that he would kill the victim, in case she reported the
matter to anybody. Thereafter, on the next day, the complainant made
telephonic calls to his relatives in that regard and brought his daughter, i.e.
the ‘victim’ to Civil Hospital, Kurukshetra. He got his daughter admitted in
the hospital and prayed for legal action against the appellant/accused.
After registration of the FIR, the medico legal examination was
conducted by Dr. Anupama Singh, Medical Officer, L.N.J.P. Hospital,
Kurukshetra. The doctor found injury on her private parts and opined that
the possibility that she had been subjected to sexual assault, cannot be ruled
out. She prepared the MLR (Ex.P1). The police reached the hospital and
moved an application (Ex.P2), on which, she declared the patient, i.e. the
‘victim’ to be fit to make her statement. She made her endorsement Ex.P3
on the police request Ex.P2. Thereafter, her statement was recorded and the
accused was arrested. Thereafter, the police found sufficient incriminating
evidence against the appellant/accused and presented the final report under
Section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
During the course of trial, the prosecution examined as many as
14 witnesses to prove the case.
In his statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C., the appellant took
his stand that he was innocent and had been falsely implicated in the said
case due to party faction in the village. The accused opted not to lead
evidence in his defence during the course of trial. Vide the impugned
judgment and order passed by the court of learned Additional Sessions
Judge, Kurukshetra, the appellant was held guilty under Sections 376, 452
and 506 IPC and was sentenced as recorded above.
Assailing the findings recorded by the learned trial Court, the
appellant has preferred the instant appeal before this Court.
Learned counsel for the appellant has argued that due to dispute
of the ancestral land, a false case has been planted on him.           He has
submitted that PW-10 Ashok Kumar, father of the victim, was inimical
towards him and has got the FIR registered against him falsely just to settle
scores.    He has further submitted that there are contradictions in the
statements of PW-11 the ‘victim’ and PW-10 Ashok Kumar (complainant).
He has further submitted that even the clothes, worn by the ‘victim’ on
19.08.2008, were not sent to the Forensic Science Laboratory, Madhuban
and this is a good ground to discredit the testimony of the ‘victim’.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the State has vehemently
argued that the learned trial court has passed a well reasoned judgment and
the same is liable to be upheld by this Court. He has further submitted that
the testimony of the ‘victim’ has to be treated like an injured witness and all
the material prosecution witnesses had withstood the test of cross-
examination.      The statements of PW-10 Ashok Kumar and PW-11
prosecutrix/victim are truthful and the conviction can be based solely on the
said two testimonies.       He further submitted that the prosecution had
examined PW-12 Rekha Rani, Teacher (In charge), Government Middle
School, Dhantori, who produced the summoned record and as per the
record, the date of birth of the ‘victim’ was 06.02.1996. Still further, the
learned State counsel referred to the statement of PW1 Dr. Anupama Singh,
who stated that the possibility of sexual assault cannot be ruled out. He has
further referred to the statement of PW-8 Dr.R.L. Arya and submitted that in
his opinion, there was nothing to suggest that the patient was unable to
perform sexual intercourse and submitted that since the appellant had
committed a heinous crime, therefore, the present appeal is liable to be
dismissed by this Court.
We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and examined
the evidence led by the prosecution in support of the charge.
The factual matrix of this appeal is unfortunately related to a
sordid and obnoxious incident, where the appellant, who is the real uncle of
the victim, raped his niece, a girl child of the tender age of 12 years. The
result was that the sacred relationship of uncle and niece was besmirched.
Such offenders are a menace to the civilised society and have to be dealt
with strictly as per law. It is an act, which is not only a blow to her supreme
honour and offends her self-esteem and dignity, it degrades and humiliates
the victim and where the victim is a helpless child or a minor, it leaves
behind a traumatic experience. Such crime is not only a crime against a
minor innocent child, rather it is a crime against the entire society.
1996 (3) RCR (Crl.) 786, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has held as under:-
“9.    Unfortunately, a woman, in our country, belongs to a
class or group of society who are in a disadvantageous
position on account of several social barriers and impediments
and have, therefore, been the victim of tyranny at the hands of
men with whom they, fortunately, under the Constitution enjoy
equal status. Women also have the right to life and liberty; they
also have the right to be respected and treated as equal
citizens. Their honour and dignity cannot be touched or
violated. They also have the right to lead an honourable and
peaceful life. Women, in them, have many personalities
combined. They are Mother, Daughter, Sister and Wife and not
play    things   for  centrespreads     in  various  magazines,
periodicals or newspapers nor can they be exploited for
obscene purposes. They must have the liberty, the freedom and,
of course, independence to live the roles assigned to them by
Nature so that the society may flourish as they alone have the
talents and capacity to shape the destiny and character of men
anywhere and in every part of the world.
10.    Rape is thus not only a crime against the person of a
woman (victim), it is a crime against the entire society. It
destroys the entire psychology of a woman and pushes her into
deep emotional crises. It is only by her sheer will power that
she rehabilitates herself in the society which, on coming to
know of the rape, looks down upon her in derision and
contempt. Rape is, therefore, the most hated crime. It is a crime
against basic human rights and is also violative of the victim's
most cherished of the Fundamental Rights, namely, the Right to
Life contained in Article 21. To many feminists and
psychiatrists, rape is less a sexual offence than an act of
aggression aimed at degrading and humiliating woman. The
rape laws do not, unfortunately, take care of the social aspect
of the matter and are inept in many respects”.
Learned counsel for the appellant has submitted that the
appellant has been falsely implicated in the instant case due to dispute over
the ancestral property inherited by the complainant and his real brother, i.e.
the present appellant. He further submitted that it was a concocted story, in
which the complainant joined the hands with his wife to falsely implicate
the appellant. He further submitted that the accused/appellant never visited
the house of the complainant on the alleged date of occurrence and there
was no question of committing any crime.
In fact, there is no substance in the arguments raised by the
learned counsel for the appellant. The prosecution examined PW-10 Ashok
Kumar, who supported the case of the prosecution in his testimony.
Similarly, the ‘victim’ was examined as PW-11 and the learned trial Court
observed that she is reasonable, prudent and sensible to give her testimony
in the court. The trial Court recorded her statement as PW-11 and she
narrated the entire incident in her testimony.        The defence had cross-
examined both the witnesses at length but nothing material could be elicited
from that. Still further, the ‘victim’ had narrated the entire incident in her
testimony and her testimony inspires confidence.               The prosecution
examined PW-10 Ashok Kumar, who is the real brother of the present
appellant and he had supported the case of the prosecution. It is highly
unbelievable that he will level false allegations of sexual assault on his
daughter, just on account of some minor dispute relating to inheritance of
the property. Further, it is equally inconceivable that a girl of 12 years of
age would invent on her own a false story of sexual assault/rape upon her by
her own real uncle. It is unthinkable that the parents would also tutor their
minor daughter to concoct such a story in order to wreak vengeance on
some one. They would not do so for the simple reason that it would bring
down their own social status in the society apart from ruining future
prospects of their own child. They would also be expected to be conscious
of the traumatic effect on the psychology of the child and the disastrous
consequences likely to ensue when she grows up. We, therefore, refuse to
countenance the suggestions made by the learned defence counsel that the
appellant had been falsely roped at the instance of the father of the victim.
The testimonies of PW-10 Ashok Kumar and PW-11 the
‘victim’ have been duly supported by the testimony of PW-1 Dr. Anupama
Singh, Medical Officer, L.N.J.P. Hospital, Kurukshetra. The relevant part of
the testimony of PW-1 Dr. Anupama Singh has been reproduced below:-
3.      Local Examination: Public hairs were taken for
chemical examination. Labia majora and labia minora were
healthy and whitish discharge was present on it. On the inner
side of right labia minora, there was a reddish abrasion
present. Reddish abrasion was present on the fourchette. Two
swabs were prepared from the area and sent for chemical
4.      The patient was admitted in the Hospital vide C.R.
no.4192.
5.      The following things were handed over to the police:
i)      Copy of M.L.R.
ii)     A parcel with one seal containing clothes and swabs.
iii)    An envelope with five seals containing copy of M.L.R.,
forwarding letter and sample seal.
6.     The possibility that she had been subjected to sexual
assault cannot be ruled out. The carbon copy Ex.P1 of the
M.L.R. is true and correct copy of the original brought by me
today, which bears my signatures. On 21.8.2008, the police
came in the Hospital and moved an application is Ex.P2, on
which, I declared the patient to be fit to make her statement. In
this regard, my endorsement is Ex.P-3 on the police request
Ex.P2, which bears my signatures.”
Still further, the prosecution examined PW-8 Dr. R.L. Arya,
Medical Officer, CHC Shahabad, who examined the appellant/accused and
clearly opined that there was nothing to suggest that the patient was unable
to perform sexual intercourse.
Learned counsel for the appellant has further referred to certain
minor contradictions in the testimonies of PW-10 Ashok Kumar and PW-11
the ‘victim’, which cannot be the basis to discard their evidence. The
testimony of a rape victim has its own efficacy and relevance. She also
suffered injuries on her private parts and the evidence of such a witness
must be given due weightage and the case of the prosecution cannot be
doubted on simple suggestions by the defence. Rather the testimony of a
victim of a sexual assault is accorded special status in law. Consequently,
there are no grounds for rejection of the evidence of PW-10 Ashok Kumar
and PW-11 the ‘victim’ on the basis of minor discrepancies, which are
bound to creep in the testimonies of truthful witnesses.
The prosecution examined PW-12 Rekha Rani, Teacher
(In charge), Govt. Middle School, Dhantori, District Kurukshetra, who
brought the relevant record and deposed that the date of birth of the victim
is 06.02.1996, i.e. she was aged about 12 years at the time of the incident.
The prosecution also examined SI Swaran Singh as PW-13, who conducted
the initial investigation. The prosecution further examined ASI Pritam
Singh as PW-14, who deposed with regard to various steps taken by the
investigating agency during the course of investigation. The statements of
all the witnesses clearly established that the appellant had committed the crime.
Learned counsel for the appellant has further submitted that the
clothes of the prosecutrix, worn by her on 19.08.2008, i.e. the date of
occurrence, were not sent to the Forensic Science Laboratory, Madhuban.
But this is hardly a ground to reject the testimony of the ‘victim’ which is
otherwise found to be truthful and cannot be punished for a minor lapse on
the part of the investigating officer. The testimony of the ‘victim’ finds full
corroboration from the testimonies of PW-10 Ashok Kumar and PW-1
Dr. Anupama Singh and the case of the prosecution is liable to be believed.
Consequently, we find no substance in the arguments raised by
the learned counsel for the appellant and thus, the present appeal is
dismissed, being devoid of any merit. The impugned judgment of conviction
dated 30.11.2009 and order of sentence dated 19.12.2009 passed by the
court of learned Additional Sessions Judge, Kurukshetra, are upheld.
Pending application(s), if any, also stands disposed of.