Counsel for Revisionist :- Shashank Shekhar Singh,Anil Bhushan
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Govt. Advocate
1.    Heard Sri Anil Bhushan, learned senior counsel assisted by Sri
Siddharth kumar Mishra, learned counsel for the revisionist and Sri
Suresh Bahadur Singh, learned A.G.A. for the State-opposite party
No.1. Even in the revised list none appeared on behalf of the opposite
party nos.2 to 4 nor any counter affidavit has been filed on their
behalf, this court proceed to hear the matter finally.
2.    This revision is directed against the order dated 26.07.2001
passed by learned District and Sessions Judge, Kannauj by which he
has accepted the final report submitted by the Investigating Officer
and set aside the order dated 25.04.2001 passed by the Judicial
Magistrate, Chhibramau by which he has summoned the opposite
party no.2 under Section 379 I.P.C.
3.    The brief facts of the present case is that the revisionist has
constructed a house in the property in dispute and also there are 32
trees of Mango and one tree of Neem. On 06.09.2000 respondent
No.2 along with some unsocial elements has broken the lock of the
house of the revisionist and took possession on the same and also take
away the goods of Rs. 8000/-. The revisionist tried to lodge F.I.R. by
approaching the concerned Police Station and by sending Fax
message to the Superintendent of Police, but no F.I.R. has not been
lodged. Thereafter, revisionist filed an application under Section 156
(3) Cr.P.C. before the Judicial Magistrate on 02.12.2000 and on the
application of the revisionist on the same day the Judicial Magistrate,
First Class has passed an order directing the Police Station of
concerned Police to lodge an F.I.R. and inform the Court. Pursuant to
the order passed by the Judicial Magistrate an F.I.R. has been lodged
by the police on 07.12.2000, under Sections 147, 504, 506, 427, 448,
379 I.P.C. and the same was registered as Case Crime No. 454 of
2000 and after investigation the Investigating Officer in a mechanical
manner submitted final report in favour of the opposite party no.2
without considering the evidence on record.
The revisionist has again approached to the Police Authority for
again re-investigation and also filed protest petition before the Judicial
Magistrate and on the protest petition of the revisionist the learned
Magistrate vide order dated 25.04.2001 have issued summons to the
opposite party no.2 under Section 379 I.P.C.
4.     Feeling aggrieved by the order dated 25.04.2001 the opposite
party no.2 filed a criminal revision before the learned District and
Sessions Judge, Kannauj and the revisional court vide impugned order
dated 26.07.2021 set aside the summoning order dated 25.04.2001 and
also accepted the final report without considering the evidence on
5.     After hearing the learned counsel for the revisionist and learned
A.G.A. for the State and on perusal of the record it reveals that the
F.I.R. was registered by the revisionist against opposite party no. 2
under Sections 147, 504, 506, 427, 448, 379 I.P.C. and after
investigating final report was submitted by the Investigating Officer in
a mechanical manner. Thereafter, the learned Magistrate after
considering the protest petition and perusing the record summoned
the accused under Section 379 Cr.P.C. vide order dated 25.04.2001,
expressing his judicial power.
6.    In Gangadhar Janardan Mhatre vs. State of Maharashtra
and others 2004 (7) SCC 768, the Court reiterating above view said
"The Magistrate can ignore the conclusion arrived at by
the Investigating Officer and independently apply his
mind to the facts emerging from the investigation and
take cognizance of the case, if he thinks fit, exercise of
his powers under Section 109(1)(b) and direct the issue
7.    In Pakhando and others Vs. State of U.P. reported in 2001
SCC Online All 967 a Division Bench of this Court after considering
Section 190 Cr.P.C. has held that if upon investigation Police comes to
conclusion that there was no sufficient evidence or any reasonable
ground of suspicion to justify forwarding of accused for trial and
submits final report for dropping proceedings, Magistrate shall have
following four courses and may adopt any one of them:
(I) He may agreeing with the conclusions arrived at by
the police, accept the report and drop the proceedings.
But before so doing, he shall give an opportunity of
(II) He may take cognizance under Section 190(I)(b) and
issue process straightway to the accused without being
bound by the conclusions of the investigating agency,
where he is satisfied that upon the facts discovered or
unearthed by the police, there is sufficient ground to
(III) He may order further investigation, if he is satisfied
that the investigation was made in a perfunctory manner;
(IV) He may, without issuing process or dropping the
proceedings decide to take cognizance under Section
190(I)(b) upon the original complaint or protest petition
treating the same as complaint and proceed to act under
Sections 200 and 202 Cr.P.C. and thereafter decide
whether complaint should be dismissed or process should
be issued.
8.     In Mohammad Yusuf Vs. State of U.P. 2007 (9) ADJ 294,
Police submitted final report which was not accepted by Magistrate,
not on the basis of material collected by Police, but, relying on Protest
Petition and accompanying affidavit Magistrate issued process. Court
disapproved the aforesaid procedure adopted by Magistrate and said:
"Where the magistrate decides to take cognizance under
section 190 (1) (b) ignoring the conclusions reached at by
the investigating officer and applying his mind
independently, he can act only upon the statements of the
witnesses recorded by the police in the case-diary and
material collected during investigation. It is not
permissible at that stage to consider any material other
than that collected by the investigating officer. In the
instant case the cognizance was taken on the basis of the
protest petition and accompanying affidavits. The
Magistrate should have adopted the procedure of
complaint case under Chapter XV of the Code of
Criminal Procedure and recorded the statements of the
complainant and the witnesses who had filed affidavits
under Section 200 and 202 Cr.P.C. The Magistrate could
not take cognizance under section 190 (1) (b) Cr.P.C. on
the basis of protest petition and affidavits filed in support
thereof. The Magistrate having taking into account
extraneous material i.e. protest petition and affidavits
while taking cognizance under section 190 (1) (b) Cr.P.C.
the impugned order is vitiated." (emphasis added).
9.     In the instant case, after submission of final report under
Section 173 Cr.P.C.        against opposite party no. 2, the learned
Magistrate after considering the protest petition rejected the final
report and arrived at conclusion that case is made out against opposite
party under Sections 379 I.P.C. and cognizance order was also passed
on 25.04.2001 and summoned the accused/opposite party. Contention
of the counsel for the revisionist is perfectly correct that the
Magistrate has power straightway disagreeing with the conclusion
arrived at by the Investigating Officer.        Being aggrieved with the
order dated 25.04.2001, opposite party No.2 filed revision in the court
of District and Sessions Judge, Kannau. Sessions Court considered the
plea of alibi of the accused only on the basis of affidavit submitted by
opposite party and quash the order of cognizance passed by
Magistrate against the opposite party under Sections 379 I.P.C. vide
order dated 26.07.2001 and accepted the final report submitted by
investigating officer. Revisional Sessions Court has allowed the
revision of opposite party no.2 on the basis of plea of alibi filed on
affidavit of witness. But it is a settled principal of law that plea of alibi
must not be looked at the stage of investigation and inquiry. Plea of
alibi of accused shall be examined only during the trial at the stage of
defence. Order of learned Revisional Sessions Court is totally based
on plea of alibi of accused-oppposite parties on the basis of affidavit
submitted by witness before the Sessions Court. So the order of the
lower revisional court is not sustainable in the eyes of law. On
exercising the revisional power, learned Sessions Court cannot
quash the cognizance and summoning order passed by the
Magistrate, in exercising its revisional power, jurisdiction of
Sessions Court is very limited and the Sessions Court can only
examine the illegality, irregularity and impropriety of the order
passed by the Magistrate. If the Sessions Court find any illegality,
irregularity or jurisdictional error then Sessions Court cannot
quash the proceedings but the revisional court have only power to
issue direction by pointing out the error regarding the order
passed by the Magistrate. Therefore, order of learned Sessions
Court, is wholly erroneous and against the set principles of law.
10.   In view of the aforesaid discussion this Court is of the view the
present revision of revisionist is liable to be allowed and the order
dated 26.07.2001 passed by learned District and Session Judge,
Kannauj is hereby quashed.
11.   The District and Session Judge, Kannauj is directed to pass a
fresh order in accordance with law in view of the observation of this
Court after hearing the aggrieved parties.
12.   Accordingly, the revision is allowed.
13.   The office is directed to transmit back the lower court record, if
any, with a copy of the judgment and order of this Court before the
court below for its compliance.