referred to here as per their status before the trial Court.
3. It is the case of the plaintiffs that they owned residential
premises Tenement No. 0513-35-0216-0003-1 admeasuring
30.93.68 sq. mtrs, City Survey No. 53 (present 53/2) of
Municipal Census No. 1383 of village Mithakali, Ellisbridge
Ward No. 513 is owned and possessed by the appellants
and are staying with the family since the time of their
predecessors. It is the case of the plaintiffs that on eastern
side wall of his property, on the first floor of the premises,
there is window and balcony through which the appellants
used to get easementary right of air and sunlight, etc. since
long. According to the plaintiffs, they are using the said
balcony and window for their said easementary since
beginning, uninterruptedly and consistently. It is the case
of the plaintiffs that the defendant is raising construction
of the wall resulting into closure of their window and
balcony on the first floor on the eastern side. It is
contended that the defendant had started movement for
construction on 18.9.2016 touching to the eastern wall of
the plaintiffs in a manner that window and the balcony will
get closed. That the plaintiff tried to persuade the
defendant for not making such type of construction, but
the defendant had threatened of carrying out the
construction and, therefore, they have filed Civil Suit along
with injunction application.
3.1 Upon notice on the defendant, the defendant has appeared
and has filed reply and also filed counter-claim raising the
objection to the effect that the Suit is not maintainable in
its present form and the plaintiff has suppressed the
material fact. It is contended by the defendant that plaintiff
has no cause of action and plaintiff has not right of such
easement.     The     defendant        has contended        that       the
defendant is making construction on her own property and
that too with the approval of the concerned authorities.
4.  After hearing both the parties, ultimately trial Court has
rejected the application filed by the plaintiffs based on the
observation that there is no specific recital qua the right of
easement in respect of window and balcony on the eastern
side of the property of the plaintiffs at the first floor. It has
also observed that on perusal of the Sale Deed at Exh-4/1
reveals that no such right of easement has been mentioned
in Exh-4/1. It has also observed that the defendant is raising
the construction in her own property and Ahmedabad
Municipal Corporation or any other authority is not a party
to the present suit as well as there are no pleadings that
defendant is raising construction in violation of any law or
without obtaining any prior permission from any concerned
authorities. On this ground, trial Court has rejected the
application of the plaintiff.
5. Heard Mr. Mukesh Patel, learned advocate for the plaintiff
and Mr. Ankit Patel, learned advocate for the defendant
through video-conferencing. Perused the material placed
on record and the impugned order of the trial Court.
6. Mr. Mukesh Patel, learned advocate for the appellant has
vehemently submitted that the trial Court has committed
serious error of facts and law in rejecting interim injunction
application of the plaintiff. He has submitted that the
plaintiff’s property has been constructed after appropriate
approval by the concerned authority in the past and there is
a window and balcony in the eastern side wall of the
property of the plaintiffs. He has also submitted that the
defendant is trying to put up construction in such a manner
that the window and balcony of the plaintiff would be
closed and there will be no air and light available to the
plaintiff. According to him, there is a easementary right of
air and light in favour of the plaintiff from window and
balcony in the eastern side of the wall. He has invited the
attention of this Court to the various photographs
produced in the matter showing that the proposed
construction would close the window and balcony of the
plaintiff’s property. He has also submitted that the
defendant has filed a counter claim in the suit. He has
submitted that the plaintiff has also placed on record the
written arguments before the trial Court which has not
been considered by the trial Court. According to him, even
in the year 2014, the defendant has specifically issued
notice wherein it has been stated that the plaintiff was
putting construction on his property in his own land. He has
also invited the attention of the Court regarding the
alleged Notice dated 21.1.2014 wherein there is specific
averment made by the defendant’s husband namely
Vijaykumar that Plaintiff Atulbhai is putting construction
after leaving certain operation on the eastern side and has
not put up any common wall and has started construction in
his own portion of land leaving certain portion on the
eastern side. He has also contended that the wall on the
eastern side where the gap is made on the eastern side
should be closed immediately. In this regard, it is submitted
by the plaintiff that the averment itself suggest that the
plaintiff has left certain portion from his property for being
used for common purpose and thereafter they have
erected their house. According to him, the defendant has
filed counter-claim against the plaintiff for the closure of
the window. According to him, when there is dispute
pertaining to easementary right of air and light, since there
was status-quo maintained since 2016, same arrangement
may be continued for further time and plaintiff is ready to
cooperate for early disposal of the suit. He has also
submitted that there is no case of common wall.
6.1 Mr. Patel, learned advocate for the plaintiff has also
submitted that even if any permission is granted by the
concerned authority to the defendant for making any
construction in her own plots, that permission cannot
affect the easementary right of the neighbor in any
manner. While inviting the attention of this Court to the
illegal permission, a copy of which is on record, Mr. Patel
has submitted that there is a clause that it will not affect
the right of the others. He has submitted that the trial
Court has committed serious error of facts and law and,
therefore, this Court may interfered in the matter and
interim injunction be granted in favour of the plaintiff
restraining the defendant from raising the construction in a
manner which closes the window and balcony in the
eastern wall of the plaintiff.
7. Mr. Ankit Patel, learned advocate for the defendant has
vehemently submitted that the plaintiff is relying upon the
so-called plan of 1993 which is of the village Changispur
whereas now the vicinity is known as Mithakali and that this
plan is not authentic. The plaintiff has not put on record the
construction permission of the year 1933. He has also
submitted that even as per the Registration Act with every
registered document, there must be proper description of
the property with description of all the four sides. He has
submitted that the so-called old documents of the plaintiff
have no recital regarding the window and balcony. He has
submitted that the plaintiffs have put up the construction
of the first floor in 2014 and that too without any
permission of the Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation. He
has submitted that the defendant has served notice to the
plaintiff in the year 2014 which has not been replied by the
plaintiff. He has also submitted that the plaintiffs have put
up construction on 3rd floor during the pendency of the Suit.
While relying upon the written statement of the plaint as
well as the injunction application and the counter-claim, as
filed by the defendant before the trial Court, he has
submitted that this fact has been properly pleaded before
the trial Court and the defendant has already claimed the
counter-claim for removeal of the construction put up by
the plaintiffs with regard to window and balcony on the
first floor of plaintiff’s property. He has submitted that the
defendant has been granted permission by the authority as
per the plan and, therefore, the trial Court has rightly not
granted injunction in favour of the plaintiff. He has also
submitted that the defendant has raised construction in her
own property and if the window and balcony of the plaintiff
is kept as it is, then it will affect the privacy of the
defendant. He has also submitted that in the guise of
renovation due to damage caused due to earthquake, the
plaintiffs have put up window and balcony on the eastern
side wall of his property, creating alleged right of air and
light. He has submitted that the plaintiff has not come with
clean hands and submitted that if the construction of the
defendant is stopped, irreparable injury would be caused to
the defendant, whereas by putting the construction, no
injury would be caused to the plaintiff as they have illegally
put window and balcony on eastern side wall of his
property. He has supported the reasoning of the trial Court
and has prayed to dismiss the present appeal.
8.  Now, considering the averments made on behalf of both
the sides coupled with the material placed on record and
the impugned order of the trial Court, it is undisputed fact
that the plaintiffs and the defendant are neighbours. It also
appears from the record that at present there is a balcony
and window on the eastern side wall of the plaintiff’s
property facing to the property of the defendant. It also
appears that the defendant has got permission of
construction from Ahmedabad Municipal Corporation. It
also appears from the record that in the year 2014, there
was some construction of wall being carried out by the
plaintiff in their property, against which the defendant’s
husband had issued notice to one of the plaintiffs, wherein
he has specifically referred that as per the instruction of
Vijaykumar, the plaintiff Atulbhai has left certain portion of
the      land vacant   and    thereafter    has     started        new
construction upto first floor. It is also alleged that there is
no common wall constructed between two properties and
by leaving the portion of common wall, has completed the
construction of first floor. It is also averred therein that on
the side wall some portion has been kept open wherein no
ventilation or window be put up and if it is put up,
necessary legal action will be taken against him. Prima-
facie, it appears that the plaintiffs have put up this
construction in his own land keeping certain portion of land
open for common wall. Now, on perusal of the Photograph
produced in the matter, it clearly appears that the
constructions of the defendant is completely adjacent with
the wall of the plaintiffs. At this juncture, it is also
pertaining to note that defendant has also filed counter
claim for closure of the window and balcony of the
plaintiffs which is on the eastern side wall of the property
of the plaintiff. Thus, prima-facie it appears that when suit
was filed there was no construction, obstructing the
window and balcony of the plaintiff’s property on the
eastern side.      Now, there is allegation and counter
allegation, regarding the easementary right as well as
regarding illegal construction and there is also counter
claim for removal of window and balcony. Under these facts
and circumstances, it is necessary that status-quo be
maintained till both the parties lead their evidence in
support of their claim and counter-claim.
9. At this juncture, it is pertinent to note that it is settled law
that so far as the appeal against the interim order is
concerned, the Appellate Court is very much circumscribed
and the Appellate Court may not disturb the discretionary
order passed by the trial Court even if second view of the
matter is possible. However, if it appears that the trial
Court has not considered the material placed on record in
its proper perspective or has mis-directed itself or the
order is perversed one, the appellate Court can interfere in
such order which is passed under discretionary authority at
interim stage, by the trial Court. Now, admittedly in this
case, the trial Court has only referred to the document ar
Mark-4/1 and observed that there is no specific averment
regarding the easementary right of air and light. But the
pleadings of both the sides as well as the Photographs and
the notice issued by the defendant earlier wherein the
stand of the defendant is that plaintiffs have put up the
construction on first floor in 2014 after leaving certain
portion of land for common wall, and the fact that there is a
counter-claim put up by the defendant meaning thereby
that at the time of filing of the suit, window and balcony
were existing in the eastern wall of the plaintiff’s property,
all these facts are not considered by the trial Court . The
trial Court has merely relied upon the construction
permission    granted    by      the Ahmedabad          Municipal
Corporation in favour of the defendant for the proposed
construction. But even on perusal of the said permission,
there are conditions prescribed therein that it will not
affect the other right of the neighbours so far as the
construction is concerned.
10. It also appears that even during the pendency of the
interim injunction application, from 2016, there was interim
status-quo order in existence. Considering the aforesaid
fact, prima-facie it appears that if the defendant is
permitted to carry out the construction towards eastern
wall of the plaintiff, obstructing the window and balcony
then there would be closure of air and light permanently
and if the defendant completes the construction then suit
of the plaintiff would automatically stand dismissed
without any adjudication. Further, if in the trial, the
defendant succeeds to establish that the plaintiff has put
up the window and balcony illegally then as prayed in the
counter-claim, the said window and balcony may be
ordered to be closed. Thus, there is a triable issue.
Therefore, it is desirable that status-quo qua the
construction towards the eastern wall of the plaintiff is
maintained till the final disposal of the suit.
11. In view of the above, the present appeal from order is
allowed. The impugned order dated 5.1.2022, passed below
Exh-6-7 injunction application in Civil Suit (CCC) No. 1836 of
2016, passed by the learned Judge, Court No. 21, City Civil
Court, Ahmedabad is set-aside. The defendant is directed
to maintain status-quo of the construction towards eastern
side wall of the plaintiff’s property and will not carry out
any further construction on the side of plaintiff’s property
till the final disposal of the suit.
12.    It is made clear that whatever observations are made
hereinabove is purely made for adjudication on the interim
injunction application. The trial Court shall decide the suit
in accordance with law on the basis of evidence produced
by both the sides during trial, without being influenced by
any of the observations made herein.
13.    Considering the fact that the Suit is of the year 2016, the
trial Court is directed to expedite the suit and dispose of
the same as early as possible, preferably within four
months from the date of receipt of copy of this order.
Parties are directed to cooperate with the trial for disposal
of the Suit in a time bound manner.
No order as to costs.
Civil Application,    if     any, stands,    disposed           of
accordingly.