1)     Through the medium of instant petition, the petitioner has
sought bail in anticipation of arrest in FIR No.10/2021 for offences
under Section 366, 376, and 109 IPC registered with Police Station,
2)     The facts giving rise to the filing of the instant petition are that
the aforesaid FIR came to be registered on the basis of a complaint
made by one Ghulam Mohammad Ganai, the father of the prosecutrix.
In the complaint, the complainant submitted that his daughter, who is
aged 22 years, left her home on 26th January, 2021, but did not return
in the evening. It was further submitted in the complaint that despite
making efforts to trace out the prosecutrix, she could not be traced. It
was also alleged that the complainant had come to know that the
prosecutrix has been kidnapped by the petitioner herein. During
investigation of the case, the prosecutrix was recovered on 18.02.2021
from the custody of the accused/petitioner and her statement under
Section 164 of Cr. P. C came to be recorded by Judicial Magistrate,
1st Class, Beerwah. In her statement recorded under Section 164 of
Cr. P. C, the prosecutrix narrated that on 26th of January, 2021 at about
3.30 PM, when she had gone out of her house to fetch water from a
tube well, the petitioner came from behind, tied a cloth on her mouth
and forcibly made her to board a vehicle whereafter she was taken to
an unknown place and kept over there from 10/15 days. The
prosecutrix further stated that the petitioner committed forcible sexual
intercourse upon her. She went on to state that she was taken by the
petitioner to Otligam where, when they were waiting for a vehicle,
police came over there and the petitioner ran away and she was taken
by police and handed over to her father. It seems that statement of the
prosecutrix under Section 164 of Cr. P. C was once again recorded on
2nd July, 2021. This statement of the prosecutrix is more or less on
similar lines.
3)     It appears that relatives of the petitioner filed a writ petition
bearing WP(C) No.1332/2021 before this Court contending therein
that the prosecutrix has entered into a wedlock with the petitioner
which has annoyed the father of the prosecutrix and that the police
have registered an FIR, on the basis of which they are being harassed.
4)     This Court vide order dated 12.07.2021 passed an interim order
observing that there cannot be any reason for the official respondents
to harass the petitioners because of the fact that their close relation is
married to the prosecutrix. On 16.08.2021, the Writ Court directed
SHO, P/S Beerwah, to produce the prosecutrix before the Court.
Accordingly, on 23.08.2021, the prosecutrix was produced before the
Writ Court. In the order dated 23.03.2021, passed by the Writ Court,
it has been recorded that the girl has reiterated the statement made by
her before the Judicial Magistrate, 1st Class, Beerwah.
5)     The respondent has contested the bail application by filing a
reply thereto. In its reply, the respondent has reiterated the facts which
have been narrated hereinbefore and it has been contended that the
petitioner has committed a heinous offence, as such, he does not
deserve the concession of bail.
6)     It has been contended by learned counsel for the petitioner that
the prosecutrix has entered into a wedlock with the petitioner out of
her own will and volition and, as such, the allegations made in the FIR
are absolutely false. The petitioner has placed on record a copy of the
marriage agreement and copy of the Nikah Nama to substantiate these
contentions. It has been further contended that the investigating
agency has never called the petitioner nor has the investigating agency
felt any need to arrest the petitioner, which clearly shows that the
petitioner is not required for the investigation. In support of these
contentions, learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the
(I)    Haji Umar Din v. UT of J&K & others, Bail App
7)     Per contra, it has been contended by learned counsel for the
respondent that the petitioner is avoiding his arrest and on this ground
alone, his application deserves to be rejected. According to the
respondent, the earlier bail application of the petitioner was rejected
by the learned Additional Sessions Judge, Budgam, and there is no
reason to enlarge the petitioner on bail by taking a different view.
8)     I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
record of the case including the Case Diary.
9)     So far as the principles for grant of bail in anticipation of arrest
are concerned, the same have been laid down by a Constitution Bench
of the Supreme Court in the case of Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and ors.
vs. State of Punjab, (1980) 2 Supreme Court Cases 565. The Court
has, while observing that the question, whether to grant bail or not,
depends for its answer upon a variety of circumstances, the cumulative
effect of which must enter into the judicial verdict, held as under:
“In regard to anticipatory bail, if the proposed
accusation appears to stem not from motives of
furthering the ends of justice but from some ulterior
motive, the object being to injure and humiliate the
applicant by having him arrested, a direction for the
release of the applicant on bail in the event of his arrest
would generally be made. On the other hand, if it
appears likely, considering the antecedents of the
applicant, that taking advantage of the order of
anticipatory bail he will flee from justice, such an order
would not be made. But the converse of these
propositions is not necessarily true. That is to say, it
cannot be laid down as an inexorable rule that
anticipatory bail cannot be granted unless the
proposed accusation appears to be actuated by mala
fides; and, equally, that anticipatory bail must be
granted if there is no fear that the applicant will
abscond. There are several other considerations, too
numerous to enumerate, the combined effect of which
must weigh with the court while granting or rejecting
anticipatory bail. The nature and seriousness of the
proposed charges, the context of the events likely to
lead to the making of the charges, a reasonable
possibility of the applicant's presence not being
secured at the trial, a reasonable apprehension that
witnesses will be tampered with and "the larger
interests of the public or the state" are some of the
considerations which the court has to keep in mind
while deciding an application for anticipatory bail. The
relevance of these considerations was pointed out
in The State v. Captain Jagjit Singh, which, though,
corresponds to the present Section 439 of the Code. It
is of paramount consideration to remember that the
freedom of the individual is as necessary for the
survival of the society as it is for the egoistic purposes
of the individual. A person seeking anticipatory bail is
still a free man entitled to the presumption of
innocence. He is willing to submit to restraints on his
freedom, by the acceptance of conditions which the
court may think fit to impose, in consideration of the
assurance that if arrested, he shall be enlarged on
bail”.
10)   Relying upon the aforesaid judgment, the Supreme Court in the
case of Siddharam Satlingappa Mhetre vs State of Maharashtra
And Ors, (2011) 1 Supreme Court Cases 694 has, while observing
that no inflexible guidelines or straitjacket formula can be provided
for grant or refusal of anticipatory bail, held that the following factors
and parameters can be taken into consideration while dealing with the
“(i). The nature and gravity of the accusation and the
(ii). The antecedents of the applicant including the fact
as to whether the accused has previously undergone
imprisonment on conviction by a Court in respect of
(iii). The possibility of the applicant to flee from
iv. The possibility of the accused's likelihood to repeat
similar or the other offences.
(v). Where the accusations have been made only with
the object of injuring or humiliating the applicant by
arresting him or her.
(vi). Impact of grant of anticipatory bail particularly
in cases of large magnitude affecting a very large
number of people.
(vii). The courts must evaluate the entire available
material against the accused very carefully. The court
must also clearly comprehend the exact role of the
accused in the case. The cases in which accused is
implicated with the help of sections 34 and 149 of the
Indian Penal Code, the court should consider with
even greater care and caution because over
implication in the cases is a matter of common
(viii). While considering the prayer for grant of
anticipatory bail, a balance has to be struck between
two factors namely, no prejudice should be caused to
the free, fair and full investigation and there should be
prevention of harassment, humiliation and unjustified
(ix). The court to consider reasonable apprehension of
tampering of the witness or apprehension of threat to
(x). Frivolity in prosecution should always be
considered and it is only the element of genuineness
that shall have to be considered in the matter of grant
of bail and in the event of there being some doubt as
to the genuineness of the prosecution, in the normal
course of events, the accused is entitled to an order of
bail”.
11)    In the light of the afore-quoted principles laid down by the
Supreme Court, let me now proceed to analyze the facts of the instant
12)    As already noted, the prosecutrix has, in her statement recorded
under Section 164 of Cr. P. C on two occasions, clearly implicated the
petitioner by stating that she was kidnapped by him whereafter she
was taken to some unknown place and subjected to forcible sexual
13)    It has been contended by learned counsel for the petitioner that
the prosecutrix has entered into wedlock with the petitioner and
because of pressure from her parents, she has made a false statement
against the petitioner. The contention of learned counsel for the
petitioner cannot be accepted for the reason that while considering a
bail application, the Court has to attach presumption of correctness to
the statement of a witness recorded during the investigation of the
case, particularly when the said statement has been recorded by a
Judicial Magistrate. Even otherwise, the prosecutrix has reiterated her
allegations against the petitioner when she was brought before the
High Court during the proceedings in the writ petition. The
prosecutrix has not admitted her marriage with the petitioner in any of
her statements. Therefore, it cannot be stated that the prosecution
launched against the petitioner is frivolous. The ratio laid down in the
judgments relied upon by the petitioner is not applicable as the same
are distinguishable on facts.
14)    Another factor which needs to be taken into account while
considering an application for grant of anticipatory bail is the
possibility of the accused to flee from justice. It has been specifically
pleaded by the respondent that the petitioner is avoiding his arrest. In
fact, a perusal of the Case Diary reveals that the investigating agency
has made strenuous efforts to trace out and arrest the petitioner but
their efforts so far have not met with success. In such circumstances,
when the petitioner is dodging the investigating agency and has not
made himself available before the investigating agency, if he is
enlarged on anticipatory bail, there is every likelihood that he may flee
from justice.
15)    Apart from the above, another factor which goes against the
petitioner is the nature and gravity of the accusation and his role in the
alleged crime. The petitioner has been booked for having committed
the offences under Section 366/376 IPC, which is a serious offence.
The investigating agency has collected material to support the
allegations made against the petitioner who happens to be the main
accused. The offences of this kind are very grave in nature and cannot
be taken lightly otherwise perpetrators of sexual assault upon women
would get encouraged.
16)     For the forgoing reasons, the petitioner cannot be extended the
concession of anticipatory bail. The petition is, therefore, dismissed
along with connected CrlM.
17)     CD file be returned to the learned counsel for the respondent.