1]                Rule. Rule made returnable forthwith and heard
finally.
2]                The petitioner is challenging the order dated
08.09.2022 passed by the respondent no.1 – Collector, Jalna
under section 7 read with 16 of the Maharashtra Village
Panchayats Act, 1958 [for short ‘the 1958 Act’], and thereby
disqualifying the petitioner as a member and Sarpanch of
village Panchayat, Gundewadi, Taluka & District, Jalna, for
not conducting at least four meetings of the Gram Sabha in
the financial year.
Brief facts leading to filing of the petition can be
summarised as under :
3]                The petitioner is a Sarpanch of Grampanchayat,
Gundewadi. The respondent no.3 filed an application to the
Collector, respondent no.1, seeking disqualification of the
petitioner under Section 7 read with 16 of the 1958 Act, on
22.10.2021. It was contended in the said application that
the applicant has not attended any meeting of the Gram
Sabha and as such the petitioner should be disqualified
from holding the post of the Sarpanch and also from his
membership of the village panchayat for not holding four
meetings of Gram Sabha in the financial year. Pursuant to
the said application, the respondent no.1 – Collector, Jalna,
by letter dated 30.12.2021, issued notice to the petitioner.
On 11.05.2022, the respondent no. 2 – Gramsevak, Village
Panchayat, Gundewadi submitted his report in the office of
the respondent no.1 - Collector. Vide its say dated
14.06.2022, the petitioner submitted that he has conducted
Gramsabha meetings and that there was a delay in taking
meeting in the beginning of the year, on account of Covid-
19 pandemic and the various prohibitory orders being
passed under Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code
by the Collector, Jalna, himself.
4]                By order dated 8th September, 2022, the
respondent no.1 – Collector, Jalna disqualified the petitioner
for violation of mandate of Section 7 [1] of the 1958 Act.
The Collector held that the petitioner has conducted
consecutive meetings in short period without explanation
for the same and has also not held one of the meeting at the
beginning of the financial year within first two months.
5]                The learned counsel for the petitioner submits
that time of the election, covid-19 pandemic was prevalent
and that there were Government Circulars and prohibitory
orders passed by the respondent no.1 in force. The
Government Circular was issued on 12 th May, 2020 under
the Disaster Management Act wherein it was directed that
in view of the prevalent pandemic situation there shall be a
stay to conducting of Gram Sabhas as per Section 7 of the
Maharashtra Village Panchayats Act. This Circular was in
force for a period of one year, which was again extended
further. It is further contended that the respondent no.1 –
Collector of the Jalna District had also issued prohibitory
order under Section 144 from 05.04.2021 to 15.06.2021.
6]                The petitioner submits that he conducted the
requisite minimum four [4] Gram Sabhas. The first Gram
Sabha meeting was held by the petitioner on 03.09.2021.
The second Gram Sabha meeting was held on 16.11.2021.
The third Gram Sabha meeting was fixed on 26.11.2021 but
the same was postponed to 30.11.2021 and the fourth Gram
Sabha meeting was held on-line on 26.01.2022, in view of
the direction issued by the Deputy Chief Executive Officer
[Panchayat], Zilla Parishad, Jalna to conduct the meeting of
Gram Sabha on-line on 26.01.2022.
7]                The petitioner submits that he has conducted
requisite number of meetings within the relevant financial
year after the prohibitory orders were lifted. The Act of
1958 does not contemplate nature and manner in which the
meetings are to be conducted except that there has to be
not more than four months gap in between two meetings.
8]                The learned counsel further submits that even if
it is held that the meetings are not conducted as per the
provisions of the Act of 1958 unless there is mala fide
reasons for not doing so, the petitioner cannot be removed
from his office for mere violation unless there are
exceptional circumstances.
9]                The learned counsel for the respondent no.2,
who supports the petitioner, submits that the notice issued
by the Collector, Jalna dated 30.12.2021 in the application
filed by the respondent no.3, does not specify the charge
and is bad in law, in view of the judgment of this Court in
the case of Sunil Daulat Patil Vs. The State of Maharashtra
& others in Writ Petition No.3419 of 2023, decided on
04.12.2013 at paras 13 to 18 wherein it is held that the
charges have to be specific, in absence of which, the notice
is bad in law and the subsequent proceedings are also bad
in law.
10]               The learned counsel further submits that the
requirement of the meeting to be held within first two
months of the financial year is contemplated in the Rules
and not in the Act and violation of the Rule cannot lead to
disqualification. The learned counsel for the respondent
no.2 relies upon the judgment in the case of Pratibha Sanjay
Hulle Vs. Additional Collector & ors. reported in 2010 (4)
Bom.C.R. 700 at paras 4, 5 and 6 wherein it is held that no
penal action can be initiated for violation of the rules if
there is no provisions for the same in the Statute.
11]               The learned counsel for the respondent no.3
submits that in the reply of the petitioner before the
Collector no dates are mentioned of the meetings and
therefore there were no meetings conducted by the
petitioner and that the petitioner has created bogus record
to show the meetings were held and as such the petitioner
should be disqualified.
Consideration and conclusions :
12]               The relevant provisions i.e. section 7 (1) and 16
of the Maharashtra Village Panchayats Act, 1958 are quoted
7.    Meetings of Gram Sabha. -
(1) There shall be held at least [four
meetings] of the Gram Sabha [every financial
year] on such date, at such [time and place and
in such manner], as may be prescribed [and if
the Sarpanch, or in his absence the Upa-
Sarpanch fails without sufficient cause, to [hold
[any of such four meetings]], he shall be
disqualified for continuing as Sarpanch or, as
the case may be, Upa Sarpanch or for being
chosen as such for the remainder of the term of
office of the members [of the Panchayat; and
the Secretary of the Panchayat shall also if,
prima facie, found responsible of any lapse in
convening such meeting, be liable to be
suspended, and for being proceeded against, for
such other disciplinary action as provided under
the relevant rules]. The decision of the
Collector on the question whether or not there
was such sufficient cause shall be final] :
[Provided that, the Sarpanch may, at any
time of his own motion, and, shall, on
requisition of the Standing Committee,
Panchayat Samiti, or chief Executive Officer, call
a meeting of the Gram Sabha within the period
specified in the requisition; and, on failure to
do so, the Chief Executive Officer shall require
the Block Development Officer to call the
meeting within fifteen days from the date he is
so required to do. The meeting shall,
notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section
(3), be presided over by him or any officer
authorised by the Block Development Officer, in
that behalf.]
[Provided further that, a period of not
more than [four months] shall be allowed to
elapse between the two meetings of the Gram
Provided also that, if the Sarpanch or
Upa-Sarpanch, as the case may be, fails to call
any such meeting within the specified period,
the Secretary shall call the meeting and it shall
be presumed that such meeting has been called
with the concurrence of the Sarpanch or, as the
case may be, Upa-Sarpanch.]
16.    Disability from continuing as members. -
(1)    If any member of a panchayat, -
(a) who is elected or appointed as
such, was subject to any of the
disqualifications mentioned in Section 14
at the time of his election or
(b) during the term for which he has
been elected or appointed, incurs any of
the disqualifications mentioned in
he shall be disabled from continuing to be a
member, and his office shall become vacant.
(2) [If any question whether a vacancy has
occurred under this section is raised by the
Collector suo motu or on an application made
to him by any person in that behalf, the
Collector shall decide the question as far as
possible within sixty days from the date of
receipt of such application. Until the Collector
decides the question, the member shall not be
disabled under sub-section (1) from continuing
to be a member.] Any person aggrieved by the
decision of the Collector may, within a period of
fifteen days from the date of such decision,
appeal to the State Government, and the orders
passed by the State Government in such appeal
Provided that no order shall be passed
under this sub-section by the Collector against
any member without giving him a reasonable
opportunity of being heard.
13]               Having heard the rival submissions of both
parties. It is to be noted that the requirement of Section 7 of
the 1958 Act is that there has to be at least four meetings in
the financial year. In the present case, we are concerned
with the financial year i.e. 1 st April, 2021 to 31st March,
2022. The petitioner was appointed as Sarpanch on
12.02.2021. The record indicates that first meeting of Gram
Sabha was held on 03.09.2021. The record further indicates
that the Gramsabha meeting dated 16.11.2021 was
conducted as a special meeting. Thereafter, the next
Gramsabha           meeting    was   scheduled      on    26.11.2021,
however, on account of lack of requisite quoram, the said
meeting was postponed and the said meeting was held on
30.11.2021. Thereafter, the meeting was held online on
26.01.2022 on account of direction issued by the authority
to hold on-line meeting.
14]               As per the Government Circular dated 12 th May,
2020 issued under the Department of Revenue and Forest,
Disaster        Management,    Relief  and      Rehabilitation,         the
meetings of Gram Sabha were directed to be stalled until
further orders or for a period of one year.
15]               The learned counsel for the petitioner has
submitted that this order dated 12.05.2020 was again
continued. It appears from the record that from 5 th April,
2021 the Collector, Jalna, had issued the orders under
Section 144 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in the entire
Jalna District and the same were extended up to 15th June,
2021. The requirement of law under Section 7 (1) of the
1958 Act is that there has to be four [4] meetings in the
financial year and that there should not be a gap of more
than 4 months between the meetings.
16]               The law on the subject i.e. disqualification of an
elected member for not complying mandatory provisions is
dealt with in the cases of Ravi Yashwant Bhoir Vs. District
Collector, Raigad and others reported in [2012] 4 SCC 407,
Gangabai Vithal Bade Vs. State of Maharashtra & ors.
Reported 2013 [3] Bom.C.R. 277 and Sunil Daulat Patil Vs.
The State of Maharashtra & others in Writ Petition No.3419
of 2013, decided on 04.12.2013.                The Hon’ble Supreme
Court in the case of Ravi Yashwant Bhoir Vs. District
Collector, Raigad and others reported in [2012] 4 SCC 407
has held at para nos.35, 36 and 37 as under:
35.    The elected official is accountable to its
electorate because he is being elected by a large
number of voters. His removal has serious
repercussions as he is removed from the post
and    declared    disqualified    to    contest        the
elections for a further stipulated period, but it
also takes away the right of the people of his
constituency    to    be   represented        by      him.
Undoubtedly, the right to hold such a post is
statutory and no person can claim any absolute
or vested right to the post, but he cannot be
removed without strictly adhering to the
provisions provided by the legislature for his
removal (vide Jyoti Basu v. Debi Ghosal, Mohan
Lal Tripathi v. District Magistrate, Rae Bareily
and Ram Beti v. District Panchayat Raj
36.    In view of the above, the law on the issue
stands crystallised to the effect that an elected
member      can   be  removed       in    exceptional
circumstances giving strict adherence to the
statutory provisions and holding the enquiry,
meeting the requirement of principles of
natural justice and giving an incumbent an
opportunity to defend himself, for the reason
that removal of an elected person casts stigma
upon him and takes away his valuable statutory
right. Not only the elected office-bearer but his
constituency / electoral college is also deprived
of representation by the person of their choice.
37.    A duly elected person is entitled to hold
office for the term for which he has been
elected and he can be removed only on a
proved misconduct or any other procedure
established under law like “no confidence
motion”, etc. The elected official is accountable
to its electorate as he has been elected by a
large number of voters and it would have
serious repercussions when he is removed from
the office and further declared disqualified to
contest the election for a further stipulated
period.
17]               This Court in the case of Gangabai Vithal Bade
Vs. State of Maharashtra & ors. Reported 2013 [3] Bom.C.R.
277, it has been held at paras 4 and 5, as under:-
4.     No doubt, provisos of section 7 provided
various other requirements of Gram Sabha
meetings. In addition to section 7, there are
rules made for providing procedure etc. of
Gram Sabha meetings. Section 7 on the whole
read with rules indicates that a Sarpanch or in
his absence Upsarpanch should at least hold six
meetings of Gram Sabha every financial year.
Proviso and rules provided inter alia that
maximum period of three months is permitted
between two meetings of Gram Sabha. Sub-
section (5) of section 7 further provides that
meeting of women members of Gram Sabha
should be held before the regular meeting of
Gram Sabha. In addition to this, prescribed
rules, namely, Bombay Village Panchayats
Rules, 1959 further enjoins a Sarpanch to hold
first meeting of Gram Sabha of every financial
year    within     two       months        from         the
commencement of the year and second should
be held in November every year. They further
provide that Gram Sabha meeting should be
held also in August and January of every year.
In my view, since the rule in respect of
disqualification is mentioned in sub-section (1)
and since it is a penal provision, strict
construction is required to be given to it. Sub-
section (1) clearly lays down a rule that only in
case of failure to hold six Gram Sabha
meetings,     the    Sarpanch         would          incur
disqualification. Other requirements of meeting
are not included in sub-section (1) and so in
case of non observance of other requirements
penal consequence of disqualification is not
incurred. In other words, if six meetings are
held in one financial year, but they were not
held as per remaining provisions contained in
section 7 or in the rules, a Sarpanch may not
incur disqualification.
5.    Second point that arose in this case is
whether the petitioner / sarpanch incurred
disqualification in case he did not give notice of
meetings. Learned Assistant Collector held that
because of want of notice, he incurred
disqualification.    The     rules    provided         that
sarpanch is responsible for giving seven days
notice of each Gram Sabha meeting. It is
observed that seven days notice for meetings
was not given by the petitioner. The learned
Assistant Collector held that because of this
lapse      the      petitioner        would           incur
disqualification. I am not in agreement with this
ruling also. I would place reliance only on sub-
section (1) of section 7 when I would examine
whether the petitioner incurred disqualification.
As said above, other lapses or infringement of
other rules and provisos, in my view will not
incur drastic result of disqualification. The
petition, therefore, should succeed on merit.
The impugned order stands set aside.
18]               In the case of Sunil Daulat Patil Vs. The State of
Maharashtra & others in Writ Petition No.3419 of 2013,
decided on 04.12.2013 held at para nos.14 and 15 :
14.     Upon careful perusal of the contents of
the notice,    which      was      issued        to     the
petitioner    under Sections       7     and      36      of
the said Act, it is abundantly clear that
there is no mention of any specific charges-
points, which are required to be answered by
the petitioner. This Court in the case of Pratiba
Sanjay Hulle Vs. Additional Collector & others
reported      in    2010(4)Bom.C.R.700,              more
particular, in para No. 36 held that, 'to enable
Sarpanch     to    raise   proper      defence         and
explain sufficient cause for his failure to
perform any statutory function, he must be
informed essentially as regards his failure
meaning thereby he must be communicated the
specific charges.'
15. In the facts of that case, the allegation was
that the petitioner therein i.e. Sarpanch, did not
perform his statutory obligation as envisaged
under     Sections    7 and     36     of    the      said
Act. This Court taking into consideration the
fact that the specific      charges       were         not
communicated        to   the petitioner          therein,
held that enquiry and the order passed against
the petitioner therein is vitiated.
19]               Thus, from the judgments quoted above, it is
made clear that an elected member is to be removed in
exceptional circumstances and that he has to be explained
the specific charge against him and also the elected member
should be given an opportunity to explain sufficient cause
for his failure to perform statutory duty. Mere non-
performance of the statutory duty would not disqualify the
elected member unless he is not able to give a good reason
for non-performing of the statutory duty. Thus, non-
performance of statutory duty does not lead to automatic
disqualification.
20]               In the instant case, the petitioner has held four
[4] meetings of Gram Sabha after lifting of the prohibitory
orders under the Disaster Management Act and prohibition
under Section 144 of the Criminal Procedure Code and thus
he has not violated provisions of Section 7 of the 1958 Act,
which contemplates that there has to be four meetings every
financial year and that there should not be a gap of more
than four months in between two meetings. The petitioner
has indisputably held meetings on 03.09.2021, 16.11.2021,
30.11.2021 and on-line meeting on 26.01.2022.
21]               In view of the fact that I hold that the petitioner
has complied with the Section 7 of the 1958 Act it is not
necessary for me to go into the issue of notice being served
without specific charges.
22]               The Collector by the impugned order has held
that there was no reason given for holding consecutive
meetings, however, the Act does not contemplate holding of
meetings in a particular way. The requirement of law is that
in the financial year there has to be at least four meetings of
the Gram Sabha and that gap in between meetings should
not be more than 4 months. Even otherwise excluding
period of covid-19 whereby the State had directed not to
hold the meetings of Gram Sabha and that the various
prohibitory orders are passed under Section 144 of Code of
Criminal         Procedure,    placing   restrictions      on     holding
meetings up to 15th June, 2021, the petitioner has complied
with the provision of holding of Gram Sabha meetings as
contemplated in the Act.
23]               In view of this, the Writ Petition is allowed. The
impugned order dated 08.09.2022 passed by the respondent
no.1 – the Collector, Jalna is quashed and set aside.
24]               Rule is made   absolute    in    above        terms.
Accordingly, the Writ Petition is disposed of.