under sections 20, 21 and 22 of the NDPS Act and under
Section 66(B) and 65(E) of the Prohibition Act, the appellant –
State of Gujarat has preferred the captioned appeal inter alia
challenging the judgment and order of acquittal in favour of
the respondent-accused.
2.     The brief facts of the case are that on 08/06/1990 at
about 17:00 while the respondent-accused was passing near
Juni Haji Dawod Hospital, Pehla Nala on Dhoraji Road to Jetpur
Village carrying one bag, at that time the Police Personnel on
suspicion made his search and found 1 Kilogram and 490 Gram
of Charas for selling without having valid pass or permit and
thus committed the aforesaid offence. The complainant lodged
the complaint with regard to the incident before Jetpur City
Police Station, which was registered as I – C.R. No.59 of 1990
for the aforesaid offences.
3.     In pursuance of the complaint lodged by the complainant,
investigating agency recorded statements of the witnesses,
collected relevant evidence and drawn various Panchnamas
and other relevant evidence for the purpose of proving the
offence.       After having found material against the respondent
accused, charge-sheet came to be filed in the Court of learned
Magistrate, Jetpur. As said Court lacks jurisdiction to try the
offence, it committed the case to the Sessions Court, Gondal
as provided under section 209 of the Code.
4.     Upon committal of the case to the Sessions Court,
Gondal,         learned Sessions Judge framed charge at Exh.1
against the respondent accused for the aforesaid offence. The
respondent accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried
5.      In order to bring home charge, the prosecution has
examined following prosecution witnesses and also produced
various documentary evidence before the learned trial Court,
List of Prosecution Witnesses:-
6.      On conclusion of evidence on the part of the prosecution,
the     trial     Court      put   various       incriminating    circumstances
appearing in the evidence to the respondent accused so as to
obtain his explanation/answer as provided u/s 313 of the Code.
In the further statement, the respondent accused denied all
incriminating circumstances appearing against him as false.
After hearing both the sides and after analysis of evidence
adduced by the prosecution, the learned trial Judge acquitted
the respondent accused of the offences, for which he was tried,
as the prosecution failed to prove the case beyond reasonable
7.    We have heard learned APP Ms. Shah appearing for the
appellant-State and re-examined the record and proceedings
conducted before the learend trial Court. The case ended into
acquittal mainly on the premise that there was non-compliance
of mandatory provisions of the NDPS Act on the part of the
Investigating Agency. The learned trial Court in nutshell
recorded non-compliance in paragraph 7 of the impugned
judgment and order (free translation in English) which reads
“(7)         As discussed above, when the independent Pancha
witnesses have not corroborated the case of prosecution, it is to be
taken into consideration as to whether the accused can be held
responsible for the stated offence only on the basis of evidence of
police witnesses? If this question is taken into consideration, it
appears that it cannot be answered except in negative. Because, as
per the provisions of the NDPS Act and the established principles
of law, the complainant and the investigator cannot be the same.
The offence should have been investigated by an independent
agency. In the present case, the complainant P.S.I. Shri Jankate
has also investigated the case. Thus, the investigation in the
present case is against the established principles of law. It cannot
be said to be a neutral investigation. Further, as per the provisions
of the NDPS Act, it is mandatory to record in writing the
information received by a Police Officer. Despite this fact, it has
been stated that P.S.I. Shri Jankat had received the information at
3:45 hours, he reached the so called place of incident at 4:00 hours
and he had recovered the muddamal from the accused at 5:30
hours. Thus, though he had sufficient time for making an entry
regarding receiving of information, he has not made an entry in
writing in this regard. Such circumstances make the case further
doubtful and important provisions of the NDPS Act have been
violated. It is important to note that it is clear from the depositions
of Police Witness Shri Shah and the complainant that P.S.I. Jankar
had not given understanding to the accused as to the fact that
under the provisions of N.D.P.S Act, an accused has a right to get
his physical examination done before a gazetted officer or a
Magistrate. A remark in this regard is also not made in the
panchnama. Further, Shri Jankat has admitted this fact during his
cross-examination. Thus, the accused had been deprived of such an
important right and thereby the important provisions of the NDPS
Act have been violated. Further, the muddamal of the incident has
been recovered by him on 08/01/1990 and he has not undertaken
any procedure regarding sending it to the F.S.L. Further, not any
clear evidence has been produced by him which corroborates that
he had handed over the muddamal to the P.S.O. Thus, the
investigating officer has kept the muddamal with him for a long
time. Under such circumstances the facts of complainant become
doubtful. It is pertinent to note that, as stated by P.S.I. Shri Jankat
and as per the remark on the panchnama, he had sent 40 grams of
Hashish to the F.S.L., whereas, as per the letter of F.S.L., 28.526
grams of Hashish has been stated as received, which means that
the quantity sent to F.S.L. had not been weighed in presence of the
accused or Shri Jankat had recorded the estimated weight. This is
a serious nature of irregularity and it also makes the case of
prosecution doubtful. It is pertinent to note that, with a view to
show that he had informed the recovery of muddamal to his
seniors, the complainant has produced the letter at Exhibit-21. But,
any statement of the C.P.I. has not been produced with regard to
receiving the letter by the C.P.I. Further, there is a noteworthy
contradiction in the depositions of Shri Jankat and the deposition
of the constable. As stated by Jankat, when the muddamal was
recovered at the place of incident, it was kept in a clothe bag
which had been made by stitching the cloth with a needle and
thread. Whereas, in the muddamal produced before the court, the
bag appears to have been stitched with a machine on three sides
and this fact has been admitted by the complainant. Thus, all the
procedure, i.e. seizing the muddamal, applying seal thereon and
sending it to the F.S.L., done by P.S.I. Shri Jankat appears to be
doubtful. Under such circumstances and on the basis of such
evidences of the police witnesses including the complainant and
the Investigating Officer, it appears not to be in the interest of
justice that the accused be held guilty for violation of such serious
provisions    of  the N.D.P.S.     Act. Therefore,    consequent           to
determining Point no.1 and 2 accordingly, following order is
issued.”
8.     In view of the fact that there is an allegation and also
prosecution case that the respondent was carrying 1 Kilogram
and 490 Gram Charas on 08/06/1990 at about 5:00 p.m. while
passing through Dhoraji Road to Jetpur Village, we have re-
assessed and re-analyzed the evidence placed on record to
verify the fact as to whether there is non-observance of
provisions of NDPS Act or not.
9.     It is a matter of fact that the Investigating Officer acted
on prior information as deposed by him below Exhibit-18 as PW
9. In view of such position, PW 9, complainant-IO while acting
on prior information and before making search of a person, it is
imperative for him to inform the respondent-accused about his
right to sub-section (1) of Section 50 of the NDPS Act for being
taken to the nearest Gazetted Officer or the Magistrate for
making search in their presence. It also appears that neither
such procedure is followed; nor any note to the said effect is
made in the Panchnama drawn while making search of the
person of the respondent-accused. As laid down in the case of
State Of Punjab vs Baldev Singh [1999 (6) SCC 172], the
respondent-accused must be made aware of his right for being
search to be carried out in presence of a Gazetted Officer or a
Magistrate. Learned APP could not point out any evidence or
document showing that respondent-accused was made aware
of his right before the Magistrate or Gazetted Officer. On
perusal of deposition of PW 9, the complainant, no evidence
has been adduced to show that respondent-accused was
communicated of his such right and thus there is a non-
compliance of provisions of Section 50 read with Section 43 of
10.    There also appears to be breach or violation of Section 50
of the NDPS Act, because it is a statutory requirement of
writing down or conveying information to Superior Officer. In
the case on hand, neither such intimation is sent to Superior
Officer; nor any entry is made in the station diary. It has also
come on record that PW 9 has sent 40 Gram of muddamal to
FSL.; whereas, as per letter of FSL, it has received only 28.526
Gram. No explanation as to difference in weight is brought on
record, the learned trial Court has considered the same as
serious nature of irregularity and lapse on the part of the
prosecution. No any information has been forwarded to the
Superior Officer with regard to the recovery of muddamal.
11.    Similarly, there is contradiction in the deposition of PW 9-
complainant and Police Constable; inasmuch as the muddamal
was recovered on the place of incident which was kept in
clothe bag which had been made by stitching the cloth with
needle and thread. Whereas, the muddamal produced before
the Court in the bag which appears to have been stitched with
a machine on three sides and thus all the procedure seizing of
the muddamal, sealing of the muddamal and sending to FSL
were found doubtful and procedure precedent to the search
was done in utter disregard to the mandatory provisions of law
and therefore, the learned trial Court has rightly extended the
benefit of doubt to the respondent-accused and we also
endorse the view/finding of the learned trial Judge leading to
the acquittal.
12.    It is a cardinal principle of criminal jurisprudence that in
an acquittal appeal if other view is possible, then also, the
appellate Court cannot substitute its own view by reversing the
acquittal into conviction, unless the findings of the trial Court
are perverse, contrary to the material on record, palpably
wrong, manifestly erroneous or demonstrably unsustainable.
(Ramesh Babulal Doshi V. State of Gujarat (1996) 9 SCC 225).
In the instant case, the learned APP has not been able to point
out to us as to how the findings recorded by the learned trial
Court are perverse, contrary to material on record, palpably
wrong, manifestly erroneous or demonstrably unsustainable.
13.    In the case of Ram Kumar v. State of Haryana, reported
in AIR 1995 SC 280, Supreme Court has held as under:
“The powers of the High Court in an appeal from order of
acquittal to reassess the evidence and reach its own
conclusions under Sections 378 and 379, Cr.P.C. are as
extensive as in any appeal against the order of conviction. But
as a rule of prudence, it is desirable that the High Court
should give proper weight and consideration to the view of
the Trial Court with regard to the credibility of the witness, the
presumption of innocence in favour of the accused, the right
of the accused to the benefit of any doubt and the slowness of
appellate Court in justifying a finding of fact arrived at by a
Judge who had the advantage of seeing the witness. It is
settled law that if the main grounds on which the lower Court
has based its order acquitting the accused are reasonable and
plausible, and the same cannot entirely and effectively be
dislodged or demolished, the High Court should not disturb
the order of acquittal."
14.     As observed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Rajesh Singh & Others vs. State of Uttar Pradesh reported in
(2011) 11 SCC 444 and in the case of Bhaiyamiyan Alias Jardar
Khan and Another vs. State of Madhya Pradesh reported in
(2011) 6 SCC 394, while dealing with the judgment of acquittal,
unless reasoning by the learned trial Court is found to be
perverse, the acquittal cannot be upset. It is further observed
that High Court's interference in such appeal in somewhat
circumscribed and if the view taken by the learned trial Court
is possible on the evidence, the High Court should stay its
hands and not interfere in the matter in the belief that if it had
been the trial Court, it might have taken a different view.
15.     Considering the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the
case and law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court while
considering the scope of appeal under Section 378 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, no case is made out to interfere with the
impugned judgment and order of acquittal.
16.     In view of the above and for the reasons stated above,
present appeal deserves to be dismissed and is accordingly
dismissed while confirming the judgment and order of acquittal
rendered by the learned Court below.