The State of Tripura and 3 others                     ----Respondent(s)
Heard Mr. DC Roy, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner. Also
heard Mr. PK Dhar, learned Senior GA assisted by Ms. Sarama Deb,
learned counsel for the State-respondents and Mr. KK Pal, learned
counsel appearing for the respondent-AMC.
Very unfortunate case is placed before this court.
The wife of the petitioner died at Bangalore. It is not disputed.
In the discharge certificate, it is clearly written that the wife of the
petitioner, namely, Chandana Gon Chowdhury, died on 27.05.2021 at
Bangalore. After returning from Bangalore, the husband of the deceased,
Sri Abhijit Gon Chowdhury, the petitioner herein, furnishing all
necessary documents in support of her death, had applied to the Agartala
Municipal Corporation for issuance of death certificate of his wife, but,
till today the death certificate has not been issued by the Agartala
Municipal Corporation on the ground that a software has been developed
by the Government of India, which has been introduced in Agartala
Municipal Corporation also, and that system is not allowing the entry or
to record a name of the person, who died at a place outside Agartala
In my opinion, this is a faulty system and faulty software developed
by the Government of India, for which the citizens of this State as well as
of the country should not suffer.
In view of this, I direct the Agartala Municipal Corporation to issue
death certificate of late Chandana Gon Chowdhury, wife of Sri Abhijit
Gon Chowdhury within 48 hours from today by any means whatsoever, it
may be by manual exercise also or by any modes under which the AMC
used to issue death certificate earlier i.e. before installation of the present
software.
It is observed that, if this court finds similar petition filed by any of
the citizen of this State, then, a cost of Rs. 5 lakh will be imposed.
I refrain myself from imposing any cost in this petition for causing
unnecessary hardship and harassment to the petitioner who lost his wife
recently, and is under bereavement.
The State-government is directed to take up the matter with the
concerned authorities of the Union of India to resolve this issue so that
the citizens of this country may not face any harassment.
With this observations and directions, the instant writ petition stands
allowed and disposed.
A copy of this order may be furnished to learned counsel for the
parties in course of the day.
Pending application(s), if any, also stands disposed of.