1.            The petitioner has filed the present petition under Article
226 of the Constitution of India for issuance of a writ in the nature of
habeas corpus for appointment of a warrant officer to raid the premises
of respondent Nos. 4 to 9 and to recover the detenue namely Lovepreet
Bains aged 3 years (minor son of the petitioner) from illegal
confinement of respondent Nos. 4 to 9.
2.            The petition has been filed on the averments that husband
of the petitioner used to beat her on instructions of his mother without
any reason and caused injures on the neck of the petitioner. On
26.07.2020, the petitioner made a written complaint to the police
officials that her in-laws forcibly took the custody of her minor son of 3
years. The petitioner also made a request before the Senior
Superintendent of Police Rural Jalandhar as well as to SHO and DSP
regarding handing over the custody of minor son to the petitioner but
no action has been taken on the same.
3.           It has been further averred that the husband and in-law
family of the petitioner are habitual offender as more than 198 FIRs
under the NDPS Act have been registered against them.
4.           That respondent No. 4 i.e. husband of the petitioner has
filed suit for permanent injunction restraining the defendants from
interfering into peaceful life of plaintiff in any manner and further
restraining the defendants not to forcibly take away the minor child
namely Lovepreet Bains from the custody of plaintiff. The said civil
suit is pending before the Court of learned Additional Civil Judge
(Senior Division) Nakodar. No interim injunction has been granted
5.           The petitioner by way of CRM-W-380-2022 placed on
record the photographs of her husband while he was in America. In her
application she stated that her husband i.e. respondent No. 4 went to
America and left his minor child in India with her mother in law and
her mother-in-law is not the natural guardian of the minor son.
Therefore, the petitioner craves for indulgence of this Court to get the
custody of her minor son from respondents No. 4 to 9.
6.           Learned Counsel for the petitioner has contended that the
detenue Lovepreet Bains is around the age of three years therefore, the
petitioner being biological mother is entitled for her custody. Further,
the petitioner is under worry due to bad conduct of the private
respondents towards the detenue, who shall spoil his future and welfare.
Therefore, the petition may be allowed and custody of the minor child
may be ordered to be handed over to the petitioner-mother by issuance
of a writ of habeas corpus.
7.            In support of his arguments, learned Counsel for the
petitioner has placed reliance on judgment passed by Co-ordinate
Benches of this Court in case CRWP No. 9723 of 2020 titled as 'Pinki
Agarwal Vs. State of Punjab and others', decided on 20.12.2021 ;
CRWP No. 1423 of 2019 titled as 'Mandeep Kaur Vs. State of
Punjab and others', decided on 03.11.2020; CRWP No. 3013 of
2020 titled as 'Neha Vs. State of Haryana and Ors.', decided on
01.06.2020 and judgment passed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in case
titled as 'Syed Saleemuddin Vs. Dr. Rukhsana' 2001(2) RCR (Civil)
8.            Learned Counsel for the State, on the basis of reply filed
on behalf of respondents No. 1 to 3, has submitted that there has been a
matrimonial dispute between petitioner and her husband. There is no
such illegal detention of the younger child Lovepreet Bains as alleged
by the petitioner in the present petition. Out of two children, elder child
is living with the mother and the younger child is living with father.
The petitioner is required to adopt the legal procedure under Law of
Guardianship for taking the guardianship of the child by filing suit in
the competent court of law.
9.         Learned Counsel for respondent Nos.4 to 9, taking through the
contents of reply filed on their behalf, submitted that if the petitioner is
aggrieved of having the custody of detenue Lovepreet Bains, then she
can avail appropriate remedy available to her under law and filing of
the present petition is nothing but an abuse of process of law. The
petitioner has equally efficacious remedy of filing petition under the
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 for custody of the minor child.
Therefore, the present habeas corpus petition is not maintainable. The
marriage of the petitioner was solemnized with respondent No. 4 in the
year 2014 and out of the wedlock two sons were born. One son namely
Khushpreet Bains aged about 6 years is residing with mother whereas
the other son is with respondent No. 4. The said fact has not been
deliberately mentioned by the petitioner in her petition. Respondent
No.4 is well off economically as he is owner of Dairy Farm, shops and
also runs Taxi business. He has sufficient sources to maintain the child
and respondent No. 4 is not involved in any criminal activity.
10.          Learned Counsel for respondents while relying upon
judgments passed by this Court in case CRWP-10817-2020 titled as
'Priyanka Rani Vs. State of Punjab and Others', decided on
14.01.2022, as well as judgments passed by Co-ordinate Benches of
this Court in cases CRWP No. 10833-2020 titled as Manisha Gupta
Vs. State of Punjab and others, decided on 15.03.2022 ; CRWP
No.10366 of 2021 titled as 'Amanpreet Kaur Bale Vs. State of
Punjab and Others, decided on 03.11.2021 and judgment passed by
Hon'ble Apex Court in case 'Sumedha Nagpal Vs. State of Delhi and
others', 2001 SCC (Cri) 698 has further submitted that while deciding
the custody of minor, prima facie consideration is paramount welfare of
the child and custody is not to be decided upon the rights of the parties
under the law.
11.          I have heard learned Counsel for the parties and perused
12.           At the very outset, question of the maintainability of
present writ petition seeking custody of minor child has attracted the
attention of this Court. In a landmark judgment, the Apex Court in case
Gohar Begum v. Suggi alias Nazma Begum and others, 1960 AIR
(SC) 93, has laid down that the remedy of the writ in the nature of
habeas corpus is available where the minor child is illegally or
improperly detained. Thus, the writ of habeas corpus for custody of
minor child is certainly maintainable. It is a settled principle of law that
whenever a question arises before a court pertaining to the custody of a
minor child, the matter is to be decided not on considerations of the
legal rights of parties but on the sole and predominant criterion of what
would best serve the interest and welfare of the minor. It is also well
settled law by a catena of judgments that while deciding matters of
custody of a child, primary and paramount consideration is welfare of
the child. If welfare of the child so demands then technical objections
cannot come in the way. The courts should decide the issue of custody
only on the basis of what is in the best interest of the child.
13.           After concluding         that writ   for habeas corpus is
maintainable, it has to be seen whether custody is illegal or improper
keeping in view the peculiar circumstances of the case.
14.           In case Pinki Agarwal (Supra), it has been held as
“.........10. Section 6 of the Act of 1956 stipulates that
custody of a minor who is less than five years has to be
with her/his mother. For ready reference, said section is
reproduced as under:-
6. Natural guardians of a Hindu minor-The natural
guardian of a Hindu minor, in respect of the minor's person
as well as in respect of the minor's property (excluding his
or her undivided interest in joint family property), are-
(a) in the case of a boy or an unmarried girl-the father, and
after him, the mother; provided that the custody of a minor
who has not completed the age of five years shall
ordinarily be with the mother." (Emphasis supplied).”
As per the Act of 1956, the custody of a minor, who has
not completed the age of 5 years, shall ordinarily be with
the mother, unless it can be established that the mother is
incompetent or unable to look after the minor. A mother
plays an important role in shaping, in nurturing and
moulding a young tender mind. She is in fact the child’s
first teacher, guide and mentor and provides a safe
emotional haven to her children. There is a presumptive
truth that a mother is better suited to fulfil the needs of a
minor, unless proved to the contrary. The term 'Welfare of
the Child' has a wide connotation and cannot be limited to
fulfilling the financial needs only. It is in this background
that the legislature in its wisdom has tried to ensure that the
custody of a minor child who has not attained the age of 5
would remain with the mother.....”
15.      In case     Mandeep Kaur (Supra), it has been held as
24. As between the parties who are Hindus, the HMG Act
lays down the principles on which custody disputes are to
be decided. As per Section 6 (a) of the HMG Act, natural
guardian of a Hindu Minor in respect of the minor's person
as well as in respect of the minor's property (excluding his
or her undivided interest in joint family property) is the
father, in the case of a boy or an unmarried girl and after
him, the mother. However, proviso to Section 6(a) of the
HMG Act provides that the custody of a minor who has not
completed the age of five years shall ordinarily be with the
mother.
25. In Roxann Sharma v. Arun Sharma (SC) : 2015 (2)
R.C.R. (Civil) 93 Hon'ble Supreme Court observed as
“12. The HMG Act postulates that the custody of an
infant or a tender aged child should be given to
his/her mother unless the father discloses cogent
reasons that are indicative of and presage the
livelihood of the welfare and interest of the child
being undermined or jeopardised if the custody
retained by the mother. Section 6(a) of HMG Act,
therefore, preserves the right of the father to be the
guardian of the property of the minor child but not
the guardian of his person whilst the child is less
than five years old. It carves out the exception of
interim custody, in contradistinction of guardianship,
and then specifies that custody should be given to
the mother so long as the child is below five years in
age. We must immediately clarify that this Section or
for that matter any other provision including those
contained in the G&W Act, does not disqualify the
mother to custody of the child even after the latter's
crossing the age of five years.”
27. In the present case the question of welfare and interest
of the minor daughter has to be judged on the
consideration of universally acknowledged superiority of
the mother’s instinctive selfless love and affection of her
children, particularly the infants. The lap of the mother is
the natural cradle where the safety and welfare of the infant
can be assured and there is no substitute for the same.
Mother's protection for the infant is indispensable and no
other protection will be equal in measure and substance to
the same. No amount of wealth or mother like love can
take place of mother's love and care. Motherly care and
affection is indispensable for the healthy growth of the
infants.
16.         In case Neha Vs. State of Haryana (Supra), it has been
13. Another aspect that is particularly noteworthy herein is,
the tender age of the minor daughter. She is merely four
years and ordinarily, per Section 6 of 1890 Act, custody of
a minor who is less than five years has to be with her
mother. For ready reference, said section is reproduced as
“6. Natural guardians of a Hindu minor- The natural
guardian of a Hindu minor, in respect of the minor’s person
as well as in respect of the minor’s property (excluding his
or her undivided interest in joint family property), are-
(a) in the case of a boy or an unmarried girl-the father, and
after him, the mother; provided that the custody of a minor
who has not completed the age of five years shall
ordinarily be with the mother.”
No doubt, the above provision postulates that the custody
shall “ordinarily” be with the mother. But the word
“ordinarily” is to be construed to mean that unless, prima
facie, it is shown otherwise by the father that child would
be better taken care of by deprivation of motherhood.
Father must then give some cogent reasons, indicative of
the welfare and interest of the child being jeopardized or
the exclusive motherhood being imminently non-
conducive to the upbringing of child. In the family scenario
and circumstances herein, there is no such cogent
reasoning forthcoming so as to deny statutory right of a
mother. Said motherhood right, in fact, is essentially more
for the benefit and welfare of the minor child. Spirit of
section 6 hypothesizes that, given the tender age of a
minor, suitability of custody is not the predominant factor,
what is more relevant or should weigh, is the requisite
biological and natural environment, which gives rise to a
general presumption that mother is first and best suitable
for child care of a minor that age.
14. In the aforesaid background, while there is no
dissention with the proposition that respondent No.4 being
father of the minor daughter herein, cannot be stated to be
in her illegal or unlawful custody, however, since the
minor daughter is less than five years, the mother is,
therefore, entitled to the benefit of Section 6, ibid. That
apart, prima facie, this Court is of the opinion that until the
prayer of the parties qua custody of the minor child is
decided by Guardian court, the welfare and interest of the
minor child would be better in the hands of mother-
petitioner.”
17.          In case Syed Saleemuddin (Supra), Hon'ble Supreme
Court granted the custody of the children to their mother till the family
Court disposed of the petition for the custody of the children.
18.          In view of the above referred judicial precedents, it has
emerged that in view of proviso to Section 6(a) of the HMG Act, the
custody of a minor child who has not completed the age of five years
shall ordinarily be with the mother.
19.          On the other hand, learned Counsel for the respondents
while referring to the judgments in Priyanka Rani (Supra) ; Manisha
Gupta (Supra) ; Amanpreet Kaur Bale (Supra) and Sumedha
Nagpal (Supra) has tried to made out a case for dismissal of the
present petition on the ground that only the petition under the Hindu
Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 or the Guardian and Wards Act,
1890 is maintainable for seeking custody of the minor child. Criminal
writ petition for issuance of writ of habeas corpus is not maintainable.
Therefore, the petitioner may be asked to approach the Family Court
concerned for redressal of her grievances. Further, as per provisions of
Section 6 of Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956, father is a
natural guardian of the minor child and it is only on demise of the
father, that the mother becomes the natural guardian. In selecting
proper guardian of a minor, the paramount consideration should be the
welfare and well-being of the child and the custody is not to be decided
on legal rights of the parties.
20.           In the present case, the petitioner has sought custody of her
minor son on the ground she being his biological mother entitled to his
custody, the private respondents are habitual offender and are involved
in many cases under the NDPS Act and his son not being looked after
and well maintained.
21.           In the case of custody of a minor, paramount consideration
as contemplated under Section 7 of the Guardians and Wards Act, 1890
is relevant to take note of which is reproduced as under:-
“7. Power of the Court to make order as to
guardianship.- (1) Where the Court is satisfied that it is
for the welfare of a minor that an order should be made –
(a) appointing a guardian of his person or property or both,
(b) declaring a person to be such a guardian the Court may
make an order accordingly.
(2) An order under this section shall imply the removal of
any guardian who has not been appointed by will or other
instrument or appointed or declared by the Court.
(3) Where a guardian has been appointed by will or other
instrument or appointed or declared by the Court, an order
under this section appointing or declaring another person
to be guardian in his stead shall not be made until the
powers of the guardian appointed or declared as aforesaid
have ceased under the provisions of this Act.”
22.          In case, Tejaswini Gaud and Ors. Vs. Shekhar Jagdish
Prasad Tewari and others : 2019 (3) R.C.R. (Civil) 104, Hon'ble
Supreme Court observed as under:-
“19. In child custody matters, the ordinary remedy lies
only under the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act or
the Guardians and Wards Act as the case may be. In cases
arising out of the proceedings under the Guardians and
Wards Act the jurisdiction of the court is determined by
whether the minor ordinarily resides within the area on
which the court exercises such jurisdiction. There are
significant differences between the enquiry under the
Guardians and Wards Act, 1890 and the exercise of
powers by a writ court which is of summary in nature.
What is important is the welfare of the child. In the writ
court, rights are determined only on the basis of affidavits.
Where the court is of the view that a detailed enquiry is
required, the court may decline to exercise the
extraordinary jurisdiction and direct the parties to
approach the civil court. It is only in exceptional cases, the
rights of the parties to the custody of the minor will be
determined in exercise of extraordinary jurisdiction on a
petition for habeas corpus.”
23.          From the perusal of record and legal proposition, this
Court is of the considered view that the most important consideration
which must always weigh with the Court in making orders for the
appointment of guardians of minors is the welfare of the minor, and in
that view of the matter, the legal rights of the mother, in the case in
hand, must be understood subject to provisions of Section 7. Under
Section 7 of the Act, the Court should be guided by the sole
consideration of the welfare of the minor, and what would be for the
welfare of the minor must necessarily depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each particular case.
24.          The duty of a court exercising its parens patraie
jurisdiction as in cases involving custody of minor children is all the
more onerous. Sentiments and welfare of the minor are supreme
consideration which cannot be ignored.
25.           Record reveals that the petitioner filed many complaints
against her husband and in-laws family to the police wherein the
petitioner has levelled allegations of harassment and beating by her
husband, selling of narcotics by her husband and father-in-law and
keeping younger child by husband and the said complaints have been
consigned/filed after enquiry. Learned Counsel for the private
respondents has also placed on record copy of order dated 22.07.2019
passed by learned Judge, Special Court, Jalandhar wherein respondent
No. 4 i.e. father of the minor child has been acquitted of the charges
under Sections 15 and 25 of the NDPS Act. Also, respondent No. 4 has
filed application before the learned trial Court seeking custody of elder
son namely Khushpreet Bains who is now residing with the petitioner.
26.           It is true that mother being a natural guardian of a minor
child has a preferential right to claim custody of her son. However, the
utmost consideration before this Court is the well being of the minor
and not the legal right of a particular party. The term guardian has to be
taken in its widest possible sense. It has to be measured not only in
terms of money and physical comfort but also should include moral and
ethical welfare of the child. The term 'custody' should not be interpreted
in its strict sense as physical custody. Custody means custody in the
sense of supervision and control over the child. The mother's or father's
right to the custody of a their minor child is no longer absolute. It is
circumscribed by the consideration of the welfare of the minor. The
welfare of the child is decisive for the claim of custody. In case of
custody of a minor child, the Court is expected to strike a just and
proper balance between the requirements of welfare of the minor child
and rights of parents over the minor child. The Court should also take
into consideration the preference of the minor child to stay with either
parent or grand parent.
27.          A Division Bench of this Court in its judgment dated
23.05.2019 passed in LPA No.3716 of 2018 in case titled as 'Reetu
Verma vs. State of Haryana and others', observed as under:
“ The parties are husband and wife, having a minor son
namely Jiyanshu Verma. Admittedly, on account of
matrimonial dispute minor son is in the custody of the
father-respondent, as every time they have appeared before
us, the child has been brought by him. Habeas Corpus
petition was filed by the appellant-wife seeking custody of
the minor child for herself. Learned Single Judge
dismissed the habeas corpus petition on the ground that the
custody of a minor child with a natural guardian cannot be
said to be illegal and relegated the parties to avail the
remedy under the Guardian and Wards Act. Before this
Court innumerable efforts have been made by us for an
amicable settlement between the two, to secure the interest
of the child so that he is not deprived of either love of
father or the mother. On more than two occasions we
interacted with the parties in the Chamber to bring an
amicable settlement but the same failed. Lastly, on the
suggestion of learned counsel appearing for the parties, we
referred the matter to the mediation, where also the parties
have failed to arrive at an amicable settlement. Since the
question of the custody of the minor child and the
welfare of the child being supreme it can only be
decided on the basis of evidence as to which of the two
parents are in a better position to look after the welfare
of the child and a conclusion in respect of same only be
arrived at by way of an evidence.
impugned order and judgment does not require any
interference and it would be in the interest of justice
that the appellant is relegated to avail the remedy
under the Guardian and Wards Act to seek the custody
of the minor child before the appropriate Court. With
this, intra court appeal stands dismissed.”
28.           Taking into consideration the provisions of law and the
factual matrix which is disputed, I am of the opinion that custody of the
father as a natural guardian cannot be said to be illegal or unlawful and
therefore, it would not be appropriate to issue a writ of habeas corpus in
favour of the petitioner. In the case of disputed questions of facts, it is a
matter of evidence to be led by both the parties as to which party will
be in a better position to take care of the minor child which is
concededly the paramount consideration.
29.           In view of the observations made above, this Court finds
that minor child namely Lovepreet Bains has not been kept in illegal
custody of private respondents. Finding no merit in the instant petition,
the same is dismissed with liberty to the petitioner to approach an
appropriate court under relevant provisions of law seeking the relief
claimed in this petition.
30.           Nothing in this order shall be treated as expression of any
opinion on merits of the case so as to bind or influence appropriate
court under relevant provisions of law seeking the relief claimed in this
petition, if any so filed by any of the parties.