1]                Rule. Rule made returnable forthwith. With the
consent of both the sides, heard finally at admission stage.
2]                By this Petition, the petitioner is challenging the
order dated 04.12.2019 passed by respondent No. 2
thereby rejecting the proposal of petitioner being appointed
on compassionate ground as Peon in respondent No. 3
School and the petitioner is also seeking directions against
respondent no.2 to grant approval in favour of petitioner as
Peon being appointed on compassionate ground from the
date of initial appointment i.e. 01.11.2018 and also to make
the payment of salary from the date of initial appointment
till today and also in future.
3]                The undisputed factors are as under:
[a]        The husband of the petitioner – Deepak Desale,
was a ‘Peon’, working with respondent no. 3 –
[b]        Husband of the petitioner passed away on
[c]        The petitioner applied for the post of ‘Peon’ on
compassionate ground on 06.10.2018.
[d]        Respondent no.3–School by passing a
Resolution on 27.10.2018 appointed the
petitioner as Peon on 01.11.2018.
[e]        The proposal of the petitioner was forwarded to
respondent no.2 Education Officer by
respondent no.3 – School on 27.11.2018.
[f]        On 04.12.2019, respondent no.2 - Education
Officer refused to accord approval to the
compassionate appointment of the petitioner on
the ground that the proposal seeking sanction to
the new staffing pattern is pending with the
Government and as yet no sanction is received
from the Government.
4]                The learned counsel for the petitioner submits
that the reasons assigned in the impugned order are not
sustainable in the light of decision of this Court in Writ
The State of Maharashtra and others], Writ Petition
No.163/2020 [Sachin Shivajirao Suryawanshi versus The
State of Maharashtra and others] and also in Writ Petition
State of Maharashtra and others].
5]                It is the contention of the learned AGP that new
staffing pattern has not been sanctioned by the State
Government, therefore, approval cannot be granted to the
petitioner as Peon.
6]                Upon hearing the learned counsel for the
respective parties, we find that issue involved in this
petition is no longer res-integra and is covered by the
decision / order of this Court in the case of Smt.Yogita
Shivsing Nikam [supra]. While considering similar fact
situation in para nos. 28, 29 and 30 of the order, this Court
has observed thus:
“28.        To say the least, we are shocked by
the stand taken by the State Government,
which is not only against logic and reason, but
is in complete contradiction to the law
crystallized by this court in numerous
judgments. It is unconscionable for the State to
canvass such grounds virtually rendering the
bereaved family to starvation. We find that the
State has consistently ensured that not a single
Government Resolution, pertaining to ban on
recruitment, stay on filling in vacant posts and
prohibition on appointments until the staffing
pattern of the non teaching posts is formalized,
would apply to appointments made on
compassionate grounds. This Court has also
consistently taken a view that compassionate
appointment would be an exception to the
mandatory rule of following specific selection
procedure for recruitment on vacant posts or on
newly created posts.
29.           We have noticed the agony caused
to litigants in such cases. We, therefore, find it
appropriate at this stage to record that after the
delivery of this judgment, if any case refusing
approval to a compassionate appointment
which is otherwise legally sustainable satisfying
the eligibility criteria, comes to this court, we
would be issuing directions recommending
strict disciplinary action against the Education
Officer and we would not hesitate to initiate
contempt of Court proceedings against persons
responsible, since they are interpreting the
Government        Resolutions       in      the       most
inappropriate manner, despite the crystalised
position of law. Because of such acts of the
Education Officers, widows and eligible
candidates are compelled to rush to this Court
after having suffered mental and physical agony
of a personal loss of a sole bread earner and
also spend on litigation which is costly these
days. We would also impose heavy costs to be
recovered from the salaries of such Education
Officers for the pain caused to such petitioners.
We find it appropriate to record that if the
Education Officer notices that a particular
Management is attempting to defeat the rights
of an eligible candidate for compassionate
appointment, the Education Officer would be at
liberty to initiate appropriate action against
such Management.
30.           In view of the above, these petitions
are allowed. The impugned orders stand
quashed and set aside. Approvals stand granted
to these petitioners from the dates of their
joining duties on compassionate basis, with all
monetary benefits accruing to their posts.
Formal approval orders shall be issued by the
concerned      Education      Officers,          before
7]                In view of the above, there is no necessity to
have sanction to the new staffing pattern for appointment
on compassionate ground, therefore, the petition deserves
to be allowed. Hence we pass the following order :
a]                Writ Petition is allowed. The impugned order
dated 04.12.2019 is set aside. Respondent no.2 is directed
to accord approval to the petitioner’s appointment on
compassionate ground from 01.11.2018, as expeditiously as
possible.
b]                Rule is made absolute in the above terms.