For Petitioner(s)         :   Mr. Trilok Joshi on VC
For Respondent(s)         :   Mr. Pankaj Sharma, AAG on VC
1.    In wake of instant surge in COVID-19 cases and spread of its
highly infectious Omicron variant, lawyers have been advised to
refrain from coming to the Courts.
2.    The petitioner has preferred this writ petition claiming the
"A). By an appropriate writ, order or direction, the order
impugned dated 06.06.2017 (Annex.10) may kindly be
declared illegal and the same may kindly be quashed and set
aside.
B).   By  an   appropriate         writ,      order     or  direction,  the
respondents may kindly be directed to reconsider the case of
the petitioner for grant of appointment on compassionate
ground and offer her appointment as per her qualification.
C). Any other appropriate relief which this Hon'ble High
Court deems just and proper may kindly be granted in
3.    Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the father of
the petitioner, who was working as Lineman in the Jodhpur
Vidhyut Vitran Nigam Limited, died while in service on 05.11.2016
leaving behind his wife Smt. Shanti Devi and daughter (the
present petitioner). Learned counsel further submits that the wife
of the deceased employee was suffering from serious medical
ailments and thus, the present petitioner, who is a married
daughter of the deceased employee, made efforts for the
compassionate appointment by submitting an application seeking
compassionate appointment, and though the same was being
processed,     but   subsequently,            the       said     application   for
compassionate appointment of the present petitioner (married
daughter of the deceased employee) was rejected vide order
dated 06.06.2017 by the concerned authority, holding that as per
Appointment     of  Dependents           of    Deceased         Nigam    Servants
Regulation, 2016 (hereinafter to referred as 'Regulation of 2016'),
a married daughter of deceased employee would not fall within the
category of the ‘dependents’. Learned counsel also submits that
against the said order, the petitioner immediately preferred this
writ petition on 15.09.2017 and notices were issued and reply has
been filed.
4.      Learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn attention of this
Court       to   the  notification      dated         28.10.2021     whereby    the
Government of Rajasthan, Department of Personnel, has amended
the Rajasthan Compassionate Appointment of Dependents of
Deceased Government Servant Rules 1996; in the definition of
‘Dependents’ in Rule 2, a provision was inserted that ‘dependent’
will include a married daughter, if no other dependent of the
deceased Government Service mentioned in Clauses (i), (ii) and
(iii) is available. The said notification dated 28.10.2021 reads as
““2. Amendment of rule 2.- the existing clause (c) of
rule 2 of the Rajasthan Compassionate Appointment of
Dependents of Deceased Government Servant Rules
1966 shall be substituted by the following, namely :-
(ii) son including son legally adopted by the deceased
Government servant during his/her life time, or
(iii)    unmarried/widowed/divorced                daughter   including
daughter legally adopted by the deceased Government
(iv) married daughter, if no other dependent of the
deceased Government servant mentioned in clause (ii)
(v) mother, father, unmarried brother or unmarried
sister in case of unmarried deceased Government
who       was   wholly      dependent             on      the deceased
Government servant at the time of his/her death. ”
5.      Learned counsel for the petitioner further submits that the
petitioner is a married daughter of the deceased employee and in
the present case, as per Clause (iv) of Rule 2(c) and as per the
clear interpretation of the Rules of 1996, as notified and quoted
above, the petitioner is entitled to be given the compassionate
6.    Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the
judgment     of  Bhuvaneshwari               V      Puranik       Vs.  State    of
Karnataka & Ors. in writ petition No.17788 of 2018 (S–
RES); the relevant portion of the judgment of the Hon’ble
Karnataka High Court reads as follows:-
"Half the world; and not even half the chance"
is the cry of the petitioner in this petition on being denied
consideration for appointment on compassionate ground
on the death of her father on the score that she is "a
9. In furtherance of the aforesaid submissions, the point
"Whether Rule 2(1)(a)(i), Rule 2(1)(b) and Rule
3(2)(i)(c)      of     the       Karnataka              Civil   Services
(Appointment on Compassionate Grounds) Rules,
1996 are ultravires the Constitution for it offends
Article 14 of the Constitution of India?"
10.1. It is by now a well settled principle that object of
compassionate appointment is to help the family tied over
the crisis that befalls them on the death of the sole
breadwinner of the family. It is given, in a given
circumstance, so that the family will not be put to
jeopardy by     being      driven        to       impecuniosities     and
condemned by penury. It is for this reason the emphasis
on appointment on compassionate grounds is immediacy
of appointment.
This is the principle that is laid down in plethora of
judgments of the Apex Court interpreting the need,
benefit and its limitations right from the judgment of the
Apex Court in the case of Umesh Kumar Nagpal Vs.
State of Haryana reported in (1994) 4 SCC 138
wherein the Apex Court has held as follows:
2. The question relates to the considerations which
should guide while giving appointment in public
services on compassionate ground. It appears that
there has been a good deal of obfuscation on the
issue. As a rule, appointments in the public
services should be made strictly on the basis of
open invitation of applications and merit. No other
mode of appointment nor any other consideration
is permissible. Neither the Governments nor the
public authorities are at liberty to follow any other
procedure or relax the qualifications laid down by
the rules for the post. However, to this general
rule which is to be followed strictly in every case,
there are some exceptions carved out in the
interests    of    justice       and        to     meet   certain
contingencies. One such exception is in favour of
the dependants of an employee dying in harness
and leaving his family in penury and without any
means of livelihood. In such cases, out of pure
humanitarian          consideration                taking    into
consideration the fact that unless some source of
livelihood is provided, the family would not be able
to make both ends meet, a provision is made in
the rules to provide gainful employment to one of
the dependants of the deceased who may be
eligible for such employment. The whole object
of granting compassionate employment is
thus to enable the family to tide over the
sudden crisis. The object is not to give a
member of such family a post much less a
post for post held by the deceased. What is
harness does not entitle his family to such
source of livelihood. The Government or the
public authority concerned has to examine
the financial condition of the family of the
deceased, and it is only if it is satisfied, that
but for the provision of employment, the
family will not be able to meet the crisis that
a job is to be offered to the eligible member
of the family. The posts in Classes III and IV are
the lowest posts in non-manual and manual
categories and hence they alone can be offered on
compassionate       grounds,        the      object     being   to
relieve the family, of the financial destitution and
to help it get over the emergency. The provision of
employment in such lowest posts by making an
exception to the rule is justifiable and valid since it
is not discriminatory. The favourable treatment
given    to  such     dependant            of     the   deceased
employee in such posts has a rational nexus with
the object sought to be achieved, viz., relief
against destitution. No other posts are expected or
required to be given by the public authorities for
the purpose. It must be remembered in this
connection that as against the destitute family of
the deceased there are millions of other families
which are equally, if not more destitute. The
exception to the rule made in favour of the family
of the deceased employee is in consideration of
the services rendered by him and the legitimate
expectations, and the change in the status and
affairs, of the family engendered by the erstwhile
employment which are suddenly upturned.
The   aforesaid    enunciation         of     law      with   regard   to
compassionate appointment is reiterated by the Apex
Court in line of judgments up to this date. Thus, the law
with regard to compassionate appointment is by now too
well settled that it is not a matter of right and not an
alternate source of recruitment.
11.1. In the light of the question that has arisen for my
consideration, the Karnataka Civil Services (Appointment
on Compassionate Grounds) Rules, 1996 which governs
the    appointment     on    compassionate              grounds  to   the
Government servants in the State of Karnataka is
required to be noticed and is extracted hereunder for the
purpose of ready reference.
"2. Definitions :- (1) In these rules, unless the
[(a) "Dependent of the deceased Government
(i) in the case of deceased male Government
servant, his widow, son [unmarried daughter
and widowed daughter] who were dependent
(ii) in the case of a deceased female Government servant,
her widower, son [unmarried daughter and widowed
daughter] who were dependent upon her and were living
(iii) in the case of deceased male unmarried Government
Servant, his unmarried brother, unmarried or widowed
sister who were dependent upon him and were living with
(iv)    in  the   case     of     deceased           female   unmarried
Government Servant, her unmarried brother, unmarried
or widowed sister who were dependent upon her and
(b)   "Family"       in     relation           to     a   deceased
Government servant means his or her spouse
and their son [unmarried daughter and widowed
daughter], [unmarried brother, unmarried or
widowed sister] who were living with him.
(2) Words and expressions used but not defined shall
have the same meaning                 assigned to them             in the
3. Eligibility for appointment :- (1) Appointment on
compassionate grounds under these rules shall not be
claimed as a matter of right and shall not be given as a
matter of course.
(2) Appointment under these rules shall be
restricted    to   the     dependent             of    a  deceased
Government servant in the following order of
(b) a son, if widow is not eligible or for any valid reason
she is not willing to accept the appointment;
(c) an unmarried daughter, if the widow and son
are not eligible or for any valid reason they are
not willing to accept the appointment;
[(d) a widowed daughter, if the widow, son and
unmarried daughter are not eligible or for any valid
reason they are not willing to accept the appointment.]
[(i-a) in the case of the deceased male unmarried
(b) unmarried or widowed sister, who were dependent
(ii) in the case of the deceased female Government
(b) an unmarried daughter, if the son is not eligible or
for any valid reason he is not willing to accept the
(c) the widower, if the son and daughter are not eligible
or for any valid reason they are not willing to accept the
(ii-a) in the case of the deceased female unmarried
(b) unmarried or widowed sister, who were dependent
(3) An adopted son or daughter of a deceased Government
servant shall not be eligible for appointment under these
[(4) A person against whom at the time of making
application a criminal case is under investigation or trial,
on the charge of having committed murder of the
deceased     Government         servant         or     for abetting  the
commission of such offence shall not be eligible for
It is the said Rules which declines appointment on
compassionate grounds to a daughter who is married
and restricts the consideration of appointment to an
unmarried daughter if the son is not eligible for any valid
reason or he is not willing to accept the appointment, that
is called in question for it being violative Articles 14, 15
and 16 of the Constitution of India.
12.1. Article 14 of the Constitution of India prohibits the
State from denying any person equality before the law or
equal protection of the laws. Article 16 is of application of
general Rule of equality as laid down in Article 14 with
special reference to opportunity for appointment and
employment      under      the     State. Article          15(1) prohibits
discrimination on the ground of religion, race, caste, sex
or place of birth. It is an extension of Article 14, which
expresses application of principle of equality. Therefore,
no citizen shall be discriminated on the grounds of race,
caste, sex or place of birth religion. Article 16 takes its
root from Article 14 and ensures equality of opportunity
in matters of employment under the State. Therefore,
the fundamental right to equality means that persons in
like situations under like circumstances should be treated
12.2. Article 14 of the Constitution of India ensures
equality among equals and its main object is to protect
persons similarly placed against discriminatory treatment.
The equality before law guaranteed under Articles 14, 15
and 16 is a constitutional admonition against both the
legislative and executive organs of the State, neither the
legislature nor the Rule making authority can make a law
or a Rule which is violative of these articles.
12.3. The case of the petitioner and the issue raising a
challenge to the constitutional validity of the provision
relating to appointment on compassionate grounds will
have to be tested on the bedrock of the purport of the
aforesaid articles.
(i) Indian Bank v. Promila reported in (2020) 2
4. It is trite to emphasise, based on numerous judicial
pronouncements of this Court, that compassionate
appointment is not an alternative to the normal course
of appointment, and that there is no inherent right to
seek compassionate appointment. The objective is only
to provide solace and succour to the family in difficult
times and, thus, the relevancy is at that stage of time
when the employee passes away.
20. We have to keep in mind the basic principles
applicable to the cases of compassionate employment
i.e. succour being provided at the stage of unfortunate
demise, coupled with compassionate employment not
being an alternate method of public employment. If
these factors are kept in mind, it would be noticed that
the respondents had the wherewithal at the relevant
stage of time, as per the norms, to deal with the
unfortunate situation which they were faced with. Thus,
looked under any Schemes, the respondents cannot
claim benefit, though, as clarified aforesaid, it is only the
relevant Scheme prevalent on the date of demise of the
employee, which could have been considered to be
applicable, in view of the judgment of this Court
in Canara Bank [Canara Bank v. M. Mahesh Kumar,
(2015) 7 SCC 412 : (2015) 2 SCC (L&S) 539] . It is not
for the courts to substitute a Scheme or add or subtract
from the terms thereof in judicial review, as has been
recently emphasised by this Court inState of H.P. v.
Parkash Chand [State of H.P. v. Parkash Chand, (2019)
21. We may have sympathy with the respondents about
the predicament they faced on the demise of Shri
Jagdish Raj, but then sympathy alone cannot give
remedy to the respondents, more so when the relevant
benefits available to the respondents have been granted
by the appellant Bank and whenRespondent 1, herself,
was in employment having monthly income above the
(ii) State of H.P. v. Parkash Chand reported in
10. In the exercise of judicial review under Article
226 of the Constitution, it was not open to the High
Court to rewrite the terms of the Policy. It is well settled
that compassionate appointment is not a matter of right,
but must be governed by the terms on which the State
lays down the policy of offering employment assistance
to a member of the family of a deceased government
[Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana [Umesh
Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana, (1994) 4 SCC 138 :
1994 SCC (L&S) 930] , SBI v. Kunti Tiwary [SBI v. Kunti
943] , Punjab National Bank v. Ashwini Kumar Taneja
[Punjab National Bank v. Ashwini Kumar Taneja, (2004)
7 SCC 265 : 2004 SCC (L&S) 938] , SBI v. Somvir Singh
[SBI v. Somvir Singh, (2007) 4 SCC 778 : (2007) 2 SCC
(L&S)     92]  ,    Mumtaz        Yunus         Mulani      v.  State   of
Maharashtra      [Mumtaz         Yunus         Mulani       v.  State   of
1077] , Union of India v. Shashank Goswami [Union of
India v. Shashank Goswami, (2012) 11 SCC 307 :
(2013) 1 SCC (L&S) 51] , SBI v. Surya Narain Tripathi
[SBI v. Surya Narain Tripathi, (2014) 15 SCC 739 :
(2015) 3 SCC (L&S) 689] and Canara Bank v. M.
Mahesh Kumar [Canara Bank v. M. Mahesh Kumar,
7. Article 16(1) of the Constitution of India guarantees
to all its citizens equality of opportunity in matters
relating to employment or appointment to any office
under the State. Article 16(2) protects citizens against
discrimination in respect of any employment or office
under the State on grounds only of religion, race, caste,
sex and descent. It is so well settled and needs no
restatement      at     our      end       that       appointment     on
compassionate grounds is an exception carved out to the
general rule that recruitment to public services is to be
made     in   a   transparent          and      accountable      manner
providing opportunity to all eligible persons to compete
and     participate    in     the      selection         process.  Such
appointments are required to be made on the basis of
open invitation of applications and merit. Dependants of
employees died in harness do not have any special or
additional claim to public services other than the one
conferred, if any, by the employer.
8. In Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of Haryana [(1994)
this Court held: (SCC pp. 139-40, para 2) "As a rule,
appointments in the public services should be made
strictly on the basis of open invitation of applications and
merit. No other mode of appointment nor any other
consideration is permissible. Neither the Governments
nor the public authorities are at liberty to follow any
other procedure or relax the qualifications laid down by
the rules for the post. However, to this general rule
which is to be followed strictly in every case, there are
some exceptions carved out in the interests of justice
and to meet certain contingencies. One such exception is
in favour of the dependants of an employee dying in
harness and leaving his family in penury and without
any means of livelihood. In such cases, out of pure
humanitarian consideration taking into consideration the
fact that unless some source of livelihood is provided,
the family would not be able to make both ends meet, a
provision is made in the rules to provide gainful
employment to one of the dependants of the deceased
who may be eligible for such employment. The whole
object of granting compassionate employment is thus to
enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis. The
object is not to give a member of such family a post
much less a post for post held by the deceased."
9. In Union Bank of India v. M.T. Latheesh [(2006) 7
SCC 350 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 1646] this Court while
dealing    with   the    similar        question        observed     that
indiscriminate grant of employment on compassionate
grounds would shut the door for employment to the
ever- growing population of unemployed youth.
15.4. An analysis of the judgments relied on by the
petitioner   and    the     respondent-State               as   extracted
hereinabove     would     lead      to    two       conclusions.     One,
dependency is the key determinative factor for grant of
compassionate appointment and the other being a Rule
that brooks discrimination on the basis of gender is not
to remain in the statute book as it would violate Articles
14, 15 and 16 of the Constitution of India, Article 15 in
particular, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of
religion,   race,   sex,      gender.          Even      the    remotest
impression a Rule gives that its consequence is resulting
in any of the ingredients of Articles 14 and 15 being
violated, such a Rule will have to be held to be ultravires
15.5. The Rule that is called in question and has fallen
for interpretation, without a shadow of a doubt is
discriminatory as the words "unmarried" permeates
through the entire fabric of Rule 2 and 3 as extracted
hereinabove     to   deny        appointment            to    a   married
daughter. If the Rule is left as it is, in view of my
preceding analysis, would create a discrimination on the
basis of gender. If the marital status of a son does not
make any difference in law to his entitlement for seeking
appointment on compassionate grounds, the marital
status of a daughter should make no difference, as the
married daughter does not cease to be a part of the
family and law cannot make an assumption that married
sons alone continue to be the part of the family.
Therefore, the Rule which becomes violative of Articles
14, 15 on its interpretation will have to be struck down
as unconstitutional as excluding the daughters purely on
the basis of marriage will constitute an impermissible
discrimination which is invidious and be violative of
Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution of India.
It should be remembered that "nature bestows so
much on women; the law cannot bestow too little".
16. For the praefatus reasons, I pass the following:
(i) I allow the writ petition and hold that the exclusion
of married daughters from the ambit of expression
'family' in Rule 2(1)(a)(i), Rule 2(1)(b) and Rule
3(2)(i)(c)      of    the       Karnataka              Civil   Services
(Appointment on Compassionate Grounds) Rules,
1996 is illegal and unconstitutional being violative
of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution.
(ii)    I   accordingly,         strike         down         the    word
"unmarried" in Rule 2(1)(a)(i), Rule 2(1)(b) and
Rule 3(2)(i)(c) of the Karnataka Civil Services
(Appointment on Compassionate Grounds) Rules,
7.     Learned counsel for the petitioner further relied upon the
order passed by Hon’ble Apex Court in State of Karnataka &
Ors. Vs. C.N. Apporva Shree & Anr. (Special Leave to
Appeal (C)       No.20166/2021) on 17.12.2021, which reads as
“We    have     heard        learned          counsel   for   the
petitioner(s) and have analyzed the impugned judgment.
We give our full imprimatur to the reasoning of the High
Court, more so, as even the rule in question relied upon
by the petitioner to deny a married daughter a job on
compassionate grounds while permitting it to a married
son, has been quashed in the judgment of the Karnataka
High Court in Bhuvaneshwari V. Purani v. State of
The Special Leave Petition is dismissed.
Pending application stands disposed of ”
8.    Learned counsel for the petitioner also submits that the
statutory rule prevailing in the State of Rajasthan shall bind the
respondent-Nigam, as it normally regulated by prevailing State
statute. Learned counsel further submits that the Regulations of
2016 are also bad in the eye of law in light of the judgment
passed by the Hon’ble Apex Court and Hon’ble Karnataka High
9.    Learned counsel for the petitioner further submits that once
the Hon’ble Apex Court has arrived at an analyzed position, while
giving their full imprimatur to the reasoning of the Hon’ble
Karnataka High Court and has sustained the quashing of the rule
denying a married daughter a job on the compassionate ground,
the mandate of the precedent law is binding on all parties.
10.   Learned counsel for the petitioner has also relied upon the
judgment rendered by this Hon’ble Court in the matter of Smt.
Sonu     Devi   Vs.    State      of     Rajasthan            &  Ors.   (SBCWP
No.9022/2014) decided on 10.02.2017, the relevant portion of
“9. Accordingly, it is held that the petitioner who had
applied as an unmarried daughter would be entitled to
be appointed under the Rules 1996. If the submission of
the counsel for the respondent is to be accepted then it
would be a case where a dependant unmarried daughter
even after appointment may not be allowed to get
married, as the situation of a woman and her status may
change, she cannot be deprived of her rightful claim
under the Rules of 1996. The judgment passed by the
Division  Bench    in   the     case       of    Seema    (supra)   is
distinguishable as the same only relates to the case
where a claimant was a married daughter at the time of
death of the deceased Government Servant and she
challenged Rule 2 (c) of the Rules of 1996. The Court
has not accepted the said petition and has refused to
even examined the validity of the Rule 2 (c) of the Rules
of 1996. The same would, therefore, not applied to the
facts and circumstances of the present case. The
judgment passed by the Apex Court in the case of
Canara Bank (Supra) gives a guideline for finding as to
what should be the date. This Court respectfully agrees
to the view and taking into consideration all the aspects,
allow the writ petition.”
11.    Learned counsel for the respondent, however, submits that in
para 5 of their reply, they have taken a stand regarding dismissal
of claim of compassionate appointment of the petitioner and that
remains the reasons for doing the same. The para 5 of the reply is
“5. That the grant of compassionate appointment to the
family member of the deceased Government Servant as
per the rule is prevalent in the respondent Nigam.
However,       according       to      Rule        2(c)     of  ‘JDVVNL
Compassionate Appointment Dependents of Deceased
Nigam Servants, Regulations 2016’ (hereinafter referred
to as rules of 20165) the definition of ‘Dependent’
includes spouse, son, unmarred or widowed daughter,
legally adopted son / unmarried daughter by the
deceased Nigam servant during his / her lifetime and
who was wholly dependent on the deceased Nigam’s
servant at the time his / her death. The definition of the
Dependent nowhere mentions married daughter of the
deceased Nigam servant for the purpose of giving
compassionate appointment. Therefore, the petitioner
being the married daughter of the deceased employee of
the    Nigam     is   not      entitled        to     the    benefits  of
compassionate appointment to the rules of 2016.”
12.    Learned counsel for the respondent has relied upon the order
of this Hon’ble Court in case of Nakul Vs. State of Rajasthan &
Ors. in D.B. Civil Writ Petition No.15912/2021, decided on
26.11.2021 wherein the question before the Court was whether
the dependent of a deceased person should include an unmarried
brother or unmarried sister, the relevant portion of the said order
“There is nothing discriminatory in the nature of Rule
itself. If the rule making authority at the relevant time
provided within the purview of the definition of dependent
a smaller class of members of the family of the deceased
Government servant and excluded his/her brothers or
sisters, the same per se so cannot be said to be
discriminatory.
It may be that subsequently the Government on its own,
upon deliberations, thought of expanding the definition.
That by     itself does not mean that the definition in the
original form was arbitrary or discriminatory. The case of
the petitioner shall have to be governed by the provisions
of the scheme for compassionate appointment contained in
statutory Rules as they prevailed at the time of death of
the Government servant. ”
13.   Learned counsel for the respondent also tried to impress
upon the Court by contending that the Scheme, Regulations and
Statute prevailing at the time of filing of the application ought to
be taken into consideration.
14.   Heard learned counsel for the parties as well as perused the
record of the case alongwith the precedent laws cited above.
15.   The Hon’ble Single Bench of this Court in Smt. Pinki Vs.
State of Rajasthan & Ors. S.B. Civil Writ Petition No. 9177
of 2010 wherein the petitioner’s father in law and husband had
both passed away simultaneously, while in government service,
applied the purposive rule of interpretation, while observing that,
“if any difficulty arises in getting the purpose of the Rule served
then to meet such exigencies, the Courts are having authority to
adopt “purposive construction”, which as a matter of fact is an
extension or to say a dimension to the doctrine of the literal
construction of a statute.”
15.1 The Hon’ble Single Bench further observed that under Rule 5
of the Rules of 1996, the appointment of a dependent on the
ground of compassionate appointment is conditional, and that the
dependent shall properly maintain the other family members who
were dependent on the deceased government servant, stated
through the furnishing of an undertaking to the same effect.
15.2 The Hon’ble Single Bench also observed that under Rule 5
(1), the exclusion of “widowed daughter” “in quite unambiguous
terms depicts that the author of the Rules were aware about the
fact that a “daughter – in – law”, who also happens to be a
“widowed daughter” is supposed to serve her in – laws, her
children and also her parental family.”
16.    The Hon’ble Chattisgarh High Court, in Sarojni Bhoi Vs.
State of Chattisgarh and Ors Writ Petition (S) No. 296 of
2014 held that the exclusion of a daughter / woman on the
ground of her marriage is not a permissible classification and that
the argument that she does not have an obligation to maintain her
parents, because she has joined the household of her husband is
invalid; and stated “a daughter even after marriage remains the
daughter of her father and she cannot be treated as not belonging
to her father’s family.” The Court further observed that, “the
institution of marriage is an important and basic civil right of man
and woman and marriage by itself is not a disqualification”.
17.    A Division Bench of the Hon’ble Allahabad High Court, in
Vimla Srivastava and Ors. Vs. State of U.P. and Ors. Writ C
– Nos. 60881, 14853 and 20204 of 2015, observed that the
purpose    of   appointment       on      the      ground      of compassionate
appointment is “to provide ameliorative relief to the family of a
government servant who has died in harness.”
17.1 The Hon’ble Division Bench, in the said case, also observed
that, “Marriage does not bring about a severance of the
relationship between a father and mother and their son or
between parents and their daughter. These relationships are not
governed by marital status ... Our society is governed by
constitutional principles. Marriage cannot be regarded as a
justifiable ground to define and exclude from who constitutes a
member of the fmaily when the state has adopted a social welfare
policy grounded on dependency”.
17.2 The Hon’ble Division Bench, also made succinct observations,
while stating that, “The living tree – the Constitution – on which
the law derives legitimacy is a liberal instrument for realising
fundamental human freedoms. The law and the Constitution must
account for multiple identities ... Marriage does not have and
should not have a proximate nexus with identity”
18.   The Hon’ble Supreme Court in Charu Khurana Vs. Union
of India (2015) 1 SCC 192 observed, “It is clear as the
cloudless sky that all practices derogatory to the dignity of the
women are to be renounced.”
19.   The Hon’ble Single Bench of this Court, in Ms. Indira
Bishnoi Vs. The State of Rajasthan & Ors. S.B. Civil Writ
Petition No. 14502 of 2015 answered the question as to
whether a divorced daughter would be entitled for appointment on
compassionate grounds in the affirmative, stating, “when equal
status has been given to daughter with sons there is no rational in
treating  a  daughter     differently        only      becuase of  the  term
“Divorced”. The term ‘unmarried’ ‘widow’ ‘divorced’ are only                a
nomenclature added to the term daughter”.
20.   The Hon’ble Special Bench of the Hon’ble Calcutta High Court
in The State of West Bengal and Ors. Vs. Purnima Das and
Ors. C.A.N. No. 12495 of 2014 in F.M.A. No. 1277 of 2015,
WPST No. 447 of 2013 and WPST No. 78 of 2014 observed
that there may be many probabilities in which a married daughter
may be fully dependent upon the income of her father so that
death of the father would leave her and the rest of the members
of the family in extreme economic hardship.
21.   The Hon’ble Special Bench of the Hon’ble Uttarakhand High
Court in Udham Singh Nagar District Cooperative Bank Ltd.
and Ors. Vs. Anjula Singh and Ors. Special Appeal Nos. 187,
290, 723, 741 and 887 of 2017 observed, “If the criteria, for
providing compassionate appointment, is dependence on the
deceased Government servant, it is difficult to accept the
submission that “dependant married sons” are the norm and
“dependent married daughters”                are the exception. On the
contrary married sons, not dependent on their parents,may be the
norm, and married sons, dependent on their parents, the
21.1 The Hon’ble Court further observed that daughters, whether
married, have been included in the coparcenary, with rights akin
to a son, and are being treated at par with respect to the
responsibility to take care of their parents in old age under the
Maintenance and Welfare of Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007;
then there exists no reason to discriminate between married
daughter and married son with respect to appointment on the
grounds of compassionate appointment.
22.   This Court also observes that in RBF Rig Corpn. v. Commr.
of Customs (Imports) (2011) 3 SCC 573, State of A.P. v.
Golconda Linga Swamy (2004) 6 SCC 522 and L. Chandra
Kumar v. Union of India), it was held that in an appropriate
case the writ court retains the power as inherent in its constitution
to do the right and undo a wrong in course of administration of
justice on the principle of quando lex aliquid alicui concedit,
concedere videtur id sine quo res ipsa esse non potest (when the
law gives a person anything, it gives him that without which it
cannot exist).
23.   This Court observes that the perception of the daughter,
after marriage no longer being a part of her father’s household
and becoming an exclusive part of her husband’s household, is an
outdated view and mindset.
24.   Other Statutes, namely the right to be included in the
coparcenary    of  her    father      and      the      equal   responsibility   of
maintenance of parents in old age as that of a son, regardless of
marital status; place responsibilities on married daughter and
married son, equally and this Court, sees no reason as to why a
distinction must be made on the same ground when it comes to
compassionate appointment of married daughters.
25.   This  Court   further     observes,          that     if a   daughter    was
unmarried or single, she would be eligible to seek appointment on
the ground of compassionate appointment; and if she was
widowed or divorced, then too she would be eligible for the same;
and that she then, must not be devoid of the same right, to seek
compassionate appointment, only when she is married. The pre-
marriage status of a daughter, of being single/unmarried and post
marriage status of a daughter either divorced, widowed or single
again renders her capable of seeking compassionate appointment.
Only the exclusion of a daughter, during the period of marriage,
for seeking compassionate appointment is arbitrary and unjust.
26.   Under   Article    14    of     the      Constitution       of   India,  the
discrimination between a married son and a married daughter,
with regard to appointment on the ground of compassionate
appointment is not a reasonable classification and amounts to a
treatment of equal persons in the eyes of law as unequal, and this
is a gross violation of the fundamental right of equality of perons
before the law.
27.    Article 15 of the Constitution of India explicitly prohibits
discrimination on the ground of sex. Further, under sub clause (3),
the Constitution empowers the State to make special provisions
for women and children; and the distinction between a married
son and a married daughter, with regard to appointment on
ground of compassionate appointment is, prime facie, not only
violative of Article 15 of the Constitution of India, but goes against
the interest of women.
28.    Article   16,   specifically      under        sub     clause   (2),  of   the
Constitution of India prohibits discrimination, on certain grounds;
one    being    sex,   among       citizens        in    the     matters  of   public
employment, and provides that an equal opportunity be afforded
to all citizens in matters relating to employment or appointment to
any office under the State.
29.    This Court is thus of the firm opinion that the discrimination
on    the    basis    of   gender,        of      married        daughter    seeking
compassionate appointment, would violate Articles 14, 15 & 16 of
the Constitution of India, and thus, the discrimination against a
married daughter vis-a-vis married son, and against a married
daughter      vis-a-vis   unmarried,          divorced,        widowed    or   single
daughter has been held to be unacceptable and the concerned
statutes were quashed and set aside by Hon’ble Karnataka High
Court and affirmed by Hon’ble Apex Court. The Hon’ble Apex Court
while analyzing the judgment has given full imprimatur to the
reasoning of the Hon’ble Karnataka High Court and thus, it is clear
that the rule within expression of family/dependent has to include
unmarried daughter at par with married daughter and married
daughter at par with married son.
30.   The submissions made by learned counsel for the respondent
and judgment cited by him of Nakul (supra) would not apply in
the present case, as admittedly their case was one where a
married brother was being sought to be inserted in the definition
of “dependent”; and as per the Rules of 1996, a married brother
and a married sister are treated at par, and therefore it cannot be
said to be violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India, as
was rightly observed by the Hon’ble Division Bench of this Court.
31.   The law laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, in the matter
of C.N. Apporva Shree (Supra), after fully analyzing the
judgment of the Hon’ble Karnataka High Court in the matter of
Smt. Bhuvaneshwari V. Puranik (Supra) granted its full
imprimatur to the same. The position of law, therefore, stands
settled, and the word ‘unmarried’ in the regulation does not
withstand the judicial scrutiny made by the Hon’ble Karnataka
High Court and the Hon’ble Apex Court.
32.   The larger ramification of a law being struck down by the
Hon’ble Courts is that it stands nullified in its stream of parallel
legislation, and even if any analogous law or legislation having the
same meaning is not directly mentioned, then also, if it is
absolutely on the same terms, as that of the law having been
struck down by the Hon’ble Apex Court, then such legislation will
fall within the same purview.
32.1 It is not necessary that all legal parameters on the same
wavelength     need   to    be    mentioned            while    striking   down    a
legislation, and what is to be seen is that the words and the exact
spirit, if same, the verdict of the Hon’ble Apex Court is bound to
have an impact of completely governing the field in question.
32.2 In this case also, for the purpose of the compassionate
appointment, the definition of ‘dependent’ was same as in Smt.
Bhuvaneshwari V. Puranik (Supra), and the legislation therein
on the same pedestal, as that in the State of Rajasthan i.e. Rules
of 1996, has been struck down, and thus, no separate striking
down is required, and in the present case, the verdict of the
Hon’ble Apex Court can be easily made applicable.
32.3 The Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in Behram Khurshed
Pesikaka       Vs.     Respondent:The                   State       of     Bombay
MANU/SC/065/1954 held, “...In this country once a law has
been struck down as unconstitutional law by a Court, no notice
can be taken of that law by any Court, and in every case an
accused     person  need      not     start      proving       that    the  law   is
unconstitutional. The Court is not empowered to look at that part
of the law which has been declared as void, and therefore there is
no onus resting on the accused person to prove that the law that
has already been declared unconstitutional is unconstitutional in
that particular case as well. The Court has to take notice only of
what the law of the land is, and convict the accused only if he
contravenes the law of the land...”
33.    This Court, therefore, observes that the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in C.N. Apporva (supra), has declared the law, holding
married daughter to be excluded from definition of ‘dependent’, as
a bad law, and under Article 141 of the Constitution of India, the
law so declared by the Hon’ble Apex Court is the law of the land,
and thus, the same is binding on all courts of the country.
33.1 An analogous rule existed in the Rules of 1996 before the
amendment made by the Legislature of the State of Rajasthan on
28.10.2021. While this Court does not require to strike down the
said provision of law, it sees no reason to deprive the petitioner of
her right, especially in light of the Hon’ble Supreme Court’s
judgment and the subsequent amendment brought by the State
34.   This Court also derives strength from fact that the State
Legislature, in its wisdom, has already brought the married
daughter within the domain of the definition of dependent, and the
respondents being a corporation of the State are bound to
maintain the line and length of the State’s Rules and Regulations.
35.   The welfare legislation, in the considered opinion of the State
Legislature of Rajasthan has, after recent amendment to the Rules
of 1996, now includes “married daughter” in the definition of
dependent in the Rules of 1996, and to give a full colour to the
welfare legislation, it needs to be implemented on all pending
issues, which have not attained finality. The present case comes
within the perspective of pending issue because the order was
passed on 06.06.2017 by the respondent authority and an
immediate challenge to the same was given on 15.09.2017, and
the matter is sub judice and alive since then.
36.   This Court also takes a note of the fact that the Hon’ble Apex
Court has already declared that any discrimination between
unmarried and married daughter and married son and married
daughter would be in clear violation of Article 14 , Article 15 &
Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
37.   This Court taking into account that the Rules of 1996 are a
welfare legislation, and the resounding mandate of the Hon’ble
Apex Court declaring the law treating a married daughter, as a
disqualified person, as a trite law, is not inclined to accept the
proposition of the learned counsel for the respondent seeking
rejection of the claim of compassionate appointment of the
petitioner.
38.   In light of the aforesaid observations, the present writ
petition   is  allowed,    the     impugned           order     dated  06.06.2017
Annexure-10 is quashed and set aside and the respondents are
directed to consider the petitioner being a married daughter to be
within   the    purview     of    the      definition        of  dependents,     for
compassionate appointment, as per the Regulations of 2016. The
conclusion arrived at by this Court is in conformity with the verdict
of the Hon’ble Apex Court as well as the current intention of the
39.   Accordingly, the petitioner shall move fresh application and
the respondent shall consider the same within a period of three
months from today without cancelling the candidature of the
petitioner on the ground of being the married daughter strictly in
accordance with law. All pending applications stand disposed of
accordingly.