CAN 1 of 2019 (Old CAN 6604 of 2019)
The State of West Bengal & Ors.
The affidavit of service filed by the appellant
discloses that the respondent no. 9 is served. She is not
appearing before this Court.
In this appeal the appellant who is a widow lady
aged about 80 years has challenged the order of the
learned Single Judge dated 01.03.2019 whereby WP No.
3672(W) of 2019 has been dismissed.
The record reflects that the writ petition was filed
by the appellant with the prayer to issue a direction to
the respondent no. 9 to provide financial assistance to
the appellant for survival and medical treatment.
The aforesaid prayer was made in the background
of the fact that the husband of the appellant had died
long back and her son Bajadulal Mandal was working a
Primary School Teacher but unfortunate he also died on
14.10.2014.    The   daughter-in-law   (wife of   Bajadula
Mandal) had applied for compassionate appointment in
the school and had also filed the affidavit dated
25.07.2016 stating that she will bear the responsibility of
all the maintenance with treatment of the appellant in
future and forever.
However,    after   receiving the appointment    the
respondent no. 9 did not care of the appellant. Therefore,
the appellant had initially filed WP 16153(W) of 2017
which was disposed of by order dated 18.09.2017 with
liberty to the appellant to file a detailed representation
before the respondent no. 5 therein and with a direction
to the said respondent to decide the representation.
Thereafter,     the    appellant  has    filed   the
representation dated 14.11.2017 which was dismissed by
the District Inspector of Schools (PE) by order dated
14.12.2017 which led to filing of WP 2737(W) of 2018 by
the appellant and this Court had permitted to the
appellant to file the fresh representation and directed the
appropriate authority to consider the same.
As no decision on the representation was taken the
appellant approached the Writ Court by filing the petition
but the learned Single Judge by the order under
challenge has dismissed the petition taking the view that
the appellant’s son aged about 37 years is in a position to
look after her.
It has been pointed out by learned counsel for the
appellant that only surviving son of the appellant is
unemployed and is not in a position to look after the
appellant.   He    has   also   submitted  that once    the
appointment on compassionate ground was obtained by
the respondent no. 9 by giving an undertaking before the
authorities that she will maintain the appellant then at
this stage she cannot turn around and ignore the
Learned counsel for the respondent no. 6 has also
fairly submitted that if a fresh representation is filed by
the appellant then the respondent no. 6 will duly look
into it.
We have also perused the affidavit dated 25th July,
2016 which was submitted by the respondent no. 9 at the
stage of obtaining the compassionate appointment. The
said affidavit clearly states as under:
“2. That my husband Braja Dulal Mandal
died on-14/10/2014 and he has an employee
as a Primary School Teacher.
3. That I do hereby declare that in the event
of my Appointment as a Clerk (C-Group)
under the Government of West Bengal on
compassionate ground, I shall be bound the
entire     responsibility  along   with     all
maintenance with treatment of my mother-
in-law Srimatya Durga Bala Mandal in future
and for ever.”
Once the respondent no. 9 had obtained the
compassionate appointment by giving an undertaking as
above to maintain and extend medical assistance to the
appellant, then she is bound by that.
In these circumstances, we dispose of the present
appeal granting liberty to the appellant to file an
appropriate detailed representation before the respondent
no. 6 who will duly consider the grievance of the
appellant and pass an appropriate order after giving an
opportunity to the appellant and the respondent no. 9 in
accordance    with  law   as   expeditiously  as  possible,
preferably within a period of two months from the date of
receipt  of  a   copy  of   this   order  along  with  the
The appeal and the connected application are
accordingly disposed of.