      HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE FOR RAJASTHAN AT
                S.B. Criminal Misc(Pet.) No. 3063/2022
  Manisha Vishnoi D/o Mohanram Vishnoi, Aged About 25 Years,
  R/o Village Saranpura, Surpura, Malamsingh Ki Sidh, Jodhpur, At
  Present Behind Veterinary Hospital, Village Bap, Jodhpur.
                                                         ----Petitioner
  1.      State Of Rajasthan, Through Supdtt. Of Police Jodhpur.
  2.      Station  House   Officer,   Police Station   Baap,   District
          Jodhpur.
  3.      Mohanram Vishnoi S/o Pancha Ram Vishnoi, R/o Behind
          Veterinary Hospital, Village Bap, Jodhpur.
                                                     ----Respondents
 For Petitioner(s)       :   Mr. Naman Mohnot
 For Respondent(s)       :   Mr. Mahipal Bishnoi, PP
                      JUSTICE DINESH MEHTA
1.    The petitioner has approached this Court with the grievance
that her parents are pressurizing her to live with the person with
whom her marriage was solemnized while she was a child. It is
argued that such marriage was illegal, as she was not of
marriageable age at the relevant time.
2.    It is the case of the petitioner that though she wants to
pursue her studies, her family members would get her arrested or
forcefully take her to her village and restrict her movement due to
which she would be unable to complete her studies.
3.    Having regard to the apprehension expressed by the
petitioner that her parents and family members will intrude in her
life and liberty, instant petition is being disposed of with a
                               (2 of 2)           [CRLMP-3063/2022]
direction to the petitioner to file a representation before the
Superintendent of Police, Jodhpur (Rural) for appropriate security
so as to enable her to take up her examinations at Jaipur which
are going to be scheduled from 11.06.2022 to 06.07.2022.
4.    If any such representation is made, the Superintendent of
Police, Jodhpur (Rural) shall consider the same, in accordance
with law.
