Counsel for Appellant :- Devesh Mishra,Rishabh Kesarwani
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
1.    Heard Sri Devesh Misra learned counsel for the appellant and Sri
B.P. Singh Kachhawah, learned standing counsel for the State
2.    This Special Appeal has been filed praying to set aside the
judgment and order dated 18.07.2019, passed by the learned Single Judge
in WRIT - A No. - 9064 of 2019 (Iqbal Khan Vs. State Of U.P. And 2
3.    The impugned judgment and order dated 18.7.2019, passed by the
learned Single Judge is reproduced below :-
“Petitioner had applied for compassionate appointment, consequent
upon death of his father. An order was passed on 14.5.2015, declining
appointment on the post of Pharmacist and offering him appointment
on the post of Lab Attendant or any other post for which petitioner
possess requisite qualification. Pursuant to this direction, petitioner
applied for the post of Lab Attendant and has been offered appointment
also. Petitioner has been working since July, 2015. He has now
approached this Court with the grievance that qualification for the post
of Pharmacist had been amended and that amended rule had not been
taken note of as per which he is eligible for appointment to the post of
Learned Standing Counsel has obtained instructions, according to
which, appointment on the post of Pharmacist is to be made through
U.P. Subordinate Service Selection Commission and, therefore, in view
of the provision contained in Rule 5 read with rule 3 of the U.P.
Recruitment of Dependants of Government Servants Dying in Harness
Rules, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Rules of 1974'), no
compassionate appointment can be granted on such post. It is stated
that the vacancies have otherwise been notified on the post of
Pharmacist         to      the       Selection       Commission.
Rules of 1974 clearly provides that appointment can be offered only on
a post for which recruitment is not required to be undertaken by the
Since post of Pharmacist is earmarked to the Commission for
recruitment, the petitioner's claim for compassionate on it cannot be
considered. The petitioner has been appointed on the post of Lab
Attendant in July, 2015, and therefore, he has otherwise acquiesced to
his appointment on the said post. There is no challenge laid to the
order declining petitioner's claim on the post of Pharmacist. In that
view of the matter, no relief can be granted to the petitioner. The writ
petition is dismissed.”
4.     It is admitted to the petitioner that compassionate appointment was
offered to him on 14.05.2019 and he accepted the offer and joined on the
post of Lab Attendant. After about four years he filed the aforesaid writ
petition claiming that he has the qualification for the post of Pharmacist
and, therefore, a mandamus may be issued to the respondents to give
appointment/absorb the petitioner on the post of Pharmacist in place of
the post of Lab Attendant considering his qualification.
5.     The aforesaid contention of the petitioner has been rejected by the
impugned judgment and order passed by the learned single Judge on two
grounds firstly the appointment on the post of Pharmacist is to be made
through U.P. Subordinate Service Selection Commission which has been
notified by the Commission for selection and secondly, the petitioner has
otherwise acquiesced to his appointment on the post of Lab Attendant.
6.     Aggrieved with the aforesaid judgment passed by the learned Single
Judge, the appellant has filed the present appeal.
7.     Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that as per Rule 5 of the
U.P. Recruitment of Dependants of Government Servants Dying in
Harness Rules, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the 'Rules 1974') the
appointment has to be given by the employer in accordance with the
qualification of the candidate applying for compassionate appointment
under Rules 1974. He further submits that even if the petitioner has
accepted the appointment on the post of Lab Attendant under the Rules
1974 yet his claim for the post of Pharmacist on the basis of qualification,
can not be denied by the respondents.
8.     Learned standing counsel supports the impugned judgment.
9.     We have carefully considered the submissions of learned counsels
for the parties and perused the records of the writ petition.
Object and principles of Compassionate Appointment:-
10.     The Apex Court in the case of Hamza Haji vs. State of Kerala
reported in 2006 (7) SCC 416 in paragraphs 28 and 29 has observed as
Company (1918 Appeal Cases 888) the Privy
Council held that if a judgment is affected by
fraudulent conduct it must be set aside. In Rex vs.
Recorder of Leicester (1947 (1) K B 726) it was held
that a certiorari would lie to quash a judgment on
the ground that it has been obtained by fraud. The
basic principle obviously is that a party who had
secured a judgment by fraud should not be enabled
to enjoy the fruits thereof. In this situation, the High
Court in this case, could have clearly either quashed
the decision of the Forest Tribunal in OA No.247 of
1979 or could have set aside its own judgment in
MFA No.328 of 1981 dismissing the appeal from the
decision of the Forest Tribunal at the stage of
admission and vacated the order of the Forest
Tribunal by allowing that appeal or could have
exercised its jurisdiction as a court of record by
invoking Article 215 of the Constitution to set at
naught the decision obtained by the appellant by
playing a fraud on the Forest Tribunal. The High
Court has chosen to exercise its power as a court of
record to nullify a decision procured by the
appellant by playing a fraud on the court. We see no
objection to the course adopted by the High Court
even assuming that we are inclined to exercise our
jurisdiction under Article 136 of the Constitution of
India at the behest of the appellant.”
11.    A Full Bench of this Court in the case of Shiv Kumar Dubey and
others vs. State of U.P. and others, 2014(2) ADJ, 312 (Para 29),
considered various aspects relating to compassionate appointment and
“We now proceed to formulate the principles which
must govern compassionate appointment in pursuance
(i) A provision for compassionate appointment
is an exception to the principle that there must
be an equality of opportunity in matters of
public employment. The exception to be
constitutionally valid has to be carefully
structured and implemented in order to
confine compassionate appointment to only
those situations which subserve the basic
object and purpose which is sought to be
(ii) There is no general or vested right to
compassionate appointment. Compassionate
appointment can be claimed only where a
scheme or rules provide for such appointment.
administrative scheme or statutory rules,
compassionate appointment must fall strictly
within the scheme or, as the case may be, the
(iii) The object and purpose of providing
compassionate appointment is to enable the
deceased employee to tide over the immediate
financial crisis caused by the death of the
(iv) In determining as to whether the family is
in financial crisis, all relevant aspects must be
borne in mind including the income of the
family; its liabilities, the terminal benefits
received by the family; the age, dependency
and marital status of its members, together
with the income from any other sources of
(v) Where a long lapse of time has occurred
employee, the sense of immediacy for seeking
compassionate appointment would cease to
exist and this would be a relevant circumstance
which must weigh with the authorities in
determining as to whether a case for the grant
of compassionate appointment has been made
(vi) Rule 5 mandates that ordinarily, an
application for compassionate appointment
must be made within five years of the date of
death of the deceased employee. The power
conferred by the first proviso is a discretion to
relax the period in a case of undue hardship
and for dealing with the case in a just and
(vii) The burden lies on the applicant, where
there is a delay in making an application
within the period of five years to establish a
justification supported by documentary and
other evidence. It is for the State Government
after considering all the facts to take an
appropriate decision. The power to relax is in
the nature of an exception and is conditioned
by the existence of objective considerations to
(viii) Provisions for the grant of compassionate
appointment do not constitute a reservation of a post
in favour of a member of the family of the deceased
employee. Hence, there is no general right which can
be asserted to the effect that a member of the family
who was a minor at the time of death would be
entitled to claim compassionate appointment upon
attaining majority. Where the rules provide for a
period of time within which an application has to be
made, the operation of the rule is not suspended during
the minority of a member of the family.”
12.   In Civil Misc. Writ Petition No. 13102 of 2010, Union of India
Vs. Smt. Asha Mishra, decided on 7.5.2010, a Division Bench of this
“The principles of consideration for compassionate
appointment have been firmly settled and have been
reiterated from time to time. Compassionate
appointment is not a vested right or an alternate
mode of employment. It has to be considered and
granted under the relevant rules. The object of
compassionate appointment is to tide over an
immediate financial crisis. It is not a heritable right
to be considered after an unreasonable period, for
the vacancies cannot be held up for long and that
appointment should not ordinarily await the
attainment of majority. Where the family has
survived for long, its circumstances must be seen
before the competent authority may consider such
appointment. It is not to be ordinarily granted,
where a person died close to his retirement. The
Court, however, has emphasised time to time and
more authoritatively in National Institute of
481 that such appointment can be granted only under
a scheme. It should not be considered after a long
lapse of time.”
13.   The judgment in the case of Smt. Asha Mishra (supra) has also
been taken notice by the Full Bench of this Court in Shiv Kumar Dubey
(supra) reiterating the legal principles so mandated therein. Recently, the
Apex Court in Civil Appeal No. 897 of 2021, in the matter of Central
Coalfields Limited Through its Chairman an Managing Director and
Ors. Vs. Parden Oraon decided on 09.04.2021, in paragraph 9 has
“9. … The application for compassionate
Respondent in the year 2013 which is more
than 10 years after the Respondent’s husband
compassionate appointment is for providing
immediate succour to the family of a deceased
employee, the Respondent’s son is not entitled
for compassionate appointment after the
passage of a long period of time since his
father has gone missing.”
14.    The object of compassionate appointment is to enable the family of
the deceased - employee to tied over the sudden financial crisis due to
death of the bread earner which has left the family in penury and without
means of livelihood, it is an exception to the normal rule of public
employment, it is a concession; vide; V. Sivamurthy vs. State of A.P.,
(2008) 13 SCC 730 (Paras 13-18), Umesh Kumar Nagpal vs. State of
Haryana, (1994) 4 SCC 138 (Para-2), Haryana SEB vs. Hakim Singh,
(1997) 8 SCC 85 at 87, Director of Education (Secondary) vs. Ankur
Gupta, (2003) 7 SCC 704 (Para-6), Food Corporation of India vs.
Ramkesh Yadav, (2007) 9 SCC 531 (Para.9), Indian Bank vs. Promila,
(2020) 2 SCC 729, State of U.P. vs. Pankaj Kumar Vishnoi, 2013 (11)
SCC 178 (Paras 11-15), N.C. Santosh vs. State of Karnatka (2020) 17
SCC 617 (Para 18), State of H.P. vs. Shashi Kumar, (2019) 3 SCC 653
(Para 18), State of Gujarat vs. Arvind Kumar Tiwari, (2012) 9 SCC
SCC 583 (Para 6-9), Union of India vs. P. Venktesh (2019) 15 SCC 613
(Para.7), Union of India vs. V. R. Tripathi, (2019) 14 SCC 646 (Para
13). The basic intention to grant compassionate appointment is that on the
death of the employee concern his family is not deprived of the means of
livelihood vide PNB Vs. Ashwini Kumar Taneja, (2004) 7 SCC 265
(para 4). It can not be claimed by way of inheritance vide State of
Chhatisgarh & others Vs. Dhirjo Kumar Sengar (2009) 13 SCC 600
(para 10 and 12). In Santosh Kumar Dubey Vs. State of U.P., (2009) 6
SCC 481 (para 11 & 12), the Apex Court held that Compassionate
Appointment can not be treated as a Bonanza.
Supreme Court has held that it is not disbursement of gift. It is not
sympathy syndrome. In State of U.P. Vs. Pankaj Kumar Vishnoi
2013(11) SCC 178 (paras 7,12,13 & 20). The Apex Court held that it is
meant to provide minimum relief for meeting immediate hardship to
save the bereaved family from sudden crisis due to death of sole bread
winner. Similar view has been expressed in SAIL Vs. Madhusudan
(2008) 15 SCC 560 (para 15) and SBI Vs. Anju Jain (2008) 8SCC 475
16.   In SBI Vs. Surya N. Tripathi, (2014) 15 SCC 739 (paras 4,9), the
Apex Court held that if employer finds that Financial Arrangement
made for family subsequent to death of the employee is adequate
members of the family can not insist for compassionate appointment.
17.   In General Manager (D & PB) and others Vs. Kunti Tiwary and
other (2004)7 SCC 271 (Para 9), Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the
Division Bench erred in diluting the criteria of penury to one of “not very
18.   In Union of India Vs. Shashank Goswami, (2012) 11 SCC 307
(Paras 9, 10) the Apex Court held that an applicant has no right to claim
compassionate appointment in a particular class or group. It is not for
conferring status on the family. In Pepsu Road Transport
the Apex Court held that while minimum qualification for eligibility
may be matriculation, generally graduate and even post graduate decree
holders respond and offer themselves for clerical appointments. Courts
can not ignore this fact and direct that possession of minimum
qualification alone would be sufficient.
19.   In State of Madhya Pradesh & others VS. Ramesh Kumar
Sharma (1994) Supp.(3) SCC 661, the Apex Court held that a candidate
for compassionate appointment has no right to any particular post of
choice. He can only claim to be considered.
20.   In the case of The Director of Treasuries in Karnataka & Anr.
vs. Somyashree, in Civil Appeal No.5122 of 2021, decided on
13.09.2021, Hon’ble Supreme Court reiterated the object and principles of
compassionate appointment, as under:
“7. While considering the submissions made on behalf of
the rival parties a recent decision of this Court in the case
of N.C. Santhosh (Supra) on the appointment on
compassionate ground is required to be referred to. After
considering catena of decisions of this Court on
appointment on compassionate grounds it is observed and
held that appointment to any public post in the service of
the State has to be made on the basis of principles in
accordance with Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of
India and the compassionate appointment is an exception to
the general rule. It is further observed that the dependent of
the deceased Government employee are made eligible by
virtue of the policy on compassionate appointment and they
must fulfill the norms laid down by the State’s policy. It is
further observed and held that the norms prevailing on the
date of the consideration of the application should be the
basis for consideration of claim of compassionate
appointment. A dependent of a government employee, in the
absence of any vested right accruing on the death of the
government employee, can only demand consideration of
his/her application. It is further observed he/she is,
however, entitled to seek consideration in accordance with
the norms as applicable on the day of death of the
Government employee. The law laid down by this Court in
the aforesaid decision on grant of appointment on
compassionate ground can be summarized as under:
(i) that the compassionate appointment is an exception
(ii) that no aspirant has a right to compassionate
(iii) the appointment to any public post in the service of
the State has to be made on the basis of the principle in
accordance with Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution
(iv) appointment on compassionate ground can be made
only on fulfilling the norms laid down by the State’s
policy and/or satisfaction of the eligibility criteria as
(v) the norms prevailing on the date of the
consideration of the application should be the basis for
consideration of claim for compassionate appointment.
8.2 Apart from the above one additional aspect needs to be
noticed, which the High Court has failed to consider. It is to
be noted that the deceased employee died on 25.03.2012.
The respondent herein – original writ petitioner at that time
was a married daughter. Her marriage was subsisting on
the date of the death of the deceased i.e. on 25.03.2012.
Immediately on the death of the deceased employee, the
respondent initiated the divorced proceedings under Section
13B of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 on 12.09.2012 for
decree of divorce by mutual consent. By Judgment dated
20.03.2013, the Learned Principal Civil Judge, Mandya
granted the decree of divorce by mutual consent. That
immediately on the very next day i.e. on 21.03.2013, the
respondent herein on the basis of the decree of divorce by
mutual consent applied for appointment on compassionate
ground. The aforesaid chronology of dates and
events would suggest that only for the purpose of
getting appointment on compassionate ground the
decree of divorce by mutual consent has been
obtained. Otherwise, as a married daughter she
compassionate ground. Therefore, looking to the
aforesaid facts and circumstances of the case, otherwise
also the High Court ought not to have directed the
appellants to consider the application of the respondent
herein for appointment on compassionate ground as
‘divorced daughter’. This is one additional ground to reject
the application of the respondent for appointment on
compassionate ground.”
21.   In a most recent judgment in the case of The State of Uttar
Pradesh and others vs. Premlata in Civil Appeal No.6003 of 2021,
decided on 05.10.2021, Hon’ble Supreme Court considered the
provisions of U.P. Rules 1974 and summarized the principles of
compassionate appointment in the context of U.P. Rules, 1974, as under:
“9. As per the law laid down by this court in catena of
decisions on the appointment on compassionate ground,
for all the government vacancies equal opportunity should
be provided to all aspirants as mandated under Article 14
and 16 of the Constitution. However, appointment on
compassionate ground offered to a dependent of a
deceased employee is an exception to the said norms. The
compassionate ground is a concession and not a right.
9.1 In the case of State of Himachal Pradesh and Anr. vs.
Shashi Kumar reported in (2019) 3 SCC 653, this court
had an occasion to consider the object and purpose of
appointment on compassionate ground and considered
decision of this court in case of Govind Prakash Verma vs.
LIC reported in (2005) 10 SCC 289, in para 21 and 26, it
“21. The decision in Govind Prakash Verma [Govind
Prakash Verma v. LIC, (2005) 10 SCC 289, has been
considered subsequently in several decisions. But,
before we advert to those decisions, it is necessary to
note that the nature of compassionate appointment had
been considered by this Court in Umesh Kumar Nagpal
v. State of Haryana [Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of
The principles which have been laid down in Umesh
Kumar Nagpal [Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of
have been subsequently followed in a consistent line of
precedents in this Court. These principles are
encapsulated in the following extract: (Umesh Kumar
Nagpal case [Umesh Kumar Nagpal v. State of
“2. … As a rule, appointments in the public services
should be made strictly on the basis of open invitation of
applications and merit. No other mode of appointment
nor any other consideration is permissible. Neither the
Governments nor the public authorities are at liberty
to follow any other procedure or relax the
qualifications laid down by the rules for the post.
However, to this general rule which is to be followed
strictly in every case, there are some exceptions carved
out in the interests of justice and to meet certain
contingencies. One such exception is in favour of the
dependants of an employee dying in harness and leaving
his family in penury and without any means of
livelihood. In such cases, out of pure humanitarian
consideration taking into consideration the fact that
unless some source of livelihood is provided, the family
would not be able to make both ends meet, a provision is
made in the rules to provide gainful employment to one
of the dependants of the deceased who may be eligible
for such employment. The whole object of granting
compassionate employment is thus to enable the family
to tide over the sudden crisis. The object is not to give a
member of such family a post much less a post for post
held by the deceased. What is further, mere death of an
employee in harness does not entitle his family to such
source of livelihood. The Government or the public
authority concerned has to examine the financial
condition of the family of the deceased, and it is only if
it is satisfied, that but for the provision of employment,
the family will not be able to meet the crisis that a job
is to be offered to the eligible member of the family.
The posts in Classes III and IV are the lowest posts in
nonmanual and manual categories and hence they alone
can be offered on compassionate grounds, the object
being to relieve the family, of the financial destitution
and to help it get over the emergency. The provision of
employment in such lowest posts by making an
exception to the rule is justifiable and valid since it is
not discriminatory. The favourable treatment given to
such dependant of the deceased employee in such posts
has a rational nexus with the object sought to be
achieved viz. relief against destitution. No other posts
are expected or required to be given by the public
authorities for the purpose. It must be remembered in
this connection that as against the destitute family of the
deceased there are millions of other families which are
equally, if not more destitute. The exception to the rule
made in favour of the family of the deceased employee is
in consideration of the services rendered by him and the
legitimate expectations, and the change in the status and
affairs, of the family engendered by the erstwhile
employment which are suddenly upturned.”
“26. The judgment of a Bench of two Judges in Mumtaz
Yunus Mulani v. State of Maharashtra [Mumtaz Yunus
Mulani v. State of Maharashtra, (2008) 11 SCC 384 :
(2008) 2 SCC (L&S) 1077] has adopted the principle
that appointment on compassionate grounds is not a
source of recruitment, but a means to enable the family
of the deceased to get over a sudden financial crisis.
The financial position of the family would need to be
evaluated on the basis of the provisions contained in the
scheme. The decision in Govind Prakash Verma
[Govind Prakash Verma v. LIC, (2005) 10 SCC 289 :
2005 SCC (L&S) 590] has been duly considered, but the
Court observed that it did not appear that the earlier
binding precedents of this Court have been taken note of
in that case.”
10. Thus as per the law laid down by this court in the
aforesaid decisions, compassionate appointment is an
exception to the general rule of appointment in the public
services and is in favour of the dependents of a deceased
dying in harness and leaving his family in penury and
without any means of livelihood, and in such cases, out of
pure humanitarian consideration taking into consideration
the fact that unless some source of livelihood is provided,
the family would not be able to make both ends meet, a
provision is made in the rules to provide gainful
employment to one of the dependants of the deceased who
may be eligible for such employment. The whole object of
granting compassionate employment is thus to enable the
family to tide over the sudden crisis. The object is not to
give such family a post much less a post held by the
10.1 Applying the law laid down by this court in the
aforesaid decisions and considering the observations made
hereinabove and the object and purpose for which the
appointment on compassionate ground is provided, the
submissions on behalf of the respondent and the
interpretation by the Division Bench of the High Court on
Rule 5 of Rules 1974, is required to be considered.
10.2 The Division Bench of the High Court in the present
case has interpreted Rule 5 of Rules 1974 and has held
that ‘suitable post’ under Rule 5 of the Rules 1974 would
mean any post suitable to the qualification of the
candidate irrespective of the post held by the deceased
employee. The aforesaid interpretation by the Division
Bench of the High Court is just opposite to the object and
purpose of granting the appointment on compassionate
ground. ‘Suitable post’ has to be considered, considering
status/post held by the deceased employee and the
educational qualification/eligibility criteria is required to
be considered, considering the post held by the deceased
employee and the suitability of the post is required to be
considered vis a vis the post held by the deceased
difference/distinction between the appointment on
compassionate ground and the regular appointment. In a
given case it may happen that the dependent of the deceased
employee who has applied for appointment on
compassionate ground is having the educational
qualification of Class-II or Class-I post and the deceased
employee was working on the post of Class/Grade IV and/or
lower than the post applied, in that case the
dependent/applicant cannot seek the appointment on
compassionate ground on the higher post than what was
held by the deceased employee as a matter of right, on the
ground that he/she is eligible fulfilling the eligibility criteria
of such higher post. The aforesaid shall be contrary to the
object and purpose of grant of appointment on
compassionate ground which as observed hereinabove is to
enable the family to tide over the sudden crisis on the death
of the bread earner. As observed above, appointment on
compassionate ground is provided out of pure humanitarian
consideration taking into consideration the fact that some
source of livelihood is provided and family would be able to
make both ends meet.
11. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above,
the Division Bench of the High Court has misinterpreted
and misconstrued Rule 5 of the Rules 1974 and in observing
and holding that the ‘suitable post’ under Rule 5 of the
Dying-In-Harness Rules 1974 would mean any post suitable
to the qualification of the candidate and the appointment on
compassionate ground is to be offered considering the
educational qualification of the dependent. As observed
hereinabove such an interpretation would defeat the object
and purpose of appointment on compassionate ground.
22.   In the case of Navendra Kumar Upadhyay Vs. State of U.P. and
others (Special Appeal No.1601of 2012) decided on 22.10.2021, a
Division Bench of this Court considered in detail the principles and object
of Compassionate appointment and concluded as under :-
35.    We have discussed above in detail the case of the petitioner /
appellant and the principles of law on compassionate appointment laid
down by this Court and by Hon’ble Supreme Court, which are briefly
(a) A provision for compassionate appointment is an
exception to the principle that there must be an equality
of opportunity in matters of public employment. The
exception to be constitutionally valid has to be carefully
structured and implemented in order to confine
compassionate appointment to only those situations
which subserve the basic object and purpose which is
(b) The object of compassionate appointment is to
enable the family of the deceased - employee to tied over
the sudden financial crisis due to death of the bread
earner which has left the family in penury and without
means of livelihood, it is an exception to the normal rule
of public employment, it is a concession. The basic
intention to grant compassionate appointment is that on
the death of the employee, his family is not deprived of
the means of livelihood. It can not be claimed by way of
inheritance. Compassionate Appointment can not be
treated as a Bonanza. It is not disbursement of gift. It is
not sympathy syndrome. It is meant to provide minimum
relief for meeting immediate hardship to save the
bereaved family from sudden financial crisis due to
death of sole bread winner. If employer finds that
Financial arrangement made for family subsequent to
death of the employee is adequate members of the family
can not insist for compassionate appointment.
(c) Mere death of an employee in harness does not
entitle his family to such source of livelihood. The
Government or the public authority concerned has to
examine the financial condition of the family of the
deceased, and it is only if it is satisfied, that but for the
provision of employment, the family will not be able to
meet the crisis that a job is to be offered to the eligible
member of the family.
(d) In determining as to whether the family is in
financial crisis, all relevant aspects must be borne in
mind including the income of the family; its liabilities,
the terminal benefits received by the family; the age,
dependency and marital status of its members, together
with the income from any other sources of employment;
(e) There is no general or vested right to compassionate
appointment. Compassionate appointment can be
claimed only where a scheme or rules provide for such
appointment. Where such a provision is made in an
administrative scheme or statutory rules, compassionate
appointment must fall strictly within the scheme or, as the
(f) Where a long lapse of time has occurred since the
date of death of the deceased employee, the sense of
immediacy for seeking compassionate appointment
would cease to exist and this would be a relevant
circumstance which must weigh with the authorities in
determining as to whether a case for the grant of
compassionate appointment has been made out;
(g) An applicant has no right to claim compassionate
appointment in a particular class or group. It is not for
conferring status on the family. A candidate for
compassionate appointment has no right to any
particular post of choice. He can only claim to be
(h) The dependent/applicant cannot seek the appointment
on compassionate ground on the higher post than what
was held by the deceased employee as a matter of right,
on the ground that he/she is eligible fulfilling the
eligibility criteria of such higher post.
(i) Provisions for the grant of compassionate
appointment do not constitute a reservation of a post in
favour of a member of the family of the deceased
employee. Hence, there is no general right which can be
asserted to the effect that a member of the family who
was a minor at the time of death would be entitled to
claim compassionate appointment upon attaining
majority. Where the rules provide for a period of time
within which an application has to be made, the
operation of the rule is not suspended during the
minority of a member of the family.
(j) The norms prevailing on the date of the
consideration of the application should be the basis for
consideration of claim for compassionate appointment.
(k) Neither the Governments nor the public authorities
are at liberty to follow any other procedure or relax the
qualifications laid down by the rules for the post. The
whole object of granting compassionate employment is
to enable the family to tide over the sudden financial
crisis.
(l) Rule 5 mandates that ordinarily, an application for
compassionate appointment must be made within five
years of the date of death of the deceased employee. The
power conferred by the first proviso is a discretion to
relax the period in a case of undue hardship and for
dealing with the case in a just and equitable manner;
(m) The burden lies on the applicant, where there is a
delay in making an application within the period of five
years to establish a case on the basis of reasons and a
justification supported by documentary and other
evidence. It is for the State Government after considering
all the facts to take an appropriate decision. The power
to relax is in the nature of an exception and is
conditioned by the existence of objective considerations
to the satisfaction of the government;
(n) The father of the petitioner died on 07.07.1991 when
petitioner was aged about eight years. He applied for
compassionate appointment sometime in the year 2006-
07 and the District Basic Education Officer granted
appointment unauthorisedly, without grant of relaxation
by the Competent Authority/ State Government. Thus, the
petitioner unauthorisedly and in contravention of the
government order, without relaxation of period for
submission of application, obtained appointment on
compassionate ground, which is nullity. Therefore, the
appointing authority has lawfully cancelled the order of
appointment of the petitioner. Hence impugned order of
the learned Single Judge does not suffer from any
manifest error of law.
23.   In view of the law laid down by Hon’ble Supreme Court and this
Court referred above, we do not find any error of law in the impugned
Judgment. Hence, the Special Appeal is dismissed.