interconnection as the PPF Account is opened with
the Central           Government     through       the respondent,
while Cash Credit Account is maintained and held
with the respondent.
3.    Learned         advocate   Mr.Aditya         Gupta      appearing
for     the        petitioner     has        submitted        that           the
Government           of   India    vide        notification             being
Public         Provident       Fund         Scheme,      2019           dated
12.12.2019           under    Section         15   of    the          Public
Provident Fund Act, 1968 has clarified that the
amount standing in the PPF Account shall not be
liable to any attachment in respect of any debt
or    liability          incurred     by      the   account           holder
hence, the PPF account is protected against any
kind of recovery, debt etc.
3.1 It        is submitted       that        due to the         pandemic
situation            and    economic          condition         of           the
petitioner           and   other    coparceners         of      the          HUF
required the fund urgently and, therefore, wanted
to withdraw the fund lying in the PPF Account and
thus,      the petitioner         approached        the respondent
Bank to withdraw the amount of the PPF Account on
26.06.2020. Learned advocate has submitted that
the respondent Bank has illegally and without the
consent of the petitioner debited the amount of
Rs.85,380/- from his PPF Account to Cash Credit
Account of his partnership firm.
3.2 Learned advocate Mr.Gupta has submitted that
the action of the respondent Bank of debiting the
aforesaid         amount     from    the       PPF   Account         of        the
petitioner is illegal and de hors the procedure
prescribed          in   law.   He     has      placed     reliance              on
Section        60(1)      of   the       Civil      Procedure             Code,
1908(the CPC), which provides for the properties
liable      to      be  attached.        He     has   submitted              that
Section 60(1) Clause (a top) provides for the
properties, which are not liable to be attached
and Clause (ka) to the proviso of Section 60 of
the CPC states that “all deposits and other sums
in or derived from any fund to which the Public
Provident Fund Act, 1968 (23 of 1968), for the
time    being         applies,     in      so    far    as      they          are
declared by the said Act as not to be liable to
3.3 He       has       further     placed         reliance          on         the
judgement           of   Division        Bench      of     this           Court
rendered in the case of Dineshchandra Bhailalbhai
OnLine Gujarat 15889. The Division Bench of this
Court in the said judgement has held thus:
“7. The Scheme is framed under the Public Provident
Fund Act, 1968. The statement of objects and reasons
for enactment of the Act state inter alia that the
object of the bill is to provide for the institution
of a Provident Fund for general public. The fund is
meant to be a medium for long term savings for
individuals. With such object in mind, the Public
Provident Fund Act was enacted. Section 3 of the PPF
Act, 1968 provides for framing of the Public
Provident Fund Scheme. Sub-section (1) of Section 3
provides that the Central Government may, by a
notification in the official Gazette, frame a scheme
to be called the Public Provident Fund Scheme for the
establishment of a provident fund for the general
public and there shall be established, as soon as may
be after the framing of the Scheme, a Fund in
accordance with the provisions of this Act and the
8.        Section 4 of the PPF Act, 1968 provides that
any individual may, on his own behalf or on behalf of
a minor, of whom he is the guardian, subscribe to the
Fund in such manner and subject to such maximum and
minimum limits as may be prescribed in the Scheme.
Section 5 pertains to interest to be paid on such
subscriptions. Section 6 pertains to withdrawals
which may be permitted to the extend and subject to
terms and conditions as may be specified. Section 9,
which is important for us, reads as under :-
“9. Protection against attachment – The amount
standing to the credit of any subscriber in the
Fund shall not be liable to attachment under any
decree or order of any Court in respect of any
debt or liability incurred by the subscriber.”
9.        From the provisions of the PPF Act, 1968 it can
be seen that the same is a benevolent statute and
envisages creation of an institution of the Provident
Fund for the general public, for the purpose of a
medium for long term savings for individuals. The Act
envisages framing up of a Public Provident Fund
Scheme and creation of a fund in accordance with the
provisions of the Act and the Scheme. The Act
contains provisions for the subscription to the fund
and interest to be paid on the subscriptions. It also
controls the withdrawals and granting of loan against
the amount standing to the credit of a subscriber in
the Fund. Section 9 of the PPF Act, therefore, has to
be seen in the background of such benevolent
provisions. The provision of the PPF Act, 1968 seen
in light of the PPF Scheme would demonstrate that the
withdrawals and loans against the amount lying in the
account of a subscriber are controlled thereby
encouraging long term savings for an individual and
discouraging withdrawals intermittently and pre-
maturely. It can thus be seen that the PPF Scheme
which covers all individuals whether employed in the
public sector or not or covered under the labour
welfare legislations or not. In essence, therefore,
even for individuals not covered by the public
employment       and   therefore      enjoying      contributory
provident fund or pension scheme or organized sector,
and therefore, covered under the labour welfare
schemes, provides for a social security and a fund to
depend upon in old age; post-retirement.
10.       In case of Union of India v. Radha Kissen
Agarwalla & Anr., reported in AIR 1969 SC 762, in the
context of Railway Provident Fund created under the
Provident Funds Act, 1925, the Apex Court observed
that the Union of India was a trustee for the
subscriber of the money. When the amount lying with
the Reserve Bank as an agent of the Railway
administration was attached, the Union had clearly an
interest to maintain the application for removal of
the attachment. With such observation, the order of
attachment        of   the     amount     by     the          Railway
Administration was held to be contrary to Section 3
of the PPF Act, 1925. We may refer to Section 3 (1)
of the PPF Act, 1925 which provides, inter alia,
that, “..A compulsory deposit in any Government or
Railway Provident Fund shall not in any way be
capable of being assigned or charged and shall not be
liable to attachment under any decree or order of any
Civil, Revenue or Criminal Court in respect of any
debt or liability incurred by the subscriber or
depositor, and neither the Official Assignee nor any
receiver appointed under the Provincial Insolvency
Act, 1920, shall be entitled to, or have any claim
on, any such compulsory deposit.”
11.       The decision in case of Union of India v. Radha
Kissen Agarwalla & Anr. [Supra] was reiterated in
case of Union of India v. Jyoti Chit Fund and Finance
& Ors., reported in AIR 1976 SC 1163. Here also, the
Court was considering Section 3 of the PPF Act, 1925.
Referring to clause (k) of Section 60 of the Code of
Civil Procedure, the Court observed that so long as
the amounts are provident fund dues, pensions and
other compulsory deposits then, till they are
actually paid to the government servant who is
entitled to it on retirement or otherwise, the nature
of the dues is not altered. The government is a
trustee for those sums and has an interest in
maintaining the objection in court to attachment.
12.       At this stage, we may refer to Rule 10 of
Schedule-II to the Income-tax Act, 1961. The second
schedule pertains to procedure for recovery of tax.
Rules contained in the schedule make detailed
provisions and the manner in which tax dues of the
department could be recovered from the debtors. Rule
10 thereof reads as under :-
“10. Property exempt from attachment:
(1) All such property as is by the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), shall be exempt from
attachment and sale in execution of a decree of a
civil court shall be exempt from attachment and
sale under this Schedule.
(2) The Tax Recovery Officer’s decision as to
what property is so entitled to exemption shall
be conclusive.”
14.       In turn, if one peruses Section 60 of the Code
of Civil Procedure, it pertains to property liable to
attachment       and  sale    in     execution      of        decree.
Subsection (1) of Section 60 lists the properties
which shall be liable to attachment or sale. Proviso
to section 60(1) contains list of properties which
shall not be liable to attachment or sale. Clause
(ka) thereof reads as under :-
“(ka) all deposits and other sums in or derived from
any fund to which the Public Provident Fund Act, 1968
(23 of 1968), for the time being applies, in so far
as they are declared by the said Act as not to be
liable to attachment.”
15.       To our mind, three provisions noted above,
namely, Section 9 of the PPF www.taxguru.in C/SCA/1
1575/2005 JUDGMENT Page 9 of 10 Act, 1968 Rule 10 of
Schedule-II to the Income-tax Act, 1961 and clause
(ka) to the proviso to Section 60(1) of the Code of
Civil Procedure complete a full circuit, making any
amount lying in the public provident fund of a
subscriber immune from attachment and sale for
recovery of the income tax dues. We may recall that
Rule 10 of Schedule-II to the Income-tax Act, 1961
exempts all such properties as by the Civil Procedure
Code are exempted from attachment and sale in
execution of a decree of a civil court from
attachment and sale under the said schedule. In turn,
clause (ka) of the provision to Section 60 (1) of the
Code of Civil Procedure provides that all deposits
and other sums in or derived from any fund to which
the Public Provident Fund Act, 1968 applies in so far
as they are declaring by the said Act not to be
liable to attachment, shall not be liable for
attachment or sale under the Code. This brings us
right back to Section 9 of the PPF Act, 1968 which
provides that the amount standing to the credit of
any subscriber shall not be liable to attachment
under any decree or order of any Court in respect of
any debt or liability incurred by the subscriber.”
3.4 Thus,          it   is   submitted       that   the      respondent
Bank    may be directed             to refund        the amount                of
Rs.85,380/-          withdrawn      from      the   provident              fund
account of the petitioner.
4.    Per contra, learned advocate Ms.Nalini Lodha
appearing for the respondent Bank has submitted
that the action of the respondent is justified
and    hence,        no   orders     may     be   passed.        She         has
submitted that the respondent Bank was forced to
undertake the necessary action for withdrawal of
the amount of PPF Account since the bank, along
with the partners of the firm and others in their
personal           and     individual         capacity,          executed
General         Form    of    Guarantee        on   03.05.2018               for
Rs.24,00,00,000/- and the petitioner, alongwith
other guarantors, are liable to pay the entire
debt due to the respondent Bank. Thus, she has
submitted that the action of the respondent Bank
withdrawing the provident fund amount may not be
set aside.
5.    Heard          the    learned         advocates         for            the
respective parties and also perused the documents
as pointed out by them.
6.    It is not in dispute that the respondent Bank
have     withdrawn/debited          the aforesaid            amount            of
Rs.85,380/-           from    the       PPF     Account          of          the
petitioner. It is well settled proposition of law
that the amount of Public Provident Fund account
shall not be liable to any attachment in respect
of any debt or liability incurred by the account
holder. Thus, the action of the respondent Bank
of withdrawing/debiting the aforesaid amount from
the PPF Account of the petitioner is illegal and
7. Under the circumstances, the respondent Bank
is directed to deposit the amount of Rs.85,380/-
within a period of four weeks in the Savings Bank
Account          No.29760100019545           in     the        name            of
Rajnikant          Punjalal   Shah       HUF   with    the       Bank          of
Baroda,         Law    Garden   Branch,        Ahmedabad.             It       is
clarified          that   the  observations          made        by        this
Court       may      not   be  construed         adverse          to         the
respondent Bank in any other proceedings.
8.    The       present    writ    petition       stands         allowed.
Rule made absolute.