Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 2120 of 2022
Counsel for Applicant :- Anjani Kumar Mishra
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
(1)   The present bail application has been nominated by Hon’ble the
Chief Justice to this Bench vide order dated 07.03.2022, hence
the Registry has placed the instant bail application before this
Court today.
(2)   The instant first application for bail under Section 439 Cr.P.C.
has been preferred by applicant, Mohammad Azam Khan,
seeking to enlarge him on bail in FIR/Case Crime No. 79 of
2019, under Sections 500, 505 I.P.C., Police Station Hazratganj,
(3)   Heard Shri Imran Ullah, learned Counsel for the applicant and
Shri Vinod Kumar Shahi, learned Additional Advocate General
assisted by Shri Anurag Verma, learned Additional Government
Advocate appearing on behalf of the State,
(4)   Learned Counsel for the applicant has argued that an F.I.R. was
lodged by one Allama Jamir Naqbi, who is said to be a writer &
critic and opponent to the applicant, against the applicant on
01.02.2019 at 04:11 a.m., alleging that the applicant, while
sitting in his office at room no. 101-102 situated in Mukhya
Bhavan (Vidhan Bhawan), Police Station Hazratganj, district
Lucknow, had intentionally wrote certain letters dated
11.08.2014 on the letter pad of the office and also wrote a letter
dated 12.08.2014 on a blank paper bearing his signatures at the
footer, defaming R.S.S., a National Political Party, namely,
B.J.P. and Maulana Sayyed Kalbe Jawwad Naqbi, which was
published in National Newspaper and various T.V. national
news channels by the pressure and high end networks of the
applicant.
(5) It has been argued by the learned Counsel for the applicant that
for the alleged incident pertains to the year 2014, the aforesaid
F.I.R. has been lodged on 01.02.2019 i.e. almost after five years
without explaining inordinate delay. His submission is that the
F.I.R. has been registered in utter ignorance to the bar of
limitation as provided under Section 468 of Cr.P.C. inasmuch as
the offences alleged against the applicant entail a maximum
imprisonment of upto 3 years and, as such, the limitation period
as provided under Section 468 Cr.P.C. for the offence of three
years is only till three years.
(6) Learned Counsel for the applicant further argued that on
05.03.2022, charge-sheet has been filed against the applicant
for the offence punishable under Section 505 (2) I.P.C. only and
the Court concerned has taken cognizance on it. His submission
is that even assuming that the applicant is being convicted for
the offence punishable under Section 505 (2) I.P.C., then, the
maximum sentence is to be awarded to him by the Court as per
the statute is three years or with fine or with both.
(7) Learned Counsel for the applicant has next argued that the FIR
of the instant case has been registered on account of political
vendetta. He argued that 87 criminal cases have been registered
against the applicant on false, concocted and vexatious
allegations. However, out of 87 criminal cases, the applicant
has been enlarged on bail in 84 cases. He further argued that
applicant is incarcerating in jail since 26.02.2020 i.e. more than
2 years in one or the other false criminal cases. He further
argued there there is no material in the F.I.R. to show or even
any apprehension that the applicant would either try to abscond/
evade during trial or influence the witnesses in any manner.
Hence the applicant is liable to be enlarged on bail.
(8) Per contra, learned Additional Advocate General appearing on
behalf of the State has vehemently opposed the prayer of the
learned Counsel for the applicant to enlarge the applicant on
bail and has argued that serious allegations have been levelled
against the applicant in the F.I.R., hence applicant is not liable
to be enlarged on bail. He, however, admitted the fact that
charge sheet against the applicant has been filed under Section
505 (2) I.P.C. on 05.03.2022 and the trial Court has taken
cognizance on it.
(9)  Without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case and
and taking into account the facts that applicant has been
incarcerated in jail in the instant case since 26.02.2020 i.e. more
than 2 years; charge-sheet has been submitted against the
applicant; and the trial Court has taken cognizance on it, this
Court is of the view that the continued custody of the applicant,
prima facie, may not be necessary for the purpose of further
investigation and trial in the instant case.
(10) Accordingly, the instant application for bail is allowed.
(11) Let the applicant, Mohammad Azam Khan, involved in Case
Crime No. 79 of 2019, under Sections 500, 505 I.P.C., Police
Station Hazratganj, District Lucknow be released on bail on his
furnishing a personal bond with two sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the Court concerned with the
following conditions:-
(i)   The applicant shall not tamper with the prosecution
evidence by intimidating/pressurizing the witnesses,
during the investigation or trial;
(ii)  The applicant shall co-operate in the trial. The applicant
shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall not
seek any adjournment on the dates fixed for evidence
when the witnesses are present in Court. In case of
default of this condition, it shall be open for the trial
court to treat it as abuse of liberty of bail and pass orders
in accordance with law.
(ii)  The applicant shall remain present before the trial court
on each date fixed, either personally or through his
counsel. In case of his absence, without sufficient cause,
the trial court may proceed against him under Section
229-A of the Indian Penal Code.
(iii) In case, the applicant misuses the liberty of bail during
trial and in order to secure his presence, proclamation
under Section 82 Cr.P.C. is issued and the applicant fails
to appear before the court on the date fixed in such
proclamation, then, the trial court shall initiate
proceedings against him, in accordance with law, under
Section 174-A of the Indian Penal Code.
(iv) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the
trial court on the dates fixed for (i) opening of the case,
(ii) framing of charge and (iii) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the trial
court, absence of the applicant is deliberate or without
sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the trial court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed
against him in accordance with law.