The approach of the Union of India in the
manner   it   has   filed   the    present   special   leave
petition    exasperates    us   as   all   earlier   counsel
appears to have been thrown in the dustbin!
A writ petition was filed in the year 2000,
raising a question of parity in the pay-scale of the
employees     of      the      Central      Tibetan       School
Administration    and   that    writ  petition     came   to  be
allowed by the learned Single Judge in terms of an
order dated 07.05.2002.       The appellant-Union of India
aggrieved   by   the   said    order   preferred     a   Letters
Patent Appeal (LPA), which was dismissed for non-
prosecution    on  15.12.2008.         The   Union    of   India
decided  to   wake    up   and   preferred    an   application
seeking  restoration      of   the  LPA   in  the    year   2016
seeking condonation of delay of 2590 days.                  This
application was dismissed by the impugned order dated
19.12.2018 by the detailed order.          The Division Bench
recorded that the only ground which was urged was
that the counsel appearing in the matter has been
elevated  as    a  Judge     of  the   High   Court    and   the
Department    was    not     aware   about     the    “peculiar
circumstance”.     The High Court thus while referring
to the judicial view of this Court, inter alia, in
the  matter    of  Office     of   the   Chief   Post     Master
General & Ors. vs. Living Media India Ltd. & Anr. –
(2012)  3   SCC   563    and    Balwant   Singh    (Dead)    vs.
Jagdish Singh & Ors.- AIR 2010 SC 3043 opined that
the appellant cannot be compared to an illiterate
litigant.
The present special leave petitions have been
preferred also after delay of 532 days and 6616 days
from the original order.
We  have   heard   learned  Additional   Solicitor
General for some time and must note that the only
error which seems to have occurred in the impugned
order is of noticing that it is not an illiterate
litigant because the manner in which the Government
is prosecuting its appeal reflects nothing better!
The mighty Government of India is manned with large
legal    department    having    numerous   officers   and
Advocates.    The excuse given for the delay is, to say
the least, preposterous.
We have repeatedly being counselling through
our   orders   various   Government   departments,   State
Governments and other public authorities that they
must learn to file appeals in time and set their
house in order so far as the legal department is
concerned, more so as technology assists them.        This
appears to be falling on deaf ears despite costs
having been imposed in number of matters with the
direction to recover it from the officers responsible
for  the   delay  as  we   are  of  the  view  that  these
officers must be made accountable.        It has not had
any  salutary    effect   and  that  the   present  matter
should have been brought up, really takes the cake!
The aforesaid itself shows the casual manner
in which the petitioner has approached this Court
without    any    cogent    or    plausible   ground    for
condonation    of   delay.   In   fact,   other   than  the
lethargy and incompetence of the petitioner, there is
nothing  which    has   been   put   on  record.   We  have
repeatedly discouraged State Governments and public
authorities in adopting an approach that they can
walk in to the Supreme Court as and when they please
ignoring the period of limitation prescribed by the
Statutes, as if the Limitation statute does not apply
to them.    In this behalf, suffice to refer to our
judgment in the State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. v.
Bheru  Lal   [SLP   [C]  Diary   No.9217/2020   decided  on
15.10.2020] and The State of Odisha & Ors. v. Sunanda
Mahakuda   [SLP   [C]   Diary  No.22605/2020    decided  on
11.01.2021].    The   leeway   which   was  given   to  the
Government/public authorities on account of innate
inefficiencies was the result of certain orders of
this Court which came at a time when technology had
not advanced and thus, greater indulgence was shown.
This position is no more prevalent and the current
legal position has been elucidated by the judgment of
this Court in Office of the Chief Post Master General
& Ors. v. Living Media India Ltd. & Anr. – (2012) 3
SCC 563. Despite this, there seems to be a little
change in the approach of the Government and public
authorities.
We have also categorized such kind of cases as
“certificate cases” filed with the only object to
obtain a quietus from the Supreme Court on the ground
that nothing could be done because the highest Court
has  dismissed  the   appeal.   The  objective    is   to
complete a mere formality and save the skin of the
officers who may be in default in following the due
process or may have done it deliberately. We have
deprecated such practice and process and we do so
again. We refuse to grant such certificates and if
the Government/public authorities suffer losses, it
is time when concerned officers responsible for the
same, bear the consequences. The irony, emphasized by
us  repeatedly,  is  that   no  action  is   ever   taken
against the officers and if the Court pushes it, some
mild warning is all that happens.
Looking  to  the   gross   negligence    and   the
impunity with which the Union of India had approached
this Court in a matter like this, we consider it
appropriate to impose special costs of Rs.1 lakh in
this  case   to  be   recovered   from   the   concerned
officer(s), to be deposited with the Supreme Court
Advocates on Record Welfare Fund within four weeks.
The special leave petitions are dismissed as
time barred in terms aforesaid.
Pending application stands disposed of.
A copy of this order be placed before the Law
Secretary, Govt. of India and Secretary, Ministry of
Human Resource Development to look into the matter
personally  not  only  making   them  accountable  for
compliance but also to ensure that we are not faced
with such matters in future.