Though served, nobody has entered appearance on behalf
of the respondent.
We have heard Shri Santosh Krishnan, learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellants at length.
Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the impugned
judgment and order dated 03-02-2022 passed by the High
Court    of   Gujarat    at   Ahmedabad   in   R/First     Appeal
No.297/2022, by which the High Court has dismissed the
said appeal preferred by the appellant(s) herein and has
not interfered with the order passed by the Employees
State   Insurance    (ESI)  Court   restricting   the    levy  of
interest leviable under Section 39(5)(a) of the Employees
State Insurance Act, 1948 (For short the `the ESI Act’)
for   two   years   only,   the   Employees   State    Insurance
Corporation    and    another   have  preferred    the    present
appeal.
The facts leading to the present appeal in nut-shell
That    the   Authority    sent   Demand   Notice   to   the
respondent demanding the amount of Rs.17,295/- for the
period from April 1988 to April, 1990, and amount of
Rs.4,195/- for the period from April, 1990 to September,
1990.   Being   aggrieved   and   dissatisfied   with  the   said
demand, the respondent filed ESI Application No.53 of
1991 before the ESI Court. The ESI Court rejected the
said application by order dated 17.01.2012 and it was
decided   that   the  ESI   Act  has   been  applicable  to   the
respondent organisation w.e.f. 01.04.1988.
The Authority under the ESI Act passed an order on
01.04.1988 covering the respondent under the provisions
of  the   ESI  Act   from  01.04.1988.      The  respondent   was
allotted   the   ESI  Code   also.   The  order  passed  by   the
Authority under the ESI Act covering the respondent under
the provisions of ESI Act w.e.f 01.04.1988 was challenged
by the respondent.
That, thereafter, the respondent started paying ESI
contribution    w.e.f.   01.04.1988.    However,  as  there   was
delay in making the payment of ESI contribution, the
Authority    issued    notices   and    raised  the   demand   of
Rs.10,486/- for the period between 01.04.1988 to March,
1990  and    interest    thereon @12% (interest component of
Rs.6,333/-).     The said demand was in exercise of powers
under Section 39(5)(a) of the ESI Act.           The demand of
interest leviable under Section 39(5)(a) of the ESI Act
was again challenged by the respondent before the ESI
Court by way of ESI Application No.9/2012.          Relying upon
the decision of this Court in Employees State Insurance
Corporation Vs. HMT Ltd. and another (2008) 3 SCC 35, the
ESI   Court    partly  allowed   the    said   application   and
restricted the amount of interest to two years only.
The order passed by the ESI Court was the subject matter
before the High Court. The High Court by the impugned
judgment and order has dismissed the appeal by observing
that no substantial question of law arises.         The impugned
judgment    and  order  passed  by   the   High   Court  is  the
subject matter of present appeal.
Learned     counsel   appearing     on   behalf    of   the
appellants has vehemently submitted that both, the ESI
Court   as   well  as  the  High   Court    have   not  properly
appreciated that the levy of interest under Section 39(5)
(a) of the ESI Act is mandatory and neither the Court nor
the Authority have any jurisdiction and/or authority to
waive the interest.
It is further submitted that as such the conclusion
and the findings arrived at by the ESI Court, confirmed
by  the    High Court that the interest can be leviable for
two   years   only   is  not   supported      by   any  statutory
provision. It is further submitted by learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the appellants that the decision
of this Court in the case of Employees State Insurance
Corporation Vs. HMT Ltd. and another (supra)            shall not
be applicable at all as in the said case, this Court was
considering Section 85-B and not interest leviable under
Section 39(5)(a) of the ESI Act.
It is submitted that the language used in both the
Sections is different.      It is submitted that in Section
39(5)(a)   of  the   ESI  Act,   the  word     used  is  “Shall”,
however, in Section 85(B) which is related to the levy of
damages/compensation,    the   word   used     is  “may”.   It  is
submitted   that,  therefore,    when    the   levy  of  interest
under Section 39(5)(a) of the ESI Act is mandatory and
the  liability    to   pay   the   interest     is   a  statutory
liability,    the  ESI   Court    erred    in    restricting   the
interest to two years only.      It is submitted that though,
the aforesaid was question of law, the High Court has
failed to consider the same and has dismissed the appeal
by way of observing that no substantial question of law
Learned    counsel    appearing      on    behalf    of   the
appellants has also heavily relied upon the decision of
this   Court   in  the   case of Goetze (India) Limited Vs.
as well as the recent decision of this Court in the case
of  Transport  Corporation  of   India  Ltd. Vs.  Employees
State Insurance Corporation and Others       (2021) 11 SCC
335, in support of his above submissions.
Having heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of
the appellants, the short question which is posed for
consideration of this Court is, “whether the ESI Court
was justified in restricting the levy of interest under
Section 39(5)(a) of the ESI Act for a period of two years
For the aforesaid purpose, Section 39(5)(a) of the
ESI Act is required to be referred to, which reads as
“39.  xxx                 xxx            xxx
(5) (a) If any contribution payable under this Act
is not paid by the principal employer on the date on
which such contribution has become due,       he shall
be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of
twelve per cent per annum or at such higher rate as
may be specified in the regulations till the date of
its actual payment.
Provided that higher interest specified in the
regulations shall not exceed the lending rate of
interest charged by any scheduled bank.”
On a fair reading of    Section 39(5) (a) of the ESI
Act, the organisation/employer in default is liable to
pay the simple interest @ 12% per annum or, as such,
higher rate as may be specified in the regulations till
the date of its actual payment. The word used in Section
39(5)(a)    is     “Shall”.      Therefore,        the    interest
leviable/payable   is   a   statutory     liability    to pay  the
interest.   Neither     the    Authority      nor the Court have
any authority to either waive the interest and/or reduce
the interest and/or the period during which the interest
is payable.
From the order passed by the ESI Court, it appears
that the ESI Court has reduced the period of interest to
two  years   only.   The   same    is   not    supported   by  any
statutory provision.      On going through Section 39(5)(a)
of the ESI Act, the liability to pay the interest is from
the date on which such contribution has become due and
till the date of its actual payment. Therefore, as such
the ESI Court was not justified at all in reducing the
period of interest to two years only.          The respondent was
liable to pay the interest under Section 39(5)(a) from
the date on which the contribution became due and payable
and till the date of actual payment.
Now, so far as the reliance placed on the decision
of this Court in the case of Employees State Insurance
Corporation Vs. HMT Ltd. and another (supra), relied upon
by the ESI Court is concerned,         the said decision shall
not  be  applicable    while    construing     the   provision  of
Section    39(5)(a)     of      the   ESI Act.     In the case of
contd..
Employees State Insurance Corporation Vs. HMT Ltd. and
anther (supra), this Court dealt with Section 85-B of the
ESI Act.   Section 85-B reads as under -
“85-B. Power to recover damages. - (1) Where      an
employer fails to pay the amount due in respect of
any contribution or any other amount payable under
this Act, the Corporation may recover       (from the
employer by way of penalty such damages, not
exceeding the amount of arrears as may be specified
in the regulations]:
Provided that before recovering such damages, the
employer shall be given a reasonable opportunity
of being heard:
[Provided further that the Corporation may reduce
or waive the damages recoverable under this
section in relation to an establishment which is a
sick industrial company in respect of which a
scheme for rehabilitation has been sanctioned by
the    Board    for    Industrial    and    Financial
Reconstruction established under section 4 of the
Sick Industrial Companies (Special provisions)
Act, 1985 (1 of 1986), subject to such terms and
conditions as may be specified in regulations].
(2) Any damages recoverable under sub-section (1)
may be recovered as an arrear of land revenue [or
under section 45-C to section 45-I].”
The word used in Section 85-B is “may”.    As observed
hereinabove, the word used in Section 39(5)(a) of the ESI
Act  is  “shall”.    Therefore,  the ESI   Court  erred  in
relying upon the decision of this Court in the case of
Employees State Insurance Corporation Vs. HMT Ltd. and
another (supra) while considering the levy of interest
under Section 39(5)(a) of the ESI Act.
In view of the above and for the reasons stated
hereinabove, the impugned judgment and order passed by
the High Court and that of the ESI Court restricting the
levy of interest under Section 39(5)(a) of the ESI Act to
two   years  are   hereby   quashed   and  set   aside.  The
respondent  is   liable   to pay the interest under Section
39(5)(a) of the ESI Act from the date of contribution
due and payable till the actual payment.
The present Appeal is allowed accordingly. No costs.
Petition for Special Leave to Appeal (C)    No.  16380/2022
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 03-02-2022
in R/FA No. 297/2022 passed by the High Court of Gujarat at
(FOR ADMISSION and I.R. and IA No.123043/2022-CONDONATION OF DELAY
Date : 17-11-2022 This petition was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Though served, nobody has entered appearance on behalf
of the respondent.
The present Appeal is allowed in terms of the signed
order.
Pending application(s) shall stand disposed of.
(signed order is placed on the file)