Child Rights upon the complaint received from the
parents that their children are being harassed by
the respective schools for non payment of fees.
It was submitted that as the NCPCR issued the
summons upon the respondent No. 1-Collector and
during the course of hearing on 14th March, 2022,
the    collector      was   directed       to  take      necessary
actions in the matter of complaint filed by the
parents.         The collect    has      issued   the       impugned
communication dated 31st March, 2022 whereby the
following directions are issued:
“Reports cases of harassment of school students
for non payment of fees and discriminative
behavior by the school authorities/principals/
teachers is a grave concern. The Commission has
been receiving numerous complaints from all over
the country where children are being harassed by
the schools. This is a gross violation of Section
75 of the Juvenile Justice (Care & Protection of
children) Act, 2015 of which the NCPCR is the
monitoring authority.
It may be mentioned that the school fee is a
financial matter between the school authorities
and the parents; therefore, it is to be dealt
with the parents and not with the children.
The NCPCR in its hearing dated 14 th March, 2022
has clearly mentioned that the school can take up
the issue of non payment of fees by parents with
the appropriate court, but until then no measures
such as not allowing the students to continue
with their education in the school,threatening or
segregating them in school, not allowing the
access to school premises, material and online
classes etc. shall be permitted. Without clear
direction from a competent court, no school to do
anything that will affect education of the child.
Non compliance of this direction shall be
considered a violation of section 13(1) of the
Right to Education.
Therefore, all the private school authorities
are to deal with fee related issues with the
parents and not the students and prevent                           fee
related harassment amongst school students”
4.   It was further submitted that pursuant to the
issuance        of    the  aforesaid        directions          by         the
Collector, the respondent No.2-District Education
Officer        has     informed       the     District          Primary
Education Officer to implement aforesaid impugned
order passed by the Collector.
5.   Learned Senior Advocate Mr. Joshi submitted
that merely reminder sent to the parents for non
payment of fees cannot amount to offense under
Section        75     of   Juvenile        Justice      (Care              and
Protection          of    Children)Act,         2015.         It           was
submitted that in view of the impugned order if
any complaint is filed before the police, the
police      would      immediately        register     an       offense
under Section 75 of the Juvenile Justice (Care
and Protection of Children) Act, 2015.
6.   It was therefore pointed that the impugned
order issued by the respondent No.1-Collector is
without jurisdiction and authority of law.
7.   Considering          the    issues       raised        in          this
petition , a query was put to learned A.G.P. Mr.
Jayswal as to under which provision of law or
rule such an order can be passed by the Collector
However       the     learned   A.G.P.       Mr.    Jayswal             only
submitted that pursuant to the hearing which took
place    on      14th  March,   2022       before   the       National
Commission for Protection of Child Rights (for
short ‘NCPCR’). It was therefore submitted that
merely issuing reminder for non payment of fees
or taking any action for non payment of fees, by
the      respondents-schools,               cannot     be    said         to       be
cruelty to child as per provision of Section 75
of the Act, 2015.
8.        The petitioner has therefore made out a very
good prima facie case for granting ad interim
relief         as       the  respondent          No.1-Collector                  has
issued the impugned order prima facie without any
jurisdiction or authority of law.
9.      Issue         Notice    returnable          to   newly           joined
Respondent                No.3-National             Commission                   for
Protection of child Rights. The impugned order
dated 13th             March, 2022 issued by the respondent
Nos. 1 & 2 the implementation and execution of
the      impugned         order   dated        13th  March,       2022           are
stayed till the next date of hearing.
Issue Notice returnable on 22nd April, 2022.