Counsel for Appellant :- From Jail,Gagan Pratap Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- A.G.A.
Respondent :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Appellant :- Rajeev Sharma,Ajay Kumar
Counsel for Respondent :- Govt. Advocate
1.     Heard Sri Gagan Pratap Singh, learned Amicus Curiae
for the Appellant in Jail Appeal No.7728 of 2010 and Sri Anadi
Krishna Narayana, learned counsel for the Appellant in
Criminal Appeal No.7484 of 2010 and learned A.G.A. for the
State and perused the record.
2.     The present appeal is filed by Appellants challenging
judgment and order dated 20th October, 2010 passed by the
Special Judge (DAA), Agra. By means of impugned judgment,
Appellants-Kailash and Baba Thakur @ Prawesh Kumar Singh
has been convicted under Section 394 I.P.C. and sentenced to
undergo 10 years rigorous imprisonment and Rs.5000/- fine.
Further, Appellants have been convicted under Section 302/34
I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment and
Rs.10,000/- fine; Appellant-Kailash has also been convicted
under Section 411 I.P.C. and sentenced to undergo 2 years
rigorous imprisonment; Appellant-Kailash has further been
convicted under Section 25 of Arms Act and sentenced to
undergo 3 years rigorous imprisonment and Rs.10,000/- fine.
3.     The prosecution case as per first information report is
that on 23rd June, 2005 at about 6.30 pm, informant (PW1)
Babua along with his son Aslam (PW2) were going to tempo
stand Mantola road to meet informant's second son Arif. When
they reached near Subhash Road then one cloth agent Amar
Nath (PW4) made distress call that his belongings have been
taken away forcefully and on aforesaid distress call, informant
and his son saw that two persons were running towards the
powerhouse in which one was having countrymade pistol and a
bag and the other accused was having countrymade pistol. On
hearing distress call of Amar Nath, the son of informant
deceased-Arif and Aslam (PW2), Shahid Anwar, Mohd. Shahid,
and Amar Nath started running to catch aforesaid accused
persons and caught hold of one of the accused-person, who on
being caught, fired which hit son of informant, namely, Arif,
who suffered firearm injury and as a result of the same, accused
person was led free and on the same occasion one tempo driver
hit his tempo with the accused person, as a result of same, he
sustained injury and fell down. Thereafter, Amar Nath got back
his bag, which was forcefully taken by accused person and
when informant and his son Aslam reached the spot, accused
was having countrymade pistol in his hand and there were four
live cartridges in his pocket, which was taken in custody.
Accused person informed that his name is Kailash s/o Asharfi
Lal. Injured-Arif was brought to the hospital by Aslam and
other persons and in intervening period police personnel came.
The weapon cartridges and bag of Amar Nath was deposited in
the police station and first information report was lodged after
being scribed by Nasruddin and on the basis of the same, Case
Crime No.98 of 2005, under Section 394, 411, 302 I.P.C. and
Case Crime No.99 of 2005 under Section 25 Arms Act was
registered at 19.20 hours on the same day.
4.       The investigation in present case was carried on and
panchayatnama of deceased was prepared on 23 rd June, 2005.
The panchayatnama was held at the S.N. Hospital, Agra on 23 rd
June, 2005 at 20.20 pm and same was completed at 22.05 pm.
The panch witnesses of panchayatnama were Haji Mohd.
and as per opinion of panch witnesses deceased Arif died on
account of firearm injury. Thereafter, body was sent for post
mortem examination and post mortem held on 24th June, 2005
at 10.00 am. The post mortem was conducted by Dr. A.P. Singh
(PW-6). The following injuries were found in the post mortem
“Firearm wound of entry 0.4 cm X 0.4 cm situated
on the anterior wall of stomach in the upper part 0.5 cm
left to the midline at a level 2 cm below xephisterum.
Cavity deep on probing probe reaches on the peritoneal
cavity. Blackening and tatooing present.
Fracture of 3rd lumber vertebra. Metallic bullet 3
cm X 0.8 cm recovered from this bone.”
5.     As per post mortem report deceased Arif died due to
shock and haemorrhage as a result of ante-mortem injury.
Investigating Officer prepared the site plan of place of incident
on 23th June, 2005. On 8th September, 2005 identification
proceeding in respect of accused Baba Thakur @ Prawesh
Kumar Singh was held by Investigation Officer.
6.     After investigation, chargesheet was submitted against
the Appellants by the Investigation Officer.
7.     The trial court framed charge on 23rd January, 2006
against Appellant-Kailash under Section 25 Arms Act and
Section 411 I.P.C. The trial court further framed charges against
Appellants Kailash and Baba Thakur @ Prawesh Kumar Singh
under Sections 394 and 302 read with Section 34 I.P.C.
Appellants denied the charges and claimed to be tried.
8.     The prosecution in support of its case produced following
(a)    Babua (P.W.1), who is informant of case, has stated that
on 23rd June, 2005 at about 5.30 pm informant and his son
Aslam went to meet his second son Arif, who was working at
Tempo Stand Mantola and when they reached Shubhas Nagar
then they heard distress call of agent Amar Nath shouting that
he has been looted and then informant and his son saw two
accused persons running towards the powerhouse in which one
was having countrymade pistol and a bag in his hand and other
person was having countrymade pistol. On hearing distress call,
his son Arif and Aslam and other persons Shahid and Anwar
Mohd. Ilyas and others ran towards aforesaid accused persons;
person whose bag was forcefully taken away also ran behind
accused persons. While running towards accused persons his
son Arif caught hold of one of the accused person. However, he
fired on his son Arif and as a result of the same, Arif sustained
firearm injury; aforesaid accused person was let of from the
custody of the Arif. Later on one tempo driver has hit aforesaid
accused person with his tempo as a result of same, he was
injured and fell down. In the intervening period, Amar Nath
took the bag from injured accused person. Informant took away
countrymade pistol and four live cartridges from the pocket of
injured accused person. Injured accused person informed his
name as Kailash, s/o Asharfi Kashyap and further informed that
other accused person is Baba Sindhi resident of Gurudwara
Infomant (PW1) thereafter, send his injured son Arif to
hospital for medical treatment with the help of his second son
Aslam and other persons. Police personnel came on place of
occurrence and on his instructions first information report was
scribed by Nuruddin and countrymade pistol, live cartridges
and bag of Amar Nath recovered from accused Kailash was
taken to police station Rakabganj and first information report
was lodged. The witness has identified the first information
report dated 23rd June, 2005 and same was marked as Ex.Ka.1
before trial court; recovered countrymade pistol and live
cartridges were also handed over to police and a recovery
memo was prepared and recovered articles were sealed in
presence of the informant (P.W.1.) Informant has also stated
that Mustaqeem and Sajid had signed and informant had given
his thumb impression; witness has identified recovery memo
dated 23rd June, 2005 and the same was marked as Ex.Ka.2
before the trial court. Witness has further testified that accused
person who ran away from the place of occurrence was Baba
Sindhi and he is also known as Baba Thakur. After incident he
along with his son Aslam, Shahid, Anwar and Rakesh Sharma
went to jail for identifying Baba Sindhi @ Baba Thakur; All the
four persons had identified the accused and the identification
memo is marked as Ex.Ka.3. Countrymade pistol and four live
cartridges was exhibited as Ex.Ka.6 and the bag of Amar Nath
was exhibited as Ex.Ka.8. Witness has further stated that both
the accused persons are present in the court and as such he has
identified the accused person before the trial court.
(b)Aslam (P.W.2), s/o Haji Babua has stated that on 23rd
June, 2005, occurrence took place. He along with his father
Haji Babua went to tempo stand, to meet his brother at about
6.30 pm and when they reached Subhash Bazar, they heard
distress call of Amar Nath who shouted that he has been looted
and witness saw that two accused persons ran towards
powerhouse in which one was having countrymade pistol and a
bag and the other accused was having a countrymade pistol. On
hearing distress call, Arif, Shahid, Anwar and Shahid Qureshi
and other persons went behind aforesaid accused persons and
when they caught hold of one of the accused persons, said
accused person with the intention to kill fired and as a result of
the same his brother Arif sustained firearm injury. Accused
person was let out of custody and was trying to run away, in the
meantime, one tempo driver dashed with accused person, as a
result of the same, accused person sustained injury and fell
down. Amar Nath (PW4) thereafter, took his bag; witness
further stated that his father took the countrymade pistol and
four live cartridges from injured accused. Injured accused
informed that his name is Kailash and accused person who has
ran away from the spot his name is Baba Sindhi. In the
meantime, police came and witness took his brother with the
help of other persons to the S.N. Hospital where the doctors
have declared his brother dead. Witness has identified
Appellants in court.
Agra has stated that on 23rd June, 2005 he was posted as
Chowki In-charge Fort under Police Station Rakabganj. He has
stated that on the said date he had conducted panchayatnama of
the deceased Arif at S.N. Medical College in front of panch
witnesses. Witness has identified panchayatnama and same was
marked as Ex.Ka.4 before the trial court. Witness has further
submitted that letter to the C.M.O., photo lash, challan nash was
filled by the aforesaid witness and was duly signed and the
same was marked as Ex.Ka.5, Ex.Ka.6 and Ex.Ka.7
(d) Amar Nath (P.W.4), s/o Late Sri Sewaram has stated
that on 23rd June, 2005 he went to Etah and after recovering
money from cloth retailers he kept money in his bag and was
going to Subhash Bazar; When he reached near tempo stand at
about 6.30 pm two persons who were carrying countrymade
pistols and one of the accused person hit with butt of the
countrymade pistol and thereafter, forcefully took away the bag
and ran towards the powerhouse. Witness made distress call and
on hearing the same, some persons came and ran towards the
accused person to catch them and as a result of the same, one of
accused person fired; present witness and Arif sustained injuries
and accused person was let off. Later on, one tempo hit one of
the accused person and bag of witness was recovered. Family
members of the person who sustained firearm injury in the
meantime came and from the custody of one of accused person
countrymade pistol and four live cartridges were recovered;
accused person who was caught on the spot disclosed his name
as Kailash and he also disclose the name of other accused as
Baba Thakur. Injured was taken to the hospital and father of the
deceased went to the police station. He has also stated that
police has also prepared papers in respect of recovery of
countrymade pistol, live cartridges and bag. Witness has not
been able to identify the accused person as the occurrence is
Maniyaon, Lucknow has stated that on 23rd June, 2005 he was
posted at Police Station Rakabganj as H.M. and chik FIR in the
present case on the basis of the first information report was
lodged by Babua. He has identified the chik FIR and the same
was exhibited as Ex.Ka.9 before the trial court.
Hathras Mahamaya Nagar has stated that on 24 th June, 2005 he
was posted at District Women Hospital, Agra and on the
aforesaid date he had conducted post mortem of deceased Arif
at 10.00 am; deceased died on account of ante-mortem firearm
injures; injuries could have been sustained on 23rd June, 2005 at
6.30 pm and were firearm injuries.
Station Kotwali has stated that on 23rd June, 2005 he was
posted at Police Station Rakabganj as S.I. and was the
Investigating Officer; On the same day he had prepared the
nakal chik, nakal rapat and recorded the statement of Head
Moharrir Manoj Kumar, informant Haji Babua and also
prepared site plan after visiting the place of occurrence.
Statement of accused Kailash was also recorded on 26 th June,
2005: Statement of panchayatnama witness was recorded and
statement of S.I. Mahavir Singh was also recorded in the case
diary: On 1st July, 2005 recorded statement of Aslam and
Mustaqeem, Mohd. Sajid and Rakesh Sharma.
Budh Nagar has stated that on 9th July, 2005 he was posted as
In-charge Inspector, Police Station Rakabganj. On 11 th July,
2005 statement of S.I. Mahavir Singh was recorded. On 16 th
July, 2005 accused Baba Thakur was arrested and his statement
was recorded and he was kept hidden. On 10 th August, 2005
statement of Mustaqeem and on 15th August, 2005 statement of
Mohd. Sajid was recorded. On 12th September, 2005 recovered
articles were sent for forensic examination. On 15 th August,
2005 chargesheet was filed against accused Kailash. On 8th
September, 2007 identification of Baba Thakur was held and
thereafter, chargesheet was submitted, which is Ex.Ka.15.
9.     The accused persons did not examine any witness in
support of their defence and their statement under Section 313
Cr.P.C. was recorded by the trial court on 26th July, 2010.
10.    Appellant-Kailash in his statement under section 313 of
the criminal procedure code has denied charges/allegations
against him and has stated that he had come to meet his relative
and one tempo has hit him and as a result he sustained injury
and all the tempo drivers assembled. He has not fired on
deceased nor he has any revolver.
11.    The Appellant-Baba Thakur in his statement under
section 313 of the criminal procedure code has denied the
charges and stated that he was not present at the place of
occurrence and has no knowledge with regard to the
occurrence. It is further stated that the witness has not identified
12.    As per prosecution case on 23rd June, 2005 at about 6:30
PM when P.W.4 – Amarnath was travelling near powerhouse
area, police station – Rakabganj, District – Agra along with bag
containing tiffin in which cash was kept then Appellant –
Kailash and Baba Thakur alias Prawesh Kumar snatched away
bag of Amarnath. At the same time informant (PW1) Babua
along with his son namely Aslam (PW2) were going to tempo
stand Mantola road to meet informant's second son Arif. On
hearing distress call of Amarnath that accused persons has
forcibly taken away bag containing cash; informant and his son
saw accused persons running towards Powerhouse, one was
having country-made pistol & a bag and other accused person
was having country made pistol.
13.    On hearing distress call, son of informant deceased-Arif
(Tempo Driver), Ilbas, Rakesh Sharma, Muhiuddin and Amar
Nath started running to catch the aforesaid accused persons and
caught hold of one accused-person, who on being caught, fired
which hit son of informant, namely, Arif, who sustained firearm
injury and as a result of same, aforesaid accused person was let
free and at the same time one tempo driver hit his tempo with
accused person, as a result of the same, he sustained injury and
fell down. Thereafter, Amar Nath got back his bag, which was
forcefully taken by accused person and when informant and his
son Aslam reached the said place, accused was having
countrymade pistol in his hand and there were four live
cartridges into his pocket, which was taken in custody.
14.    The aforesaid accused person informed that his name is
Kailash, s/o Asharfi Lal. Accused Kailash disclosed the name of
other accused person as Baba Sindhi, Near Gurudwara Colony,
Etah who ran away from place of occurrence. Injured Arif was
brought to hospital by Aslam and other persons and in
intervening period police personnel came. Countrymade pistol,
cartridges and bag of Amar Nath was deposited in police station
and first information report was lodged after being scribed by
15.    Prosecution witnesses has supported the prosecution
story. P.W.4 – Amarnath supporting prosecution case has stated
that on 23rd June, 2005 he went to Etah and after recovering
cash from cloth merchants which was kept in a bag; came back
by bus from Etah to Agra. After he de-boarded the bus and was
travelling through Subhash baazar at about 6:30 PM, two
persons with country made pistol came. One person hit him
with the butt and second person snatched away the bag and ran
towards powerhouse. When Amarnath made distress call then
common people ran towards accused person and caught hold of
one person who fired on being caught and as a result of the
same, Arif got injured and person who was caught was let off
but fell down after being dashed with tempo. The bag of
Amarnath was recovered and country made pistol and live
cartridges were also recovered from the aforesaid person, who
was caught; aforesaid person disclosed his name as Kailash and
disclosed the name of accused who ran away as Baba Sindhi.
The aforesaid statement of P.W.4 is supported by P.W.1 who is
father of the deceased and P.W.2 who is brother of the
deceased. P.W.1 & P.W.2 identified the Appellants before the
trial court. Accused Baba Thakur was identified by prosecution
witness in jail also.
16.    The post-mortem of deceased was held on 24 th June,
2005 by P.W.6 – Dr A.P.Singh; aforesaid witness has proved
post-mortem report and same was marked as Ex Ka – 11 before
trial court. As per post-mortem report deceased – Arif died due
to shock and haemorrhage as a result of anti-mortem firearm
injury. The deceased suffered firearm injury in           stomach.
Blackening and tattooing was present. Lumber Vertebra was
fractured and a bullet was recovered from body of deceased.
P.W.6 has further testified that death was possible from firearm
injury. The opinion of said witness was that death could have
occurred at 6 PM.
17.    It is submitted by learned counsel for Appellants that in
present case P.W.1 – father of the deceased and P.W.2 – Aslam
(Brother of deceased) are not the independent witness and
testimony of P.W.4 does not prove prosecution case. The trial
court has recorded finding that no enmity has been shown
between Appellants and P.W.1 & P.W.2. Trial court has further
recorded finding that presence of the aforesaid witnesses have
been shown on the basis that they had gone for talks of
marriage of sister of deceased which is natural event.
18.    A witness is normally to be considered independent
unless he or she springs from sources which are likely to be
tainted and that usually means unless the witness has cause,
such as enmity against the accused, to wish to implicate him
falsely. Ordinarily a close relative would be the last to screen
the real culprit and falsely implicate an innocent person. It is
often the case that offence is witnessed by a close relative of the
victim, whose presence on the scene of offence would be
natural. The evidence of such a witness cannot automatically be
discarded by labelling witness as interested. It is worthy to note
that there is a distinction between a witness who is related and
an interested witness. A relative is a natural witness. The Apex
Court in Kartik Malhar Vs. State of Bihar, (1996) 1 SCC 614
has opined that a close relative who is a natural witness cannot
be regarded as an interested witness, for the term “interested”
postulates that the witness must have some interest in having
the accused, somehow or the other, convicted for some animus
or for some other reason.
19.    Merely because the witnesses are family members their
evidence cannot per se be discarded. When there is allegation
of interestedness, the same has to be established. Mere
statement that being relatives of the deceased they are likely to
falsely implicate the accused cannot be a ground to discard the
evidence which is otherwise cogent and credible. Relationship
is not a factor to affect credibility of a witness. It is more often
than not that a relative would not conceal actual culprit and
make allegations against an innocent person. Foundation has to
be laid if plea of false implication is made. There is no bar in
law on examining family members as witness. Evidence of a
related witness can be relied upon provided it is trustworthy.
20.    The Supreme Court in State of Uttar Pradesh Vs.
Samman Dass, (1972) 3 SCC 201 observed as under:-
“23...It is well known that the close relatives of a
murdered person are most reluctant to spare the real
assailant and falsely involve another person in place of
the assailant...”
21.    In Khurshid Ahmed Vs. State of Jammu and Kashmir
(2018) 7 SCC 429, Supreme Court on the issue of evidence of a
related witness observed as under :-
“31. There is no proposition in law that relatives are to be
treated as untruthful witnesses. On the contrary, reason
has to be shown when a plea of partiality is raised to
show that the witnesses had reason to shield actual culprit
and falsely implicate the accused.”
22.    The Apex Court in Mohd. Rojali Ali v. State of Assam,
(2019) 19 SCC 567 in respect of related witness has observed
“13. As regards the contention that all the
eyewitnesses are close relatives of the deceased, it is by
now well-settled that a related witness cannot be said to
be an “interested” witness merely by virtue of being a
relative of the victim. This Court has elucidated the
difference between “interested” and “related” witnesses
in a plethora of cases, stating that a witness may be called
interested only when he or she derives some benefit from
the result of a litigation, which in the context of a
criminal case would mean that the witness has a direct or
indirect interest in seeing the accused punished due to
prior enmity or other reasons, and thus has a motive to
falsely implicate the accused (for instance, see State of
Rajasthan v. Kalki [State of Rajasthan v. Kalki, (1981) 2
SCC 752 : 1981 SCC (Cri) 593] ; Amit v. State of U.P.
[Amit v. State of U.P., (2012) 4 SCC 107 : (2012) 2 SCC
(Cri) 590] ; and Gangabhavani v. Rayapati Venkat Reddy
[Gangabhavani v. Rayapati Venkat Reddy, (2013) 15
SCC 298 : (2014) 6 SCC (Cri) 182] ). Recently, this
difference was reiterated in Ganapathi v. State of T.N.
[Ganapathi v. State of T.N., (2018) 5 SCC 549 : (2018) 2
SCC (Cri) 793] , in the following terms, by referring to
the three-Judge Bench decision in State of Rajasthan v.
Kalki [State of Rajasthan v. Kalki, (1981) 2 SCC 752 :
1981 SCC (Cri) 593] : (Ganapathi case [Ganapathi v.
State of T.N., (2018) 5 SCC 549 : (2018) 2 SCC (Cri)
793] , SCC p. 555, para 14)
“14. “Related” is not equivalent to “interested”. A
witness may be called “interested” only when he
or she derives some benefit from the result of a
litigation; in the decree in a civil case, or in seeing
an accused person punished. A witness who is a
natural one and is the only possible eyewitness in
the circumstances of a case cannot be said to be
14. In criminal cases, it is often the case that the offence
is witnessed by a close relative of the victim, whose
presence on the scene of the offence would be natural.
The evidence of such a witness cannot automatically be
discarded by labelling the witness as interested. Indeed,
one of the earliest statements with respect to interested
witnesses in criminal cases was made by this Court in
Dalip Singh v. State of Punjab [Dalip Singh v. State of
1465] , wherein this Court observed: (AIR p. 366, para
“26. A witness is normally to be considered
independent unless he or she springs from sources
which are likely to be tainted and that usually
means unless the witness has cause, such as
enmity against the accused, to wish to implicate
him falsely. Ordinarily a close relative would be
the last to screen the real culprit and falsely
implicate an innocent person.”
15. In case of a related witness, the Court may not treat
his or her testimony as inherently tainted, and needs to
ensure only that the evidence is inherently reliable,
probable, cogent and consistent. We may refer to the
observations of this Court in Jayabalan v. State (UT of
Pondicherry) [Jayabalan v. State (UT of Pondicherry),
(2010) 1 SCC 199 : (2010) 2 SCC (Cri) 966] : (SCC p.
“23. We are of the considered view that in cases
where the court is called upon to deal with the
evidence of the interested witnesses, the approach
of the court, while appreciating the evidence of
such witnesses must not be pedantic. The court
must be cautious in appreciating and accepting the
evidence given by the interested witnesses but the
court must not be suspicious of such evidence.
The primary endeavour of the court must be to
look for consistency. The evidence of a witness
cannot be ignored or thrown out solely because it
comes from the mouth of a person who is closely
related to the victim.”
23.     The Apex Court in Kulwinder Singh v. State of Punjab,
(2015) 6 SCC 674 held that the case of the prosecution cannot
be rejected solely on the ground that independent witnesses
have not been examined when, on the perusal of the evidence
on record the Court finds that the case put forth by the
prosecution is trustworthy. When the evidence of the official
witnesses is trustworthy and credible, there is no reason not to
rest the conviction on the basis of their evidence.
24.     In Harbans Kaur v. State of Haryana, (2005) 9 SCC
195, the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that:
“6. There is no proposition in law that relatives are to be
treated as untruthful witnesses. On the contrary, reason has
to be shown when a plea of partiality is raised to show that
the witnesses had reason to shield actual culprit and falsely
implicate the accused.”
25.     It is held in recent judgement rendered in Surinder
Kumar v. State of Punjab AIR 2020 Supreme Court 303 that
merely because prosecution has not examined any independent
witness, same would not necessarily lead to the conclusion that
the appellant has been falsely implicated.
26.     In M. Nageswara Reddy v. State of Andhra Pradesh
(SC) – 2022 CrLJ 2254 the Apex Court has observed that
merely because the witnesses were the relatives of the
deceased, their evidence cannot be discarded solely on the
aforesaid ground.
27.     It is further to be seen that in the present case no material
has been shown to demonstrate that there was any prior enmity
between P.W.1 and P.W.2 and accused person. No reasons have
been assigned as to why aforesaid witness would falsely
implicate the Appellant’s. There is one more aspect of the
matter that in the present case P.W.4 – Amarnath is an
independent witness who was travelling with the money bag
and incident had occurred in presence of aforesaid witness. The
said witness is the eyewitness of the aforesaid incident and as
such it cannot be said that there is no independent witness to
support the prosecution case.
28.     It is further submitted by learned counsel for the
Appellant that in present case, scribe of first information report
– Nooruddin and tempo driver who had hit accused Kailash has
not been examined and an important evidence has been
detained by the prosecution and as such the Appellant could not
have been convicted for the alleged offence. In the present case,
first information report was scribed on the dictation of the first
informant and informant has testified on oath before the trial
court and has proved the first information report, under the
aforesaid circumstances non-production of the scribe of first
information report will not adversely affect prosecution case.
Further, tempo driver who had hit the Appellant – Kailash with
the Tempo was seen by PW-1, PW-2 and PW-4 and Appellant-
Kailash were caught at the place of occurrence with
countrymade pistol and bag and same has been proved by
prosecution by testimony of prosecution witnesses and as such
the non-examination of the Tempo Driver will not affect the
prosecution case.
29.     It is further submitted by counsel for the Appellant that
there is a contradiction in the statement of witnesses. It is
submitted that one witness has stated that he was hundred metre
away and caught hold the accused person by running whereas
the other witness has stated that witness was near the place of
occurrence. It is also submitted that informant has stated that
the alleged occurrence is of 5:30 PM whereas other witness has
stated that alleged incident is of 6:30 PM and as such there is
contradiction. It is to be noted that the statement of the
prosecution witness no 1 and 2 was recorded before the trial
court in the year 2008 and incident has taken place on 23rd June,
2005 and as such the statement itself are recorded after three
years of the date of occurrence. It is further to be noted that in
first information report being Exhibit Ka.-1, time of alleged
incident has been stated to be 6:30 PM. The memory of the
witness fades with the passage of time and as such unless the
contradiction is material the same by itself cannot demolish the
prosecution case specifically when the first information report
has been duly proved by the prosecution witness no 1. It is also
to be noted that contradiction in the statement of witness has
not been confronted with aforesaid witness in cross
30.    Minor variations in the accounts of witnesses are often
the hallmark of the truth of their testimony. When the
discrepancies were comparatively of a minor character and did
not go to the root of prosecution story, they need not be given
undue importance. Mere congruity or consistency is not the sole
test of truth in the depositions. In the depositions of witnesses
there are always normal discrepancy, however honest and
truthful they may be. Such discrepancies are due to normal
errors of observation, normal errors of memory due to lapse of
time, due to mental disposition such as shock and horror at the
time of occurrence, and the like. Material discrepancies are
those which are not normal, and not expected of a normal
person. Corroboration of evidence with mathematical niceties
cannot be expected in criminal cases. Minor embellishment,
there may be, but variations by reason therefor should not
render the evidence of eye witnesses unbelievable.
31.    Unless a contradiction is proved by putting it to the
person who records the original statement, such contradiction is
of no consequence.
32.    The very purpose of putting the contradiction to the
witness is to give an opportunity to him/her to explain
contradictory statement, if any. While       appreciating      the
evidence, the Court must examine the evidence in its entirety,
upon reading the statement of a witness as a whole, and if the
Court finds the statement to be truthful and worthy of credence,
then every variation or discrepancy particularly which is
immaterial and does not affect the root of prosecution case,
would be of no consequences.
33.    It is further submitted by learned counsel for Appellant
that P.W.1 is father of the deceased and P.W.2 is brother of
deceased however the P.W.1 went to the police station after his
son was injured by gunshot injury nor blood stain clothes of the
brother has been recovered and as such the testimony of
aforesaid witnesses is not natural. The trial court has rejected
the aforesaid contention raised by counsel for the Appellant. In
the present case P.W.1 in his testimony has stated that deceased
was taken by his son and other persons to hospital and in the
meantime the police personnel came at the place of occurrence
and as such the first information report was scribed on the
dictation of the informant and he went to the police station for
lodging of first information report. Police personnel had already
come to the place of occurrence and as such once the deceased
was sent to the hospital along with son of the informant and
other persons then it is in the natural course of event that
informant went to the police station for lodging the first
information report immediately. It is further to be noted that just
because the prosecution has not collected evidence with regard
to blood stain on the clothes of the P.W.1 and P.W.2 would not
demolish the prosecution case specifically when there are
eyewitness of the alleged incident who have supported
prosecution case before the trial court.
34.    It is submitted by learned counsel for the Appellant-Baba
Thakur that as per the prosecution case two accused persons
were involved in the alleged occurrence. Appellant-Kailash was
caught hold by prosecution witnesses and other persons at the
place of occurrence. While the other accused person had fled
away from the place of occurrence. Appellant-Kailash when
caught by mob has disclosed name of other accused person as
Baba Sindhi. The statement of the co-accused as per learned
counsel for the Appellant is not of substantive evidence against
the other co-accused in the trial but can only be used for
lending reassurance if there are any other substantive evidence.
In this reference learned counsel for the Appellant has relied
upon the judgement of the apex court in Paramhans Yadav
and Sadanand Tripathi Vs State of Bihar and others, AIR
1987 SC 955. It is submitted that the Appellant is Parvesh
kumar Singh and it is not proved that Baba Sindhi, Baba Thakur
and Parvesh Kumar Singh are one and the same person.
35.    As per section 9 of the Evidence Act, a fact which
establishes the identity of anything or person whose identity is
relevant are relevant fact. The principle in the section is a
exception to the general rule that the evidence of collateral facts
is not usually receivable.
36.     It is often important to establish the identity of a person
who witness testifies that he saw on the particular occasion.
Sometimes, a witness may not recognise the person but he may
still testify that on subsequent event he was able to identify the
person he had initially seen on the particular occasion. The
subsequent event may be formal such as test identification
parade or informal for instance seeing a person on a road or
receiving information with regard to identity from some other
person who was present at the time of occurrence. The fact of
identification of the accused person is relevant fact as the same
points towards the person who has committed the offence.
37.     In the present case, two persons are alleged to have
participated in the alleged occurrence as per the prosecution
case. One accused person namely Appellant-Kailash was caught
on the place of occurrence by the prosecution witnesses. The
occurrence is of a public place. When Appellant-Kailash was
caught by P.W.1, 2 and 4, Appellant-Kailash has disclosed the
identity of the other accused person as Baba Sindhi. The
aforesaid disclosure of identity of other accused person was
made by Appellant-Kailash at the place of occurrence just after
he was caught by the prosecution witness.
38.     P.W.1 and P.W.2 has identified accused person-
Appellants' before the trial court. In the first information report
dated 23rd June, 2005, name of the Appellants' have been
disclosed. The first information report has been lodged by
P.W.1-Babua who is father of the deceased and was present at
the time of alleged occurrence.
39.     Appellant-Baba Sindhi was seen by the prosecution
witness at the time of alleged occurrence. The identity of the
aforesaid Appellant was disclosed by accused Kailash. The fact
regarding disclosure of identity by the accused Kailash is
proved by the statement of prosecution witness no 1, 2 & 4. The
fact relating to identity of accused person is relevant and has
been proved by prosecution witnesses before trial court. It is to
be noted that evidence may be given under section 3 of the
evidence act in any proceedings of existence or non-existence
of every fact in issue and such other facts as our declared
relevant. The fact with regard to identity of the Appellant –
Baba Sindi as has been disclosed by Appellant – Kailash is a
relevant fact and as such the evidence in respect of the same
can be given to prove the aforesaid fact. It is also important to
note that the identity of the Appellant – Baba Sindhi has been
disclosed at the place of occurrence just after the incident has
occurred. The name of the Appellant – Baba Sindhi is stated as
co-accused in the first information report lodged by P.W.1. The
Appellants were seen by prosecution witnesses at the time of
occurrence however the name of the aforesaid persons were
disclosed when Appellant – Kailash was caught and he has
disclose the name of other accused person.
40.    It is further to be noted that Appellants including Baba Sindhi
has been identified before trial court by the eyewitnesses and the
same is corroborated by the identification of the accused person at
the time of identification parade. The fact relating to identity of a
person who is involved in the alleged crime is a relevant fact which
conforms the presence of the Appellant at the time of occurrence.
Once the accused person have been identified by the eyewitnesses as
perpetrator of crime before the trial court and the same is
corroborated by the test identification parade then it is not open for
Appellants to submit that disclosure of co-accused cannot be a
foundation for conviction of the Appellant.
41.    It is further submitted by learned counsel for Appellant-
Baba Sindhi that name of the Appellant is Prawesh Kumar
Singh and he is not known by any other name, namely, Baba
Sindhi and Baba Thakur. In this respect, counsel for the
Appellant submits that P.W.1 has stated that the co-accused
Kailash has disclosed the name of Appellant who has fled the
place of occurrence as Baba Sindhi. He has further stated that
the Appellant is also known as Baba Thakur. Similarly, P.W.4
has stated that the accused who fled from the place of
occurrence was Baba Sindhi however how he come to know
that the name was Baba Thakur is not known.
42.    One of accused persons namely Appellant – Kailash was
caught at place of occurrence by prosecution witnesses. The
occurrence is a public place. When Appellant – Kailash was
caught by P.W.1, 2 and 4, the aforesaid Appellant – Kailash has
disclosed the identity of other accused person as Baba Sindhi.
43.    On the aforesaid basis, first information report was
lodged by P.W.1 against Appellant’s. Name of Appellant was
disclosed as Baba Sindhi in the first information report.
44.    After the lodging of the first information report,
investigation was carried on by Investigating Officer and in
case diary dated 26th June, 2005 it has been recorded by the
Investigating Officer that Sub- Inspector Jitendra Singh along
with other police officials went in search of accused Baba
Sindhi however on reaching the place where the aforesaid
accused was residing it has come to knowledge that the correct
name of the accused is Baba Thakur and was also known as
Baba Sindhi in the area.
45.    The Appellant in a statement under section 313 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure has got recorded his name as Baba
Thakur alias Pravesh kumar. In a statement under section 313
Cr.P.C. the aforesaid accused – appellant has not stated that he
is not known as Baba Sindhi. The memo of appeal has been
filed by Appellant in name of Baba Thakur alias Parvesh
Kumar Singh before this court. The P.W.7 in his cross
examination has stated that in his investigation the name of
accused Baba Thakur has come during investigation. P.W.1 in
his statement has identified Appellant Baba Thakur alias Sindhi
alias Parvesh Kumar. Under the circumstances, Baba Sindhi,
Baba Thakur and Parvesh Kumar are same person who has
been identified by prosecution witness before the trial court as
the person who is one of the accused involved in alleged crime.
46.    It is further submitted on behalf of the Appellant-Baba
Thakur that none of the witnesses of the alleged occurrence has
seen the Appellant at the place of incident.
47.    The testimony of the prosecution witness who are the
eyewitness of alleged incident is a substantive piece of
evidence before the trial court. P.W.1 has identified the
Appellants' before the trial court. P.W.1 was present at the place
of occurrence on 23rd June, 2005 as he had gone to to meet his
son Aslam. The alleged occurrence has taken place in presence
of P.W.1. Appellants have also been identified by the aforesaid
witness in the identification parade.
48.    Similarly, P.W.2 has also identified the Appellants' before
the trial court. The aforesaid witness has further stated that he
had seen the accused persons; accused person who ran away
from the place of incident was seen by him from a distance of
20 steps; both the accused persons were involved in the alleged
occurrence. It is to be noted that prosecution witness no 1 and 2
are the relative of the deceased.
49.    The P.W.4 has supported the prosecution story however
has stated that the co-accused Kailash has disclosed the name of
Baba Thakur and has further stated that he is not in a position to
recognise the accused person before the trial court as sufficient
time has passed when the alleged occurrence took place. It is to
be noted that the alleged incident is of 23rd June, 2005 and the
statement of P.W.4 was recorded on 16th March, 2010 and as
such in case there is a minor variation in the statement of
prosecution witness the same will not in any manner affect the
prosecution case specifically when P.W.1 and P.W.2 have
identified accused persons and have supported the prosecution
50.    It is further submitted on behalf of Appellant-Baba
Thakur that identification parade was held on 8th September,
2005 whereas the alleged occurrence has taken place on 23 rd
June, 2005. He submits that there is inordinate delay in holding
the test identification parade and as such the identification itself
loses its credibility. Learned counsel for the Appellant has
further relied upon the judgement of the apex court in Hari
Nath Vs State of U.P., AIR 1988 SC 345 in this respect.
51.    In the present case, alleged occurrence has taken place on
23rd June, 2005 and thereafter the Appellant – Baba Sindhi was
arrested on 16th July, 2005 and test identification parade was
held in jail on 8th September, 2005. The accused person have
been identified by P.W.1 and 2 before the trial court. The
aforesaid witness were present at the time of alleged occurrence
and are related to the deceased.
52.     The necessity for holding an identification parade can
arise only when the accused persons are not previously known
to the witnesses. The whole idea of a test identification parade
is that witnesses who claim to have seen the culprits at the time
of occurrence are to identify them from the midst of other
persons without any aid or any other source. The test is done to
check upon their veracity. In other words, the main object of
holding an identification parade, during the investigation stage,
is to test the memory of the witnesses based upon first
impression and also to enable the prosecution to decide whether
all or any of them could be cited as eyewitnesses of the crime.
53.       The identification parades belong to investigation stage
and they serve to provide investigating authority with materials
to assure themselves if the investigation is proceeding on the
right lines. In other words, it is through these identification
parades that investigating agency is required to ascertain
whether the persons whom they suspect to have committed the
offence were the real culprits. There is no provision in the Code
which obliges the investigating agency to hold or confers a
right upon the accused to claim, a test identification parade.
They do not constitute substantive evidence and these parades
are essentially governed by Section 162 of Code of Criminal
Procedure. Failure to hold a test identification parade would not
make inadmissible the evidence of identification in Court.
54.     Test identification parade is not substantive evidence and
it can only be used as corroborative of the statement in court.
The facts, which establish the identity of the accused persons,
are relevant under Section 9 of the Evidence Act. As a general
rule, the substantive evidence of a witness is the statement
made in Court.
55.    In Malkhansingh v. State of M.P., (2003) 5 SCC 746 a
three-Judge Bench of Apex Court observed as under:-
“7. It is trite to say that the substantive evidence is the
evidence of identification in court. Apart from the clear
provisions of Section 9 of the Evidence Act, the position
in law is well settled by a catena of decisions of this
Court. The facts, which establish the identity of the
accused persons, are relevant under Section 9 of the
Evidence Act. As a general rule, the substantive
evidence of a witness is the statement made in court. The
evidence of mere identification of the accused person at
the trial for the first time is from its very nature
inherently of a weak character. The purpose of a prior
test identification, therefore, is to test and strengthen the
trustworthiness of that evidence. It is accordingly
considered a safe rule of prudence to generally look for
corroboration of the sworn testimony of witnesses in
court as to the identity of the accused who are strangers
to them, in the form of earlier identification proceedings.
This rule of prudence, however, is subject to exceptions,
when, for example, the court is impressed by a particular
witness on whose testimony it can safely rely, without
such or other corroboration. The identification parades
belong to the stage of investigation, and there is no
provision in the Code of Criminal Procedure which
obliges the investigating agency to hold, or confers a
right upon the accused to claim a test identification
parade. They do not constitute substantive evidence and
these parades are essentially governed by Section 162 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure. Failure to hold a test
identification parade would not make inadmissible the
evidence of identification in court. The weight to be
attached to such identification should be a matter for the
courts of fact. In appropriate cases it may accept the
evidence of identification even without insisting on
corroboration.”
56.    The value to be attached to test identification parade
would depend on the facts and circumstances of the case and no
hard and fast rule can be laid down. Where, however, court is
satisfied that witnesses had ample opportunity of seeing the
accused at the time of commission of offence and there is no
chance of mistaken identity, delay in holding test identification
parade may not be held to be fatal.
57.    In Lal Singh v. State of U.P., (2003) 12 SCC 554, the
Apex Court in paras 28 and 43 dealt with the value or
weightage to be attached to test identification parade and the
effect of delay in holding such test identification parade.
“28. The next question is whether the prosecution has
proved beyond reasonable doubt that the appellants are the
real culprits. The value to be attached to a test
identification parade depends on the facts and
circumstances of each case and no hard-and-fast rule can
be laid down. The court has to examine the facts of the
case to find out whether there was sufficient opportunity
for the witnesses to identify the accused. The court has
also to rule out the possibility of their having been shown
to the witnesses before holding a test identification parade.
Where there is an inordinate delay in holding a test
identification parade, the court must adopt a cautious
approach so as to prevent miscarriage of justice. In cases
of inordinate delay, it may be that the witnesses may
forget the features of the accused put up for identification
in the test identification parade. This, however, is not an
absolute rule because it depends upon the facts of each
case and the opportunity which the witnesses had to notice
the features of the accused and the circumstances in which
they had seen the accused committing the offence. Where
the witness had only a fleeting glimpse of the accused at
the time of occurrence, delay in holding a test
identification parade has to be viewed seriously. Where,
however, the court is satisfied that the witnesses had
ample opportunity of seeing the accused at the time of the
commission of the offence and there is no chance of
mistaken identity, delay in holding the test identification
parade may not be held to be fatal. It all depends upon the
facts and circumstances of each case.
43. It will thus be seen that the evidence of identification
has to be considered in the peculiar facts and
circumstances of each case. Though it is desirable to hold
the test identification parade at the earliest-possible
opportunity, no hard-and-fast rule can be laid down in this
regard. If the delay is inordinate and there is evidence
probabilising the possibility of the accused having been
shown to the witnesses, the court may not act on the basis
of such evidence. Moreover, cases where the conviction is
based not solely on the basis of identification in court, but
on the basis of other corroborative evidence, such as
recovery of looted articles, stand on a different footing and
the court has to consider the evidence in its entirety.”
58.    In the present case, the alleged occurrence took place on
23rd June, 2005 and the Appellant was arrested on 16 th July,
2005 and the test identification parade was held on 8th
September, 2005. P.W.1 and 2 in their testimony before the trial
court has identified Appellants as persons involved in the
alleged crime on 23rd June, 2005. P.W.1 and 2 are related to the
deceased. Witnesses are not known to the Appellants prior to
the alleged occurrence. No prior enemity has been shown
between prosecution witness and the Appellants. Prosecution
witnesses were involved in catching hold one of the Appellant
namely Kailash and the other Appellant namely Baba Sindhi
fled away from the place of occurrence. Appellants have been
identified by the prosecution witness in the test identification
parade held on 8th September, 2005. As per P.W.1 they were
present in the market when the Appellants took bag of P.W.4
and started running towards powerhouse. On the distress call of
P.W.4, son of the Appellant namely Arif (deceased) and Aslam
went to catch the appellants. One of the Appellant's, namely,
Kailash fired on Arif (deceased) as a result of same he sustained
injuries and subsequently died. The firearm wound of deceased
as per the post-mortem report shows blackening and tattooing
which is indicative of the fact that firing was made by
Appellant at a close range.
59.    P.W.1 has stated that when accused person was caught he
had fired. The fire was made from 2 to 3 steps. Further, P.W.2
has also stated that when accused person was caught one of
them fired and arif was injured. He has further stated that the
bag was being taken back from the accused person when he
fired. The said witness has stated that he had seen the incident
from 20 steps. P.W.8 was one of the investigating officer when
the test identification parade was held. He has stated that the
Appellant’s face were hidden (baparda).
60.    There is one more aspect of the issue, in the cross
examination of prosecution witnesses accused has not put any
question with regard to delay in holding the test identification
parade. It was the duty of the accused to question the
Investigating Officer, if any advantage was sought to be taken
on account of the delay in holding the test identification parade.
The burden of establishing the guilt is on the prosecution but
that theory cannot be carried so far as to hold that prosecution
must lead evidence to rebut all possible defences. If test
identification parade was held in an irregular manner then
Investigating Officer ought to have been cross-examined in that
behalf. The purpose of cross-examination is to test evidence of
a witness, to expose weaknesses where they exist and if so, to
undermine the account the witness has given. This gives
prosecution witness the opportunity to respond to the defence
case and either agree or disagree with it. Once such an
opportunity to respond to the defence case is not given to
prosecution witness by not cross-examining in that behalf then
it would not be open to accused person to challenge the veracity
of the test identification parade at the appellate stage. In the
present case we find that defence has not imputed any motive to
the prosecution for the delay in holding the test identification
parade, nor has the defence alleged that there was any
irregularity in the holding of the test identification parade
before the trial court. The evidence of investigating officer has
gone unchallenged in this respect.
61.    In Pramod Mandal v. State of Bihar, (2004) 13 SCC
150, the Apex Court has observed as under:-
“18. Learned counsel for the State submitted that in the
instant case there was no inordinate delay in holding the
test identification parade so as to create a doubt on the
genuineness of the test identification parade. In any event
he submitted that even if it is assumed that there was
some delay in holding the test identification parade, it was
the duty of the accused to question the investigating
officer and the Magistrate if any advantage was sought to
be taken on account of the delay in holding the test
identification parade. Reliance was placed on the
judgment of this Court in Bharat Singh v. State of U.P.
[(1973) 3 SCC 896 : 1973 SCC (Cri) 574] In the aforesaid
judgment this Court observed thus: (SCC p. 898, para 6)
“6. In Sk. Hasib v. State of Bihar [(1972) 4 SCC
773 : AIR 1972 SC 283] it was observed by the
Court that identification parades belong to the
investigation stage and therefore it is desirable to
hold them at the earliest opportunity. An early
opportunity to identify tends to minimise the
chances of the memory of the identifying
witnesses fading away due to long lapse of time.
Relying on this decision, counsel for the appellant
contends that no support can be derived from what
transpired at the parade as it was held long after
the arrest of the appellant. Now it is true that in the
instant case there was a delay of about three
months in holding the identification parade but
here again, no questions were asked of the
investigating officer as to why and how the delay
occurred. It is true that the burden of establishing
the guilt is on the prosecution but that theory
cannot be carried so far as to hold that the
prosecution must lead evidence to rebut all
possible defences. If the contention was that the
identification parade was held in an irregular
manner or that there was an undue delay in
holding it, the Magistrate who held the parade and
the police officer who conducted the investigation
should have been cross-examined in that behalf.”
In the instant case we find that the defence has not
imputed any motive to the prosecution for the delay in holding
the test identification parade, nor has the defence alleged that
there was any irregularity in the holding of the test
identification parade. The evidence of Magistrates conducting
the test identification parade as well as the investigating
officer has gone unchallenged. Learned counsel for the State
is, therefore, justified in contending that in the facts and
circumstances of this case the holding of the test identification
parade, about one month after the occurrence, is not fatal to
the case of the prosecution as there is nothing to suggest that
there was any motive for the prosecution to delay the holding
of the test identification parade or that any irregularity was
committed in holding the test identification parade.
20.      It is neither possible nor prudent to lay down any
invariable rule as to the period within which a test
identification parade must be held, or the number of witnesses
who must correctly identify the accused, to sustain his
conviction. These matters must be left to the courts of fact to
decide in the facts and circumstances of each case. If a rule is
laid down prescribing a period within which the test
identification parade must be held, it would only benefit the
professional criminals in whose cases the arrests are delayed
as the police have no clear clue about their identity, they being
persons unknown to the victims. They, therefore, have only to
avoid their arrest for the prescribed period to avoid
conviction. Similarly, there may be offences which by their
very nature may be witnessed by a single witness, such as
rape. The offender may be unknown to the victim and the case
depends solely on the identification by the victim, who is
otherwise found to be truthful and reliable. What justification
can be pleaded to contend that such cases must necessarily
result in acquittal because of there being only one identifying
witness? Prudence therefore demands that these matters must
be left to the wisdom of the courts of fact which must consider
all aspects of the matter in the light of the evidence on record
before pronouncing upon the acceptability or rejection of such
identification.”
62.    In Raja v. State By The Inspector of Police, Criminal
Appeal No. 740 of 2018 decided on 10.12.2019 the Apex Court
has observed:-.
“It is, thus, clear that if the material on record sufficiently
indicates that reasons for "gaining an enduring
impression of the identity on the mind and memory of the
witnesses" are available on record, the matter stands in a
completely different perspective. This Court also stated
that in such cases even non-holding of identification
parade would not be fatal to the case of the prosecution.”
63.    In the facts and circumstances of the present case,
witnesses had ample opportunity of seeing the accused at the
time of the commission of the offence and there is no chance of
mistaken identity, delay in holding the test identification parade
may not be held to be fatal. Further, facts and circumstances are
indicative of enduring impression of the identity on the mind
and memory of the witnesses.
64.    It is further submitted by learned counsel for Appellant-
Baba Sindhi that even assuming that Appellant was present with
accused at place of occurrence even then Appellant could not
have been convicted under section 302 read with 34 of Indian
Penal Code. He submits that there was no intention to commit
murder and common intention was to commit robbery and run
away. There was no premeditation to commit murder. It is
further submitted that the co-accused in order to save himself
has fired which resulted in death of the deceased as such the
provisions of section 34 of Indian Penal Code would not be
attracted to convict Appellant-Baba Sindhi under section 302 of
65.    Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code provides that when
criminal act is done by several persons in furtherance of the
common intention of all, each of such person is liable for the
act in the same manner as if it were done by him alone.
66.    Section 34 IPC carves out an exception from general law
that a person is responsible for his own act, as it provides that a
person can also be held vicariously responsible for the act of
others if he has the “common intention” to commit offence.
This section has been enacted on the principle of joint liability
in the doing of a criminal act. The section is only a rule of
evidence and does not create a substantive offence. The
distinctive feature of the section is the element of participation
in action. The liability of one person for an offence committed
by another in course of criminal act perpetrated by several
persons arises under Section 34 if such criminal act is done in
furtherance of a common intention of the persons who join in
committing the crime.
67.     The section recognises the principle of constructive
liability and essence of that liability is the existence of a
common intention. It is to be noted that section 34 of the Indian
penal code has used the expression “criminal act” and not
“offence”. Section 33 of the Indian Penal Code provides that
the word “act” denotes as well a series of acts as a single act.
Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code is to be read along with the
preceding section 33 which makes it imperative that the act
referred to in section 34 of the Indian penal Court includes
series of acts as a single act. All such acts which were either
contemplated and were to be done in furtherance of the
common intention will be included in criminal act.
68.     In Krishnamurthy @ Gunodu v. State of Karnataka
(SC) : Criminal Appeal No.288 of 2022 (Arising out of
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6893 of 2021), decided on
16.2.2022, the Apex Court has observed as under:-
“10. Appropriate at this stage would be reference to an
earlier decision of this Court in Afrahim Sheikh and
Others v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1964 SC 1263,
which referred to with approval the following quote on
the expression "act" explained by Judicial Commissioner
in Barendra Kumar Ghosh v. The King-Emperor, ILR
"criminal act means that unity of criminal
behaviour, which results in something, for which
an individual would be punishable, if it were all
done by himself alone i.e. a criminal offence".
This "criminal act" under Section 34 IPC, it was held,
applies where a criminal act is done by several persons in
furtherance of common intention of all. The criminal
offence is the final result or outcome but it may be
through achievement of individual or several criminal
acts. Each individual act may not constitute or result in
the final offence. When a person is assaulted by a number
of accused, the "ultimate criminal act" normally will
constitute the offence which finally results or which may
result in death, simple hurt, grievous hurt, etc. This is the
final result, outcome or consequence of the criminal act,
that is, action or act of several persons. Each person will
be responsible for his own act as stipulated in Section 38
IPC. However, Sections 34 and 35 expand the scope and
stipulate that if the criminal act is a result of common
intention , every person, who has committed a part of the
criminal act with the common intention, will be
responsible for offence.”
69.   In case of Sudip Kr. Sen @ Biltu and others v. State of
W.B. & Ors. (2016) 3 SCC 26, Supreme Court has held as
"14. Section 34 IPC embodies the principle of joint
liability in the doing of a criminal act and essence of that
liability is the existence of common intention . Common
intention implies acting in concert and existence of a pre-
arranged plan which is to be proved/inferred either from
the conduct of the accused persons or from attendant
circumstances. To invoke Section 34 IPC, it must be
established that the criminal act was done by more than
one person in furtherance of common intention of all. It
must, therefore, be proved that:-
(i)     there was common intention on the part of several
persons to commit a particular crime and
(ii)    the crime was actually committed by them in
furtherance of that common intention.”
70.   In Balu @ Bala Subramanium and Anr. v. State (UT
of Pondicherry) (2016) 15 SCC 471, the Supreme Court has
"14. Common intention is seldom capable of direct
proof, it is almost invariably to be inferred from proved
circumstances relating to the entire conduct of all the
persons and not only from the individual act actually
performed. The inference to be drawn from the manner of
the origin of the occurrence, the manner in which the
accused arrived at the scene and the concert with which
attack was made and from the injuries caused by one or
some of them. The criminal act actually committed
would certainly be one of the important factor to be taken
into consideration but should not be taken to be the sole
factor.”
71.   In Krishnamurthy @ Gunodu v. State of Karnataka
(SC) : Criminal Appeal No.288 of 2022 (Arising out of
Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No.6893 of 2021), decided on
16.2.2022, the Supreme Court has observed as under:-
“19. Section 34 IPC also uses the expression "act in
furtherance of common intention". Therefore, in each
case when Section 34 is invoked, it is necessary to
examine whether the criminal offence charged was done
in furtherance of the common intention of the
participator. If the criminal offence is distinctly remote
and unconnected with the common intention, Section 34
would not be applicable. However, if the criminal offence
done or performed was attributable or was primarily
connected or was a known or reasonably possible
outcome of the preconcert/contemporaneous engagement
or a manifestation of the mutual consent for carrying out
common purpose, it will fall within the scope and ambit
of the act done in furtherance of common intention. Thus,
the word "furtherance" propounds a wide scope but
should not be expanded beyond the intent and purpose of
the statute. Russell on Crime, (10th edition page 557),
while examining the word "furtherance" had stated that it
refers to "the action of helping forward" and "it indicates
some kind of aid or assistance producing an effect in the
future" and that "any act may be regarded as done in
furtherance of the ultimate felony if it is a step
intentionally taken for the purpose of effecting that
felony." An act which is extraneous to the common
intention or is done in opposition to it and is not required
to be done at all for carrying out the common intention,
cannot be said to be in furtherance of common
intention.”
72.   In the present case the prosecution case based on the fact
that the Appellants took away the bag of one Amar Nath
(P.W.4) from the marketplace and deceased and other
prosecution witness ran towards the Appellants to catch them
and one of the Appellant-Kailash was caught by the prosecution
witness who has disclosed the name of other Appellant-Baba
Sindhi. When one of the Appellant, namely, Kailash was caught
he fired as a result of the same deceased Arif sustained firearm
injury and later he died in the hospital. Appellant Kailash has
disclosed the name of the Appellant-Baba Thakur alias Baba
Sindhi. The two Appellants were engaged in a robbery of bag of
Amarnath from a public place and when Kailash was caught by
the prosecution witnesses, he fired on deceased.
73.    The common intention of both the accused person was to
commit robbery and the act of firing on the deceased was done
at the time when Appellant-Kailash was caught by the deceased
while both the Appellants were running away with the bag of
Amarnath. The criminal offence was attributable or connected
or possible outcome of the preconcert/contemporaneous
engagement or a manifestation of the mutual consent for
robbery and it will fall within the scope and ambit of the act
done in furtherance of common intention. The Appellant –
Kailash has fired on the deceased in the act of committing
robbery and as such co-accused baba Thakur will be liable for
such act has been done in furtherance of the common intention
of committing an offence and would come within the scope of
Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code. It is to be noted that the
Appellant-Kailash was carrying a fire arm while committing
robbery itself is indicative of intention of the Appellants at the
time of committing of crime. The manner of the origin of the
occurrence, manner in which the accused arrived at the scene
and concert with which attack was made and from the injuries
caused by one of them leaves no doubt that accused person had
common intention to commit crime and acts done in
furtherance of common intention would come within the ambit
of section 34 of the Indian Penal Code.
74.    The Apex Court in State of A.P. v. M. Sohan Babu,
(2010) 15 SCC 69 : (2013) 2 SCC (Cri) 123 : 2010 SCC has
“9. We find that in the facts of the case, the observations
given above are not correct. It cannot be ignored that the
two accused had entered the premises at midnight duly
armed with the intention of committing robbery. They
were also charged under Section 460 IPC on that
account. It is also in evidence that the deceased had
managed to pin A-2 down to the ground and A-2 had
caused one injury in the stomach of the deceased while
he lay on top of him. Two injuries were thereafter caused
on the thigh of the deceased by A-2 and the other
accused. It is also in evidence that when the neighbours
arrived on the scene they too were caused injuries and
threatened with dire consequences. To say, therefore, that
there was no intention on the part of the accused to cause
death would be carrying the matter a little too far.
10. The High Court has been influenced by the fact that
there was no common intention on the part of the accused
to commit murder. We see, however, that the common
intention can be inferred from the circumstances of the
case and that the intention can be gathered from the
circumstances as they arise even during an incident. The
initial purpose was to commit robbery, but as the accused
were armed with knives which they had used repeatedly
and effectively, they were willing to kill as well and that
they could not cause more damage as they were
overwhelmed and pinned down.”
75.    It is further submitted by learned counsel for the
Appellant-Baba Sindhi that the Appellant-Kailash cannot be
held guilty for an offence under section 302 of the Indian penal
code. It is submitted that the act of firing from country made
pistol by Appellant-Kailash in worst-case scenario was done
with the knowledge that it is likely to cause death but the act
was not done with any intention to cause death or to cause such
bodily injury as is likely to cause death. He submits that the act
of firing was without premeditation and in a sudden fight in the
heat of passion upon sudden quarrel. In view of the aforesaid
the appellant Kailash is liable to be convicted under section 304
(II) of the Indian penal code.
76.     Homicide is killing of a human being by another human
being. It may either the lawful or unlawful. The lawful
homicide includes several cases falling under the general
exceptions provided under chapter IV of the Indian penal code.
The unlawful homicide includes culpable homicide not
amounting to murder (section 299), murder (section 300), rash
or negligent homicide (section 304A), suicide (section 305 and
77.     Section 299 of the Indian Penal Code provides that
whoever causes death by doing an act with intention of causing
death or with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is
likely to cause death or with the knowledge that he is likely by
such act to cause death, commits the offence of culpable
78.     Culpable homicide is murder under section 300 of the
Indian Penal Code where the act is done intentionally or with
the knowledge or means of knowing that is the natural
consequences of the act. The intention or knowledge necessary
in order to render culpable homicide must be clearly proved by
the prosecution which can usually be done by proof of the
circumstances which prove the act or omission in question for
the presumption that the person knows the probable result of his
conduct. An offence cannot amount to murder unless it falls
within the definition of culpable homicide but an offence may
also amount to culpable homicide without amounting to
murder. To render culpable homicide to be murder, the case
must come within the provisions of clause 1, 2, 3 or 4 of section
300 of the Indian penal code.
79.    In Satish Narayan Sawant v. State of Goa, (2009) 17
1638 at page 738, the Apex Court has observed as under:-
35. Section 299 and Section 300 IPC deal with the
definition of culpable homicide and murder respectively.
Section 299 defines culpable homicide as the act of
causing death (i) with the intention of causing death, or
(ii) with the intention of causing such bodily injury as is
likely to cause death, or (iii) with the knowledge that
such act is likely to cause death. The bare reading of the
section makes it crystal clear that the first and the second
clauses of the section refer to intention apart from the
knowledge and the third clause refers to knowledge alone
and not intention. Both the expressions “intent” and
“knowledge” postulate the existence of a positive mental
attitude which is of different degrees. The mental element
in culpable homicide i.e. mental attitude towards the
consequences of conduct is one of intention and
knowledge. If that is caused in any of the aforesaid three
circumstances, the offence of culpable homicide is said to
have been committed.
36. Section 300 IPC, however, deals with murder
although there is no clear definition of murder provided
in Section 300 IPC. It has been repeatedly held by this
Court that culpable homicide is the genus and murder is
species and that all murders are culpable homicide but
not vice versa. Section 300 IPC further provides for the
exceptions which will constitute culpable homicide not
amounting to murder and punishable under Section 304.
When and if there is intent and knowledge then the same
would be a case of Section 304 Part I and if it is only a
case of knowledge and not the intention to cause murder
and bodily injury, then the same would be a case of
Section 304 Part II. The aforesaid distinction between an
act amounting to murder and an act not amounting to
murder has been brought out in the numerous decisions
of this Court.
80.   In Abdul Waheed Khan v. State of A.P. [(2002) 7 SCC
175 : 2005 SCC (Cri) 1301] observed as follows: (SCC pp.
184-87, paras 13-22)
“13. Clause (b) of Section 299 corresponds with clauses
(2) and (3) of Section 300. The distinguishing feature of
the mens rea requisite under clause (2) is the knowledge
possessed by the offender regarding the particular victim
being in such a peculiar condition or state of health that
the internal harm caused to him is likely to be fatal,
notwithstanding the fact that such harm would not in the
ordinary way of nature be sufficient to cause death of a
person in normal health or condition. It is noteworthy
that the ‘intention to cause death’ is not an essential
requirement of clause (2). Only the intention of causing
the bodily injury coupled with the offender's knowledge
of the likelihood of such injury causing the death of the
particular victim, is sufficient to bring the killing within
the ambit of this clause. This aspect of clause (2) is borne
out by Illustration (b) appended to Section 300.
14. Clause (b) of Section 299 does not postulate any such
knowledge on the part of the offender. Instances of cases
falling under clause (2) of Section 300 can be where the
assailant causes death by a fist-blow intentionally given
knowing that the victim is suffering from an enlarged
liver, or enlarged spleen or diseased heart and such blow
is likely to cause death of that particular person as a
result of the rupture of the liver, or spleen or the failure
of the heart, as the case may be. If the assailant had no
such knowledge about the disease or special frailty of the
victim, nor an intention to cause death or bodily injury
sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death,
the offence will not be murder, even if the injury which
caused the death, was intentionally given. In clause (3) of
Section 300, instead of the words ‘likely to cause death’
occurring in the corresponding clause (b) of Section 299,
the words ‘sufficient in the ordinary course of nature’
have been used. Obviously, the distinction lies between a
bodily injury likely to cause death and a bodily injury
sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.
The distinction is fine but real and if overlooked, may
result in miscarriage of justice. The difference between
clause (b) of Section 299 and clause (3) of Section 300 is
one of degree of probability of death resulting from the
intended bodily injury. To put it more broadly, it is the
degree of probability of death which determines whether
a culpable homicide is of the gravest, medium or the
lowest degree. The word ‘likely’ in clause (b) of Section
299 conveys the sense of probable as distinguished from
a mere possibility. The words ‘bodily injury … sufficient
in the ordinary course of nature to cause death’ mean that
death will be the ‘most probable’ result of the injury,
having regard to the ordinary course of nature.
15. For cases to fall within clause (3), it is not necessary
that the offender intended to cause death, so long as the
death ensues from the intentional bodily injury or injuries
sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature.
Rajwant Singh v. State of Kerala [AIR 1966 SC 1874] is
an apt illustration of this point.
20. Thus, according to the rule laid down in Virsa Singh
case [AIR 1958 SC 465] even if the intention of the
accused was limited to the infliction of a bodily injury
sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course of nature,
and did not extend to the intention of causing death, the
offence would be murder. Illustration (c) appended to
Section 300 clearly brings out this point.
21. Clause (c) of Section 299 and clause (4) of Section
300 both require knowledge of the probability of the act
causing death. It is not necessary for the purpose of this
case to dilate much on the distinction between these
corresponding clauses. It will be sufficient to say that
clause (4) of Section 300 would be applicable where the
knowledge of the offender as to the probability of death
of a person or persons in general as distinguished from
a particular person or persons being caused from his
imminently dangerous act, approximates to a practical
certainty. Such knowledge on the part of the offender
must be of the highest degree of probability, the act
having been committed by the offender without any
excuse for incurring the risk of causing death or such
injury as aforesaid.”
81.   In State of A.P. v. Rayavarapu Punnayya [State of A.P.
(Cri) 659] the distinction between the two provisions was noted
by apex court in paragraph 12 and 13 which is quoted herein
“12. In the scheme of the Penal Code, “culpable
homicide” is genus and “murder” its specie. All
“murder” is “culpable homicide” but not vice-versa.
Speaking generally, “culpable homicide” sans “special
characteristics of murder”, is “culpable homicide not
amounting to murder”. For the purpose of fixing
punishment, proportionate to the gravity of this generic
offence, the Code practically recognises three degrees
of culpable homicide. The first is, what may be called,
“culpable homicide of the first degree”. This is the
greatest form of culpable homicide, which is defined in
Section 300 as “murder”. The second may be termed as
“culpable homicide of the second degree”. This is
punishable under the first part of Section 304. Then,
there is “culpable homicide of the third degree”. This is
the lowest type of culpable homicide and the
punishment provided for it is, also, the lowest among
the punishments provided for the three grades. Culpable
homicide of this degree is punishable under the second
part of Section 304.
13. The academic distinction between “murder” and
“culpable homicide not amounting to murder” has
vexed the courts for more than a century. The confusion
is caused, if courts losing sight of the true scope and
meaning of the terms used by the legislature in these
sections, allow themselves to be drawn into minute
abstractions. The safest way of approach to the
interpretation and application of these provisions seems
to be to keep in focus the keywords used in the various
clauses of Sections 299 and 300.”
In Pulicherla Nagaraju v. State of A.P., (2006) 11
SCC 444, this Court had an occasion to consider the
case of culpable homicide not amounting to murder
and the intention to cause death. It was observed and
held by this Court that the intention to cause death can
be gathered generally from a combination of a few or
several of the following, among other, circumstances:
(i) nature of the weapon used;
(ii) whether the weapon was carried by the accused or
was picked up from the spot;
(iii) whether the blow is aimed at a vital part of the
(iv) the amount of force employed in causing injury;
(v) whether the act was in the course of sudden quarrel
or sudden fight or free-for-all fight;
(vi) whether the incident occurs by chance or whether
there was any premeditation;
(vii) whether there was any prior enmity or whether the
deceased was a stranger;
(viii) whether there was any grave and sudden
provocation, and if so, the cause for such provocation;
(ix) whether it was in the heat of passion;
(x) whether the person inflicting the injury has taken
undue advantage or has acted in a cruel and unusual
(xi) whether the accused dealt a single blow or several
blows.
82.    In the present case, the appellant’s forcefully took away
the bag of one Amar Nath and while they were running away
they were caught by the prosecution witness and deceased
whereafter accused Kailash has opened fire on the deceased as
a result of the same the deceased sustain firearm injury in the
abdomen. The post-mortem of the deceased was conducted on
24th June, 2005 and as per the post-mortem report the death of
the deceased was due to shock and haemorrhage as a result of
antemortem injury.
83.     The doctor who has conducted the post-mortem in his
testimony before the trial court has stated that the death could
have occurred as a result of antemortem injuries sustained by
the deceased. It is to be noted that the blackening and tattooing
was present on the injury sustained by deceased. The aforesaid
is indicative of the fact that the firearm weapon was used from
close range. The nature of injury sustained by the deceased and
place where the injuries have been sustained it can be said that
the Appellant-Kailash fired on the deceased with the intention
of causing injury as is likely to cause death or the injuries were
sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.
Further the injuries and act of the Appellant-Kailash was
imminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause death
or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death.
84.     It is further to be noted that carrying firearm weapon at
the place of occurrence is itself indicative of intention of
accused person to cause death or such injury as is likely to
cause death. The injury has been caused on the vital part by
accused person. Under the circumstances the Appellant-Kailash
is liable to be convicted under section 302 of the Indian penal
code for the act of murder.
85.     Considering the overall circumstances and submissions
of learned counsel for the Appellants, learned A.G.A. for the
State and after going through the evidence and lower court
record, we are unable to persuade ourselves in taking a different
opinion from that of trial court. The trial court was fully
justified in convicting the Appellants.
86.     Learned counsel for the Appellants failed to point out any
illegality, infirmity or perversity in the judgment of the trial
87.   Both the appeals lack merit and are, accordingly,
dismissed.
88.    Registrar General of this Court is directed to pay an
honorarium of Rs. 25,000/- to Sri Gagan Pratap Singh, learned
Amicus Curiae for rendering effective assistance in the appeal
89.   Let the lower court record be transmitted back to court
below along with a copy of this order.
Digitally signed by :-