This writ petition has been preferred assailing the orders passed by the
respondents in proceedings initiated under the Maintenance and Welfare of
Parents and Senior Citizens Act, 2007 [“the 2007 Act”].             The District
Magistrate upon finding that the allegations of ill treatment and harassment
stood duly proven, had proceeded to frame directions requiring the
petitioners to vacate the premises. The said view as framed by the District
Magistrate has also been affirmed by the Divisional Commissioner in
appeal.
The Court notes that the senior citizens had referred to an altercation
which had occurred in 2018 as a consequence of which the relationship
between the parties had broken down and soured. Ultimately and on the
assurance that the incidents of ill treatment would not be repeated, the senior
citizens had inducted the petitioners back into the premises. Since their
conduct did not see any change or improve even thereafter, they were
constrained to institute the impugned proceedings under the 2007 Act.
The Court notes that all that the petitioners have essentially done in
those proceedings was to assert a claim of ownership in the property in
question. Those issues cannot possibly form subject matter of consideration
or adjudication in proceedings under the 2007 Act.               Ultimately the
authorities administering the said enactment have to bear in mind and accord
primacy to the issues of ill treatment of the senior citizens and their right to a
secured existence. The forums constituted under the 2007 Act are neither
obliged nor required to undertake a trial with respect to the civil and
property rights that may be claimed by the warring factions. Those issues
must be ultimately left to be conclusively adjudicated by the competent civil
courts. In proceedings initiated under the 2007 Act, the authorities would
upon finding that the senior citizens can validly claim an interest in the
property, proceed ahead and evaluate steps that would be warranted to be
taken in order to safeguard and secure their interest.
In view of the aforesaid and bearing in mind the fact that the
petitioners have failed to establish that they were in fact maintaining and
looking after the senior citizens or assailing the findings with respect to
harassment and ill treatment, the Court finds no justification to interfere with
the view as taken by the Divisional Commissioner.
The writ petition, along with pending application, fails and shall stand
dismissed.