This petition has been filed by the petitioner seeking
issuance of directions in the matter of providing proper and
effective reservation to the transgenders in terms of the mandate
of the Supreme Court in the case of National Legal Services
Authority Vs. Union of India & Ors. [(2014) 5 SCC 438].
Learned counsel for the petitioner would argue that the
Supreme Court in the case of National Legal Services Authority
(2 of 4)            [CW-10672/2021]
(supra) had examined the rights of the transgenders in the matter
of appointment to public services, as also admission to educational
institutions.     According to him, despite there being detailed
directions issued by the Supreme Court, the State, so far, has not
implemented those directions.
On the other hand, learned counsel for the State would
submit that as far as prescription relating to reservation is
concerned, it is a matter of prerogative of the State as to the
manner and the extent to which reservations have to be provided.
According to the respondent-State, the petitioner cannot seek that
the reservations in a particular manner or to the extent should be
provided to her.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, we are of the
view that in view of the aforesaid pronouncement in the case of
National Legal Services Authority (supra), the State is left with no
option but to implement the directives, which have been issued by
To remind all the authorities of their obligations to comply
with the mandate of the Supreme Court in the aforesaid decision,
we reiterate the directives, which have been issued by the
Supreme Court, which are as below:
“135.1. Hijras, Eunuchs, apart from binary gender, be
treated as “third gender” for the purpose of safeguarding
their rights under Part III of our Constitution and the laws
made by the Parliament and the State Legislature.
135.2. Transgender persons’ right to decide their self-
identified gender is also upheld and the Centre and State
Governments are directed to grant legal recognition of
their gender identity such as male, female or as third
gender.
135.3. We direct the Centre and the State Governments
to take steps to treat them as socially and educationally
(3 of 4)             [CW-10672/2021]
backward classes of citizens and extend all kinds of
reservation in cases of admission in educational
institutions and for public appointments.
135.4 The Centre and State Governments are directed to
operate separate HIV Sero-surveillance Centres since
Hijras/Transgenders face several sexual health issues.
135.5. The Centre and State Governments should
seriously address the problems being faced by
Hijras/Transgenders such as fear, shame, gender
dysphoria,     social   pressure,      depression,   suicidal
tendencies, social stigma, etc. and any insistence for SRS
for declaring one’s gender is immoral and illegal.
135.6. The Centre and State Governments should take
proper measures to provide medical care to TGs in the
hospitals and also provide them separate public toilets
and other facilities.
135.7. The Centre and State Governments should also
take steps for framing various social welfare schemes for
their betterment.
135.8. The Centre and State Governments should take
steps to create public awareness so that TGs will feel that
they are also part and parcel of the social life and be not
treated as untouchables.
135.9. The Centre and the State Governments should
also take measures to regain their respect and place in
the society which once they enjoyed in our cultural and
social life.”
Amongst various directions, which have been issued by the
Supreme Court, in paragraph 135.3, it has been categorically
directed to the Central Government as well as State Government
to take steps to treat transgenders as socially and educationally
backward classes of citizens and extend all kinds of reservations in
cases of admission in educational institutions and for public
Such a direction clearly casts an obligation on the part of the
State to work out reservation in such manner and to such extent
as it may decide on the basis of relevant data available.        Much
time has lapsed since the directions were issued by the Supreme
(4 of 4)         [CW-10672/2021]
Court in the case of National Legal Services Authority (supra) and
the State should have come out with proper rules, regulations and
legislations to provide special treatment as directed by the
Taking into consideration the nature of exercise required to
be undertaken by the State, we hereby direct the State to
complete the exercise expeditiously and we grant maximum
period of four months to do the needful.
As far as present selection process is concerned, we would
only say that presently the petitioner would be allowed to
participate in the process of selection and her candidature shall
not be rejected only on the ground that she is third gender.
Subject to the directions as stated hereinabove, this petition
is finally disposed off granting relief to the petitioner in the
manner and to the extent as indicated above.
This petition is partly allowed.