2       In this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the
petitioner has challenged the communication dated 17.07.2018 by which
the    services    of   the  petitioner     were terminated.      Reading        the
communication, it would indicate that the services of the petitioner have
been terminated in accordance with Condition No.12 of the Contract of
Appointment that was entered into. While appointing the petitioner,
Condition No.12 G provided that, in case the petitioner is found to have
committed any misconduct, cheating or moral terpitude, the petitioner’s
services shall be put to an end. This decision          is challenged by the
2.1     The petitioner was appointed in the Gujarat Livelihood Promotion
Company Ltd., as Taluka Livelihood Manager in the year 2011 by an
order dated 29.07.2011. The appointment was on contractual basis. As is
evident from the appointment order produced together with the petition.
An F.I.R, being FIR No. I-26 of 2018 dated 07.07.2018 was registered
against the petitioner as well as other officers and employees of the
District Panchayat of the District Rural Development Agency levelling
certain allegations. On this, the impugned communication was issued on
3       Mr.Asthavadi, learned counsel for the petitioner, would submit
that, though, the employment was contractual, the communication of
termination dated 17.07.2018 was a stigmatic one and could not have
been passed without an appropriate inquiry. He would draw the attentin
of the Court to the communicatin referred to in communication dated
17.07.2018 (communication of even date), which was referred to in the
order putting the services of the petitioner to an end. That communication
would indicate that in view of an FIR being filed against the petitioner on
17.07.2018, the services of the petitioner were put to an end in
accordance with terms of the contract. This according to Mr.Asthavadi,
learned counsel, was a stigmatic termination, and therefore, ought to be
set aside.
3.1     Reliance was placed on a judgment dated 29.03.2019 rendered in
Special Civil Application No. 48/2019 wherein, considering various
decisions of the Hon’ble Supreme Court, it held that the order passed
which tantamounted to stigma could not have been so passed without an
appropriate inquiry. Reliance was also placed on the decision of the
Division Bench confirming this view rendered in Letters Patent Appeal
No. 1596 of 2019. Mr.Asthavadi, learned counsel, also relied on the
(i)     (2004) 3 SCC 43 rendered in the case of Union of India vs.
(ii)    Letters Patent Appeal No. 841 of 2019 rendered in the case of
State of Gujarat vs. Rahul Aydanbhai Vank.
(iii)   Letters Patent Appeal No. 1596 of 2019 rendered in the case of
State of Gujarat vs. Chetan Jayantilal Rajgor.
(iv)    Special Civil Application No. 17872 of 2017 rendered in the case
of Imran Anwar Majothi vs. State of Gujarat.
(v)     Special Civil Application No. 9458 of 2015 rendered in the case of
Sagar Makwana vs. State of Gujarat.
(vi)    Letters Patent Appeal No. 983 of 2017 rendered in the case of
State of Gujarat vs. Prajapati Hitesh Mohanlal.
3.2     Mr.Asthavadi, learned advocate, would therefore submit that the
order being stigmatic ought to be set aside.
4       Mr.H.S.Munshaw, learned counsel appearing for the respondent –
Livelihood Corporation, would rely on the affidavit in reply filed on
behalf of the Company and submit that the Company – respondent No.4,
is incorporated under the provisions of the Companies Act. Condition No.
12 (JH) (2) of the contractual appointment order makes it clear that in
case of a misconduct, fraud, disobedience as well as the act of moral
terpitude, sevices of an employee, like the petitioner could be put to an
end. He would submit that a letter dated 11.07.2018 was addressed by the
Director of District Rural Development Agency to the Company,
informing them that a police complaint is lodged by the Taluka
Development Officer for financial irregularities committed by the
petitioner and on this count, the services of the petitioner were
4.1     In support of his submission, Mr.Munshaw, learned advocate,
relied on a decison of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of
Rajasthan State Roadways Transport Corporation vs. Paramjeet Singh,
reported in (2019) 6 SCC 250. He would rely on para 9 of the judgment
and submit that an employee who is engaged on a temporary basis can be
terminated without notice following the principles of natural justice.
5       Considering the submissions made by the learned counsels
appearing for the respective parties, the question is, whether the
communicatin dated 17.07.2018 by which the services of the petitoner
have been put to an end can be termed as stigmatic. The decision is
referred to by learned counsel for the petitioner in the case of
Niteshkumar Pradeepbhai Makwana vs. District Program Coordinator
and Director., rendered in Special Civil Application No. 48 of 2019.
Having considered the decisions rendered by this Court and the Hon’ble
Supreme Court, in paras 5.1 to 6.9 of the said decision, the Court held as
“5.1 The question posed in wake of the aforesaid fact and
submissions in the controversy is whether the impugned order
against the petitioners is punitive and whether it ought to have
been preceded with the inquiry against the petitioners in respect of
what is mentioned and alleged in the impugned order even though
the petitioners were employed in the scheme.
5.2 The above question was addressed by this Court in Manishbhai
Nayanbhai Mod v. Vadodara Municipal Corporation being Special
Civil Application No. 8339 of 2016 decided on 30th November,
2017. This decision was confirmed in Letters Patent Appeal No.
1189 of 2018 decided on 20th February, 2018. These decisions
were followed by this Court also in Rahul Aydanbhai Vank v. State
of Gujarat being Special Civil Application No.889 of 2018 as also
in Sandip Ajitsinh Vaghela v. State of Gujarat being Special Civil
Application 12071 of 2018 decided on 26th February, 2019.
5.3 The position of law in relation to effecting termination of
service of an employee, even if on the fixed pay or temporary, by
passing a stigmatic order without following principles of natural
justice came to be delineated and discussed by this Court also in
Imranbhai Anwarbhai Majothi (supra). In that case, petitioner was
appointed as Beat Guard. The allegations were raised against him
inter alia that he had stolen two pass-books, that he mentioned
wrong information in the Register to allow trucks to passby
illegally. It was stated in the order leading to his termination of
service that he used the pass-book for illegal purpose for which it
was stolen and due to the act of negligence, caused damage to the
forest's properties to a large extent. It was mentioned in the order
that if the petitioner was to continue in service, it would entail
greater loss and that it was not advisable to continue the petitioner
in service since the petitioner was found to be negligent and
careless in discharge of his duties.
6. The law on the aspect was discussed with reference to the
decisions of the Apex Court. In judging whether termination is
simpliciter or punitive, a trite distinction is made between motive
of the order and foundation of the order. In Chandra Prakash
Shahi v. State of U.P. [(2000) 5 SCC 152], the Supreme Court
explained the concept of motive and foundation in respect of
“Motive is the moving power which impels action for a
definite result, or to put it differently, motive is that which
incites or stimulates a person to do an act. An order
terminating the services of an employee is an act done by the
employer. What is that factor which impelled the employer to
take this action? It if was the factor of general unsuitability
of the employee for the post held by him, the act would be
upheld in law. If, however, there were allegations of serious
misconduct against the employee and a preliminary inquiry
is held behind his back to ascertain the truth of those
allegations and a termination order is passed thereafter, the
order, having regard to other circumstances, would be
founded on the allegations of misconduct which were to be
true in the preliminary inquiry.”
6.1 The above statement of law that if the order is punitive and
stigmatic in nature, even if the employee concerned is a temporary
employee or holding the post as on probation, his dismissal or
removal would warrant a regular inquiry and full-fledged
compliance of natural justice, emanated from the early decision of
the Apex Court in Anoop Jaiswal v. Government of India [(1984) 2
SCC 369]. In that case, the Apex Court held that it is permissible
for the Court to go behind the formal order of discharge so as to
find out the real cause of action. In that case, the appellant was an
IPS Officer, undergoing training as a probationer, arrived late by
about 22 minutes at the place, even though prior intimation was
sent about the time on which, the candidates were required to
reach the venue. The incident of delayed reporting was considered
to be one by the authorities calling for an inquiry and an
explanation was sought for from the petitioner and all other
probationertrainees who had arrived late. On the basis of
explanation, the Director recommended the Government for
discharge of the appellant from service. The Government passed
order of discharge on the basis of recommendation of the Director
with whom, the only ground prevailing was that the appellant did
not show any sign of repentance. The High Court dismissed the
Writ Petition. However, the Supreme Court allowed the Appeal
and held that the order was punitive. The appellant was directed to
be reinstated with full benefits.
6.2 The principle stated was that even the form of the order may be
merely a camouflage for order of dismissal actually passed on the
basis of misconduct. In such circumstances, the Apex Court stated,
it is always open to the court before which the order is challenged,
to go beyond the form and ascertain the true character of the
“If …. …. …. the court reaches the conclusion that the
alleged act of misconduct was the cause of the order and
that but for that incident it would not have been passed then
it is inevitable that the order of discharge should fall to the
ground where the aggrieved officer is not afforded a
reasonable opportunity to defend himself as provided in
Article 311(2). It is wrong to assume that it is only when
there is a full scale departmental enquiry any termination
made thereafter will attract the operation of Article 311(2).”
6.3 It is the foundation of the order which really matters. The
Supreme Court in Anoop Jaiswal (supra) stated that if from the
record and the attendant circumstances of the present case it
becomes clear that the real foundation for the order of discharge
of the appellant-probationer was the alleged act of misconduct, the
impugned order would amount to termination of service by way of
punishment and in absence of any enquiry held in accordance with
Article 311(2), it was liable to be struck down. The Supreme Court
thereafter directed reinstatement of the appellant of the said case
in service with the same rank of seniority he was entitled to before
the impugned order passed as if it had not been passed at all.
6.4 The Supreme Court in Gujarat Steel Tubes Limited v. Gujarat
Steel Tubes Mazdoor Sabha [(1980) 2 SCC 593] stated and
"53. Masters and servants cannot be permitted to play hide
and seek with the law of dismissals and the plain and proper
criteria are not to be misdirected by terminological cover-
ups or by appeal to psychic processes but must be grounded
on the substantive reason for the order, whether disclosed or
undisclosed. The Court will find out from other proceedings
or documents connected with the formal order of termination
what the true ground for the termination is. If, thus
scrutinised, the order has a punitive flavour in cause or
consequence, it is dismissal. If it falls short of this test, it
cannot be called a punishment. To put it slightly differently,
a termination effected because the master is satisfied of the
misconduct and of the consequent desirability of terminating
the service of the delinquent servant, is a dismissal, even if
he had the right in law to terminate with an innocent order
under the standing order or otherwise. Whether, in such a
case the grounds are recorded in a different proceeding
from the formal order does not detract from its nature. Nor
the fact that, after being satisfied of the guilt, the master
abandons the enquiry and proceeds to terminate. Given an
alleged misconduct and a live nexus between it and the
termination of service the conclusion is dismissal, even if full
benefits as on simple termination, are given and non-
6.5 Having delineated the aforesaid principles, the Apex Court
held that the order in the case before it could not be treated as a
simple order of retrenchment and that it was an order passed by
way of punishment. It was held that such order of dismissal which
was passed without holding a regular departmental inquiry cannot
be allowed to be sustained. In Ratnesh Kumar Choudhary (supra)
also the Supreme Court considered its own various decisions on
the aspect and after referring to the decision in Radhey Shyam
Gupta v. U.P. State Agro Industries Corpn. Ltd. [(1999) 2 SCC 21]
observed that the proposition of law operating two ways. In certain
cases of temporary servants and probationers if the inquiry
undertaken about the very conduct forms the motive of termination
order, then the termination could not be said to be punitive merely
because principles of natural justice have not been followed. In
such circumstances, without becoming stigmatic, the employer can
exercise its right to terminate service of the employee concerned.
In the other line of decisions, the Supreme Court has ruled that if
the facts revealed in the inquiry or from the narration of the order
itself that the inquiry into the conduct was not the motive but it was
a foundation and the allegation of misconduct considered against
employee becomes foundation of termination of service of
temporary servant or probationer, such action would become
punitive and it would make the order legally unsound. The
Supreme Court in Ratnesh Kumar Choudhary (supra) thereafter
referred to the above quoted observations from Gujarat Still Tubes
Limited (supra) terming them as instructive.
6.6 In Imranbhai Anwarbhai Majothi (supra), it was
thereafter observed and held, “6. When the impugned order
is assessed, evaluated and considered in light of the
aforesaid principles, it is even not necessary to adopt the
process of lifting of veil. It is not necessary to remove the
facade even, for, the order in these very recitals could be
manifestly said to be based on allegations of misconduct.
The plain reading of order castes stigma. It is a stigmatic
action of termination of petitioner's service. Such an action
could not have been taken, eventhough the petitioner was a
fixed period employee, without giving the petitioner a
fullfledge opportunity to defend and thus by holding a
regular departmental inquiry. The employer is not allowed
to hire and fire employee. Even if the temporary, ad-hoc or
probationer employee is driven out of service on the ground
of misconduct without holding inquiry and stigma is caste on
his career by the punitive order, it is also a facet of behaving
with hire and fire attitude by the employer.”
6.7 The Division Bench in Letters Patent Appeal No. 189 of 2018
confirmed the decision in Manishbhai Nayanbhai Mod (supra) and
“4.1 … … … As a necessary corollary, when there is a
breach of procedure of instituting full-fledged departmental
inquiry, particularly, when termination order referred to
following of Gujarat Civil Services [Discipline & Appeal]
Rules, 1971, the issuance of show cause notice, receiving
reply and then to take final decision to terminate services of
an employee was unjust, unreasonable, arbitrary, in breach
of the Rules, 1971, violative of principles of natural justice
and Article 14 of the Constitution as it would not make any
difference whether the employee was appointed temporarily
for a fixed term on a fixed salary incorporating various
conditions.”
6.8 The principles laid down in the aforesaid decisions were in the
context of temporary employees or the employees on the fixed pay
appointed for fixed period wherein it was underlined that an order
of termination passed in stigma could not have been passed
without following the principles of natural justice and holding the
inquiry for the alleged misconduct made basis of the order. In the
present case, the petitioners were employed in MNREGA Scheme.
Though he was an employee appointed on contractual basis,
however his service conditions are governed as per the order of
this Court in Prajapati Hitesh Mohanlal v. State of Gujarat being
Special Civil Application No.13621 of 2014 and allied matters. In
the said decision, followed in several cases in respect of the other
similarly situated employees of the MNREGA Scheme, the Court in
paragraphs 52 to 52.7 issued direction protecting services of such
class of employees to order that they shall not be replaced by other
set of contractual employees on adhocism and that they shall be
continued in the Scheme. There can be no gainsaying that
principles laid down above and the position of law arising, would
apply to an employee like the petitioners under the MNREGA
Scheme. In view of the directions issued by this Court in Prajapati
Hitesh Mohanlal (supra), such class of employees enjoy better
service conditions than a pure contractual or temporary
employees.
6.9 Reverting to the impugned order, on the bare reading thereof
and even without lifting the veil, it could be seen that the order is
stigmatic and cast stigma on the petitioners. The authority has
readily concluded that the petitioners were directly involved in the
irregularities and that the petitioners committed financial
defalcation and that they indulged into corrupt practice. This was
a finding arrived at without holding any inquiry. A straightway
finding was reached and the termination orders passed only on the
ground that F.I.R. was registered. The order is founded on the
allegation of misconduct and therefore, it is manifestly stigmatic.
Such orders could not have been passed even though petitioners'
service was under a contract in MNREGA Scheme. A full fledged
opportunity of defend and holding of departmental inquiry was
necessary to precede before coming to such conclusion and taking
the penal action against the petitioners.”
5.1     The same was confirmed by the Division Bench of this Court in
Letters Patent Appeal No. 1596 of 2019. Refering to the said decision in
the context of motivating foundation, while relying on the decision of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Chandra Prakash Shahi vs. State
of Uttar Pradesh & Ors., reported in (2000) 5 SCC 152, what is
considered is that the question needs to be addressed while adjudicating
an order of termination and ask as to what is the factor that compelled the
employee to take action. If the order founded on misconduct and the
allegations thereof and motive being the motivating power of such action,
then the order is stigmatic. Even in Letters Patent Appeal No. 1596 of
2019, the Division Bench, on 24.07.2020 while affirming the decision of
the learned Single Judge extensively reproducing the judgment even in
the context of contractual employees, held that a full scale inquiry
deserves to be undertaken irrespective of whether the delinquent was a
regular employee or a contractual employee. Para 11 of the decision of
the Division Bench rendered in Letters Patent Appeal No. 1596 of 2019
“11 From the overall material on record and in consideration of
aforesaid observations, we see no distinguishable material to take
a different view or deviate from the same. Since almost in similar
issue, the proposition is to the effect that whenever any charge is
levelled and action is found to be stigmatic, a full-scale
departmental inquiry deserves to be undertaken irrespective of
whether the delinquent was a regular employee or contractual
employee on a fixed salary. As a result of this, we are of the
considered opinion that since undisputedly by a brief procedure,
an action is initiated against the respondents herein while
dismissing their services, said action itself is found to be not on the
touchstone of aforesaid proposition of law. As a result of this, no
error is committed by the learned Single Judge. Having perused
these material, we are not satisfied with the submissions made by
learned counsel for the appellants in both these appeals.”
5.2     In the case of Dipti Prakash Banerjee vs. Satvendra Nath Bose
National Centre For Basic sc., Calcutta, rendered in Civil Appeal No.
750 of 1999 dated 10.02.1999 , reported in AIR 1999 SC 983, while
considering the question of whether the order is passed on a motive or
foundation and whether it can be said to be stigmatic, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court at point No.3 answered the question which reads as under:
The next question is whether the reference in the impugned order
to the three earlier letters amounts to stigma if those three letters
contained anything in the nature of a stigma even though the order
of termination itself did not contain anything offensive.
Learned counsel for the appellant relies upon Indrapal Gupta vs.
Managing Committee [1984(3) SCC 384] decided by a three Judge
Bench of this Court. In that case the order of termination of
probation, which is extracted in the judgment, reads as follows:
“with reference to the above (viz. Termination of service as
Principal), I have to mention that in view of the resolution
No.2 of the Managing Committee dated April 27, 1969 (copy
enclosed) and subsequent approval by the D.I.O.S.,
Bulandshahr, you are hereby informed that your servic as
Principal of this Institution is terminated ......”
Now the copy of Resolution of the Managing Committee appended
to the order of termination stated that the Report of the Manager
was read at the meeting and that the “facts contained in the Report
of the Manager being serious and not in the intersts of the institute,
that therfore the Committee unanimously resolved to terminate his
probation.” The Report of the Manager was not extraacted in the
enclosure to the termination order but was extracted in the
“It will be evident from the above, that the Principal’s stay
will not be in the interest of the Instituion. It is also evident
that the serious view of the lapses is enough to justify
dismissal but no educational institution should take all this
botheration. As such my suggestion that our purpose will be
served by termination of his service. Why, then, we should
enter into any botheration. For the terminiation of his period
of probation, too, the approval of the DIOS will be
necessary. Accordingly, any delay in the matter may also be
harmful in our interests.
Accordingly, I suggest that instead of taking serious action,
the period of probation of Sri Indar Pal Gupta be terminated
without waiting for the period to end.”
It was held by Venkataramiah, J. (as he then was) (p.392) that the
letter of termination referred to the resolution of the Managing
Committee, that the resolution was made part of the order as an
enclosure and that the Resolution in its turn referred to the report
of the Manager. A copy of the Manager’s Report had been filed
along with the counter and the said report was the ‘foundation’.
Venkataramiah,J. (as he then was) held that the Manager’s Report
contained words amounting to stigma. The learned Single Judge
said: “This is a clear case where the order of termination issued is
merely a camouflage for an order imposing a penalty of
termination of service on the ground of misconduct”, that these
findings in the Manager’s Report amounted to a ‘mark of disgrace
or infamy’ and that the appellant there was visited with evil
consequences. The officer was reinstated with all benefits of
backwages and continuity of service.
It will be seen from the above case that the resolution of the
committee was part of the termination order being an enclosure to
it. But the offensive part was not really contained in the order of
termination nor in the Resolution which was an enclosure to the
order of termination but in the Manager’s Report which was
referred to in the enclosure. The said report of the Manager was
placed before the Court along with the counter. The allegations in
the Manager’s Report were the basis for the termination and the
said report contained words amounting to stigma. The termination
order was, as stated above, set aside.
The above discussionis, in our view, clear authority for the
proposition that the material which amounts to stigma need not be
contained in the order of termination of the probationer but might
be contained in any document referred to in the termination order
or its Annexures. Obviously such a document could be asked for or
called for by any future employer of the probationer. In such a
case, the order of termination would stand vitiated on the ground
that no regular inquiry was conoducted. We shall presently
consider whether, on the facts of the case before us, the documents
referred to in the impugned order contain any stigma.
It was in this context argued for the Respondent that the employer
in the present case had given ample opportunity to the employee by
giving him warnings, asking him to improve and even extended his
probation twice and this was not a case of unfairness and this
Court should not interfere. It is true that where the employee had
been given suitable warnings, requested to improve, or where he
was given a long rope by way of extension of probation, this Court
has said that the termination orders cannot be held to be punitive.
Hindustan Paper Corporation vs. Purendu Chakraborty [1996
(11) scc 404] See in this connection, Oil & Natural Gas
Commission vs. Md. S.Iskendu [1980 (3) scc 428], Unit Trust of
India vs. T.Bijaya Kumar [1992 (5) Serv. L.R. 855 (SC)],
Principal, Institute of P.G.Medical Education & Research,
Pondichery vs. S.Andel & Others [1995 Suppl. (4) SCC 609] and a
labour case Oswal Pressure Die Carting Industry vs. Presiding
Officer [1998 (3) SCC 225]. But in all these cases, the orders were
simple orders of termination which did not contain any words
amounting to stigma. In case we come to the conclusion that there
is stigma in the impugned order, we cannot ignore the effect it will
have on the probationer’s future whatever be earlier opportunities
granted by the respondent organization to the appellant to
improve.
On this point, therefore, we hold that the words amounting to
‘stigma’ need not be contained in the order of termination but may
also be contained in an order or proceeding referred to in the
order of termination or in an annexure thereto and would vitiate
the order of termination . Point 3 is decided accordingly.”
5.3     Considering that, though Mr.Munshaw, learned counsel may be
right in submitting that the order of termination do not refer to anything
except the terms of contract which could give him the benefit to terminate
the petitioner, what is evident from reading point No.3 in the case of
Dipti Prakash Banerjee (supra) is that the material which amounts to
stigma need not be contained in the order of termination but may contain
in the documents referred to in the termination order or its annexures.
Therefore, when reading the impugned order of termination dated
17.07.2008, what is evident is that a reference is made to an FIR and a
case filed against the petitioner, the order of termination is bound to be
stigmatic. Even in the decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court which
Mr.Munshaw, learned advocate, relied on Rajasthan State Roadways
Transport Corporation (supra), the Hon’ble Supreme Court considered
the decision in the case of Hari Ram Maurya vs. Union of India & Ors.,
reported in (2006) 9 SCC 167. That short order of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in the case of Hari Ram Maurya (supra), would indicate that the
decision relied upon by Mr.Munshaw, learned advocate, is clearly
distinguishable. In the facts of Hari Ram Maurya (supra) also, the
Hon’ble Supreme Court held that an inquiry therefore was mandatory.
6       Accordingly, the order of termination dated 17.07.2018 is quashed
and set aside. The petitioner is directed to be reinstated in service. The
respondents are directed to take back the petitioner in service on his
original post and position with continuity of service, salary and wages for
the interregnum as if the order of temination is not passed.
However, it is left open for the respondents to take appropriate
recourse to departmental proceedings or an inquiry before terminating the
services of the petitioner. The petition is allowed, accordingly. Rule is
made absolute to the above extent.