and 506(2) of IPC and under Sections 7, 12, 13(1)(a) read with
Section 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
2.     The facts and circumstances giving rise to filing of present
application is that, the applicant being public servant, has been
charged with the offence under Section 7, 13, 13(1)(a) read with
Section 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
(hereinafter referred to as 'the Act' for short).
2.1     The applicant herein presently under suspension, was serving as
Kutchh. On 04.03.2020, the informant Rohan Nipanikar and his
friends were on long drive and when they were reached on
University Road, Bhuj, his car was intercepted by driver of the
applicant herein and beneath the driver seat, one transparent
polythene phone bag filled with green colour leaves was found.
The applicant herein was in official car – Bolero Jeep. The driver
of the applicant suspects that the material found from the polythene
bag is narcotic substance. He told to the complainant that you have
committed an offence under the provisions of NDPS Act. Driver
Haribhai Gadhavi, take a seat in the informant car and directed the
friends of the informant to sit in a police jeep. The driver –
Haribhai, demanded Rs.1,00,000/- from the informant for
settlement, otherwise, he threatened the complainant to book in the
false case under the NDPS Act and after negotiations, the deal was
finalized at Rs.50,000/-. The informant, managed Rs.15,000/- from
his friend, who had credited the amount in the account of
informant. The driver, the applicant herein, the informant and his
friends were taken to ATM HDFC Bank, Jubilee Circle in the
Bolero Jeep, where, the informant withdraw the amount of
Rs.15,000/- and given to the driver in the Jeep itself. The driver -
accused in the presence of applicant asked for the remaining
amount and at that time, the applicant herein said that “ as a main
person, when he could not manage the remaining amount, then,
booked him in NDPS Case”. The Bolero Jeep along with all
persons again driven to the spot where the car of the informant was
parked. The informant was in scared and again tried to manage
Rs.15,000/- from his employer and friends. The driver Haribhai
directed the informant to pay the said amount through Google Pay
and accordingly, payment was made by the informant in the
account of co-accused. The driver clicked the photographs of the
informant, polythene bag and car and said to the informant that he
should pay Rs.20,000/- remaining amount by tomorrow before
noon, otherwise, case under the provisions of NDPS Act would be
registered against him. On the next day, the accused demanded
thrice the remaining amount. The informant made inquiry about
the driver, who is H.P. Gadhvi, serving with the police
Department. The informant called him near ICICI Bank for
remaining amount and at about 10-00 pm, he saw the informant
and his friends standing opposite side of the road, however, he did
not turn up for taking remaining amount.
2.2     In the aforesaid facts, the informant filed an FIR against accused
driver Haribhai Gadhvi and one lady constable, for alleged
criminal intimidation and extortion, as a result, the FIR came to be
registered under Sections 384, 114, 294(B) and 506(2) of the IPC.
Pursuant to the registration of the FIR, the police constable driver
was arrested and during his interrogation it reveals that the
applicant herein being a PSI, was accompanied to him and her
involvement was there in the alleged conspiracy of demanding
illegal gratification and she was part of design for obtaining illegal
gratification. The whole incident, captured in the CC TV footage.
It is alleged that the accused driver had given Rs.15,000/- to the
applicant herein. The investigating Officer made report to the
Special Court for addition of Section 7, 13, 13(1)(a) read with
Section 13 (2) of the Act.
2.3     The applicant herein sought anticipatory bail before the learned
Sessions Court and same came to be rejected on 24.03.2020 by
well reasoned order. The learned Sessions Judge observed that
there was overt act on the part of the applicant herein for alleged
demand and extortion of money and she was very much present
throughout of the incident and got peculiary advantage of her post,
and therefore, considering the seriousness of the offence and
interest of the society at large, she dis-entitled for the discretionary
relief.
3.     This Court has heard learned counsel Hriday Buch, learned counsel
for the applicant and Mr. Manan Mehta, learned APP for the
respondent State.
4.     Learned counsel Mr. Hriday Buch, raised the following
(i) The applicant herein has been falsely implicated only on the
basis of the statement of co-accused. In this context, he
submitted that, the FIR lodged after complete inquiry made
by the informant, however, the applicant herein mentioned in
the FIR, as lady constable. Learned counsel further urged
that as per the allegations made in the FIR, the applicant
herein was present in the Police Jeep and informant himself
was there in the vehicle, however, he could not identified the
applicant herein which established that the implication of the
applicant is apparently false with oblique motive;
(ii) The constable Haribhai Gadhvi demanded the alleged money
from the informant and received Rs.15,000/- on his Google
Pay account and as such, there is no evidence to suggest that
the same was paid to the applicant herein;
(iii) Demand of illegal gratification is sin-a-qua- none to
constitute the offence, unless it is proved that the accused
voluntarily accepted the money, knowing it to be bribe. The
applicant herein did not have demanded any money and
therefore, prima-facie, no offence under the provisions of the
Act is made out, nor in absence of any alleged act of
extortion on the part of the applicant, the offence alleged
under Section 384 is made out, as she did not make any
conversation with the informant on the date, when the car
was intercepted or on the next date. Thus, therefore, it was
submitted that by no stretch of imagination, it can be said
that the present applicant was involved in the alleged
(iv) It was submitted that after registration of the FIR, the
offences under the provision of the Act have been added and
investigation for the same undertaken by the Dy.S.P. The
principal accused is not arrested on the spot. In this
background, referring Section 17A of the Act (Amended in
2018), it was submitted that the new provision prohibits any
arrest, inquiry or investigation into the offence alleged have
been committed by the public servant under the Act, except
prior approval / sanction of the State Government. In the
facts of case, no such approval being sought by the IO and
therefore, the whole investigation is vitiated, as there is a
breach of mandatory statutory provision;
(v) The applicant is a lady and is a single parent, having
responsibility of 10 years old son and widow mother and
does not have any past antecedent of like nature and pursuant
to the order passed by this Court, she has cooperated in the
investigation and therefore, if she will not protected by
granting anticipatory bail, then, her entire career would be
put to jeopardy. In these context, it was submitted that the
applicant may kindly be protected from undergoing rigorous
of arrest and custodial interrogation.
5.     In view of the aforesaid contentions, learned counsel Mr. Hriday
Buch, submitted that the case is made out for exercising the powers
vested with the Court for granting pre-arrest bail and accordingly,
there being a merits of the case, the application may be allowed.
6.     Per contra, learned APP Mr. Manan Mehta for the State,
vehemently opposed the petition, contending that the involvement
of the applicant herein is established and considering the
seriousness of the offence and in the interest of the society at large,
the application may not be entertained. He further submitted that so
far role of present applicant is concerned, without her custodial
interrogation, the effective investigation would not proceeded. In
the aforesaid facts, he submitted that the application having no any
merits, deserves to be dismissed.
7.     I have carefully analyses the rival submissions advanced by learned
counsel for the respective parties and perused the entire record.
8.     Before adverting to the issue raised by the respective parties, let us
consider the settled law with respect to granting and/or refusing the
anticipatory bail. It has been settled by the Apex Court time and
again in its various pronouncements that the powers under Section
438 Cr.P.C., is in extra-ordinary character and must be exercised
sparingly in exceptional cases only and therefore, the anticipatory
bail can be granted only in exceptional circumstances where the
court is prima-facie of the view that the applicant has falsely been
implicated in the crime, as grant of anticipatory bail to some
extent, interference in sphere of investigation of an offence and
hence, the court must be circumspect while exercising such
powers. It is also settled law that the grant or refusal of the
application should necessarily be depends on the facts and
circumstance of each case and there is no hard and fast rule and no
inflexible principles governing such exercise by the Court.
9.     In light of the aforesaid legal proposition and considering the
peculiar facts and circumstance of the case, this Court is of the
considered view that the involvement of the applicant herein is
prima-facie proved and established. A bare reading of the FIR,
would show that throughout the incident, she did not restrain the
driver Haribhai for alleged extortion and demand of illegal
gratification which he demanded under the guise of registration of
false case. In the presence of the applicant, the informant gave
Rs.15,000/- to the driver. When driver tried to confirm the
remaining amount of Rs.20000/-, the applicant herein directed the
constable to register case under the provisions of NDPS Act, as the
applicant shown his unwillingness to pay the amount. Therefore,
this court is prima-facie of the considered view that, the alleged act
of driver was in knowledge of the applicant. It was her duty either
not to harass the informant or if there is substance in the alleged
offence under the NDPS Act, then, she could have filed the case.
Therefore, prima-facie, there are reasonable ground to believe that
the applicant herein involve in the alleged offence.
10.    More emphasis being given to the applicability of Section 17A of
the Amended Act, 1988. The learned Sessions Judge while
rejecting the application, dealt with the issue at length and
observed that Section 17A is not applicable in the facts of present
case, as the case is not relatable to any recommendation made or
decision taken by the applicant herein in discharge of official
function or duties. Therefore, the learned Sessions Judge rightly
held that Section 17A is not applicable in the present case.
11.    It is the contention of learned counsel that the applicant herein
neither demanded any amount, nor delivered any threat for
extortion of money and therefore, she has been falsely involved in
the offence. If we read the contents of the FIR and progress report
of investigation, it reveals that the applicant herein was part of
design formed by the accused Haribhai. In the facts of present case,
it is useful to refer to and rely on the case of Velluswamy Vs State
represented by Inspector of Police, 2019(8) SCC 396, wherein, it
was observed by the Apex Court that actions of direct evidence for
demand and acceptance or conspiracy held, irrelevant if
circumstantial evidence unhesitatingly points towards the accused
as being a part of design for obtaining illegal gratification.
Therefore, at this stage, the issue raised having no any merits.
12.    In Niranjan Hem Chandra Sashittal Vs. State of Maharashtra,
(2013) 4 SCC 642, the Supreme Court observed that corruption is
not to be judged by degree, for corruption mothers disorder,
destroys societal will to progress, accelerates undeserved
ambitions, kills the conscience, jettisons the glory of the
institutions, paralyses the economic health of a country, corrodes
the sense of civility and mars the marrows of governance. The
Apex Court further observed that immoral acquisition of wealth
destroys the energy of the people believing in honesty, and history
records with agony how they have suffered; and the only
redeeming fact is that collective sensibility respects such suffering
as it is in consonance with constitutional morality The emphasis
was on intolerance to any kind of corruption bereft of its degree.
13.    In Subramanian Swamy Vs. C.B.I, (2014) 8 SCC 682, the
Constitutional Bench of the Supreme Court observed that
corruption is an enemy of the nation and tracking down corrupt
public servants and punishing such persons is a necessary mandate
of the 1988 Act.
14.    In State (CBI) Vs. Anil Sharma, AIR 1997 SC 3806, wherein,
anticipatory bail was refused to an MLA and son of a former
Union Minister for Telecommunications on the ground that in
cases of corruption in high places where accused has held high
offices, he may wield wide influence and the investigation could
suffer. The Court observed “In a case like this effective
interrogation of suspected person is of tremendous advantage in
disinterring many useful information and also materials which
would have been concealed succession of such interrogation would
elude if the suspected person knows that he is well protected and
insulted by a pre-arrest bail during the time he interrogated.
15.    For the foregoing reasons, having regard to facts and
circumstances, peculiar to the instant case, as have been analyzed
hereinabove, the applicant failed to make out a special case for
exercise of power to grant bail and considering the facts and
parameters, necessary to be considered for adjudication of
anticipatory bail, without commenting on the merits of the case,
this Court does not find any exceptional ground to exercise its
discretionary jurisdiction under Section 438 of the Code to grant
anticipatory bail. Therefore, this Court is of the view that
anticipatory bail has no merits and is liable to the rejected.
16.      This court has not delve into merits of the matter and views
expressed in this order, are prima-facie only.
17.      In the result, the application fails and is hereby rejected. Rule
discharged. Interim relief stands vacated.