The petitioner - the Karnataka Lokayukta is before this
Court calling in question an order dated 06.09.2021 by which
the second respondent is imposed a penalty, which falls short
of a recommendation made by the petitioner for imposition of
particular penalty.
2.    Heard Sri. Venkatesh S. Arbatti, learned counsel
appearing for the petitioner and Sri. M. Vinod Kumar, learned
AGA appearing for the respondent No1.
3.    Facts in brief that leads the petitioner to this Court
in the subject petition, as borne out from the pleadings, are as
The second respondent becomes an accused in a criminal
case in which he is allegedly caught receiving bribe of Rs.700/-
in the year 2009.     The criminal proceedings were instituted
against the second respondent, which ends up in acquittal on
the ground that there was no work pending with the second
WP No. 7122 of 2022
respondent for him to demand or accept an amount of Rs.700/-
as a bribe.
Simultaneously,  the   report  under  Sub-Section    3  of
Section 12 of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act, 1984 ('Act' for
short) was prepared and furnished to the Government, seeking
entrustment of departmental enquiry to the Lokayukta under
Rule 14A of the Karnataka Civil Services (CCA) Rules.
The Government in terms of an order dated 22.07.2011,
passed an order under Sub-Section 4 Section 12 of the Act,
entrusting the enquiry to the hands of the Lokayukta.         The
enquiry officer nominated by the Lokayukta conducts an
enquiry and holds that the allegations against the second
respondent are proved and accordingly submits an enquiry
report.   On the enquiry report, the Lokayukta recommends
imposition of penalty of compulsory retirement from service
against    the   second   respondent.    On    receipt   of   the
recommendation of imposition of such penalty, the disciplinary
authority after on consideration of the material placed before it,
resolves to impose a penalty of reversion in grade of the
petitioner   instead   of  compulsory    retirement,    as    was
WP No. 7122 of 2022
recommended by the Lokayukta. It is this order that drives the
petitioner to this Court in the subject petition.
4.    The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner
would vehemently contend that once the recommendation is
made, the reduction of penalty can only happen in accordance
with law. There are no reasons indicated as to why the penalty
against the second respondent is reduced to that of reversion
from what was recommended i.e. compulsory retirement by the
Lokayukta and would submit that the order be quashed and
recommendation be accepted.
5.    The learned AGA on the other hand would refute
the submissions to contend that it is the discretion vested with
the disciplinary authority to impose a penalty or otherwise and
the petitioner - Lokayukta cannot be considered to be an
aggrieved person against the orders passed by the disciplinary
authority imposing a particular penalty. He would submit that
the reduction in rank is imposed upon the second respondent
on the ground that he was honorably acquitted in the criminal
case, which Court had held that there was no work pending for
the petitioner to demand or accept bribe of Rs.700/- in the year
WP No. 7122 of 2022
2009 and therefore, would support the order. He would further
contend that the second respondent is not left scot-free but he
has been imposed penalty of reversion to a lower grade.
6.     I have given my anxious consideration to the
submissions made by the respective counsel and have perused
the material available on record.
7.     The statutory frame work of the Lokayukta Act
requires to be considered to consider the submission of the
learned counsel appearing for the petitioner. The very issue fell
for   consideration       at  the    hands    of    this   Court in
W.P.No.12733/2021 which came to be disposed on 25.01.2022,
this Court has held as follows:
"8. I have given my anxious consideration to the
submissions made by the respective learned counsel
and perused the material on record. In furtherance
whereof, the only issue in the subject writ petition that
calls for my consideration is,
“Whether the Lokayukta can be considered
to be an aggrieved person to knock the doors of
this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India challenging the decision of the Cabinet?”
The afore-narrated facts as to the genesis of the
present writ petition is not in dispute and need not be
reiterated. To consider the issue that has arisen in the
subject lis, it is germane to notice the provisions of the
Act, more particularly, Section 12 of the Act, which is
WP No. 7122 of 2022
the nucleus of the lis. Section 12 of the Act reads as
“12. Reports of Lokayukta, etc.- (1) If,
after investigation of any action involving a
grievance has been made, the Lokayukta or an
Upalokayukta is satisfied that such action has
resulted in injustice or undue hardship to the
complainant or to any other person, the
Lokayukta or an Upalokayukta shall, by a report
in writing, recommend to the competent authority
concerned that such injustice or hardship shall
be remedied or redressed in such manner and
within such time as may be specified in the
report.
(2) The competent authority to whom a
report is sent under sub-section (1) shall, within
one month of the expiry of the period specified in
the report, intimate or cause to be intimated to
the Lokayukta or the Upalokayukta the action
taken on the report.
(3) If, after investigation of any action
involving an allegation has been made, the
Lokayukta or an Upalokayukta is satisfied
that such allegation is substantiated either
wholly or partly, he shall by report in
writing communicate his findings and
recommendations along with the relevant
documents, materials and other evidence to
the competent authority.
(4) The Competent authority shall
examine the report forwarded to it under
subsection (3) and within three months of
the date of receipt of the report, intimate or
cause to be intimated to the Lokayukta or
the Upalokayukta the action taken or
proposed to be taken on the basis of the
report.
Upalokayukta is satisfied with the action
taken or proposed to be taken on his
WP No. 7122 of 2022
recommendations or findings referred to in
sub-sections (1) and (3), he shall close the
case under information to the complainant,
the public servant and the competent
authority concerned; but where he is not so
satisfied and if he considers that the case
so deserves, he may make a special report
upon the case to the Governor and also
inform the competent authority concerned
and the complainant.
(6) The Lokayukta shall            present
annually a consolidated report           on the
performance of his functions and         that of
the Upalokayukta under this Act           to the
(7) On receipt of the special report
under sub-section (5), or the annual report
under sub-section (6), the Governor shall
cause a copy thereof together with an
explanatory memorandum to be laid before
each House of the State Legislature.
(8) The Lokayukta or an Upalokayukta
may at his discretion make available, from time
to time, the substance of cases closed or
otherwise disposed of by him which may appear
to him to be of general, public, academic or
professional interest in such manner and to such
persons as he may deem appropriate.”
(Emphasis supplied)
Sub-section (1) of Section 12 of the Act vests
consideration of a complaint involving a grievance
which has resulted injustice or undue hardship to the
complainant or any other person and a report to that
effect is to be submitted to the competent authority.
Sub-section (2) of Section 12 mandates that the
competent authority to whom the report is sent under
Sub-section (1), within the expiry of one month,
intimate or cause to be intimated the action taken on
the report submitted under Sub-section (1) of Section
WP No. 7122 of 2022
12. These are the provisions which deal with an action
to be taken involving a grievance.
9. Sub-section (3) of Section 12 deals with an
action on an allegation. It revolves around a complaint
involving an allegation and the Lokayukta being
satisfied with such allegation, either wholly or partially
substantiated, shall by a report in writing communicate
its findings and recommendations along with relevant
documents, material and other evidence to the
competent authority. Sub-section (4) of Section 12 is
the duty of the competent authority to examine the
report forwarded by the Lokayukta under Sub-section
(3) of Section 12 and intimate the action taken within 3
months. Sub-section (5) of Section 12 deals with
satisfaction of the Lokayukta. The said provisions
permits the Lokayukta to close the case after receipt of
the information with regard to action taken on the
report submitted both under Sub-sections (1) and (3) of
Section 12 and if in the event, he is not satisfied, he
may make a special report upon the said case to the
Governor and also inform the competent authority
concerned and the complainant. Sub-section (7) of
Section 12 deals with action of the Governor on receipt
of special report under Sub-section (5) or annual report
under Sub-section (6) whereby, the Governor is directed
to cause a copy thereof together with an explanatory
memorandum to be laid before each Houses of the
State Legislature. The afore-extracted provision of law
is the statutory frame work under which the present lis
will have to be considered.
10. A search was conducted in the Office of the
2nd  respondent upon which a criminal case came to be
registered as the 2nd respondent was in possession of
Rs.9,700/- unaccounted cash. Based on the material
collected during criminal proceedings, the Lokayukta
framed a report under Sub-section (3) of Section 12 of
the Act and communicated the same seeking
entrustment of departmental enquiry to it against the
2nd respondent. In the case at hand, the role of the
competent authority - the State Government begins on
receipt of the report from the hands of the Lokayukta.
A cabinet note is put up for a decision by the Cabinet
WP No. 7122 of 2022
on the report submitted by the Lokayukta. The cabinet
by its decision dated 09-01-2019, declines to entrust
the enquiry against the 2nd respondent to the hands of
the petitioner-Lokayukta. In furtherance of the decision
of the Cabinet, a Government Order is issued on
20-03-2019, notifying that the cabinet has decided not
to entrust the enquiry against the 2nd respondent to the
Lokayukta and closed the proceedings. On issuance of
the said Government Order, the Lokayukta knocks the
doors of this Court.
11. The issue now is, whether the Lokayukta
can challenge the decision of the Cabinet by filing a
writ petition before this Court. In other words, can the
Lokayukta be considered to be an aggrieved person on
the decision of the Cabinet. The statutory frame work
afore-extracted clearly mandates certain action to be
taken once the report is submitted by the Lokayukta
under Sub-section (3) of Section 12 of the Act. The
function of the Lokayukta rests at that stage. The next
stage where the Lokayukta would again spring into
action is, when an order is passed entrusting the
enquiry after consideration of the report in terms of
Sub-section (4) of Section 12 of the Act. If the enquiry
is not entrusted, Sub-section (5) comes into play. Sub-
section (5) mandates that in the event, the Lokayukta
is not satisfied with non-entrustment of enquiry or
closure of proceedings, the only remedy available
under the Act is to communicate the same to the
Governor and it is the function of the Governor under
Sub-section (7) of Section 12 of the Act to place such
communication of the Lokayukta before each Houses of
the State Legislature along with an explanatory
memorandum. This being the statutory frame work,
the Lokayukta can hardly be said to be a person
aggrieved. No doubt, the Office of the Lokayukta is on
a much higher pedestal than that of an Inquiry Officer
in a Departmental Inquiry but, it would not mean that
the Inquiry Officer shall be permitted to challenge the
decision of the Disciplinary Authority, who alone is
empowered to act upon the report of the Inquiry Officer.
If the report submitted by the Lokayukta under Sub-
section (3) of Section 12 is declined to be accepted by
the competent authority, who alone has the discretion
WP No. 7122 of 2022
either to entrust or not to entrust the enquiry, the
Lokayukta cannot be seen to challenge the same
invoking the extraordinary discretionary jurisdiction of
this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
12. The phrase ‘person aggrieved’ has been a
subject matter of interpretation in plethora of
judgments of the Apex Court right from the case of
WEST BENGAL AND ORS1, at para No.5 has held as
“5. The first question that falls to be
considered is whether the appellant has locus
standi to file the petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution. The argument of learned counsel
for the respondents is that the appellant was
only managing the industry and it had no
proprietary right therein and, therefore, it could
not maintain the application. Article 226 confers
a very wide power on the High Court to issue
directions and writs of the nature mentioned
therein for the enforcement of any of the rights
conferred by Part III or for any other purpose. It
is, therefore, clear that persons other than
those claiming fundamental rights can also
approach the court seeking a relief
thereunder. The article in terms does not
describe the classes of persons entitled to
apply thereunder; but it is implicit in the
exercise of the extraordinary jurisdiction
that the relief asked for must be one to
enforce      a    legal     right.   In State     of
Orissa v. Madan Gopal Rungta [(1952) SCR
28] this Court has ruled that the existence
of the right is the foundation of the exercise
of jurisdiction of the court under Article
226 of the Constitution. In Chiranjit Lal
Chowdhuri v. Union of India [(1950) SCR
869] it has been held by this Court that the
legal right that can be enforced under
Article 32 must ordinarily be the right of
the petitioner himself who complains of
infraction of such right and approaches the
court for relief. We do not see any reason
why a different principle should apply in
the case of a petitioner under Article 226 of
the Constitution. The right that can be
enforced under Article 226 also shall
ordinarily be the personal or individual
right of the petitioner himself, though in
the case of some of the writs like habeas
corpus or quo warranto this rule may have
to be relaxed or modified. The question,
therefore, is whether in the present case the
petitioner has a legal right and whether it has
been infringed by the contesting respondents.
The petitioner entered into an agreement dated
July 24, 1948, with Respondent 5 in regard to
the management of Oriental Gas Company.”
(Emphasis supplied)
Again, the Apex Court in the case of ADI
PHEROZSHAH            GANDHI       v.    H.M.SEERVAI,
ADVOCATE GENERAL OF MAHARASHTREA2, holds
that the Advocate General cannot be seen to be a
person aggrieved over the decision of the Government.
The Apex Court at paragraphs 32 and 35 holds as
“32. If he is not a person summoned to be
bound by the order but a person who is heard in
a dispute between others merely to be of
assistance in reaching the right conclusion he
can hardly have a grievance. The Advocate-
General must after he has done his duty leave
the matter to the complainant and the advocate
or the Bar Council to take the matter further if
they choose. In no event the Advocate-General is
in the nature of a party having independent
rights which he can claim are injured by the
decision. The decision does not deny him
anything nor does it ask him to do anything. It is
thus that Lord Denning says that in these
disciplinary proceedings the Attorney-General is
not a party as in a lis and after the decision, his
duty ends. Lord Denning points this out clearly
by saying that the Advocate-General in that case
could not have been aggrieved by the order of
the Deputy Judge if he had acquitted the
delinquent advocate in that case. The Attorney-
General's interest was found by Lord Denning in
relation to the Crown and the Colony and that
too for the special reason that appeal court had
denied that the Deputy Judge possessed
jurisdiction to hear the case. In our country the
Advocate-General does not represent the
Executive or the Legislature or the Judiciary in
disciplinary proceedings before the Disciplinary
Committee. His function is advisory and more
akin to an amicus curiae. He is not to take sides
except in so far his arguments lend weight to the
case of the one side or that of the other. Beyond
that he is not interested in the dispute either in
his personal capacity or in his capacity as an
Advocate-General. He does not represent the
Government in these proceedings. If the
Government was interested the notice would
have gone to it. In other statutes, where the
Central Government is vitally interested, as for
example, in the Chartered Accountants' Act, the
notice does not go to the Advocate-General but to
Government and the Government appears
through the Advocate-General. The Advocate-
General under the Act finishes his duty when the
hearing is over and he cannot be considered to
be a party interested or a “person aggrieved”. I
do not find anything in the Act which
indicates that the Advocate-General is to be
treated as “person aggrieved” by a decision
whether in favour of the advocate or
against him. Indeed it would have been the
easiest thing to give a right of appeal to the
Advocate-General         eo   nomine      without
including him in the compendious phrase
“person aggrieved”. If he is not noticed, the
WP No. 7122 of 2022
order would be held to deny him something
which the law entitled him to. That is quite
different. The larger proposition contended
for by Mr Desai is therefore not acceptable
to me.
35. The advocate here explained that he
was held guilty before the Magistrate in the
circumstances in which he was placed. The fact
of his conviction as well as his full statement
bearing on his conduct were before the
Disciplinary Committee of the State Bar Council.
They had to choose between the two, that is to
say, the result of a summary trial without going
into merits and proof of the misconduct. Having
examined the advocate and seen the record, the
Disciplinary Committee of the State Bar Council
chose to accept the plea of the advocate and held
that he was not guilty. They were also satisfied
that the summary proceedings in the criminal
trial in England offended against the principles
of natural justice. They were entitled to this view
on which much can be said on both sides. If the
Advocate-General's view of the case was not
accepted by the Disciplinary Committee he could
not have any grievance. He could not make this
into his own cause or a cause on behalf of
persons he did not represent. He had done his
duty and the matter should have rested there.
For this reason I am of the view that in this case
the Advocate-General was not a “person
aggrieved” within the meaning of Section 37 of
the Advocates' Act even on the narrow ground
and the appeal filed by him before the
Disciplinary Committee of the Bar Council of
India was incompetent.”
In a later judgment, a Four Judge of the Apex Court in
the case of JASBHAI MOTIBHAI DESAI V. ROSHAN
KUMAR AND OTHERS3, while interpreting the word
‘person aggrieved’ to have locus to file a petition under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India, holds as
“8. The High Court, however, dismissed
the writ petition on the ground that no right
vested in the appellant had been infringed, or
prejudiced or adversely affected as a direct
consequence of the order impugned by him, and
as such, he was not an “aggrieved person”
having a locus standi in the matter.
17. The ratio of the decision in Queen v.
Justices of Surrey was followed in King v. Groom
ex parte [(1901) 2 KB 157 : 70 LJKB 636 : 17
TLR 433] . There, the parties were rivals in the
liquor trade. The applicants (brewers) had
persistently objected to the jurisdiction of the
justices to grant the license to one J.K. White in a
particular month. It was held that the applicants
had a sufficient interest in the matter to enable
them to invoke certiorari jurisdiction.
27. In Regina v. Padington Valuation
Officer, ex parte Peachy Properly Corporation
Ltd. [(1966) 1 QB 380] , ratepayers were held to
have the locus standi to apply for certiorari,
notwithstanding the fact that it could not be said
that the actual burdens to be borne by the
applicants fell more heavily on them than on
other members of the local community.
28. In Bar Council of Maharashtra v. M.V.
Dabholkar [(1975) 2 SCC 702] a Bench of seven
learned Judges of this Court considered the
question whether the Bar Council of a State was
a “person aggrieved” to maintain an appeal
under Section 38 of the Advocates' Act, 1961.
Answering the question in the affirmative, this
Court, speaking through Ray, C.J., indicated
how the expression “person aggrieved” is to be
WP No. 7122 of 2022
interpreted in the context of a statute, thus: [p.
“The meaning of the words ‘a person
aggrieved’ may vary according to the context
of the statute. One of the meanings is that a
person will be held to be aggrieved by a
decision if that decision is materially adverse
to him. Normally, one is required to establish
that one has been denied or deprived of
something to which one is legally entitled in
order to make one ‘a person aggrieved’. Again
a person is aggrieved if a legal burden is
imposed on him. The meaning of the words ‘a
person aggrieved’ is sometimes given a
restricted meaning in certain statutes which
provide remedies for the protection of private
legal rights. The restricted meaning requires
denial or deprivation of legal rights. A more
liberal    approach      is required    in   the
background of statutes which do not deal
with     property     rights but deal       with
professional conduct and morality. The role of
the Bar Council under the Advocates' Act is
comparable to the role of a guardian in
professional ethics. The words ‘person
aggrieved’ in Sections 37 and 38 of the Act
are of wide import and should not be
subjected to a restricted interpretation of
possession or denial of legal rights or burdens
or financial interests.”
29. In Rex v. Butt ex parte Brooke [(1921-
22) 38 TLR 537] a person who was merely a
resident of the town, was held entitled to apply
for certiorari. Similar is the decision in Regina v.
Brighton Borough Justices ex parte Jarvis [(1954)
30. Typical of the cases in which a
strict construction was put on the
expression “person aggrieved”, is Burton v.
Minister of Housing and Local Government
[(1961) 1 QB 278] . There, an appeal by a
WP No. 7122 of 2022
company against the refusal of the local
planning authority of permission to develop
land owned by the company by digging
chalk, was allowed by the minister. Owners
of adjacent property applied to the High
Court under Section 31(1) of the town and
Country Planning Act, 1959 to quash the
decision of the minister on the ground that
the proposed operations by the company
would injure their land, and that they were
“persons aggrieved” by the action of the
minister. It was held that the expression
“person aggrieved” in a statute meant a
person who had suffered a legal grievance;
anyone given the right under Section 37 of
the Act of 1959 to have his representation
considered by the minister was a person
aggrieved, thus Section 31 applied, if those
rights were infringed; but the applicants
had no right under the statute, and no legal
rights had been infringed and therefore
they were not entitled to challenge the
minister's decision. Salmon, J. quoted with
approval these observations of James, L.J.
“The words ‘person aggrieved’ do not really
mean a man who is disappointed of a benefit
which he might have received if some other
order had been made. A ‘person aggrieved’
must be a man who has suffered a legal
grievance, a man against whom a
decision has been pronounced which has
wrongfully deprived him of something or
wrongfully refused him something, or
wrongfully      affected      his   title    to
something.”
31. Ex parte Stott [(1916) 1 KB 7 : 85 LJKB
502 : 32 TLR 84] is another illustration of a
person who had no legal grievance, nor had he
WP No. 7122 of 2022
sufficient interest in the matter. A licensing
authority under the Cinematograph Act, 1901,
granted to a theatre proprietor a licence for the
exhibition of cinematograph films at his theatre.
The license was subject to the condition that the
licensee should not exhibit any film if he had
notice that the licensing authority objected to it.
A firm who had acquired the sole right of
exhibition of a certain film in the district in which
the theatre was situated entered into an
agreement with the licensee for the exhibition of
the film at his theatre. The licensing authority
having given notice to the licensee that it
objected to the exhibition of the film, the firm
applied for a writ of certiorari to bring up the
notice to be quashed on the ground that the
condition    attached       to  the licence      was
unreasonable and void, and that they were
aggrieved by the notice as being destructive of
their property. It was held that whether the
condition was unreasonable or not, the
applicants were not persons who were aggrieved
by the notice and had no locus standi to
maintain the application.
32. Similarly, in King v. Middlesex Justices
ER 345] it was held that the words “person who
shall think himself aggrieved” appearing in the
statute governing the grant of licenses to
innkeepers     mean       a person      immediately
aggrieved as by refusal of a licence to himself,
and not one who is consequently aggrieved, and
that though the justices had granted a licence to
a part to open a public house not before licensed,
within a very short distance of a licensed public
house, the occupier of the latter house could not
appeal against such grant.
33. Other instances of a restricted
interpretation of       the    expression     “person
aggrieved” are furnished by R. v. Bradford-on-
Avon Urban District Council ex parte Boulton
[(1964) 2 All ER 492] ; Gregory v. Camden
WP No. 7122 of 2022
v. London O.S. ex parte Westminister Corporation
[(1951) 2 KB 508] ; Regina v. Cardiff Justices ex
34. This Court has laid down in a
number of decisions that in order to have
the locus siandi to invoke the extraordinary
jurisdiction under Article 226, an applicant
should ordinarily be one who has a
personal or individual right in the subject-
matter of the application, though in the
case of some of the writs like habeas corpus
or quo warranto this rule is relaxed or
modified. In other words, as a general rule,
infringement of some legal right or
prejudice to some legal interest inhering in
the petitioner is necessary to give him a
locus standi in the matter, (see State of
Orissa v. Madan Gopal Rungta [AIR 1952 SC 12
: 1952 SCR 28] ; Calcutta Gas Co. v. State of
Ram Umeshwari Suthoo v. Member, Board of
Venkateswara Rao v. Government of A.P. [AIR
1966 SC 828 : (1966) 2 SCR 172] ; State of
Orissa v. Rajasaheb Chandanmall [(1973) 3 SCC
739] ; Satyanarayana Sinha Dr v. S. Lal & Co.
35. The expression “ordinarily” indicates
that this is not a cast-iron rule. It is flexible
enough to take in those cases where the
applicant has been prejudicially affected by an
act or omission of an authority, even though he
has no proprietary or even a fiduciary interest in
the subject-matter. That apart, in exceptional
cases even a stranger or a person who was not a
party to the proceedings before the authority, but
has a substantial and genuine interest in the
subject-matter of the proceedings will be covered
by this rule. The principles enunciated in the
WP No. 7122 of 2022
English cases noticed above, are not inconsistent
with it.”
Therefore, in the light of the afore-extracted enunciation
of law by the Apex Court, the petitioner cannot be
construed to be a person aggrieved, that too, to
challenge the decision of the Cabinet.
13. The learned counsel appearing for the
Lokayukta has placed reliance upon a judgment
rendered by a Division Bench of this Court holding that
the Lokayukta was entitled to challenge the order
passed by the Karnataka State Administrative
Tribunal by filing a writ petition in the case of
LOKAYUKTA v. PRAKASH T.V. in Writ Petition
No.29212 of 2017 AND CONNECTED MATTERS
disposed of on 29.06.2021. The said decision need
not bear consideration at the hands of this Court at this
juncture as the same is stayed by the Apex Court in
S.L.P.Nos.13209-210/2021 in terms of its order
dated 07.09.2021. This is in the light of the law laid
down by a Co-ordinate Bench of this Court in the case
of G.R.VENKATESHWARA REDDY v. KSRTC4,
wherein, it holds as follows:-
“18. In regard to the Decision in W.P.
28043/93, it is stated by the learned Counsel for
the respondent that the respondent has
challenged the said Decision in an Appeal and
an Interim Order of stay of operation of the
Decision in W.P. 28043/1993 has been granted.
Learned Counsel for the petitioner confirmed that
not only the Decision was stayed, but further
Enquiry in the said case was also stayed. The
Decision in W.P. 28043/1993 is contrary to the
Decision of the Supreme Court in Crescent Dyes
& Chamical's case1 which holds that a
delinquent has no right to be represented
through Counsel or Agent unless the law or
Rules specifically confers such a right. Rule 23(8)
does not confer specifically, such a right. Hence
the petitioner cannot rely on the Decision in W.P.
No. 28043/1993 nor is the said Decision binding
precedent.
contended that what was stayed was the
‘implementation’ of the Decision in W.P.
28043/1993 and not the ‘ratio decidendi’ or
the ‘reasoning’ in that case and as long as
the Decision in W.P. 28043/1993 was not
reversed, Judicial propriety requires that
this Court should follow the Decision in
W.P. 28043/1993. He relied on the Decision
of the Supreme Court in              Ayyaswami
Gounder                 v.           Muniswamy
Gounder and Shridhar v. Nagar Palika,
Naunpur14 to contend that a Single Judge
not agreeing with an earlier Decision of
another Single Judge of the same Court,
should refer the matter to a larger Bench
and propriety and decorum did not warrant
the Single Judge to hold contrary to the
earlier Decision of the same High Court.
There is no doubt that a Single Judge is
bound by the Decision of another Single
Judge of the same Court. But where the
earlier Decision has been stayed, it means
that the Decision is not in operation, but
kept in abeyance and should not be acted
upon. Thus, where the earlier Decision of
the Single Judge is stayed in appeal, there
is in effect no Decision to be followed.
Therefore the contention that I am bound to
follow the earlier Decision or refer the
matter to a larger Bench is untenable.”
(Emphasis supplied)
This Court has considered the effect of a judgment of
the Co-ordinate Bench being stayed by the Division
Bench. The decision relied on by the learned counsel
even otherwise was a case where the challenge was to
an   order    passed     by      the  Karnataka    State
Administrative Tribunal. Here, the issue at hand is the
WP No. 7122 of 2022
locus of the Lokayukta to challenge the decision of the
Cabinet, which is not the case in the aforesaid Division
Bench. In terms of the judgments rendered by the
Apex Court as afore-quoted and the statutory frame
work, it cannot but be held that the Lokayukta has no
locus to challenge the decision of the Cabinet. If the
petitioner has no locus to file a writ petition against the
decision of the Cabinet, the other grounds urged need
not be considered.
14. Wherefore, the petition by the Lokayuktha is
dismissed on account of lack of locus, as they are not,
and cannot be the person aggrieved.
In view of disposal of the main petition,
I.A.No.1/2021 does not survive for consideration and
the same is disposed of."
8.     In the light of the afore-quoted order passed by this
Court and statutory frame work of the Act, the power of the
disciplinary authority to exercise discretion cannot be taken
away merely because a recommendation is made by the
Lokayukta for imposition of particular penalty.
For all the aforesaid reasons, I do not find any warrant to
interfere in the case at hand, in the peculiar circumstances.