The State of Maharashtra                                .... Respondent
Mr. Drupad Patil, Amicus Curiae appointed in the matter.
Mr. Yogesh Y. Dabke, APP for the Respondent-State.
1.            This    matter     is   placed     before   me       by     an
administrative order. Criminal Appeal No.272/2017 is
already disposed of by a judgment and order dated
25.1.2018 passed by the Single Judge Bench of this Court
(Coram: A.M. Badar, J.). The operative part of the judgment
and order reads thus:
“(i) The appeal is partly allowed.
(ii) Conviction and resultant sentence imposed on
the appellant/accused for the offences punishable
under Sections 376 of the IPC and for the offence
punishable under Section 6 of the POCSO Act is
quashed and set aside.
(iii) Instead, the appellant/accused Suresh @ Pintya
Kashinath Kamble is convicted for the offence
punishable under Section 18 read with Section 6 of
the POCSO as well as for the offence punishable
under Section 511 read with Section 376(2) of the
(iv) The appellant/accused is sentenced to suffer
rigorous    imprisonment      for   one      half     of     the
imprisonment for the life and he shall also be liable            to
pay fine of Rs.5,000/- and in default of payment of fine to
suffer    simple     imprisonment     for      one       month
for the offence punishable under Section 18 read
with Section 6 of the POCSO Act.
(v)   As    the    appellant/accused    is     sentenced       for
committing the offence punishable under Section                  18
read    with    Section    6   of   the     POCSO          Act      by
imposing       punishment,      which       is      greater        in
degree,    no    separate   sentence    for     commission           of
offence punishable under Section           511       read       with
Section 376 (2) of the IPC is imposed on him.
(vi) Rest of the impugned Judgment and Order of the
learned trial Court is maintained. The appeal
stands disposed of accordingly.”
2.         The Registry of this Court received a letter dated
2.8.2022 sent by the Superintendent, Kolhapur Central
Prison. It was mentioned in the letter that this Court has
sentenced     the  appellant   to   suffer  half   of    the      life
imprisonment.     According to the Jail Superintendent, he
could not understand exactly how much sentence the
appellant has to undergo.       The Jail Superintendent had
requested for guidance in that behalf from the Sessions
Court at Sangli where the trial was conducted.                   The
Additional Sessions Judge and District Judge-2, Sangli
informed the Superintendent, Kolhapur Central Prison that
since the order was passed by this Court, it would be proper
if the guidance is sought from this Court. After receiving this
letter dated 18.4.2022 from the Sessions Court, the Jail
Superintendent sent this urgent letter dated 2.8.2022
addressed to the Registrar, Appellate Side of this Court. The
Jail Superintendent has specifically sought directions in the
form of guidance as to how many years the appellant has to
be detained in the prison to serve his sentence.
3.           I had appointed learned counsel Shri Drupad
Patil as a amicus curiae to assist the Court. I have heard him.
I have also heard Shri Dabke learned APP for the State.
4.           Shri Patil relied on certain provisions of the
Protection of Children From Sexual Offences Act, 2012
(POCSO Act), Indian Penal Code and Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973. He also relied on certain judgments. He
submitted that Section 2(2) of POCSO Act and Section 57 of
IPC cover the issue completely. Apart from that a Single
Judge Bench of this Court in the case of Chandrakant Vithal
Pawar Vs. State of Maharashtra1 has also clarified the issue.
He submitted that these provisions and the earlier judgment
were clear and, therefore, there was no occasion for the
Superintendent of Jail to seek any guidance from this Court
in this behalf. He submitted that the Superintendent should
have approached the Law & Judiciary Department and the
Home     Department      for  seeking  guidance    instead        of
approaching this Court when there was no ambiguity or
confusion in the operative part of the judgment.
5.           Learned APP Shri Dabke has also supported the
submissions of Shri Patil.
6.          I have considered these submissions. Before
discussing the provisions of these Acts, it is necessary to
reproduce Section 18 of the POCSO Act, which reads thus :
“18. Punishment for attempt to commit an offence. –
Whoever attempts to commit any offence punishable
under this Act or to cause such an offence to be
committed, and in such attempt, does any act towards the
commission of the offence, shall be punished with
imprisonment of any description provided for the offence,
for a term which may extend to one-half of the
imprisonment for life or, as the case may be, one-half of
the longest term of imprisonment provided for that
offence or with fine or with both.”
7.          Similarly Section 511 makes similar provision
which reads thus:
“511. Punishment for attempting to commit
offences punishable with imprisonment for life
or other imprisonment.—Whoever attempts to
commit an offence punishable by this Code with
imprisonment for life or imprisonment, or to cause
such an offence to be committed, and in such
attempt does any act towards the commission of
the offence, shall, where no express provision is
made by this Code for the punishment of such
attempt, be punished with imprisonment of any
description provided for the offence, for a term
which may extend to one-half of the imprisonment
for life or, as the case may be, one-half of the
longest term of imprisonment provided for that
offence, or with such fine as is provided for the
offence, or with both.”
8.           The operative part of the order passed in
Criminal Appeal No.272/2017 reproduces the wording used
in both these sections. Therefore, there was no ambiguity or
confusion as far as the operative part of the judgment and
order    dated    25.1.2018     passed  in   Criminal       Appeal
No.272/2017 is concerned. The Jail Superintendent is
expected to execute this sentence by following the operative
part of the order.
9.           Section 2(2) of the POCSO Act reads thus:
(2) The words and expressions used herein
and not defined but defined in the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860), the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the
Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act, 2000 (56 of 2000) and the
Information Technology Act, 2000 (21 of
2000) shall have the meanings respectively
assigned to them in the said Codes or the
10.         Hence, for the words and expressions not
defined under POCSO Act they will have to be given
meaning in consonance with their meaning in IPC.                 The
wording ‘life imprisonment’ is not defined under POCSO Act.
However, those words are used under IPC and, therefore,
reference will have to be made to IPC provisions and they
will have to be relied on. In this particular question, the
quantum of sentence is to be looked at. When it is
mentioned     that   it  should  be    one-half   of     the      life
imprisonment then the exact meaning will have to be found
from IPC and there IPC provides the answer under Section
57, which reads thus :
“57. Fractions of terms of Punishment.-- In
calculating fractions of terms of punishment,
imprisonment for life shall be reckoned as
equivalent to imprisonment for twenty years.”
This section leaves no scope of doubt, ambiguity
or confusion as to how the term should be calculated when
the accused is sentenced to suffer half of the life
imprisonment. It provides that in such case when the
fractions of imprisonment for life is to be calculated then life
imprisonment should be reckoned                  as equivalent to
imprisonment for twenty years.                Thus, half of life
imprisonment in such cases would mean imprisonment for
ten years.
11.          This particular aspect is already decided by this
Court in the case Chandrakant Pawar (supra). Paragraphs-31
& 32 of the said judgment read thus :
“31. As     noted    above,  minimum      sentence      of
imprisonment for the offence of rape under section
376(2)(a) is rigorous imprisonment for 10 years.
Therefore, the minimum sentence which may be
awarded for attempt to commit rape would be rigorous
imprisonment for five years. However, the maximum
sentence for the offence of rape under section 376(2)
(a) of the Penal Code, 1860 is life imprisonment.
Therefore, the maximum sentence for attempt to
commit rape could be half of life imprisonment.
32. Section 57 of the Penal Code, 1860 provides that
in calculating fractions of terms of punishment,
imprisonment for life shall be reckoned as equivalent
to imprisonment for twenty years. In view of this, for
the offence of attempt to commit rape punishable
under section 376(2)(a) read with section 511
maximum sentence would be rigorous imprisonment
for 10 years.’
This, further clarifies the entire situation.
12.               Hence, no further explanation or guidance is
necessary. The Jail Superintendent can seek guidance from
these provisions and the judgment referred herein and
calculate the exact sentence which the appellant has to
undergo.
13.               Before parting with this order, I must record
appreciation for the efforts put in by the amicus curiae Shri
Drupad Patil. Shri Dabke learned APP has also ably assisted
the Court.
14.               With these observations, the Registry is directed
to inform the Jail Superintendent of this order at the earliest.
Digitally signed