Petitioner :- C/M, Madarsa Anjuman Islamia Faizul Uloom
Respondent :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Mohammad Ali Ausaf,Sr.
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
Hon'ble Ajay Bhanot,J.
Heard Shri G. K. Singh, learned Senior Counsel assisted by
Shri Mohammad Ali Ausaf, learned counsel for the
petitioner; Shri H. N. Singh, learned Senior Counsel who
was requested to assist the Court and has ably assisted the
Court and learned Standing Counsel for the State.
The petitioner Institution is a Madrasa duly recognized by
the Madrasa Board and is granted aid by the State
Government.
The State Government to file counter affidavit within a
period of four weeks. While filing the counter affidavit, the
State   Government      shall   bring  in  the   record   the
syllabi/courses, conditions and standards of recognition
including the requirement for playgrounds at the Madrasas
and all other religious institutions which are recognized or
aided by the State Government. Further it shall be disclosed
whether Madrasas so recognized and aided also admit girl
students.
The State Government shall also indicate in its affidavit the
details of various other Boards of education with recognize
and institutions imparting theological education of other
religious sects.
While filing the counter affidavit the State is also directed
to shine light on the following aspects of the controversy.
Prima facie from the submissions at the Bar following
questions may arise for consideration after exchange of
I. Whether the policy of the State Government to provide
financial aid to educational institutions which impart
religious education is consistent with the scheme of the
Constitution, particularly, in light of the word "Secular" in
the Preamble to the Constitution of India?
II. Whether Government funding of institutions run by
religious minorities which impart religious education
faithfully implements the constitutional protection afforded
to all religious faiths especially religious minorities in the
country, especially with reference to provisions of the
Constitution from Articles 25 to 30 of the Constitution of
III. Whether the institutions which impart knowledge in
diverse fields and also include courses in theological
learning come within the ambit of the phrase "religious
instruction or religious worship" or only schools which
exclusively impart religious education come within the
ambit of Article 28 of the Constitution of India?
IV. Whether absence of a mandatory provision for
playground for recognition even for Madrasas and other
religious institutions is incompatible with the rights of
children conferred by Article 21 read with Article 21A of
V. Whether other religious minorities are also provided
government aid for running theological schools?
VI. Whether there is a prohibition against women from
applying as students in religious schools and if so whether
such bar is an act of discrimination prohibited by the
Put up this case on 06.10.2021 in the list of fresh cases.
