1.         The petitioner has challenged FIR No. 12/2022 for commission of
offences under Sections 498 A and 109 IPC registered with Police
2.         It appears that respondent No. 3 filed a complaint before In-charge
Women Cell, Gandhi Nagar, Jammu alleging therein that she had
entered into wedlock with the petitioner on 02.04.2021. It has been
further alleged that soon after the marriage, the petitioner subjected
respondent No. 3 to ruthless and intemperate treatment and that she
was being pressurized in connection with demands of dowry. It has
been further alleged that the petitioner is a regular drinker, chain
smoker and a drug addict. It is alleged that the petitioner has indulged
in physical violence with the complainant on a routine basis making
her life a hell. The complainant goes on to allege that the petitioner
made demands of cash amounting to sum of Rs. 16 Lakhs and he also
demanded a car from her. In short, respondent No. 3 has levelled
serious allegations of cruelty against the petitioner in connection with
demands of dowry. The allegations have also been levelled against
other relatives of the petitioner/husband.
3. Challenge has been thrown to the impugned FIR on the ground that the
allegations made therein are absolutely vexatious with a view to
victimise the petitioner and his family members. It has been further
contended that all the relatives of the petitioner including his parents
and brother-in-law have been roped in the FIR which shows that
respondent No. 3 only intends to harass the petitioner. It is also
contended that respondent No. 3 has already filed an application under
Section 12 of Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act,
2005 (hereinafter to be referred as DV Act) against the petitioner, as
such, she is debarred from lodging FIR against the petitioner and his
relatives. It has also been contended that there are no specific
allegations in the impugned FIR against the petitioner.
4. I have heard learned counsel for the petitioner and perused the record
of the case.
5. So far as the allegations made in the impugned FIR are concerned,
these are very specific in nature as regards the role of petitioner herein.
It has been specifically stated in the FIR that the petitioner made
demands of cash and car from respondent No. 3 and it has also been
specifically stated that the petitioner used to physically and mentally
torture her in connection with demands of dowry. So the ground urged
by the petitioner that there are no specific allegations against him in
the impugned FIR, is without any merit.
6. So far as the contention of the petitioner that the impugned FIR has
been lodged just to victimise the petitioner and his relatives is
concerned, the veracity of this contention can be ascertained during the
investigation of the case. It is a fact that respondent No. 3 has
unnecessarily roped in relatives of her husband in the impugned FIR,
but this ground may be available to the relatives of the petitioner and
not to the petitioner i.e. husband of respondent No. 3.
7.          The contention of the petitioner that respondent No. 3 is debarred from
lodging FIR as she has already filed an application under Section 12 of
the DV Act is also without any merit. The scope of proceedings under
Section 12 of the DV Act and the scope of criminal proceedings
initiated pursuant to the lodging of FIR are entirely different from each
other. While in proceedings under Section 12 of the DV Act, the
victim of domestic violence can be awarded monetary compensation
and she can also be given certain protective orders in her favour, but
the criminal proceedings are intended to punish the perpetrator of a
crime, may be a matrimonial crime. So, the provisions of DV Act and
IPC act in different fields. Therefore, merely because respondent No. 3
has filed an application under DV Act, she cannot be debarred from
lodging FIR against the petitioner for investigating the acts of cruelty
alleged to have been perpetrated by him against her.
8.          For the foregoing reasons, I do not find any merit in this petition. The
same is accordingly dismissed.