Mr. Asok Kumar Chakrabarti, ld. Sr. Adv.
…for the respondent nos. 1, 4 and 5
….for the respondent no.2
Mr. Billwadal Bhattacharyya, ld. A.S.G.
Sk. Md. Galib, ld. Sr. Govt. Pleader
The petitioners are two sisters and the
respective husbands are the two brothers. The
husbands worked for a political party that had lost
recent   assembly    elections.  The    petitioners
complained to the Mothabari Police Station and
subsequently to the Kaliachak Police Station that
their husbands were missing since after November
24, 2021. It is stated that one of such complaint
was received by the concerned Police Stations and
was torn up by a civic volunteer thereat. The said
civic volunteer also informed the petitioners that
their   husbands    have   converted  to  islam.  A
complaint has thereafter been addressed to the
Superintendent of Police, Malda, on December 8,
2021. The S.P., Malda also did not take any steps.
The petitioners, thereafter, complained with the
and the other respondents herein.
Counsel for the State submits a report, in
the form of instructions addressed by the I/C,
Kaliachak Police Station dated May 18, 2022 to
State Advocate. The same is taken on record and a
copy has been made available to the counsel for
the petitioners.
It is submitted by Mr. Md. Galib, learned
counsel for the State that in view of family
disputes, the husbands of the petitioners have left
them and are presently residing at Pratappur,
Malda.     The   said  two   husbands,    converted
themselves to Islam voluntarily to Islam. They
refused to return back to their residences.
It is also submitted that the said husbands
after being traced out were produced before the
Mr.    Galib   further  submits   that  on  a
complaint filed by the husband of the petitioner
no.2 an FIR was registered and a charge sheet
being Kaliachak PS Charge Sheet No. 528 of 2022
dated 31.03.2022, under Sections 363 and 365 of
the IPC has been filed. In the said case where the
petitioner no.1 is an accused, the husbands,
Gouranga Mondal now known as Gousal Azam
and Buddhu Mondal now known as Md. Ibrahim
Sk, have deposed under Section 164 of the Cr.
P.C. that they have voluntarily converted to the
Islam. Counsel for the petitioners submit that the
said the said complaint, FIR and charge sheet are
wholly suspicious. The said statements, if any, of
the   husband     is   mysterious   and   cannot  be
Affidavits sworn before a notary public by
the said husbands dated 27th October, 2021 and
23rd November, 2021, have been produced by the
State. It is not clear as to why the said affidavits
have been affirmed and for what purpose.
The petitioners have alleged that their
husbands have been forced to convert to Islam by
threat intimidation and/or under influence of
It is also alleged that the forced conversion
is a part of a punishment for supporting a rival
political party.
It is surprising to note that despite receipt
of complaints, the IC, Kaliachak PS has not
registered FIRs and the Superintendent of Police,
Malda has not ordered any steps, as were required
to be taken by the Kaliachak Police Station and
the Mothabari Police Station, in terms of the
decision of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case
of Lalita Kumari vs Govt. Of U.P. & Ors
reported in (2014) 2 SCC 1.
Since the NIA and the CBI are the party
respondents to the instant proceeding, appropriate
inputs may be given from their side as regards the
allegations made in the writ petition. The other
allegation of random forcible conversion, cross
border infiltration, threats and intimidation, inter
alia,  by   accumulation      and   storage of    huge
quantities    of   arms     and    ammunition      and
counterfeit currency may also be addressed. The
inputs may be given in the form of report by way
of affidavit. The Superintendent of Police, Malda,
shall extend necessary cooperation to the NIA and
the CBI in this regard.
The    aforesaid   allegations   may   not    be
directly in issue to the claim of the writ petitioners
but appear vitally linked to the allegations of
abduction     and    forcible   conversion    of    the
petitioners’ husbands.
Let this matter stand adjourned and be
listed   on    June     21,    2022,    for   further
The SP, Malda shall independently submit a
detail report by way of affidavit, on the adjourned
date on the allegations of the petitioners, the steps
taken by the police, any preliminary enquiry
report or any other vital information that will be
necessary for the determination of the issues in
the writ petition. A detailed chronology of events
before and after receipt of complaints from the
petitioners may also be set out by the SP.
Since the petitioners apprehend serious
threat to their life and limb, the Superintendent of
Police, Malda, shall immediately upon receipt of a
copy of this order, review the security of the
petitioners and take immediate measures.
Copy of the report filed by the Kaliachak
Police Station dated 18.05.2022, addressed to the
learned State Advocate, has been handed over to
the counsel for the State.
List the matter accordingly.