Criminal       Appeal       first      above     referred   is
preferred under the Proviso to Section 372 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973.                  A preliminary issue as
regards the maintainability of the said appeal is raised
by    the   learned      Public      Prosecutor,        Sri.V.S.Sreejith,
pointing out that the Proviso to Section 372 does not
envisage an appeal against an Order imposing inadequate
sentence.      The proviso contemplates an appeal against an
order,(i)      acquitting       the    accused,(ii)        convicting  the
accused     for     a    lesser      offence       and    (iii)   imposing
inadequate compensation. Hence, an appeal which merely
challenges       the     inadequacy        of     sentence     cannot   be
maintained at the instance of a victim.                     This power is
statutorily      vested     with     the    State     Government   as  per
Section 377 of the Code, contends the learned Public
2.     Per contra, the appellant contended that the subject
appeal is well-nigh maintainable, since the Proviso to
Section 372 Cr.P.C. contemplates an appeal against an
Order imposing inadequate compensation, which expression
takes    within     its  sweep,  an order  imposing  inadequate
sentence as well.        According to the learned counsel, the
scope of an appeal, specifically engrafted in the Code
by virtue of an amendment introduced by Act 5 of 2009,
should not be restricted to cases where the punishment
is for a lesser offence, more so when the 'Notes on
Clauses' to the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment)
Bill,     2006     stipulates,   vide  Clause   38,   that  the
amendment to Section 372 gives the victim the right to
prefer an appeal against any adverse order passed by the
trial court.
3.     The instant appeal preferred by the appellant/victim
is directed against the judgment of the Special Court
for Trial of Offences Against Children, Manjeri, dated
20/07/2017      in    S.C.No.324/2010,  as    per   which,  the
accused persons/respondents were sentenced to rigorous
imprisonment for a period of three years and a fine of
Rs.3,000/- for the offence under Section 307, read with
Section 149; for six months for offence under Section
143; for one year for offence under Section 147; two
years    for    offence   under   Section  148;  six  months  for
offence under Section 341, read with Section 149; one
year for offence under Section 329, read with Section
149; two years for offence under Section 329, read with
Section 149; three years and a fine of Rs.3,000/-, for
offence under Section 326, read with Section 149 of the
Indian Penal Code.         According to the appellant/victim,
the    punishment     imposed   is  grossly  inadequate,   having
regard to the gravity of the offences.            Therefore, the
appellant seeks enhancement of punishment in the present
appeal.
4.     Proviso to Section 372 is extracted here below:
[Provided that the victim shall have a
right to prefer an appeal against any
order passed by the Court acquitting the
accused or convicting for a lesser
offence       or      imposing      inadequate
compensation, and such appeal shall lie
ordinarily lies against the order of
conviction of such Court.]”
5.     It is clear from a perusal of the Proviso that three
categories of Orders have been culled out, in providing
a right of appeal to the victim, that is to say,
(i)   an Order acquitting the accused;
(ii) an Order convicting the accused for a lesser
(iii) an Order imposing inadequate compensation.
6.     It   is   significant    to  note    that   no   appeal   is
provided, from an Order, challenging the inadequacy of
sentence.       The right to prefer an appeal on the ground
of inadequacy of sentence is conferred upon the State
Government      by   virtue  of  Section   377   of  the  Code   of
Criminal Procedure.         It is settled that there is no
vested right to prefer an appeal, unless conferred by
statute,     which    legal  position   is   seen   recognised   in
Section 372 Cr.P.C, wherein it is stipulated that no
appeal     shall    lie  from   any  judgment    or   order  of   a
Criminal Court, except as provided for by the Code of
Criminal Procedure or by any other law for the time
being in force.
7.     The   legal    position   in  this   regard    is  no   more
res integra.         In Parvinder Kansal v. State of NCT of
Delhi and Another (AIR 2020 SC 4044), the precise issue
fell for consideration of the Honourable Supreme Court.
The Honourable Supreme Court confirmed the Order of the
Delhi High Court, which dismissed an appeal preferred by
the victim, under the proviso under section 372 Cr.P.C,
seeking enhancement of sentence.             In Parvinder Kansal
supra, the Honourable Supreme Court took stock of its
earlier     judgment   in  National    Commission    for  Women  v.
State of Delhi And Another [(2010)12 SCC 599], wherein
it was interalia held that the Proviso to Section 372
does not envisage an appeal directed against inadequate
sentence.          In   view    of    the   above    authoritative
pronouncements by the Apex Court, we cannot take stock
of    the    argument    of   the    learned   counsel    for   the
appellant, based on the 'Notes on Clauses' to the Cr.P.C
8.     In the light of the above discussion, we find that
Crl.A.No.1075/2017 is not maintainable and the same is
therefore dismissed.
9.     Order in Crl.A.No.725 of 2017:-
In    Crl.A.No.725     of   2017    preferred    by   the   accused
persons,      challenging   the    judgment   of   conviction   and
order of sentence, the maximum punishment imposed as per
the    impugned    judgment   is  rigorous   imprisonment   for  a
period      of   three   years   and  a   fine    of   Rs.3,000/-.
Although, the maximum punishment prescribed for offence
under     Section    307  is  imprisonment    for   life,  in  the
absence of an appeal by the State under Section 377
Cr.P.C,       Crl.A.No.725/2017   is  to   be   considered   by  a
Single Bench as per Section 3 (13) (a) of the Kerala
We  therefore   direct  Crl.A.No.725/2017     to  be
posted       before    the   learned    Single    Judge,    having
jurisdiction as per roster.