This appeal is filed by the wife challenging the judgment
and decree in O.P.No.2395 of 2016 on the file of the Family
Court, Thiruvananthapuram, by which her prayer for divorce on
the ground of matrimonial cruelty and desertion was rejected.
2.    The appellant/wife is a Ph.D. holder, working as
Assistant Professor and Head of the Department of Sociology at
S.N College, Chempazhanthi. The respondent/husband is a
Dentist, running his own clinic and also a Consultant at
Ananthapuri Hospital. Both of them hail from high profile
families with well- educated parents and high social status.
3.    The summary of the case is as follows:
The marriage between the appellant and the respondent
was solemnized on 07.05.1999 as per Hindu religious rites and
customs and a male child was born in their wedlock on
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020                 3
16.09.2001. After marriage, the appellant was staying at her
matrimonial home. She was subjected to matrimonial cruelties
demanding more dowry. She was not permitted to pursue her
higher studies. She was totally neglected by the husband and he
even alleged extra-marital relationship against her. Since the
property of her mother was not given to the respondent as
demanded by him, he tortured her mentally, and when her
father enquired about the same with the father of the
respondent,      she    was    asked   to   vacate   their  house,   and
accordingly in the year 2011, she shifted her residence to the
flat given by her mother. Due to the intervention of friends and
relatives, the respondent also started living with the appellant in
the flat. After one month of peaceful residence there, he started
making unwarranted allegations against her, and on 27.09.2011,
he left the flat after threatening the appellant, to take away the
child with him. Then, she filed petitions for divorce, return of
gold ornaments, custody of the child, and also a petition under
Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act against him. In
turn,   he   filed    petition   for restitution   of   conjugal  rights.
Subsequently,      after    taking   evidence    in   those   cases,  on
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020              4
compulsion from everyone close to the appellant, she agreed for
a reunion, and withdrew all the cases filed by her, and the
respondent started living with her in the flat, from 29.05.2015
onwards. Even after the reunion, there was no physical intimacy
or mental unity between them, and he failed to maintain his wife
and child. He practically neglected the appellant and she had to
undergo medical counselling for the mental trauma she had
suffered at his hands. They are living separately for more than
two years. Their marital relationship is irretrievably broken and
there is no possibility of a further reunion. It is not possible to
continue her matrimonial life with the respondent without
compromising her dignity and individuality as a woman.
4.    The respondent/husband denied all the allegations of
matrimonial cruelties and desertion, and according to him, he
was a loving husband and a caring father. He assisted and
motivated his wife to achieve all her dreams in life. Himself or
his parents never demanded dowry from the appellant or her
parents. In fact their parents were friends, and their fathers
were Doctors in health service. They never received or misused
her gold ornaments.       The allegation of neglect levelled against
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020            5
him is false. Since the appellant wanted to enjoy flat life, both of
them shifted their residence to the flat in February, 2011. On
10.10.2011, he was asked by her mother to stay separately for
some time, due to some astrological reasons, and he readily
obeyed. But, thereafter the appellant filed cases one after the
other against the respondent. Later, the appellant withdrew all
the cases and they resumed cohabitation in the flat in May 2015.
They were leading a normal family life, till December, 2016.
Thereafter she began to behave in a rude manner and with an
intention to send him out, packed all his belongings and sent it
to his paternal house, after informing him over telephone.
Subsequently, the appellant again filed a divorce petition against
him. He was always ready and willing to live with the appellant,
as a responsible husband, and a loving father to the child. There
are no grounds existing to dissolve their marriage.
5.    The Family Court formulated necessary issues and
permitted the parties to adduce their evidence. PW1 was
examined and Exts.A1 to A6 were marked from the side of the
appellant. CPW1 was examined and Exts.B1 to B3 were marked
from the side of the respondent. After analysing the facts and
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020              6
evidence, the Family Court found that the wife could not prove
the grounds alleged, and so, the petition for divorce was
dismissed. Assailing the same, she has preferred this appeal.
6.    The points that arise for consideration are:-
(i)   Whether the respondent subjected the appellant to
matrimonial cruelties so as to dissolve their marriage?
(ii)    Whether the respondent deserted the appellant?
7.    Let us revisit the facts and evidence based on the
grounds urged by the appellant.
8.      Admittedly, after the marriage on 07.05.1999, the
appellant was staying in the house of the respondent. The
appellant would say that her matrimonial life was miserable as
she was subjected to physical and mental cruelty by the
husband and in-laws.        Later she was asked to vacate her
matrimonial home in February 2011.
9.    The case of the appellant in the O.P is to the effect
that the respondent and his parents insisted her to vacate their
house, and accordingly she shifted her residence to the flat. But
her testimony (page 24 of her cross examination) is that since
the respondent and his parents abused and insulted her father
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020            7
for not giving the property, demanded as her dowry, she shifted
her residence to the flat. She was not saying that she was asked
or forced to vacate the house.      But, learned counsel for the
appellant    suggested to CPW1 (page 16 of cross examination)
that the respondent was insisting her to collect the child from
school bus, when he comes back from school, and since she was
employed, it was not possible, and so she shifted her residence
to the flat.
10.    From May 1999 till February 2011, the appellant was
residing in her matrimonial home along with her husband and
child. No complaints or cases were seen filed by her during that
period alleging any kind of matrimonial cruelties.   In February,
2011, she shifted her residence to the flat owned by her mother.
There is nothing to show that she was forcibly evicted or asked
to vacate her matrimonial home.
11.    The main allegation of cruelty levelled against the
respondent is that, he demanded more dowry, more specifically
40 cents of land owned by her mother. According to her when
her father reached her matrimonial home in January 2011, he
asked the respondent and his parents to take care of the
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020              8
appellant and to attend her financial needs, and then they
insulted her father, finding fault with him for not transferring the
land. But no such evidence is forthcoming, and if such an
incident occurred, her father might have been the best witness
to speak about the unlawful demand for dowry made by the
respondent. He was not examined from the side of the appellant
to prove that allegation.
12.   Another cruelty alleged is regarding transfer of the
Uno car given to her, from her family, at the time of marriage,
into the name of father of the respondent. Respondent admitted
that fact. But, according to him, after closing the hypothecation,
her father wanted to sell away that car, but due to emotional
attachment, the appellant wanted the respondent to purchase
that car. Since he was already having a car in his name, it was
registered in the name of his father.
13.   At the time of transfer, the Uno car was 5 years old.
In cross examination (page 37), the appellant is admitting that
the respondent is a very rich man, and several vehicles such as
Ford Ikon, Maruti 800, Ford Fiesta, Celerio, Skoda etc were there
in his house. She further admitted that, after obtaining driving
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020             9
licence for her, a brand new Maruti 800 Car was purchased by
the respondent. In that situation, demanding an old car by the
respondent as dowry is out of place. Moreover the story of
demanding the Uno Car as her dowry will not find a place in her
pleadings. So the evidence let in with respect to that allegation
cannot be admitted.
14.   Another ground of cruelty alleged by the appellant is
that, after the marriage, she was not permitted to continue her
studies, though an assurance to teach her, was given prior to the
marriage. But, her testimony shows that she did her M.A from
M.G University and thereafter she got selection as Research
Scholar under UGC as JRF, and she acquired Ph.D. Later she got
employment       in    S.N College, Chempazhanthi  as   Assistant
Professor and now she is the HOD in the Department of
Sociology. The appellant would say that, no assistance was
rendered by the respondent or his family members for her
studies, and she, on her own hardwork, acquired the Doctorate
and got employed in S.N College.
15.   According to respondent, he was giving all sorts of
assistance to the appellant for her studies.   The appellant has
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020                10
got a case that the respondent was spending nights over books,
totally neglecting her. The respondent is admitting that fact to
certain extent.       But, according to him, for the Ph.D of the
appellant, he was preparing notes and collecting materials
spending long hours in the night. The appellant admitted in her
cross     examination      that,   in   her     Ph.D   thesis  in  the
acknowledgment, it is written that “I feel obliged to my in-laws
for rendering me all necessary support that I needed for
pursuing higher studies”. In the thesis, it is written that “I am
indebted to my affectionate husband Dr.T.S.Sivapriyan for his
patience and passionate effort in making me intellectually sound
as well as moulding my carrier”. But the explanation given by
her    is   quite    interesting.     In    fact,  she   prepared  the
acknowledgment thanking God, but the respondent deleted the
same and inserted the acknowledgment as it is seen now,
deceitfully and dishonestly. She further admitted that she was
sending copy of her notes to the mail of the respondent, but it
was only to save the copy.        Those explanations are not inspiring
our confidence. She joined for M.A in the year 2004 and passed
in First Class.       Thereafter she joined for Ph.D as a Junior
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020            11
Research Fellow in the year 2006 and she got Ph.D in the year
2010. She got employment in S.N College, Chempazhanthi, and
only thereafter she shifted her residence to the flat of her
16.   The appellant has got a case that she was compelled
to do all the household works including the affairs of the child,
and she spent sleepless nights to make up her studies. The
appellant admitted that there were three workers in the house of
the respondent; one for outdoor work, one in the clinic and one
as a housemaid. The mother of the respondent was also a
housewife. So the case of the appellant seems to be quite
exaggerating. She admitted that she was attending music class,
painting class, dance class, computer course, fashion designing
class, compering class etc. during her period of stay in her
matrimonial home, and she was doing compering in two
channels such as ACV and Asianet at that time. She admitted
that she was teaching fashion designing in one institution during
that period.     Moreover, she learned driving during that period
and the respondent purchased a brand new Maruti 800 Car for
her use, as admitted by her.
17.   So, the available facts and circumstances will go to
show that the appellant was having full freedom at her
matrimonial home for her academic as well as extra-curricular
activities and there was every opportunity for her to blossom
into an all-rounder. The evidence adduced by her is not sufficient
to show that she was suppressed or oppressed by the
respondent in developing her academic brilliance and extra-
curricular activities as well. There is nothing to show that the
respondent did anything by which she lost her individuality and
dignity as a woman.
18.   Another cruelty alleged is that, the respondent made
allegations of extra marital relationship against her.        The
respondent vehemently opposed that allegation, and according
to him, he never made such an allegation, and so far, he has no
doubt regarding the integrity of the appellant.      Though there
was no pleading to that effect, during cross examination of the
respondent, it was suggested to him, that he had sent an
anonymous letter to Police officials saying that the appellant,
who is the daughter of the SNDP President, is entangled in 'Love
Jihad' with one Mr.Farooq and those letters were allegedly
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020              13
produced by the appellant before court.       But no such letter is
produced in this case. It was further suggested to him that I.G.
Zenkumar questioned the appellant, on the basis of the
complaint     of   'Love  Jihad' filed    by the  respondent.   He
emphatically denied that suggestion. If such a letter was there,
she could have very well called for the same to prove the
allegations of cruelty against the respondent. But, no such
letters were produced or summoned by the appellant, and it
remains as a mere allegation without any factual foundation.
19.   She has got another case that, for the delivery she
was not permitted to go home which also amounts to cruelty.
But there is no pleading to that effect. Moreover she herself
admitted that a close friend of her father was the Gynecologist in
the hospital where she delivered the child. That may be the
reason for selecting that hospital for her delivery. Her mother
might    have been the best person to say, that even though
demanded, the respondent did not permit the appellant to go to
her paternal house for delivery.     But her mother also was not
20.   During evidence many times the appellant stated that
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020              14
she was ill-treated by the respondent physically and mentally.
Not even one incident of physical violence is pleaded by the
appellant in her O.P., and there is no evidence also to prove any
such violence against him.       It is true that in order to attract
'cruelty' in matrimonial life, there is no need of any physical
violence.   Cruelty can be either mental or physical.      But when
there is specific allegations of physical cruelty, the person
alleging the same is bound to prove it.
21.   The appellant, during cross examination, detailed the
cruelties suffered by her from her husband during their
Singapore trip.      According to her, she was made to walk long
distance without availing a cab, and she was not provided food.
But that incident also will not find a place in her pleadings.
22.   She has got another allegation that while she was
teaching fashion designing in an institution named Arena
Multimedia, the respondent reached there and picked up quarrel
with the Manager, saying that salary given was not sufficient,
and on account of that incident, she was terminated from that
job. That also will not find a place in her pleadings. Moreover if
such an incident occurred, the Manager of that institute might
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020            15
have been examined to prove the violent behaviour of the
respondent. That also was not done.
23.   As we have seen, many of the incidents narrated by
her during evidence were not pleaded in her petition. The object
and purpose of pleadings and issues is to ensure that the
litigants come to trial with all issues clearly defined and to
prevent cases being expanded or grounds being shifted during
trial. Its object is also to ensure that each side is fully alive to
the questions that are likely to be considered, so that they may
have an opportunity of placing the relevant evidence appropriate
to the issues before the court for its considerations. Without
pleading and an opportunity of hearing being given to the
respondent, no amount of evidence, however weighty it may be,
can be looked into, to grant any relief (See Bachhaj Nahar vs.
Nilima Mandal and another [(2008) 17 SCC 491].
24.   In the O.P, the appellant was alleging that, after
shifting to the flat in February, 2011, due to the intervention of
friends and relatives, the respondent also started residence in
the flat.   They lived in the flat peacefully for one month and
thereafter, he made unwarranted allegations against her.        But,
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020              16
she has not stated what sort of allegations he was making
against her.       She further pleaded that on 27.09.2011, the
respondent left her company ‘without any justifiable cause’. So,
the impression we could gather is that the respondent left the
flat without any reason and against her wish. It follows that
there was every chance for them to continue their life in the flat.
25.   The respondent would say that his clinic was attached
to the tharavad house where his parents were living. Since the
appellant was insisting for flat life experience, he agreed, though
it was not convenient for him, and both of them shifted their
residence to the flat of her mother. Thereafter, mother of the
appellant started intervening in their matrimonial life, and her
mother prompted him to stay          separately for some time, for
some astrological reasons. He agreed, and on 10.10.2011, he
returned to his paternal house.        But only when he received
divorce notice, he realised the foul play. So, according to him,
there was justifiable cause for his return from the flat.
26.   Ext.A1 divorce petition was filed by the appellant on
02.11.2011 before the Family Court, Thiruvananthapuram.          In
that O.P also, she has made allegations of cruelty against the
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020              17
respondent. Ext.A2 order was obtained by her under the
Domestic Violence Act on 08.11.2011. Ext.A3, O.P for recovery
of money and gold, was filed by her on 28.01.2013. While trial
was going on, under the compulsion of well-wishers, she agreed
for a re-union and all the cases were withdrawn, and they
started living together on 29.05.2015 in the very same flat of
her mother.
27.   During cross examination, her testimony is to the
effect that the respondent assured her that he will not repeat
any mistakes and he would be a loving, caring and responsible
husband in future and in token thereof, he had presented a
bangle for her.      Believing his words, she agreed for a reunion.
But, in the pleadings, we will not find any such assurance given
by the respondent, and what is stated in the petition is that,
friends and relatives intervened and at their instance, the
respondent started residence in the flat. The appellant deposed
that her parents and sister advised her for a re-union,
considering the future of the child. If the respondent was so
cruel, and life along with him was so miserable or un-safe, her
parents and sister might not have compelled her for a re-union.
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020              18
So that is also a circumstance to be looked into.
28.   Anyhow, it is an admitted fact that, after withdrawing
the cases, the respondent lived in the flat along with the
appellant in May 2015. According to the appellant, in October,
2015, the respondent deserted her and left the flat. No
particular incident is stated by the appellant which prompted the
respondent to leave the flat. But her case is that even after
reunion, there was no mental unity or physical intimacy between
them, and he neglected his wife and failed to maintain his
family. She has got a case that, during that period, due to
mental imbalance, she underwent a medical counselling and she
was taken to Pushpagiri Hospital, Kochi by her sister Dr.Urmila.
Her sister was not examined and no evidence is forthcoming to
show that, she suffered mental stress due to the matrimonial
cruelties extended to her by the respondent. In the flat she was
living with her son. The son also might have been able to say
about the life of his parents in the flat, as he was 14 years old at
the time of their re-union. During trial of the O.P, he was major
also. He was also not examined to prove the so called sufferings
of his mother. When the other party is vehemently opposing the
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020             19
allegations    levelled against him, we expect some cogent
evidence, especially when there was every opportunity to
adduce the same.
29.   In paragraph 10 of the petition, she has stated that
she was never in a position to accept the respondent as a
husband. But under the compulsion of her parents and well-
wishers she agreed for a re-union. The respondent would say
that, after reunion in May 2015, till December 2016, they were
leading a normal family life, but later she asked him to move out
and sent his belongings to his house without his knowledge, and
thereafter he received notice in the present O.P for divorce. The
present O.P was filed by the appellant on 13.12.2016. So, it
more or less tallies with the case of the respondent.
30.   In the present O.P, in paragraph 12, the appellant has
stated that she is not narrating the earlier incidents further, due
to the fact that the entire issues have been settled and the
appellant and respondent decided to live together. So, it gives
an impression that she had condoned the mistakes she was
alleging against the respondent and agreed for a reunion.
31.   Learned counsel for the appellant contended that,
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020             20
though the cruelties alleged in the earlier divorce petition was
condoned and she agreed for a reunion, since the respondent
continued his ill-treatment towards her, it will revive, so that she
is entitled to get a decree of divorce on the grounds urged in the
earlier petition also.
32.   As observed by the Apex Court in Narayan Ganesh
Dastane vs. Sucheta Narayan Dastane (1975 KHC 183), 'the
condonation of a matrimonial offence is not to be likened to a
full Presidential pardon under Art.72 of the Constitution which,
once granted, wipes out the guilt beyond the possibility of
revival. Condonation is always subject to the implied condition
that the offending spouse will not commit a fresh matrimonial
offence, either of the same variety as the one condoned, or of
any other variety. "No matrimonial offence is erased by
condonation. It is obscured but not obliterated"       Condonation
means     forgiveness     of the  matrimonial    offence   and   the
restoration of offending spouse to the same position as he or she
occupied before the offence was committed. To constitute
condonation, there must be, therefore, two things: forgiveness
and restoration.
33.   In Santhosh kumar S vs. Jayashree Damodaran
[2020 (2) KHC 33), a Division Bench of this Court had occasion
to deal with the subject, whether condonation of cruelty can
revive. This Court held that an act of cruelty once condoned can
revive and give rise to a cause of action for dissolution of
marriage, when the offending spouse exploits and takes unfair
advantage of generosity or the benevolence shown by the
wronged spouse and takes to matrimonial misdeeds over again.
It was observed that condonation of cruelty is a benevolent and
generous act of an offended spouse forgiving the misdeeds of
the offending spouse and restoring the latter to the original
company. In every condonation there is an implied condition that
the excused spouse will not repeat or commit matrimonial
wrongs in future. No wrong is permanently wiped out by
condonation; but is only hibernated. So an act of cruelty once
condoned could certainly revive and give rise to a cause of
action for dissolution of marriage, when the offending spouse
repeats the misdeeds.
34.   Now two questions arise for consideration:
(i)   Whether the appellant was subjected to matrimonial
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020            22
cruelties by the respondent-husband and if so, she
(ii) After condonation of the cruelties, whether it would
35.  From the foregoing discussions, we have found that
the allegations of cruelty upto the first divorce O.P in the year
2011 could not be proved by the appellant, to reach a finding
that it was impossible or injurious to continue with the
respondent. Re-union in the year 2015 fortifies that fact.
36.   Now the question is, if at all there was cruelty,
whether it will revive after condonation?
37.  If the cruelty once condoned has to revive, there
should be repetition of matrimonial wrongs which amounts to
cruelty. Admittedly, after reunion, the appellant and respondent
were living in the flat of the appellant. Her case is that after
reunion, there was no mental unity or physical intimacy between
them, and he failed to maintain his family. At the same time she
is admitting that the respondent was remitting the fees of the
child, and he was keeping cordial relationship with his son. She
is alleging that she was practically neglected by the respondent-
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020             23
husband. With regard to the allegations of neglect and want of
physical intimacy, the respondent gave evidence to the effect
that, after reunion, they were leading a normal family life in the
flat.  But, the mother of the appellant intervened in their life,
and he was thrown out in December, 2016. Nothing cogent is
emerging out to show that after re-union, the respondent
subjected her to cruelties either physical or mental.
38.   The appellant is admitting that, the son was taken
from coaching class by the respondent but according to her
when the respondent went there to collect his nephew, at times
he used to take his son also in his car. The respondent produced
Exts.B1 to B3 documents to show that, he had taken medical
insurance for the wife and child, though the appellant is of the
view that only to save tax, he took that policy. Though several
rounds of mediation and counselling were done, the respondent
was adamant for a reunion, whereas the appellant was insisting
for a divorce.     We also tried our best to reconcile the parties.
But, both of them were adamant in their respective stand and
so, we could not succeed in our attempt.
39.   As observed by the Apex Court in Samar Ghosh vs.
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020            24
Jaya Ghosh [(2007) 4 SCC 511], human mind is extremely
complex and human behaviour is equally complicated. Similarly
human ingenuity has no bound, therefore, to assimilate the
entire human behaviour in one definition is almost impossible.
What is cruelty in one case may not amount to cruelty in other
case. The concept of cruelty differs from person to person
depending upon his upbringing, level of sensitivity, educational,
family and cultural background, financial position, social status,
customs, traditions, religious beliefs, human values and their
value system.       But mere coldness or lack of affection cannot
amount to cruelty. Frequent rudeness of language, petulance of
manner, indifference and neglect may reach such a degree that
it makes the married life for the other spouse absolutely
intolerable. It was further observed that mere trivial irritations,
quarrels, normal wear and tear of the married life which
happens in day to day life would not be adequate for grant of
divorce on the ground of mental cruelty. The married life should
be reviewed as a whole and a few isolated instances over a
period of years will not amount to cruelty. The ill-conduct must
be persistent for a fairly lengthy period, where the relationship
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020              25
has deteriorated to an extent that, because of the acts and
behaviour of a spouse, the wronged party finds it extremely
difficult to live with the other party any longer, may amount to
mental cruelty.
40.   In the case in hand, after living in the matrimonial
home for about 12 years along with husband and child, after
getting a job, the appellant moved out to live in a flat. In the
year 2011 itself, she filed cases one after another against the
respondent and that separation extended upto 2015. The
respondent cannot be blamed for not resuming cohabitation with
the appellant in her flat during that period as she had filed
several cases against him including divorce case, and she had
obtained     Ext.A2     protection order  against  him under  the
Domestic Violence Act. Ext.A2 order dated 08.11.2011, shows
that the respondent was restrained even from communicating
with the appellant. After re-union in the year 2015, according to
respondent they were leading a normal family life, but in
December 2016, her attitude became changed, and she packed
up all his belongings and sent it to his house. In December 2016
itself, she filed the present Divorce O.P against him.
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020             26
41.   It is pertinent to note that, in the year 2013, the
appellant had filed O.P. against the respondent and his parents
claiming 50 sovereigns of gold ornaments and cash worth
Rs.26,13,920/-, maintenance both past and future to the minor
child, and also Rs.25 lakh as compensation. During cross
examination, the appellant admitted that the respondent had
purchased a land in her name, but, it was after selling away her
85 sovereigns of gold ornaments in the year 2006.        But, that
fact was never mentioned in any of her O.Ps filed in the year
2011 or in the present O.P filed in the year 2016. If her gold
ornaments were sold away in the year 2006 for purchasing a
landed property in her name, her claim for return of gold
ornaments in Ext.A3 O.P might not have been a genuine one.
On reunion in the year 2015 after withdrawing all the cases, she
was alleging revival of cruelties from the part of the respondent
and so she again filed divorce O.P. But she had not filed any
other O.P.       against him for recovery of money, gold or
compensation.         She would say that     the respondent has
threatened to hook her in cases, and that is why she has filed
only the Divorce O.P.     The facts stated above point a doubting
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020             27
finger regarding the credentials of her monetary claim.
42.   Now coming to the other ground of desertion,
Section 13(1)(i)(ib) of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 says that,
any    marriage      solemnised, whether     before  or after  the
commencement of this Act, may, on a petition presented by
either the husband or the wife, be dissolved by a decree of
divorce on the ground that the other party, has deserted the
petitioner for a continuous period of not less than two years,
immediately preceding the presentation of the petition.
43.   According to the respondent, after reunion in May
2015, the respondent left her company in October 2015.        But,
according to the respondent, it was in December 2016, he was
forced out of the flat. Even if we go by the date mentioned by
the appellant, then also it was in October 2015, and by
December 2016, just one year has been completed and so, the
stipulation of two years of desertion immediately preceding the
presentation of the petition is not satisfied.
44.   The appellant deposed that, for the last 18 years they
have no physical relationship. If so, it will relate back to 2001,
just 3 years after their marriage. But, admittedly, she was
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020             28
staying in his house till 2011, and thereafter they were staying
together in the flat till September 2011. Again after re-union in
the year 2015, they were staying in the flat. So that allegation
is not a believable one.
45.   As we have already seen, in the year 2011, the
appellant filed Divorce O.P as well as a petition under the
Domestic Violence Act against the respondent and so, now the
appellant cannot blame him for not living with her from
September 2011 till October 2015 as he was prevented by court
order. Since the statutory period of two years was not there,
immediately preceding the presentation of the petition, the
appellant is not entitled for a decree of divorce on the ground of
46.   Learned counsel for the respondent contended that
the appellant shifted to the flat after obtaining job, though the
respondent was doing everything for her education and future.
More over no grounds could be proved against the respondent so
as to dissolve their marriage.
47.   The     Family Court,  on    analysing the  facts and
evidence, found that the appellant could not make out grounds
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020             29
of cruelty or desertion to get a decree of divorce.
48.   The appellant categorically deposed before court that,
she wants to escape from this relationship and wanted to marry
another man for leading a respectable and happy married life.
Her intention we can appreciate. But, when the spouses are not
able to arrive at a consensus for dissolving their marriage, we
can only go by the law and procedure, and if only they could
satisfy the statutory requirements, a court of law could grant a
decree of divorce, to dissolve their marriage.
49.   As observed by the Apex Court in the judgment cited
supra, human mind is extremely complex and human behaviour
is equally complicated. In the case in hand, both the spouses are
highly educated and both of them command respect and high
status in society. The appellant would contend that their
marriage is irretrievably broken and there is no chance for a re-
union. First of all, irretrievable break down of marriage if at all
there, is not a ground for divorce recognised by Hindu Law.
When one spouse alleges irretrievable break down of marriage,
he/she has to plead and prove the grounds recognised by law
which lead to such a break down. If one spouse wants to avoid
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020             30
the other spouse without any justifiable reasons recognized by
law and unilaterally takes a decision to break the marital tie,
he/she may not get the legal sanction, for that separation.
50.   Irrespective of cast and creed, marriage is an
institution, in which inter personal relationships, usually intimate
and sexual, are acknowledged, and it is a socially or ritually
recognized union or legal contract between spouses that
establishes rights and obligations between them, between them
and their children and between them and their in-laws.
Sometimes lot of sacrifice may be involved from either side to
preserve the family and to protect the children.
51.   Family     building demands    surrender  of   individual
autonomy in favour of mutual reliance, and care. A family is an
amalgamation of distinct individual interests. It is difficult to
define and demarcate the rights and duties of husband and wife
in their matrimonial life. The fiduciary duty in matrimonial
relationship requires the highest standard of care, good faith,
fair dealing and loyalty. The mutual rights and obligations
undertaken by the couple, forms the basis of their partnership in
love, called family, which is the basic unit of the society. Mere
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020                31
trivial irritations, quarrels, normal wear and tear of married life
which happens in day to day life may not destroy that
institution, leaving desperate human beings and orphaned
children across the globe. In the case in hand, as there is no
evidence to prove the matrimonial cruelties or desertion alleged
by the wife, her claim for divorce cannot sustain legally.
52.    From 1999 to 2011, the couple were living in the
house of respondent. From 2011 to 2015, cases filed by the
appellant for divorce, and injunction order under Domestic
Violence Act were pending. After re-union in the year 2015, in
the year 2016 she again filed Divorce petition. So the absence of
co-habitation during that period may be due to the pendency of
cases for which the respondent could not be blamed. The
husband/wife keeping the other spouse out of reach for long, by
filing cases against him/her, or by simply avoiding him/her
cannot contend later, that their marriage is irretrievably broken
or emotionally dead so as to make a claim for divorce.
53.    It is true that the delay in justice delivery system also
may be adding years to their separation.                Long years of
separation and the bitter battle fought in court with allegations
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020           32
and counter allegations may still keep them away, blocking their
reunion. Even for very simple reasons, the spouses may break
co-habitation, intending to mend the ways of the other spouse,
expecting a re-union after clearing all their apprehensions. But
the litigations once begun may take them to unknown shores,
never intended at the beginning. That is why we could see a
simple claim for maintenance or restitution ending up with
54.   The period of non-co-habitation however long it may
be, if it was due to deliberate avoidance or due to pendency of
cases filed by one party, the other party cannot be found fault
with, when the other party is still ready to continue his/her
matrimonial life, and no grounds recognized by law are
established against the other party to break their nuptial tie. So
legally, one party cannot unilaterally decide to walk out of a
marriage, when sufficient grounds are not there justifying       a
divorce, under the law which governs them, saying that due to
non-co-habitation for a considerable long period, their marriage
is dead practically and emotionally. No one can be permitted to
take an incentive out of his own faulty actions or inactions.
Mat.Appeal No.548 of 2020            33
55. The Family Court analyzed the evidence in its correct
perspective and found that the appellant was not entitled for a
decree of divorce on the ground of cruelty and desertion. The
trial court rightly dismissed the O.P., and so, we find no reason
to disturb that finding.
The appeal is dismissed upholding the impugned judgment
and decree of the Family Court. No order as to costs.