Case :- CONTEMPT APPLICATION (CIVIL) No. - 562 of 2016
Counsel for Applicant :- Mudit Agarwal,Anand Prakash
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Manish Mishra
1.    Heard Ms. Radhika Singh, learned counsel for applicant
and Sri Manish Mishra, learned counsel for opposite parties.
2.    The present contempt application under Section 12 of the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 has been filed alleging willful and
deliberate disobedience of judgment and order dated 31.03.2015
passed by a Division Bench of this Court in Writ Petition
No.9525 (M/B) of 2013, whereby following direction was issued:
"A perusal of Annexure SA-3 annexed with the supplementary
affidavit dated 31.3.2015 shows that in response to the notice dated
3.11.2014, the petitioner preferred written objection to the Assessing
Officer bringing to his notice the pendency of the aforesaid writ
petition and also apprising him that Section 127 was not even
remotely attracted. Therefore, it was incumbent upon the opposite
party No.2 to have waited for the outcome of the writ petition, but
he proceeded with the matter which shows prejudicial and impartial
attitude of the authority. It may be noted that transparency and
fairness is the essence of the state action. Therefore, the authorities
are expected to proceed in disciplined manner without creating any
doubt in the mind of the asseessees. As averred above, it was the
duty of the Assessing Officer to have referred the question of
jurisdiction to the Chief Commissioner or the Commissioner as the
case may be under sub-section (2) of Section 124 of the Act and not
doing so, this vitiated the further proceedings.
Here, there is complete departure from the settled procedure. It
comes out from the record that when the petitioner refused to submit
to the jurisdiction of the said Assessing Officer at Lucknow, the
authority/respondent No.2 proceeded ex parte and dispatched a
demand of almost Rs.52 lacs. At the cost of repetition, we would like
to mention that in the notice dated 11.9.2013, which is computer
generated clearly reveals that the Delhi address of the petitioner
was scored out and in handwriting, the local address has been
added. Therefore, it is incorrect to say that the Delhi Address was
not in the knowledge of the respondents and we find force in the
submissions of the petitioner that local address was inserted
deliberately to create jurisdiction, which, in fact, legally was not
vested with the opposite party No.2. Therefore, the opposite party
No.2 exceeded its jurisdiction, which not only vitiates the impugned
show cause notice but the entire proceedings. In these
circumstances, the entire proceedings being ab initio illegal,
without jurisdiction and in violation of Section 143 (1) (a) of the
For the reasons aforesaid, the writ petition is allowed and the
impugned notice dated 11.9.2013 is quashed. As the notice notice
has already been quashed, consequential orders, if any, are also
3.     By means of aforesaid writ petition, the applicant assailed
a notice dated 11.09.2013 issued by the respondent - Deputy
Commissioner of Income Tax, Range - 2, Lucknow under Section
143 (2) of Income Tax Act, 1961 in respect of assessment year
2012-13 on the ground that the said notice was de hors the
provisions contained under Section 124 of the Act and has been
issued in excess of jurisdiction conferred upon the respondent.
4.     Submission of learned counsel for the applicant is that the
jurisdiction to assess the petitioner at Lucknow is conspicuously
absent in the income tax authorities at Lucknow and that the
petitioner can only be assessed by the Assessing Officer at New
Delhi, where the petitioner had filed his returns for the
assessment year 2013-14 but the opposite party - contemnor has
issued notices for manual scrutiny in respect of assessment year
2013-14 and in spite of objection filed by the applicant, the
opposite party has threatened to finalize the proceedings ex-parte
5.     She next submitted that the cause of action for filing the
contempt petition arose upon receipt of notice dated 24.06.2015
at his Delhi address and again on 15.03.2016, whereby another
notice was issued to the applicant threatening to make ex-parte
assessment pursuant to earlier notices sent in respect of
assessment year 2013-14.
6.     Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that vide
notice dated 11.09.2013, a manual scrutiny was sought to be done
in respect of the assessment year 2013-14. She submitted that
address of the petitioner had been scored out and replaced by the
Lucknow address, which is indicative of the fact that the
respondent was endeavouring to assume jurisdiction for holding
assessment proceedings against the petitioner - applicant.
7.     She further submitted that during pendency of aforesaid
writ petition, a notice dated 15.10.2004 under Section 143(2) of
the Income Tax Act, 1961 was issued against the applicant -
petitioner at the recorded address at New Delhi for a manual
scrutiny of the return on income, which was followed up by
another notice dated 24.06.2015 sent at Lucknow address, which
was represented by the applicant - petitioner vide letter dated
05.07.2015 stating that the petitioner - applicant had been filing
his returns at New Delhi and as such, the respondents did not
have jurisdiction to issue such a notice.
8.     She next submitted that in furtherance to notice dated
24.06.2015, a notice dated 15.03.2016 has also been issued to the
petitioner - applicant at his Lucknow address, wherein petitioners
representation dated 05.07.2015 has been acknowledged and as a
final opportunity has been given to the objections on or before
22.03.2016, failing which necessary inference was stated to be
drawn. Objection to the notice dated 15.03.2016 was given on
21.03.2016 indicating that jurisdiction to issue notice under
Section 143(2) of the Act has been questioned and assumption of
the jurisdiction by the respondent was de hors to the provisions
contained under Income Tax Act, 1961.
9.     She further submitted that the opposite party - contemnor
has been acting in an outrageously contemptuous manner and is
endeavouring to proceed with the assessment proceedings for the
assessment year 2013-14 in blatant disregard and violation of
judgment and order dated 31.03.2015 passed in Writ Petition
No.9525 (M/B) of 2013 and as such, he is liable to be hauled up,
tried and punished for contempt of the order passed by the
Division Bench of this Court.
10.    In support of her submissions, she relied upon certain
judgments, which are as under:
a)     Sebastian M. Hongray Vs. Union of India; (1984) 3
b)     T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad (102) through the
Amicus Curiae Vs. Ashok Khot and another; (2006) 5 SCC 1.
c)     Patel Rajnikant Dhulabhai and another Vs. Patel
Chandrakant Dhulabhai and others; (2008) 14 SCC 561.
11.    On the other hand, learned counsel for the opposite party
submitted that for the assessment year 2011-12, the petitioner
preferred Writ Petition No.1848 (M/B) of 2014 challenging the
order dated 05.02.2014, which has been dismissed vide order
dated 27.03.2014. This Court in the aforesaid writ petition has
held that main place of profession of the petitioner would be at
Lucknow for the assessment year 2011-12 and accordingly, the
Assessing Officer has rightly exercised power under Section 142
of the Act.
12.    He further submitted that the petitioner preferred another
writ petition No.9525 (M/B) of 2013 for the assessment year
2012-13 challenging the notice issued under Section 143 (2) of
the Income Tax Act, which has been quashed vide order dated
13.    He submitted that the respondent had not proceeded
against the petitioner in any manner for the assessment year
2012-13 as per mandate of judgment and order of this Court
dated 31.03.2015 and submitted that the notices issued dated
15.10.2014 and 24.06.2015 under Section 143(2) are not subject
matter of the aforesaid writ petition.
14.    He next submitted that reply to the petitioners letter dated
05.07.2015 has been given by the opposite party on 15.03.2016
giving further opportunity indicating that no application for
transfer of jurisdiction has been received by the opposite parties.
He submitted that the jurisdiction of Assessing Officer cannot be
changed only by change of address of assessee. In case there is a
change in principal place of business, the assesee can move an
application under Section 127 to the competent authority to
transfer any case from one assessing officer to another, however,
the petitioner has not moved any such application for transfer of
his case to New Delhi.
15.    He further submitted that filing of online return can be
made from any corner of the entire country and a change of
address in the PAN or even the return filed online does not
change the jurisdiction of Assessing Officer automatically from
the PAN database and therefore, the respondent has jurisdiction
to assess the applicant - petitioner even if he has filed his return
at Delhi address.
16.    He further submitted that since the opposite party was the
Assessing Officer and the PAN database was showing his
jurisdiction in the assessment year 2013-14, against which no
order or direction has been passed by this Court in the judgment
and order dated 31.03.2015 in Writ Petition No.9525 (M/B) of
2013, wherein the order has been passed only for assessment year
2012-13 and no order has been passed by the higher authority
under Section 127 of Income Tax Act, 1961 and the applicant -
petitioner did not submit any objection to the first notice dated
20.09.2014 for assessment year 2013-14 within 30 days, as
required under Section 124(3) of Income Tax Act, 1961, the
notice was valid.
17.    He further submitted that the objection was raised only
after lapse of a period of 30 days which was barred by limitation.
He further submitted that new notice issued is also valid as per
para 6 of AST Instruction No.115 of Directorate of Income Tax,
Systems, New Delhi circulated vide letter F. No.DIT(S)-II/CASS/
2014 dated 02.08.2013, which categorically says that in all cases
under compulsory scrutiny, notice under Section 143(2) will be
generated from the system only by the officer having PAN in his /
her jurisdiction.
18.    He next submitted that in order to get the jurisdiction
changed, an order under Section 127 of Income Tax Act, 1961
issued by the competent authority is required and the assessee
was requested to file copy of application under Section 127 of
Income Tax Act, 1961 before the competent authority, which was
not complied with.
19.    He further submitted that for the assessment year 2011-12,
the objection was filed with delay by the applicant - petitioner,
therefore, the same was not considered by this Court in Writ
Petition No.1848 (M/B) of 2014 and the same was dismissed and
it has been denied that for assessment year 2012-13, the
petitioner was assessed at New Delhi, as there was no assessment
made by any Assessing Officer for 2012-13.
20.    He next submitted that in the order dated 31.03.2015
passed in Writ Petition No.9525 (M/B) of 2013, the Court has not
recorded any finding that the assessment for the assessment year
2012-13 has been done at New Delhi and once this Court has
held that for the assessment year 2012-13, the Assessing Officer
at Lucknow has no jurisdiction, the concerned Assessing Officer,
at that time and thereafter, has never proceeded against the
applicant - petitioner fort the assessment year 2012-13.
21.    He further submitted that merely changing the principal
place of profession or residential address in PAN does not
automatically change the jurisdiction of the Assessing Officer. He
submitted that while passing the assessment order for assessment
year 2013-14, the Assessing Officer had given opportunity to the
applicant - petitioner during course of assessment proceedings to
provide any such letter or application for transfer of jurisdiction
but no reply was submitted by him. He submitted that the
opposite party has not violated the direction given by this Court
vide judgment and order dated 31.03.2015 and no further
proceedings for the assessment year were initiated by the
opposite party against the petitioner and as such, no contempt has
been committed by the opposite party and has submitted that if
the opposite party has inadvertently violated orders of this Court,
then he renders unconditional apology to this Court.
22.    In support of his submissions, he placed reliance upon
certain judgments, which are as under:
No.23272 of 2012.
b)     V. Senthur and Another Vs. M. Vijayakumar, IAS,
Secretary, Tamil Nadu Public Service Commission and
Another; Civil Appeal No.4954 of 2016.
c)     Badri Vishal Pandey and Ors. Vs. Rajesh Mittal and
23.    I have considered the submissions advanced by learned
counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.
24.    To resolve the controversy involved in the matter, the
judgments relied upon by learned counsel for the parties are
being quoted below:
a)     Judgments relied upon by learned counsel for the
6.      Civil contempt is punishable with imprisonment
as well as fine. In a given case, the court may also
penalise the party in contempt by ordering him to pay the
costs of the application. (2) A fine can also be imposed
upon the contemnor.
7.      Now in the facts and circumstances of the case,
we do not propose to impose imprisonment nor any
amount as and by way of fine but keeping in view the
torture, the agony and the mental oppression through
which Mrs. C. Thingkhuila, wife of Shri C. Daniel and
Mrs. C. Vangamla, wife of Shri C. Paul had to pass and
they being the proper applicants, the formal application
being by Sebastian M. Hongray, we direct that as a
plary costs as is permissible in such cases, respondents
Nos. 1 and 2 shall pay Rs 1 lac to each of the
aforementioned two women within a period of four weeks
from today.
8.      A query was posed to the learned Attorney
General about the further step to be taken. It was made
clear that further adjourning the matter to enable the
respondents to trace or locate the two missing persons is
to shut the eyes to the reality and to pursue a mirage. As
we are inclined to direct registration of an offence and an
investigation, we express no opinion as to what fate has
befallen to Shri C. Daniel and Shri C. Paul, the missing
two persons in respect of whom the writ of habeas corpus
was issued save and except saying that they have not met
their tragic end in an encounter as is usually claimed and
the only possible inference that can be drawn from
circumstance already discussed is that both of them must
have met an unnatural death. Prima facie, it would be an
offence of murder. Who is individually or collectively the
perpetrator of the crime or is responsible for their
disappearance will have to be determined by a proper,
thorough and responsible police investigation. It is not
necessary to start casting a doubt on anyone or any
particular person. But prima facie there is material on
record to reach an affirmative conclusion that both Shri
C. Daniel and Shri C. Paul are not alive and have met an
unnatural death. And the Union of India cannot disown
the responsibility in this behalf. If this inference is
permissible which we consider reasonable in the facts
and circumstances of the case, we direct that the
Registrar (Judicial) shall forward all the papers of the
case accompanied by a writ of mandamus to the
Superintendent of Police, Ukhrul, Manipur State to be
treated as information of a cognizable offence and to
commence investigation as prescribed by the relevant
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
ii)    T.N. Godavarman Thirumulpad (102) through the
5.       Disobedience of this Court's order strikes at the
very root of the rule of law on which the judicial system
rests. The rule of law is the foundation of a democratic
society. Judiciary is the guardian of the rule of law. Hence,
it is not only the third pillar but also the central pillar of
the democratic State. If the judiciary is to perform its duties
and functions effectively and remain true to the spirit with
which they are sacredly entrusted to it, the dignity and
authority of the Courts have to be respected and protected
at all costs. Otherwise, the very corner stone of our
constitutional scheme will give way and with it will
disappear the rule of law and the civilized life in the
society. That is why it is imperative and invariable that
Court's orders are to be followed and complied with.
7.      On the basis of submissions made by learned
Amicus Curiae, proceedings were initiated against them. It
was highlighted by learned Amicus Curiae that the
respondents have acted in brazen defiance of the orders of
this Court and their conduct constitutes the contempt by
way of (a) wilful dis- obedience of directions issued by this
Court, (b) the manner in which contemnors have conducted
themselves clearly tends to lower the authority of this
Court and obstructs the administration of justice (c) as
their conduct falls both under the definition of Civil
contempt, as well as seeing dimensions of the matters,
under criminal contempt.
20. In B.M. Bhattacharjee (Major General) v. Russel Estate
Corpn. it was observed by this Court that "all of the
officers of the Government must be presumed to know that
under the constitutional scheme obtaining in this country,
orders of the courts have to be obeyed implicitly and that
orders of the apex court-for that matter any court- should
not be trifled with".
21. Any country or society professing rule of law as its
basic feature or characteristic does not distinguish between
high or low, weak or mighty. Only monarchies and even
some democracies have adopted the age old principle that
the king cannot be sued in his own courts.
22. Professor Dicey's words in relation to England are
equally applicable to any nation in the world. He said as
"When we speak of the rule of law as a characteristic of
our country, not only that with us no man is above the law
but that every man, whatever be his rank or condition, is
subject to the ordinary law of the realm and amenable to
the jurisdiction of the ordinary tribunals. In England the
idea of legal equality, or the universal subjection of all
classes to one law administered by the ordinary courts, has
been pushed to its utmost limit. With us every official, from
Prime Minister down to a constable or a collector of taxes,
is under the same responsibility for every act done with
legal justification as any other citizen. The reports abound
with cases in which officials have been brought before the
courts, and made, in their personal capacity, liable to
punishment, or to the payment of damages, for acts done in
their official character but in excess of their lawful
authority. A colonial governor, a secretary of State, a
military officer, and all subordinates, though carrying out
the commands of their official superiors, are as responsible
for any act which the law does not authorize as is a private
and unofficial person. (See Introduction to the Study of the
Law of the Constitution, 10th Edn. 1965, pp. 193-194).
23. Respect should always be shown to the Court. If any
party is aggrieved by the order which is in its opinion is
wrong or against rules or implementation is neither
practicable nor feasible, it should approach the Court. This
had been done and this Court after consideration had
rejected the I.A. long before.
26. It is thus crystal clear that the applications of those
eligible for grant of licenses were required to be sent to
CEC, who was then required to submit a report to this
Court. Thereafter, this Court would have decided on the
question of entitlement for license. The procedure
mandated by this Court was not followed. Instead of that by
their impugned actions, the contemnors permitted
resumption of operations by the unit holders. There was
absolutely no confusion or scope for entertaining doubt as
claimed by the contemnors.
28. The explanations of the contemnors are clearly
unacceptable. Mens rea is writ large.
29. The inevitable conclusion is that both the contemnors 1
and 2 deliberately flouted the orders of this Court in a
brazen manner. It cannot be said by any stretch of
imagination that there was no mens rea involved. The fact
situation clearly shows to the contrary.
30. Learned counsel appearing for contemnor No.1 and 2
stated that they have tendered unconditional apology which
should be accepted.
31. Apology is an act of contrition. Unless apology is
offered at the earliest opportunity and in good grace, the
apology is shorn of penitence and hence it is liable to be
rejected. If the apology is offered at the time when the
contemnor finds that the court is going to impose
punishment it ceases to be an apology and becomes an act
of a cringing coward.
32. Apology is not a weapon of defence to purge the guilty
of their offence, nor is it intended to operate as universal
panacea, but it is intended to be evidence of real
contriteness. As was noted in L.D. Jaikwal v. State of U.P.
"We are sorry to say we cannot subscribe to the
'slap-say sorry-and forget' school of thought in
administration of contempt jurisprudence. Saying 'sorry'
does not make the slapper taken the slap smart less upon
the said hypocritical word being uttered. Apology shall not
be paper apology and expression of sorrow should come
from the heart and not from the pen. For it is one thing to
'say' sorry-it is another to 'feel' sorry.
33. Proceedings for contempt are essentially personal and
punitive. This does not mean that it is not open to the
Court, as a matter of law to make a finding of contempt
against any official of the Government say Home Secretary
or a Minister.
34. While contempt proceedings usually have these
characteristics and contempt proceedings against a
Government department or a minister in an official
capacity would not be either personal or punitive (it would
clearly not be appropriate to fine or sequest the assets of
the Crown or a Government department or an officer of the
Crown acting in his official capacity), this does not mean
that a finding of contempt against a Government
department or minister would be pointless. The very fact of
making such a finding would vindicate the requirements of
justice. In addition an order for costs could be made to
underline the significance of a contempt. A purpose of the
court's powers to make findings of contempt is to ensure the
orders of the court are obeyed. This jurisdiction is required
to be co-extensive with the courts' jurisdiction to make the
orders which need the protection which the jurisdiction to
make findings of contempt provides. In civil proceedings
the court can now make orders (other than injunctions or
for specific performance) against authorized Government
departments or the Attorney General. On applications for
judicial review orders can be made against ministers. In
consequence such orders must be taken not to offend the
theory that the Crown can supposedly do no wrong.
Equally, if such orders are made and not obeyed, the body
against whom the orders were made can be found guilty of
contempt without offending that theory, which could be the
only justifiable impediment against making a finding of
contempt.
35. This is a case where not only right from the beginning
attempt has been made to overreach the orders of this
Court but also to draw red-herrings. Still worse is the
accepted position of inserting a note in the official file with
oblique motives. That makes the situation worse. In this
case the contemnors deserve severe punishment. This will
set an example for those who have propensity of dis-
regarding the court's orders because of their money power,
social status or posts held. Exemplary sentences are called
for in respect of both the contemnors. Custodial sentence of
one month simple imprisonment in each case would meet
the ends of justice. It is to be noted that in Re: Sri Pravakar
Behera (Suo Motu C.P. 301/2003 dated 19.12.2003) (2003
(10) SCALE 1126), this Court had imposed costs of
Rs.50,000/- on a D.F.O. on the ground that renewal of
license was not impermissible in cases where licenses were
issued prior to this Court's order dated 4.3.1997. That was
the case of an officer in the lower rung. Considering the
high positions held by the contemnors more stringent
punishment is called for, and, therefore, we are
compressing custodial sentence.
iii)  Patel Rajnikant Dhulabhai and another (supra):
58. The provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971
have also been invoked. Section 2 of the Act is a definition
clause. Clause (a) enacts that contempt of court means
`civil contempt or criminal contempt'. Clause (b) defines
`civil contempt' thus;
2. (b) `civil contempt' means wilful disobedience to any
judgement, decree, direction, order, writ or other process
of a court or wilful breach of an undertaking given to a
Reading of the above clause makes it clear that the
following conditions must be satisfied before a person
can be held to have committed a civil contempt;
(i) there must be a judgment, decree, direction, order,
writ or other process of a Court (or an undertaking
(ii) there must be disobedience to such judgment, decree,
direction, order, writ or other process of a Court (or
breach of undertaking given to a Court); and
(iii) such disobedience of judgment, decree, direction,
order, writ or other process of a Court (or breach of
undertaking) must be wilful.
59. Section 12 provides punishment for contempt of
Court. The relevant part of the provision reads thus;
"12 - Punishment for contempt of court--(1) Save as
otherwise expressly provided in this Act or in any other
law, a contempt of court may be punished with simple
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six
months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand
rupees, or with both:
Provided that the accused may be discharged or the
punishment awarded may be remitted on apology
being made to the satisfaction of the court.
Explanation.--An apology shall not be rejected merely
on the ground that it is qualified or conditional if the
accused makes it bona fide.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for
the time being in force, no court shall impose a
sentence in excess of that specified in sub-section (1)
for any Contempt either in respect of itself or of a
court subordinate to it.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this
section, where a person is found guilty of a civil
contempt, the court , if it considers that a fine will not
meet the ends of justice and that a sentence of
imprisonment is necessary shall, instead of
sentencing him to simple imprisonment, direct that he
be detained in a civil prison for such period not
exceeding six months as it may think fit.
Godha & Ors., (2003) 11 SCC 1, this Court had an
occasion to consider the concept of `wilful
disobedience' of an order of the Court. It was stated
that `wilful' means an act or omission which is done
voluntarily and with the specific intent to do
something the law forbids or with the specific intent
to fail to do something the law requires to be done,
that is to say, with bad purpose either to disobey or
to disregard the law. According to the Court, it
signifies the act done with evil intent or with a bad
motive for the purpose. It was observed that the act
or omission has to be judged having regard to the
facts and circumstances of each case.
61. In Kapildeo Prasad Sah & Ors. v. State of Bihar
& Ors., (1999) 7 SCC 569, it was held that for
holding a person to have committed contempt, it
must be shown that there was wilful disobedience of
the judgment or order of the Court. But it was
indicated that even negligence and carelessness
may amount to contempt. It was further observed
that issuance of notice for contempt of Court and
power to punish are having far reaching
consequences, and as such, they should be resorted
to only when a clear case of wilful disobedience of
the court's order is made out. A petitioner who
complains breach of Court's order must allege
deliberate or contumacious disobedience of the
Court's order and if such allegation is proved,
contempt can be said to have been made out, not
otherwise. The Court noted that power to punish for
contempt is intended to maintain effective legal
system. It is exercised to prevent perversion of the
course of justice.
62. In the celebrated decision of Attorney General
"There is an element of public policy in punishing
civil contempt, since the administration of justice
would be undermined if the order of any court of
law could be disregarded with impunity."
63. In Anil Ratan Sarkar & Ors. v. Hirak Ghosh &
Ors., (2002) 4 SCC 21, this Court held that the
Contempt of Courts Act has been introduced in the
statute-book for securing confidence of people in
the administration of justice. If an order passed by
a competent Court is clear and unambiguous and
not capable of more than one interpretation,
disobedience or breach of such order would
amount to contempt of Court. There can be no
laxity in such a situation because otherwise the
Court orders would become the subject of mockery.
Misunderstanding or own understanding of the
Court's order would not be a permissible defence.
B)   Judgments relied upon by learned counsel for the
15. The power vested in the High Courts as well as this
Court to punish for contempt is a special and rare power
available both under the Constitution as well as the
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971. It is a drastic power which, if
misdirected, could even curb the liberty of the individual
charged with commission of contempt. The very nature of
the power casts a sacred duty in the Courts to exercise the
same with the greatest of care and caution. This is also
necessary as, more often than not, adjudication of a
contempt plea involves a process of self determination of the
sweep, meaning and effect of the order in respect of which
disobedience is alleged. Courts must not, therefore, travel
beyond the four corners of the order which is alleged to
have been flouted or enter into questions that have not been
dealt with or decided in the judgment or the order violation
of which is alleged. Only such directions which are explicit
in a judgment or order or are plainly self evident ought to be
taken into account for the purpose of consideration as to
whether there has been any disobedience or willful violation
of the same. Decided issues cannot be reopened; nor the
plea of equities can be considered. Courts must also ensure
that while considering a contempt plea the power available
to the Court in other corrective jurisdictions like review or
appeal is not trenched upon. No order or direction
supplemental to what has been already expressed should be
issued by the Court while exercising jurisdiction in the
domain of the contempt law; such an exercise is more
appropriate in other jurisdictions vested in the Court, as
noticed above. The above principles would appear to be the
cumulative outcome of the precedents cited at the bar,
namely, Jhareswar Prasad Paul and Another vs. Tarak Nath
Ganguly and Others[3], V.M.Manohar Prasad vs. N.
Ratnam Raju and Another[4], Bihar Finance Service House
Construction Cooperative Society Ltd. vs. Gautam Goswami
and Others[5] and Union of India and Others vs. Subedar
16. Applying the above settled principles to the case before
us, it is clear that the direction of the High Court for
creation of supernumerary posts of Marine Assistant Radio
Operator cannot be countenanced. Not only the Courts must
act with utmost restraint before compelling the executive to
create additional posts, the impugned direction virtually
amounts to supplementing the directions contained in the
order of the High Court dated 02.8.2006. The alterative
direction i.e. to grant parity of pay could very well have
been occasioned by the stand taken by the Corporation with
regard to the necessity of keeping in existence the cadre
itself in view of the operational needs of the Corporation. If
despite the specific stand taken by the Corporation in this
regard the High Court was of the view that the respondents
should be absorbed as Marine Assistant Radio Operator
nothing prevented the High Court from issuing a specific
direction to create supernumerary posts of Marine Assistant
Radio Operator. The same was not done. If that be so, the
direction to create supernumerary posts at the stage of
exercise of the contempt jurisdiction has to be understood to
be an addition to the initial order passed in the Writ
Petition. The argument that such a direction is implicit in
the order dated 02.08.2006 is self defeating. Neither, is such
a course of action open to balance the equities, i.e. not to
foreclose the promotional avenues of the petitioners, as
vehemently urged by Shri Rao. The issue is one of
jurisdiction and not of justification. Whether the direction
issued would be justified by way of review or in exercise of
any other jurisdiction is an aspect that does not concern us
in the present case. Of relevance is the fact that an
alternative direction had been issued by the High Court by
its order dated 02.08.2006 and the appellants, as officers of
the Corporation, have complied with the same. They cannot
be, therefore, understood to have acted in willful
disobedience of the said order of the Court. All that was
required in terms of the second direction having been
complied with by the appellants, we are of the view that the
order dated 02.08.2006 passed in W.P. No. 21518 of 2000
stands duly implemented. Consequently, we set aside the
Order dated 19.01.2012 passed in Contempt Petition No.
161 of 2010, as well as the impugned order dated
11.07.2012 passed in Contempt Appeal No.2 of 2012 and
allow the present appeal.
13. Shri Vaidyanathan relied on the following judgments of
this Court in support of his submissions that, in contempt
proceedings, the Court cannot travel beyond the original
judgment and order.
Jhareswar Prasad Paul and Another v. Tarak Nath
Ganguly and others, Midnapore People's Coop. Bank
Limited and others v. Chunilal Nanda and Others 4, V.M.
Manohar Prasad v. N. Ratnam Raju and Another5 and
Sudhir Vasudeva, Chairman and Managing Director, Oil
and Natural Gas Corporation Limited and others v. M.
George Ravishekaran and others.
14. There can be no quarrel with the proposition that in a
contempt jurisdiction, the court will not travel beyond the
original judgment and direction; neither would it be
permissible for the court to issue any supplementary or
incidental directions, which are not to be found in the
original judgment 3 (2002) 5 SCC 352 4 (2006) 5 SCC 399
5 (2004) 13 SCC 610 6 (2014) 3 SCC 373 and order. The
court is only concerned with the wilful or deliberate non-
compliance of the directions issued in the original
judgment and order.
iii)   Badri Vishal Pandey and Ors. (Supra):
25. Still further there is no direction in the order passed by
this Court to reinstate the petitioners or to place them in
minimum or regular pay scale. The contempt jurisdiction
cannot be invoked on the basis of impressions, when the
order of the Court does not contain any direction for
reinstatement or for grant of regular pay scale. The
contempt would be made out when there is wilful
disobedience to the orders of this Court. Since the Order
of this Court is not of reinstatement, the petitioners under
the garb of the contempt petition cannot seek
reinstatement, when nothing was granted by this Court.
25.    Vide order of this Court dated 28.09.2022, a show cause
notice was issued to the opposite party - Mr. Harish Gidwani,
Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax, Range-2, Lucknow that
why he should not be tried and punished under Section 12 of
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 for willful and deliberate
disobedience of the order dated 31.03.2015 passed in Writ
Petition No.9525 (M/B) of 2013. In pursuance to the same, the
opposite party filed his reply.
26.    In the present contempt application, vide judgment and
order dated 31.03.2015, passed by a division bench of this Court
in Writ Petition No.9525 (M/B) of 2013, notice issued to the
petitioner - applicant for the assessment year 2012-13 dated
03.11.2014 was quashed on the ground of jurisdictional error and
the opposite party was to delete all the outstanding amount from
the web portal showing the dues to be paid.
27.    The Assessing Officer in spite of direction issued for
consequential action, permitted to continue the outstanding
amount for a period of seven months on the web portal and when
this Court made query in the present contempt application in
regard to consequential benefits granted to the applicant -
petitioner, only then it was deleted from the web portal. This fact
has been admitted by the opposite party in his affidavit dated
05.12.2022. This clearly amounts violation of the judgment and
order passed by the division bench of this Court on 31.03.2015.
28.    Civil contempt is punishable with imprisonment as well as
fine. In a given case, the court may also penalise the party in
contempt by ordering him to pay the costs of the application and
a fine can also be imposed upon the contemnor.
29.    Disobedience of this Court's order strikes at the very root
of the rule of law on which the judicial system rests. The rule of
law is the foundation of a democratic society. Judiciary is the
guardian of the rule of law. Hence, it is not only the third pillar
but also the central pillar of the democratic State. If the judiciary
is to perform its duties and functions effectively and remain true
to the spirit with which they are sacredly entrusted to it, the
dignity and authority of the Courts have to be respected and
protected at all costs. Otherwise, the very corner stone of our
constitutional scheme will give way and with it will disappear the
rule of law and the civilized life in the society. That is why it is
imperative and invariable that Court's orders are to be followed
and complied with.
30.    On the basis of submissions advanced by Ms. Radhika
Singh, learned counsel for the applicant, proceedings were
initiated against the opposite party. It was highlighted by learned
counsel for the applicant that the opposite party has acted in
defiance of the order passed by this Court and his conduct
construe contempt by way of willful disobedience of direction
issued by this Court. The manner, in which the contemnor has
acted, itself clearly tends to lower the authority of this Court and
obstructs the administration of justice, as his conduct falls both
under the definition of Civil contempt, as well as seeing
dimensions of the matters, under criminal contempt.
31.    On perusal of judgment and order dated 31.03.2015, it is
crystal clear that notice issued by the Assessing Officer was
quashed on the ground of jurisdiction as well as consequential
orders were also directed to be set-aside. Meaning thereby, the
Assessing Officer has to take care that the entry existing on the
web portal was to be deleted immediately after passing of the
judgment and order dated 31.03.2015 but deliberately and
intentionally the outstanding of notice of assessment year 2011-
12 became operative on the web portal till seven months, which
ruined the reputation of the applicant and this act of the Income
Tax authority was in deliberate and willful disobedience of the
judgment and order dated 31.03.2015.
32.    In the celebrated decision of Attorney General v. Times
Newspaper Ltd.; 1974 AC 273, the Hon'ble Court has held that
there is an element of public policy in punishing civil contempt,
since the administration of justice would be undermined if the
order of any court of law could be disregarded with impunity.
33.    Here, in the present case, as per own admission of Sri
Manish Mishra, learned counsel for opposite party, the
outstanding amount was deleted from the web portal after seven
months, which amounts deliberate and willful disobedience of the
judgment and order dated 31.03.2015, for which the opposite
party is liable to be punished with imprisonment as well as fine.
34.    In the judgments relied upon by learned counsel for the
opposite party in the case of Sudhir Vasudeva, Chairman &
MD, ONGC & Ors. (Supra), this Court has held that the power
vested in the High Courts as well as this Court to punish for
contempt is a special and rare power available both under the
Constitution as well as the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971. It is a
drastic power which, if misdirected, could even curb the liberty
of the individual charged with commission of contempt. The very
nature of the power casts a sacred duty in the Courts to exercise
the same with the greatest of care and caution.
35.    In the case of V. Senthur and Another (Supra), it was held
that the Court cannot travel beyond the original judgment and
order. In the case of Badri Vishal Pandey and Ors. (Supra), it
was held that there is no direction in the order passed by this
Court to reinstate the petitioners or to place them in minimum or
regular pay scale. The contempt jurisdiction cannot be invoked
on the basis of impressions, when the order of the Court does not
contain any direction for reinstatement or for grant of regular pay
36.    The ratio of the judgments relied upon by learned counsel
for the opposite party is not applicable to the present facts and
circumstances of the case.
37.    Here, in the present case, this Court has set aside the notice
dated 11.09.2013 on the ground of jurisdiction with further
direction that as the notice has already been quashed,
consequential order, if any, are also quashed. Meaning thereby,
the outstanding showing on the web portal against the applicant
was to be deleted immediately after the judgment but the
authorities have permitted to continue the outstanding amount on
the web portal for a period of seven months, which clearly
violates the judgment and order dated 31.03.2015 and this act and
action of the opposite party is deliberate in nature, for which he is
liable to be punished.
38.    In the opinion of this Court, the action of the opposite party
is not only contemptuous but is also malicious. He took care with
the money of the applicant in spite of clear direction of this Court
and there is no justifiable reason for the said action. If the action
of Mr. Harish Gidwani, Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax,
Range -2, Lucknow is considered in the background by the
allegations made against him, it was his purposeful act to harass
the applicant in spite of order of the writ Court. Unnecessarily
mens rea is not required to be proved in a case of contempt but
in the present case the violation is willful, deliberate and coupled
with intention and motive to harass the applicant.
39.    For the reasons given above, this Court finds the opposite
party - Mr. Harish Gidwani, Deputy Commissioner of Income
Tax, Range-2, Lucknow to be guilty under Section 12 of
Contempt of Courts Act, 1971.
40.    On these facts, fine only would not meet the ends of justice
because Mr. Harish Gidwani, Deputy Commissioner of Income
Tax, Range-2, Lucknow is a senior officer, who is the custodian
of assessing of the applicant and and has committed a grossly
reprehensible act and in case he is not punished, it would send
down a wrong signal to other officials of Income Tax Department
that even such unbusiness like conduct invites only a warning or
fine, as Courts are flooded with matters, where orders are passed.
41.    Accordingly, a fine of Rs.25,000/- along with simple
imprisonment for a period of one week is awarded to the
contemnor - opposite parity i.e. Mr. Harish Gidwani, Deputy
Commissioner of Income Tax, Range-2, Lucknow. In case of
default, he would suffer one day's further simple imprisonment.
42.    The contemnor - opposite parity Mr. Harish Gidwani,
Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax, Range-2, Lucknow will
surrender before the Senior Registrar of this Court at 03.00 p.m.
on 16.12.2022, who will send him jail to serve out the sentence.
43.    The Senior Registrar is directed to submit a report by
19.12.2022 to this Court in regard to compliance of the order.
44.    The contempt application is finally disposed of.
45.    All the pending applications are, accordingly, disposed of.
Order after delivery of judgment:
A.     After delivery of judgment, Sri Manish Mishra, learned
counsel for contemnor - opposite party requested to extend the
time period of surrender of         Mr. Harish Gidwani, Deputy
Commissioner of Income Tax, Range-2, Lucknow to surrender
before the Senior Registrar of this Court.
B.     Accordingly, taking into consideration the request made by
learned counsel for the opposite party, the contemnor - Mr.
Harish Gidwani, Deputy Commissioner of Income Tax, Range-2,
Lucknow is directed to surrender before the Senior Registrar of
this Court at 03.00 p.m. on 22.12.2022, who will send him jail to
serve out the sentence.
C.    The Senior Registrar is directed to submit a report by
23.12.2022 to this Court in regard to compliance of the order.