3.             As the identical issue involved in both the aforesaid
petitions, the same is decided by way of common order and
Special Civil Application No. 16268 of 2020 is treated as lead
4.             The present petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India is filed by the petitioners seeking the
following reliefs, which reads thus:
“(A) to quash and set aside the notice dated
14.08.2020 of the Respondent Bank;
(B) direct the Respondent Bank, its servants
and agents to act in accordance with law and
to refrain from taking any steps or further
steps in the matter of proceedings against the
Petitioner No.1 as a willful defaulter;
(C) direct the Respondent Bank to produce
the records of the Respondent relating to
possible classification of the Petitioners as
willful defaulter;
(D) to direct that pending the hearing and
final disposal of the present Special Civil
Application the proceedings pertaining to
classification of the Petitioners as willful
(E) To pass such other and further order(s)
as this Hon’ble Court deems fit and proper in
the facts and circumstances of the case;
(F) To provide for the costs of the present
5.             The brief facts leading to filing of the present
petition are stated thus:
5.1.           The petitioners have challenged the illegal actions
undertaken by the respondent in sheer contravention of the
terms and conditions of the Master Circular namely “Master
Circular on Willful Defaulters’ dated 01.07.2015 issued by the
Reserve Bank of India (RBI), whereby, the respondent has
threatened to declare the petitioners as willful defaulter by
issuing impugned show cause notice dated 14.08.2020 which
was received by the petitioner herein through e-mail on
5.2.           It is stated that, in view of above, the petitioners
are    constrained        to   approach       this Court    invoking           writ
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
6.             Heard    Mr.   Ayaan       A. Patel,    learned         counsel
appearing for the petitioners.
6.1.                  Mr. Ayaan A. Patel, learned counsel appearing
for the petitioners submitted that the impugned show cause
notice dated 14.08.2020, alleges that the petitioners have
committed defaults in repayment of the amount due and
payable to the respondent bank under the Facilities Agreement.
It is further stated that, the petitioner no.1 has been making
regular payments to the respondent Bank, with the last
payment being made on 18.10.2019, and accordingly, the
petitioner no.1 in good faith and bona-fide has made payment,
despite the fact that actions / inactions on the part of the
respondent were causing immense distress and financial loss to
the petitioner no.1. While referring various other submissions,
main bone of the contention of Mr. Patel, learned counsel
appearing for the petitioners is that the impugned show cause
notice can be said to be vague and it does not refer the
necessary particulars to facilitate the petitioner to answer the
6.2.           During the course of hearing, it was also submitted
by Mr. Patel, learned counsel that the petitioners have replied
to the said show cause notice dated 14.08.2020, however, the
respondent bank has failed to provide necessary documents /
documents as sought for by the petitioners.
6.3.           In view of above, Mr. Patel, learned counsel
submitted that the show cause notice being devoid of any
clarity and being vague, required to be quashed and set aside.
7.             Heard Mr. Saurabh N. Soparkar, learned senior
counsel assisted by Mr. Arjun Joshi, learned counsel for Ms.
Gargi Vyas, learned counsel appearing for the respondent-Bank.
7.1.           Mr. Saurabh N. Soparkar, learned senior counsel
raised preliminary objection with regard to the maintainability
of the present petition. Mr. Soparkar, learned senior counsel at
the outset submitted that the writ under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India is not maintainable against a Private
Bank. The respondent being a Private Bank, the aforesaid
petition would not be maintainable against the respondent-
Bank and the present petition be dismissed on the aforesaid
ground only.
7.2.           Mr. Soparkar, learned senior counsel submitted that
the aforesaid issue is no more res-integra. Mr. Soparkar,
learned senior counsel relied on the judgment of Ionic Metaliks
v. Union of India reported in 2015 GLH(2) 156. Mr. Soparkar,
learned senior counsel further relied on the judgment passed
by the coordinate bench of this Court in                Special Civil
Application No. 15813 of 2019 decided on 28.11.2019.
7.3.           Relying on the aforesaid judgment, Mr. Soparkar,
learned senior counsel submitted that the Division Bench of
this Court in the case of Ionic Metaliks held that a writ would
not maintainable against the private bank. The said ratio as
laid down by the Division Bench was followed in Special Civil
Application No. 15831 of 2019, wherein, in an identical issue
a writ was sought for against the Yes Bank and it is held that
the respondent - Yes Bank being a private bank, writ against
the said Bank is not maintainable.
8..           In response to the aforesaid contentions, Mr. Ayaan
Patel, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted
that after the order came to be passed in Special Civil
Application No. 15813 of 2019, the present respondent bank
has undergone change in the shareholding pattern and relying
on the said documents produced on record the shareholding
pattern and submitted that the State Bank of India (SBI) has
30% and Life Insurance Corporation of India (LIC) has 4.90%
shareholding of Yes Bank- respondent bank, which comes to
total   34.90%       shareholding    in     the respondent       bank         and
resultantly the State has deep and persuasive control over the
9.            In view of above, Mr. Patel, learned counsel
submitted that it can be said that the respondent bank is
derelicting the duty of public nature, and therefore, it can be
said to be a ‘State’ and also submitted that in view of the fact
that the respondent bank has been derelicting the public
function, a writ would be maintainable against the respondent
10.           Heard    the  learned       counsel appearing         for      the
respective parties.
11.           Since the preliminary objection has raised by the
respondent bank, this Court finds it appropriate to decide the
said issue as a preliminary issue.
12.           In view of the facts as stated above, which are
germane for adjudication of the present petition, they are not
repeated, as there are undisputed facts for determination of the
present dispute / issue.
13.           In case of Federal Bank Ltd. v. Sagar Thomas &
ors. reported in AIR 2003 SC 4325, the Hon’ble Supreme Court
has observed thus:
Companies Act for the purposes of carrying on any
trade or business is a private enterprise to earn
livelihood and to make profits out of such
activities. Banking is also a kind of profession and
a commercial activity, the primary motive behind
it can well be said to earn returns and profits.
Since time immemorial, such activities have been
carried on by individuals generally. It is a private
affair of the company though case of nationalized
banks stands on a different footing. There may,
well be companies, in which majority of the share
capital may be contributed out of the State funds
and in that view of the matter there may be more
participation or dominant participation of the State
in managing the affairs of the company. But in the
present case we are concerned with a banking
company which has its own resources to raise its
funds without any contribution or shareholding by
the State. It has its own Board of Directors elected
by its shareholders. It works like any other private
company in the banking business having no
monopoly status at all. Any company carrying on
banking business with a capital of five lacs will
become a scheduled bank. All the same, banking
activity as a whole carried on by various banks
undoubtedly has an impact and effect on the
economy of the country in general. Money of the
shareholders and the depositors is with such
companies, carrying on banking activity. The banks
finance the borrowers on any given rate of interest
at a particular time. They advance loans as against
securities. Therefore, it is obviously necessary to
have regulatory check over such activities in the
interest of the company itself, the shareholders,
the depositors as well as to maintain the proper
financial equilibrium of the national economy. The
Banking companies have not been set up for the
purposes of building economy of the State on the
other hand such private companies have been
voluntarily established for their own purposes and
interest but their activities are kept under check so
that their activities may not go wayward and harm
the economy in general. A private banking
company with all freedom that it has, has to act
in a manner that it may not be in conflict with or
against the fiscal policies of the State and for such
purposes, guidelines are provided by the Reserve
Bank so that a proper fiscal discipline, to conduct
its affairs in carrying on its business, is
maintained. So as to ensure adherence to such
fiscal discipline, if need be, at times even the
management of the company can be taken over.
Nonetheless, as observed earlier, these are all
regulatory measures to keep a check and provide
guideline and not a participatory dominance or
control over the affairs of the company. For other
companies in general carrying on other business
activities may be manufacturing, other industries
or any business, such checks are provided under
the provisions of the Companies Act, as indicated
earlier. There also, the main consideration is that
the company itself may not sink because of its
own mismanagement or the interest of the
shareholders or people generally may not be
jeopardized for that reason. Besides taking care of
such interest as indicated above, there is no other
interest of the State, to control the affairs and
management of the private companies. The care is
taken in regard to the industries covered under the
Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951
that their production which is important for the
economy may not go down yet the business
activity is carried on by such companies or
corporations which only remains a private activity
of the entrepreneurs/companies.
28.       Such private companies would normally
not be amenable to the writ jurisdiction under
Article 226 of the Constitution. But in certain
circumstances a writ may issue to such private
bodies or persons as there may be statutes which
need to be complied with by all concerned
including the private companies. For example,
there are certain legislations like the Industrial
Disputes Act, the Minimum Wages Act, the
Factories     Act    or     for      maintaining     proper
environment say Air (Prevention and Control of
Pollution) Act, 1981 or Water (Prevention and
Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 etc. or statutes of
the like nature which fasten certain duties and
responsibilities statutorily upon such private bodies
which they are bound to comply with. If they
violate such a statutory provision a writ would
certainly be issued for compliance of those
provisions. For instance, if a private employer
dispense with the service of its employee in
violation of the provisions contained under the
Industrial Disputes Act, in innumerable cases the
High Court interfered and have issued the writ to
the private bodies and the companies in that
regard. But the difficulty in issuing a writ may
arise where there may not be any non-compliance
or violation of any statutory provision by the
private body. In that event a writ may not be
issued at all. Other remedies, as may be available,
may have to be resorted to.
33.       Merely because the Reserve Bank of India
lays the banking policy in the interest of the
banking system or in the interest of monetary
stability or sound economic growth having due
regard to the interests of the depositors etc. as
provided under Section 5(c)(a) of the Banking
Regulation Act does not mean that the private
companies carrying on the business of or
commercial activity of banking, discharge any
public function or public duty. These are all
regulatory measures applicable to those carrying on
commercial activity in banking and these
companies are to act according to these provisions
failing which certain consequences follow as
indicated in the Act itself. Provision regarding
acquisition of a banking company by the
Government, it may be pointed out that any
private property can be acquired by the
Government in public interest. It is now judicially
accepted norm that private interest has to give
way to the public interest. If a private property is
acquired in public interest it does not mean that
the party whose property is acquired is performing
or discharging any function or duty of public
character though it would be so for acquiring
authority.
34.       For the discussion held above, in our
view, a private company carrying on banking
business as a scheduled bank, cannot be termed as
an institution or company carrying on any
statutory or public duty. A private body or a
person may be amenable to writ jurisdiction only
where it may become necessary to compel such
body or association to enforce any statutory
obligations or such obligations of public nature
casting positive obligation upon it. We don't find
such conditions are fulfilled in respect of a private
company carrying on a commercial activity of
banking. Merely regulatory provisions to ensure
such activity carried on by private bodies work
within a discipline, do not confer any such status
upon the company nor puts any such obligation
upon it which may be enforced through issue of a
writ under Article 226 of the Constitution. Present
is a case of disciplinary action being taken against
its employee by the appellant Bank. Respondent's
service with the bank stands terminated. The
action of the Bank was challenged by the
respondent by filing a writ petition under Article
226 of the Constitution of India. The respondent is
not trying to enforce any statutory duty on the
part of the Bank. That being the position, the
appeal deserves to be allowed.”
14.           The decision of Ionic Metaliks v/s. Union of India
reported in 2015 GLH (2) 156 (supra), the relevant paras read
“4. The petitioners availed of a loan facility from the
respondent No. 2 Punjab National Bank. The
respondent No. 2 Bank noticed that the loan account
of the petitioners was a Non -Performing Asset (NPA)
since 30th June 2012 with the outstanding of Rs.1027
lac (as on the date of the NPA) including the interest
at the applicable rate.
7. The petitioners availed of the facility of the Home
Saver Account videsanction letter dated 30th
September 2010 to the tune of Rs.3,45,87,900/ - in
Account No. 48111724 from the respondent No. 2 -
Standard Chartered Bank. The petitioners availed one
more facility of the Home Saver Account by sanction
letter dated 30th September 2010 of Rs.1,45,12,100/ -
vide Account No. 48134899 from the respondent No.
48134899 was declared as NPA on 1st December 2013
whereas the Account No. 48111724 was declared as
NPA on 10th January 2013.
24. Apart from the challenge to the Constitutional
validity of the Master Circular issued by the Reserve
Bank of India, the petitioners have also challenged the
proposed action on the part of the Bank.
25. It has been vehemently submitted by the learned
Advocates appearing on behalf of the petitioners that
having regard to the contents of the notice it could be
said that the Bank has already taken a decision to
declare the petitioners as willful defaulters without
disclosing any reasons in the show -cause notice and
the show -cause notice is also bereft of the necessary
particulars and details. In the absence of the necessary
details and the reasons, the petitioners would not be
able to effectively put forward their case.
26. Mr.Mitul Shelat, the learned Advocate appearing
for the petitioners of Special Civil Application No.
10120 of 2014, submitted that although the impugned
action is at the instance of a private Bank, viz.
Standard Chartered Bank, yet the same figures as a
scheduled Bank in the Second Schedule of the Reserve
Bank of India Act, 1934, and therefore, would be
amenable to the writ jurisdiction of this Court under
Article 226 of the Constitution so far as the challenge
to the notice is concerned.
27. In support of his submission that the Standard
Chartered Bank is amenable to the writ jurisdiction of
this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution being
a State or an instrumentality of a State within the
meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India,
Mr.Shelat has     placed     reliance on  the     following
Vandasjiswami Survarna Jayant Smarak Trust v. V.R.
(ii) Praga Tools Corporation v. C.A. Imanual and
others, AIR 1969 SC 1306;
(iii) Apex Electricals v. ICICI Bank Ltd., 2003(2) GLR
(iv) M/s A -One Mega Mart Pvt. Limited and others v.
HDFC Bank and another, (2013)169 Punjab Law
(v) M/s. Inder Surgical v. Union of India and others,
146. Since we have dealt with all the submissions
regarding the constitutional validity of the Master
Circular, we shall now look into the legality and
validity of the notice issued by the Bank so far as the
proposed action of declaring the petitioners as willful
defaulters is concerned.
150. The show -cause notice is absolutely vague and
contains no factual or other materials. We fail to
understand on what basis the Bank has alleged in the
show -cause notice that the funds provided by the
Bank have been siphoned of and the same were used
for the purpose other than the project for which the
loan was sanctioned. If such are the nature of the
allegations, then at least it is expected of the Bank to
provide some materials so that the petitioners can
meet with the same. It has to be held that there is
violation of the principles of natural justice. One of
the facets of the principles of natural justice is
fairness which, we do not find on the part of the
Bank in the proposed action.
176. What is discernible from an exhaustive review of
the case -law, considered and discussed above, may
be summed up thus : -
(1) For issuing writ against a legal entity, it would
have to be an instrumentality or agency of a State or
should have been entrusted with such functions as are
Governmental or closely associated therewith by being
of public importance or being fundamental to the life
of the people and hence Governmental.
(2) A writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India may be maintainable against (i)
the State Government; (ii) Authority; (iii) a statutory
body; (iv) an instrumentality or agency of the State;
(v) a Company which is financed and owned by the
State; (vi) a private body run substantially on State
funding; (vii) a private body discharging public duty
or positive obligation of public nature; and (viii) a
person or a body under liability to discharge any
function under any Statute, to compel it to perform
such a statutory function.
(3) Although a private Banking Company like the
Standard Chartered Bank with which we are
concerned is duty bound to follow and abide by the
guidelines provided by the Reserve Bank of India for
smooth conduct of its affairs in carrying on its
business, yet those are of regulatory measures to keep
a check and provide guideline and not a participatory
dominance or control over the affairs of the Company.
(4) A private Company carrying on Banking business
as a Scheduled Bank cannot be termed as a Company
carrying on any public function or public duty.
(5) Normally, mandamus is issued to a public body or
Authority to compel it to perform some public duty
cast upon it by some statute or statutory rule. In
exceptional cases a writ of mandamus or a writ in the
nature of mandamus may issue to a private body, but
only where a public duty is cast upon such private
body by a statute or statutory rule and only to
compel such body to perform its public duty.
(6) Merely because a statue or a rule having the force
of a statute requires a Company or some other body
to do a particular thing, it does not possess the
attribute of a statutory body.
(7) If a private body is discharging a public function
and the denial of any rights is in connection with the
public duty imposed on such body, the public law
remedy can be enforced. The duty cast on the public
body may be either statutory or otherwise and the
source of such power is immaterial but, nevertheless,
there must be the public law element in such action.
(8) According to Halsbury's Laws of England, 3rd Ed.
Vol.30, p.682, "a public Authority is a body not
necessarily a county council, municipal corporation or
other local Authority which has public statutory duties
to perform and which perform the duties and carries
out its transactions for the benefit of the public and
not for private profit". There cannot be any general
definition of public Authority or public action. The
facts of each case decide the point.
177.      We are  again    posing   a question    for      our
consideration. The answer to the same should put an
end to the matter.
178. The Master Circular relating to the willful
defaulters has been issued by the Reserve Bank of
India in exercise of its powers under the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949, and the Reserve Bank of India
Act, 1934, very much binding to the Standard
Chartered Bank, therefore, while acting under the
Master Circular for the purpose of declaring a
particular borrower as a willful defaulter, does the
Bank discharge a public duty.
179. To put it in other words, if a private Bank has
failed to perform its duty in the sense that it has
gone beyond the scope of the regulations of the
Master Circular, or in performance of the same, has
violated any of the fundamental rights or any other
legal rights of the borrower against whom the action
is proposed, then whether such a borrower can
legitimately maintain a writ -application before this
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
180. A body, public or private, should not be
categorized as "amenable" or "not amenable" to writ
jurisdiction.   The      most        important    and         vital
consideration should be the "function" test as regards
the maintainability of a writ application. If a public
duty or public function is involved, any body, public
or private, concerned or connection with that duty or
function, and limited to that, would be subject to
judicial scrutiny under the extraordinary writ
jurisdiction of Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
182.      Applying the above test, the Bank herein
cannot be called a public body. It has no duty
towards the public. It's duty is towards its account
holders, which may include the borrowers having
availed of the loan facility. It has no power to take
any action, or pass any order affecting the rights of
the members of the public. The binding nature of its
orders and actions is confined to its account holders
and borrowers and to its employees. Its functions are
also not akin to Governmental functions.
200.So far as the grievance of the petitioners of the
Special Civil Application No. 10120 of 2014 as regards
the legality and validity of the notice is concerned, it
cannot be gone into as we have taken the view that
the Standard Chartered Bank being a private Bank is
not amenable to the writ jurisdiction of this Court.
However, it would be open for the petitioners to seek
appropriate legal remedy before the appropriate forum
in accordance with law. No costs.
15.           The Division Bench in Para-200 in the above-
referred decision, considered the submissions, and it was held
that the writ against the private Bank is not maintainable.
16.           This Court in Special Civil Application No. 15813 of
2019 decided on 28.11.2019 in para-14 has held as under:
“14. In my opinion, considering the decisions
of the Federal Bank Limited (Supra) & Ionic
Metalliks (Supra), a writ against Yes Bank
Limited seeking a relief in the nature as is
sought, cannot be said to be maintainable.
While dealing with the maintainability of a
petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, even otherwise as so submitted by
Mr.Joshi since the petition involves serious
disputed question of facts, this Court in exercise
of powers under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India, should not interfere with.”
17.           In view of this Court, the shareholding in the
respondent Bank would not be sufficient for the purpose of
holding that the Bank is derelicting the public function. It is
ultimately      the  transaction    between      the   creditor       and         the
borrower, and mere shareholding would not constitute the
Bank within the purview of a State. No other documents have
been    produced      on   record    by      the  petitioner      except         the
shareholding of State Bank of India and LIC i.e. 30% and
4.90% respectively, which comes to 34.90% of shareholding in
the respondent bank. Relying on the decision in Fedral Bank
(supra) and Ionic Metaliks (supra), it was held as referred to
above in para-14 in Special Civil Application No. 15813 of
2019 that a writ against Yes Bank Ltd. is not maintainable.
The submission that after the order / decision rendered in
Special Civil Application No. 15813 of 2019, the State Bank of
India has 30% shareholding and LIC has 4.90% shareholding,
resultantly, the respondent bank can be said to be derelicting
functions of a “State”, in view of this Court, cannot be
18.            The scope of ‘State’ is well-defined in Article-12. It
includes      legislative and   executive    organs    of    the       union
government and state government, statutory and non-statutory
authorities, all local authorities and other authorities.
19.            Referring to in the aforesaid judgment of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Federal Bank Limited v/s. Sagar
Thomas reported in AIR 2003 SC 4325, wherein, the Hon’ble
Supreme Court has held that private financial institutions,
carrying commercial activities or business would not come
under the scope of ‘State’ as defined under Article 12,
although, they are performing public duties. It was further
held that private financial institutions do not receive any
financial assistance from the Government and and no state
protection is offered to such institutions. No part of their share
capital was being held by the Government and the state of
affairs is controlled by the Board of Directors, which are duly
elected by the Bank’s shareholders. Normally, there is not any
form of interference or partaking of the State or its authorities
in the day-to-day affairs of the private financial institutions. It
was     further      held that to maintain    a healthy,        economic
atmosphere, regulatory measures are adopted and statutes were
framed keeping in mind that the malfunctioning of such
institutions or companies in the banking business, would not
affect the stability of the fiscal equilibrium.      Further, it was
also held that for business and commercial activity, which had
impact on economy but the same does not come within the
ambit of discharging public duty. Eventhough, a private Bank
could discharge the public duty, they cannot be said to be a
State entity and they can benefit by absolving their obligations
and liabilities by the State or State body.
20.            The aforesaid ratio as laid down by the Hon’ble
Supreme Court in AIR 2003 SC 4325 (supra) came to be
followed by the Division Bench of this Court in 2015 GLH (2)
156. The aforesaid ratio is followed in Special Civil Application
No. 15813 of 2019. The issue is not res-integra, as held in
above-referred decisions that a writ would not be maintainable
against a private Bank.
21.           This Court also deems it apposite to refer to the
decision rendered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Civil
Appeal No. 257-259 of 2022 in the case of Phoenix ARC
Private Limited v. Vishwa Bharati Vidya Mandir & Ors . The
relevant para-12 reads thus:
“12. Even otherwise, it is required to be noted that a
writ petition against the private financial institution –
ARC – appellant herein under Article 226 of the
Constitution    of    India      against  the      proposed
action/actions under Section 13(4) of the SARFAESI
Act can be said to be not maintainable. In the
present case, the ARC proposed to take action/actions
under the SARFAESI Act to recover the borrowed
amount as a secured creditor. The ARC as such
cannot be said to be performing public functions
which are normally expected to be performed by the
State authorities. During the course of a commercial
transaction and under the contract, the bank/ARC lent
the money to the borrowers herein and therefore the
said activity of the bank/ARC cannot be said to be as
performing a public function which is normally
expected to be performed by the State authorities. If
proceedings are initiated under the SARFAESI Act
and/or any proposed action is to be taken and the
borrower is aggrieved by any of the actions of the
private bank/bank/ARC, borrower has to avail the
remedy under the SARFAESI Act and no writ petition
would lie and/or is maintainable and/or entertainable.
Therefore, decisions of this Court in the cases of
Praga Tools Corporation (supra) and Ramesh
Ahluwalia (supra) relied upon by the learned counsel
appearing on behalf of the borrowers are not of any
assistance to the borrowers.”
22.           In view of this Court, the submissions canvased by
Mr. Soparkar, learned senior counsel require consideration. It
can be said that Yes Bank being a private bank is not
amenable to writ jurisdiction of this Court. Mere investment by
the State Bank of India (S.B.I.) having shareholding of 30% in
the respondent-Yes Bank cannot be termed as a ‘State’. The
State Bank of India is not a government body, it is a statutory
bank, and therefore, holding of shares by the SBI cannot be
said to be a ‘State’ or Authority as defined under Article 12 of
the Constitution of India. Similarly, the Life Corporation of
India (LIC) is having invested 4.90% also cannot be said to be
a State as defined under Article 12 of the Constitution of
23.           For the foregoing reasons, without entering into the
merits, in view of this Court, the respondent – Yes bank being
a private Bank is not amenable to the writ jurisdiction of this
Court. However, it would be open for the petitioner to seek
appropriate legal remedy before the appropriate forum in
accordance with law.
The present petition stands dismissed, accordingly.