Suo Motu W.P.No.574 of 2015 and WP(MD)No.24178 of 2018
W.M.P.Nos.30869 of 2017, 19652 of 2018, 20421 of 2020 and
1810, 1814, 1816, 1818, 1819, 1821 and 1822 of 2021
Tourism, Culture and Religious Endowment Department,
(R5 impleaded as per the order of this Court dated 10.02.2015)
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowment Department,
(R6 impleaded as per the order of this Court dated 09.04.2015)
Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
praying to issue a Writ of Mandamus, directing the respondents to
take speedy steps to constitute the 17 Member Heritage Commission
and        also   to   set   up   the   Mamallapuram    World     Heritage       Area
Management Authority to safeguard the archaeological monuments in
the State of Tamil Nadu.
Petitioner in WMP.Nos.
1818, 1819, 1821 and 1822 of 2021 : Mr.Rangarajan Narasimhan
Petitioner in WMP.No.20421 of 2020             : Mr.R.Venkataraman,
Tourism, Culture and Religious Endowments Department,
Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
praying to issue a Writ of Mandamus, directing the first respondent to
appoint all the members, as informed by the second respondent vide
its letter Na.Ka.No.25639/2018/Y2 dated 12.06.2018 to the State
"Without culture, and the relative freedom it implies, society, even
when perfect, is but a jungle. This is why any authentic creation is a gift to
“We repeat, these hybrid constructions are not the least interesting for
the artist, the antiquary and the historian. They make us aware to what
extent architecture is a primitive thing, demonstrating as they do, like the
cyclopean remains, the pyramids of Egypt, or the gigantic Hindu pagodas,
that architecture's greatest products are less individual than social creations;
the offspring of nations in labor rather than the outpouring of men of genius;
the deposit let behind by a nation; the accumulation of the centuries; the
residue from the successive evaporations of human society; in short, a kind
of formation. Each wave of time lays down its alluvium, each race deposits
its own stratum on the monument each individual contributes his stone. Thus
do the beavers, and the bees; and thus does man.”
While considering the importance of issues involved in the
present cases, the aforesaid quotes of the renowned literary masters
have been reminiscent in the mind of this Court.
1.1  India has extraordinary, vast and diverse pool of cultural
heritage and ancient monuments in the form of buildings, temples
and other archaeological sites and remains. Its southern State
Tamil Nadu’s ancient culture is one of the most glorious ones to have
existed in the world’s history, dating back more than 2,000 years. Its
immortal          creations  of   resplendent   architecture,     design       and
construction of forts to temples, murals to paintings, sculptures to
scriptures, made of lime mortar to clay bricks, from stones to rocks,
from herbs to fruits in an era of might is right, have stood bent on to
unite this glorious land. Tamil Nadu is famous for all over the world
its magnificent and ancient temples. The monuments here are the
remembrances of the living witnesses about the golden historic era of
over thousand years. They exemplify the valor of this land and are
the symbols of cultural expressions. More particularly, the temples,
many of which are more than 2000 years old, are repositories of
knowledge and treasure houses of arts & architecture. They are
continuing legacy, which connect the present with the past and vice
versa and are living symbols of unique culture; and the festivities
connected there to make them vibrant and colorful. Our people are
also deep rooted in heritage. However, these heritage and cultural
assets are going into oblivion now-a-days. The upcoming generation
does not know about the value of the same. That apart, the
custodians of grand and antique temples and ancient monuments are
least bothered and the conservation of our valuable heritage is
deteriorating not due to any natural calamity or catastrophe, but due
to reckless administration and maintenance under the guise of
renovation.
1.2 In ancient times, there have been cultural invasions,
which though have damaged certain places with historical and
archaeological importance to thrust deep rooted dispel into the minds
of our people with hyperbole, there is much more in this land to pass
on. It would not be enough if a monument or a heritage site is just
handed over to future generations it is equally exigent that its history
is also passed on. The younger generation hyping upon science and
technological development needs to understand that many things
claimed to be discovered and equated with scientific objective were
said and laid down here before centuries in spiritual sphere. The
intelligence, knowledge and skill of the people of this land have been
far superior and precocious even in fields that science is yet to find
answers. In proof, not only have the primogenitors of this land left
behind theories beyond human comprehension, but also astonishing
and illuminating monuments and scriptures. The object of such
creation was not just a personal achievement, but a conscious effort
to leave a historical imprint for future generations. Just as good
memories create nostalgia, knowledge about history brings in a sign
of pride, belonging and motivation to recreate history. To fulfil its
informative and educative functions, a monument or a place of
historical       importance  with  heritage  value,   in   addition      to    its
preservation needs to be opened to the public, which means that its
spatial dimension as well as its content can be experienced by the
public and be sustainable. Thus, it is needless to emphasis that these
have to be preserved and protected at all costs and for posterity.
With this prelude, this Court is inclined to proceed with this Suo motu
2.1  On 06.01.2015, the First Bench headed by the Hon'ble
The Chief Justice Sanjay Kishan Kaul, as he then was, initiated a
suo motu proceedings, based on the newspaper report published in
“The Hindu” on Sunday, 4th January, 2015 titled “Silent Burial”,
relating to the inaction on the part of the Government in establishing
the statutory authority, framing Rules and constituting a 17-member
Heritage Commission to advise them on heritage issues. It was
pointed out that in April 2012, the Government announced its
decision to enact a law on Heritage Commission, which move was
welcomed by activists and conservationists and the State Legislature
passed a bill in this regard and it had received the assent of the
Governor, however, there was no progress ever since. The newspaper
report further indicated about another initiative of the Government
viz., the Mamallapuram World Heritage Area Management Authority,
inspired from the model of Hampi World Heritage Area Management
Authority, meant for conservation of cultural heritage of area declared
as a World Heritage Site in 1984, which has also not been set up.
2.2  Our constitution, understanding the importance of long
standing history and civilization, has thrust upon the state, a duty to
protect, safeguard and nourish the rich culture, tradition and heritage
of this land. The devout inhabitants of indigenous faiths of this land
have left behind numerous symbols reflecting their adroit and
arduous work, which by efflux of time have garnered great veneration
to the faiths now known as religions. The right to profess, practice
and propagate religion shall also include within its domain the right to
protection of the symbols of such religion. When the state obligated
under the Constitution to protect the symbols of heritage, tradition
and culture, fails in its duty, the courts have to step in. Since the
same was a matter of vital importance, it has been taken up as Public
Interest Litigation and registered as suo motu W.P.No.574 of 2015 to
issue a mandamus, directing the respondents to take speedy steps to
constitute the 17-Member Heritage Commission and also set up the
Mamallapuram World Heritage Area Management Authority for the
purpose of safeguarding the archaeological monuments in the state of
Tamil Nadu. During the pendency of the same, various writ petitions
touching upon the protection, maintenance and sustenance of the
ancient temples, idols, murals, temple lands and other places /articles
which all are also of archaeological and historical importance, came
to      be     filed  before this  Court. In  view  of   the    commonality,
interconnectivity and interdependence of the issues involved, all the
writ petitions have been clubbed together and taken up for hearing
along with this Public Interest Litigation. However, for the sake of
convenience and easy understanding, separate orders are being
passed by this Court and the present order is with respect to
suo motu WP.No.574 of 2015 and WP(MD)No.24178 of 2018.
3.     At the outset, it would be apropos to brief about the
heritage and cultural assets possessed by the state of Tamil Nadu and
its role in improving local economy by way of tourism, preservation of
cultural and traditional values and practices, serving educational
resources, increasing community value and social inclusion and above
all, bringing pride to our Nation. The entire state is strewn with great
example of ancient Tamil architecture that goes as far back as two
thousand years. Apart from the temples, the state is also home to
several historical forts and other modern architectural marvels from
its medieval heritage to colonial history. It comprises of the oldest
inhabitants of the world, as it is the motherland to the world’s oldest
language, Tamil, in usage. The state has remained a cultural hub for
various activities like debates, art, innovations, architecture, music
and commerce from time immemorial. The culture, tradition and
practices were connected with religious beliefs. The record of valorous
and historical events, found in many places like temples and forts,
monuments and heritage sites, exemplify the indomitable claim
towards the ancientness of the language, belief, tradition and culture
of the people. Czech Professor Dr. Kamil.V. Zvelebil in 'Tamil Culture'
under chapter "The Tamil Contribution to World's Civilization"
narrated as "There is no doubt that the culture of the Tamils belongs
to the great and immortal treasures of the world's civilization”. This
will stand testimony to the pride of Tamil culture.
3.1 In social and cultural parlance, “Heritage” is often related
to tradition, folklore, arts, monuments, places or things of special
importance, architectural excellence or historical value. Such value is
accredited by recognition from the society based on its uniqueness,
artistic and historical importance. Amongst ancient rulers, the
pandiya, chozha and pallava kings gave importance to art and
architecture, people and governance, language and culture, temple
and faith, until the renaissance when much resurrection was done by
the Vijayanagara Empire. The monuments act as authentic records of
history. Especially, in civilizations that lack written records, they are
the only means that throw light on the past. Apart from being a
historical record, the monuments bear witness to the artistic, cultural,
technological and economic development of the people who created
them.
3.2 Monuments, which have been created for thousands of
years, are the most durable and famous symbols of ancient
civilizations. The evolution of the human race, from primitive to
middle age, from renaissance to current age is transition of human
thought and execution. Such transitions are ostensible from the
artefacts that stand tall and strong, effervescent and illuminating.
They symbolise the growth and development of the place and people
and are frequently used to enhance the appearance of a city or
location. Structures created for other purposes that have been made
notable by their age, size or historical significance may be regarded
as monuments. They are also designed to convey historical or political
information and the same can be used to reinforce the primacy of
contemporary political power and educate the populace about
important events or figures from the past. Such monuments, which
stand as testimony to cultural, artistic, traditional and natural
heritage of this land, have to be preserved and such heritage has to
be passed on to the future generations.
3.3 Apart from that, the land of Tamil Nadu has multitudinous
and ancient, large and exhilarating, intriguing and mystical temples
with astounding       and unique style and art, which           are     all of
archaeological importance.      These temples played multiple roles in
the development of Society. They are not only the places for worship,
but also the places that exhibited extraordinary art in the form of
sculptures, idols, paintings, murals and music, which also formed part
of its heritage. Temples that have withstood the test of time are also
to be treated as places of archaeological or historical importance as
they are not only built with extraordinary skill, but also they reflect
historical events termed as “legend” in common parlance and they
are instrumental in the survival of the language of this land.
Therefore, this Court feels it necessary to describe the activities
associated with the temples exhaustively, but objectively.
3.4 Every ancient temple was structured in such a way that
specific places were allocated for the activities associated with the
traditional method of worship that included recital of hymns in praise
of deity, recital of Thirumuraigal, vedic hymns, dance, drama or
folklore, debates, conduct of festivals, etc. During festivals, folklore
programmes and dramas were conducted not only depicting the
historical events, but also about the legends of the temple, where the
events take place. Bharathanatiyam, one of the ancient dance forms
in the world, which has its origin in Tamil Nadu, attributable to lord
Nataraja, along with other dance forms, were rendered in traditional
folklore. The activities held in the mandapams have gone a long way
in the preservation, promotion and survival of the temples and also of
various types of arts and literature and contributed to research work
on our language, tradition and culture. The mandapams in temples
had pillars, different in numbers and size, form and technique, art
and design. The artistic exuberance of ancient Tamils reflected in the
paintings and murals in the temples and religious places. The
paintings also conveyed various stories including the legend of the
temples. Any art, be it music or painting, can continue to survive only
if it is practiced. The existence of the temple is interwoven with the
co-existence of the various activities mentioned above. The waning of
one activity will not only affect the rituals, but also result in waning of
other activities and eventually the temples itself. Hence, not only the
preservation and redemption of temples alone, but also the activities
associated with the regular and traditional functioning of the temples,
are of paramount consideration.
3.5 From time  immemorial,   music  and     art   are     closely
associated with the culture and tradition of temples. Music, in this
land is mixed with every tradition and ritual. It is still a matter of
pride for an artist to perform or give discourse in a temple. Legends
speak about the Tamil Sangams conducted, wherein the talents in
music, art and debates were displayed. The temple artistes /
musicians have dedicated their services to play musical instruments
in an eminent manner, whenever poojas for the deities are performed
and during festivals arranged by the authorities of the temples as per
the rituals and customs. Some see it as a spiritual opportunity to
unify and experience the bliss of the supreme. The classical “Tamil
literature” of our land was set to music. The ancient musical tradition
has been referred to in the Sangam literature such as Puranaanooru,
Kalithogai, Ettuthokai and other works. Silappathikaram, which
belongs to post-sangam period has made various references to
different forms of music performed by the Tamil musicians. It is
believed that recitations in a particular Ragaa or Pann yielded specific
results..Appar, Thirugnanasambanthar, Sundarar, Manikkavasagar
and Alwars, the Saiva and Vainava saints, composed music linked
with the hymns, Devaram and Divyaprabhandam compositions
between the sixth and tenth centuries CE. Legends recorded in the
temple fortify that the saints and their hymns performed many
miracles to the extent of even bringing back the dead to life. They not
only paved way for the upliftment of the Tamil language, but also in
revival of the old temples and emergence of new structures in the
existing     temples     throughout      the    state.      Prof.Kudavayil
Balasubramanian in his book 'RAJARAJECHARAM' refers to a stone
inscription, which describes that 50 musicians were appointed 1000
years back by King Rajarajan in a sivan temple to perform Devara
hymns. “Oduvars” were trained and appointed in all the temples
along with set of musicians well versed in various forms of musical
instruments     like  Mridangam,      percussion    instruments,         flute,
Sagadai and Karadigai. After RajaRaja made it mandatory that hymns
from “Thirumurai” was to be recited every day in the temple,
dedicated Oduvars for each temple were appointed. Also, people well
versed in Mrudangam, Nadaswaram and other musical instruments
were appointed for each temple. However, such appointments are
now unfortunately, restricted only to few cities and temples.
Therefore, it can be safely concluded that it is the duty of the temple
administration to ensure that the recitations of the divine hymns with
musical instruments are taken place in every temple, which would be
significant in the survival and flourish of the art, besides aiding in
preservation of the ancient temples and its values.
3.6   Temples were used as office of records, wherein records
relating to allocation of lands, historical events, poems and literary
works written in Palm leaves were stored. They were accepted to be
authentic places for record keeping. The recovery of “Thirumurai”
from Thillai Chidambaram Temple by RajaRajaCholan would stand as
testimony to the same. Two early 13th century inscriptions mention
about         re-organization  of old temple   library.    That    apart,     the
inscriptions in Thiruvothur, Tirumalperu, Koogoor, Tiruverumbur and
Thiruppanandhal record that temples were not only places of worship,
but also acted as places for justice. It is relevant to mention here
about the synonymous place in Asia viz., Thiruvarur, which is a
chariot house and known for its culture and the great king of this soil
Manu NeedhiCholan has dispensed fair justice as per the advice of his
Council of Ministers, whose statue finds place in this Chartered High
Court of Madras.
3.7   Temples were the epicentres for philanthropic services
ensuring to conduct various social welfare activities. Huge extent of
lands, jewels, properties and even animals were donated to temples.
Such donations were made not only of the love for the deity, but also
considering the fact that the income derived from the lands would
help the temples in the performance of every ritual perpetually. The
stone         inscriptions record that  there  were      many      charitable
endowments, which provided both food and accommodation for
students studying Tamil literature and grammar. Though the land was
administered by the Kings, the intervention of the Kings in spiritual
and charitable matters was less. In those days, people were
conscious enough not to encroach or usurp temple lands. With
changing times, culture and belief, the lands and other properties of
the temples have been coveted warranting interference by this Court.
3.8   Temples have also been medical centres for physical
treatment. The holy ash given in Saivite temples was believed to cure
many diseases. Even today, the sacred sand (Puthuman) taken by
people from Sankaran Koil is believed to have curing effect. Further,
its      premises    were  used  by people   to  enter    into    commercial
transactions and the officials were appointed in each temple to take
care of the economical activities and safe keeping of the temple
properties and documents.
3.9   The mutts, where Tamil literature, hymns, music and
scriptures associated with the religion and beliefs of this land are
taught, also remained as platform for national leaders, poets,
scholars and ascetic hermits. They were the pillars to instil discipline
and        faith.  Even  today, the traditional mutts      run    educational
institutions. The mutts owned huge extent of lands, donated by the
devotees to enable the same to sustain and propagate the religious
beliefs by conducting regular poojas, festivals, rituals and religious
courses.
3.10 The ancient temples, which we adore upon, were all
constructed with a specific design and stability that they were also
capable         of  acting  as   fortress   during   the     times     of     war.
KotchengatChozan, a chola king and one of the 63 Nayanmars, built
many          adorable  madakoils(Temples).    Our   history     reveals      that
the temples have not only acted as fortresses during invasions, but
also used as shelters during natural calamities.
3.11 The stone inscriptions found in the temples are great
sources of historical data. Numerous stone inscriptions left by Pallava,
Chozha and Pandiya dynasties visible in Temples reveal not only
about the history of our ancestors, their culture, traditions, welfare
activities, thought process, scientific skills and forethought, but also
their administrative excellence. They act as great sources of evidence
and link us to the past. The stone inscriptions in Uthiramerur
Vaikundaperumal          temple  record   the   prevalence     of    democratic
elections to local bodies before 1100 years. There are many such
numerous and rare stone inscriptions and epigraphy found in the
temples of Tamil Nadu.
3.12 The Temples here have been centres for tourist attraction
mainly because of its ancientness, some of which have legends dating
it to before 2000 years. Despite many storms in various forms, they
stood tall reflecting not only the structural stability, but also the
universal truth. Therefore, in order to save and safeguard the ancient
heritage of this land, it is not only necessary to protect and resurrect
the temples and its properties, but also to restore the age old Tamil
traditions and cultures followed in the temples and bring it to the
knowledge of the public.
4. Our Kings adopted the ideology using scientific methods in
constructing the temples for its future preservation. A monument,
sculpture or scripture is not just a record of historical fact, but is a
testimony to the knowledge, culture, tradition and lifestyle of the
people. It exhibits in brief, the happenings of the yesteryears that is,
to be imbibed, followed and carried forward by the present and future
generations. It is now an accepted fact that the temples were not
constructed as a mere place of worship, but also have some scientific
significance based on its locations. The murals and paintings in the
temples and caves demonstrate the knowledge of our people in
chemistry and the prevalence of the same in many places of
Tamil Nadu speaks volumes on the natural intelligence of the people
of this land.
5. Many such monuments and sites of historical importance
came to be revealed because of expeditions. The Big Temple built by
the King RajarajaCholan, which is unique in its style and architecture,
has been declared as the World Heritage Site by the UNESCO. During
the British Regime, efforts were made by British Archaeologists to
unearth the history and architectural treasure of this country, which
paved way for the establishment of Archaeological Survey of India.
6. Archeology is the study of the human past using material
remains. These remains can be any objects that naturally formed,
people created, modified or used. The word “Archeology” derived
from the Greek word “arkhaios,” which means “ancient.” Although
some         archaeologists  study  living cultures,  most     archaeologists
concern themselves with the distant past. The remains that are
mobile are called artifacts. Artifacts include tools, clothing and
decorations. The immobile remains, such as pyramids or post-holes,
are called features. The quest to acquire knowledge is an ardent
quality of zealous mind. History of human evolution, of places, of
culture, of faith, of language, of practices, of traditions has baffled the
human brains for long without conclusive answer. But the search for
the same has never stopped.
7. The subject of archaeology and the preservation of ancient
monuments are considered as important sovereign functions by many
countries. The attempt to claim to be one among the oldest of the
aborigines of the world has pushed the countries to considerably
invest time and money to know the past. The presence of such
monuments is not only a matter of national pride, but also contributes
significantly to the economy of the country through tourism and
business opportunities. Not only the Government departments, but
also many independent bodies have been continuously working by
forming organisations towards protection and preservation of the
heritage sites, monuments, temples etc., a few of which, are
UNESCO, IUAES, RCHME, NPS, NRHP, AHC, MCRF and CCGAS. Its
functions and activities are detailed in nutshell as below:
 According        to the   UNESCO's     World   Heritage     Convention,
landscapes and sites of outstanding universal value can be
designated as World Heritage Sites; and Monuments, groups of
buildings and sites, which are of outstanding universal value
from the point of view of history, art or science, are to be
designated as cultural heritage, for which the designating nation
has appropriate legal, scientific, technical, administrative and
financial measures in place to identify, protect, conserve,
present and rehabilitate world heritage sites. However, the
sovereignty of the State where the site is located is not to be
compromised. The World Heritage Committee is the body
responsible for the practical implementation of the Convention
as well as managing and deciding how to use the World
Heritage Fund. It also determines whether a property will be
included in the World Heritage List.
 The International Union of Anthropological and Ethnological
Sciences (IUAES) situated at Paris is most concerned with
anthropological interests; and its purposes are (a) to promote
international cooperation in the domain of the sciences of man
and notably by way of the International Congress, the work of
study    commissions,      expeditions,   subsidies      to    scholars,
publications and all other scientific activities; (b) to organize
researches on an international basis; (c) to promote scientific
cooperation among national societies of anthropology and
ethnology; (d) to promote cooperation with other Unions.
 The Royal         Commission      on  the   Historical    Monuments          of
England (RCHME) is responsible for documenting buildings and
monuments      of  archaeological,    architectural     and    historical
importance in England.
 The National Park Service (NPS) is an agency of the Federal
Government of United States that manages all national parks,
many     national  monuments       and   other    conservation         and
historical properties. It is charged with a dual role of preserving
the ecological and historical integrity of the places entrusted to
its management, besides making them available and accessible
for public use and enjoyment.
 The National Register of Historic Places (NRHP) is the United
States   federal   Government's     official   list of Districts,     sites,
buildings,   structures   and     objects     deemed         worthy       of
preservation for their historical significance. A property listed in
the National Register or located within a National Register
Historic District, may qualify for tax incentives derived from the
total value of expenses incurred in preserving the property.
 The Australian Heritage Council (AHC) is the principal adviser to
the Australian Government on heritage matters. Its role
includes the assessment of the places for the Heritage list and
common wealth list and nomination of places for inclusion in the
list.
 The Ministry of Culture of the Russian Federation (MCRF) deals
with culture and art issues and its main function is to implement
the Strategy of State Cultural Policy; and the Ministry of Culture
is authorized to issue legal regulations, to develop and propose
draft regulations in the areas of culture, arts, cinematography,
copyright and associated rights, cultural and historical heritage
and tourism as well as international cultural and information-
related cooperation.
 The Central Committee of the Greek Archaeological Service
(CCGAS) which renamed as Archaeological Committee deals
with the preservation and restoration of cultural monuments,
management      of   archaeological   sites,    establishment         and
management of museums and supervision of research and
excavation activities both by the local as well as by the foreign
archaeological institutes active in Greece.
8.1   In India, the places of historical importance also linked to
belief, culture, tradition and arts. Though the culture, tradition, style
and design of various places of archaeological importance in the world
are        different,   it   was   a  poet   from  Tamil    Nadu      by     name
Kaniyanpoongundranar, who not only called upon the people to unite
for the cause of love and affection by labelling all as one race, but
also laid down the world to be for all by using the phrase “ahJk; Cnu.
ahtUk;          nfsph;”    (Yaadum Oore Yavarum Kelir), which is at
present, depicted in the United Nations Organisation. Our country has
a Central Government Organisation at the centre and each state has
its own Archaeological department. Considering the provisions of the
constitution, whenever a place is declared to be a place of national
importance, the Central Act will govern the subject and the
monument would come under the control of the Archaeological
Survey of India (ASI). ASI was founded in 1861 by Alexander
Cunningham. After Independence, it is attached to the office of the
Ministry        of  Culture.    It  administers  more   than     3650      ancient
monuments, archaeological sites and remains of national importance,
which include everything from temples, mosques, churches, tombs
and cemeteries to palaces, forts, step-wells and rock-cut caves. The
ASI also maintains ancient mounds and other similar sites, which
represent the remains of ancient habitation.
8.2 The Tamil Nadu State Archaeology Department was
founded in 1961. It has separate wings for excavations, chemical
laboratory wing, monuments, epigraphy and manuscripts. So far, this
Department has conducted excavation works at 40 different sites,
which include on shore and off shore excavations and has 93
monuments within its ambit. That apart, the Hindu Religious and
Charitable Endowments Department (in short, HR&CE Department)
custodian of ancient temples, its money, articles and land, is also
duty bound to protect and maintain the various temples under its
control, which are of archaeological and historical importance.
9.  Before proceeding further, it would be worthwhile to have
a look at the architectural excellence found in Mamallapuram and
some of the temples in Tamil Nadu.
9.1 Mamallapuram is an important place in the history of art
and its temples and sculptures are not only earliest in this region, but
also significant in variety and elegance. It is situated nearby a coastal
village, which is a great tourist spot and heritage attraction. Earlier, in
the reign of Pallava rulers, it was a major port. The formation of
Mamallapuram is the result of artistic works from 580 A.D. to 730A.D.
It is a unique site and is the only place in India, where all the three
stages of temple architecture, namely, cave temples, single stone
temples and structural temples can be seen. Open air base reliefs are
not found anywhere else in the country, except Mamallapuram. It is a
museum of temple architecture. There are many sculptures of
historical importance, besides many live natural scenes enshrined in
the rocks. The place known for its tourist attraction, has surprised
physicists and has been a subject matter for research scholars.
9.2 Meenakshi Amman Temple, a historic one located at
Madurai is an important pilgrimage place with Saiva tradition
attracting thousands of devotees. With huge gopurams, thousands of
sculptures, numerous sculpted pillared halls, which were built over
the centuries, stand even today as the masterpiece of Dravidian
architecture. Thiruparankundram Subramanya Swamy Temple is one
among six temples of Lord Muruga, built in rock-cut architecture and
the statues are carved on the wall of the Thiruparankundram rock
with antiquity traces in the Sangam Literature.
9.3  Ramanathaswamy Temple, Rameshwaram, dedicated to
Lord Siva, is one of the twelve Jyotirlinga temples. Appar, Sambandar
and Sundarar have glorified the temple with their songs. The temple
has        the  longest  and  magnificent corridor  with     the    advanced
architectural designs of the Tamil Kings. Thanjavur is the center of
architecture, art and religion of South India having the grand
Brihadeeswarar Temple, which is also called as Big Temple, the
largest one of the country with the world tallest tower and a huge
statue of Nandi as its marvel.
9.4  Srirangam Ranganathar Swamy Temple, dedicated to
Lord Vishnu, was constructed in the Tamil style of architecture
glorified in the Thiviya Pirabandham, the early medieval Tamil
literature of the Alvars. The temple is surrounded by seven
rectangular enclosures, one within the other and there are 21
gopurams, leading into these various enclosures. The architectural
portion of the temple begins with the fourth court, the outer wall of
which is massive height. Within the courtyard, there are two
interesting structures one is the Hall of a thousand carved granite
pillars, arranged in rows and another is 'Horse Court' which contains
rows of pillars carved as furiously rearing horses. Such significant and
monstrous architecture made in those early days, portray the ability
of the sculptors. Srirangam is an outstanding model, which has
reached the stage of a temple-town and that is why, it is about to be
enlisted as World Heritage Site.
9.5 Thiruvattaru Adikesava Perumal Temple, situated at
Kanyakumari District, is a notable temple, which was built with
granite stones and provided with a copper sheeted roof. The history
of the temple has been written by Professor A.K.Perumal as a
research book titled 'Adikesava Perumal Temple' which depicts the
various paintings enshrined in the temple. With more than 50
inscriptions in Tamil and number of stunning sculptures it has a note
in Purananooru, one of the oldest literatures in Tamil dating back to
2000 years, by the Poet Mangudi Maruthanar. The temple complex is
enormous and spans 150 acres, magnificent towers in all prakaras,
wooden carvings, wall paintings, sculptures relating to epics it is
declared as an ancient temple with high traditions.
9.6 Arunachaleswarar Temple, Tiruvannamalai is an ancient
one with the thousand pillared hall and the massive shrine of
Unnamalai Amman. Thirucourtalanatha Swamy Temple, Tenkasi was
constructed by Cholas with one of the 64 Shakti Peethams and the
Chitra Sabhai, the hall of pictures exemplifies the artistic talents of
the Tamils. Srivilliputhur Temple, dedicated to Lord Vishnu and Andal,
is the marvel of the Dravidian style of architecture with the
inscriptions from Chola, Pandya and Nayak rulers. Bhagavathi Amman
Temple, Kanyakumari located on the confluence of the Bay of Bengal,
the Arabian Sea and the Indian Ocean is said to be constructed over
3000 years ago.
9.7 As regards Temple Architecture, naturally our minds will
be attracted to the architectural designs and beauty of many kinds,
namely, Kara Kovil, KokudiKovil, AalaKovil and Perungovil, each with
different characteristics. All these types of temples have been
constructed with sense of devotion and hard work, taking note of the
necessity to record the history and to pass on the culture to the
future generations. Thus, our Kings have taken much care and
caution to see that the temples are built with an astounding skill with
a great sense of intelligence.
9.8  Cave  temples are  very  good   example       for    temple
architecture. The entire Thirukazhukundram temple was constructed
by digging a single massive rock, which is termed as “Otraikal
Mandapam” in Tamil. It is not just as temple that alone has been
constructed out of a single rock many temples have been constructed
like this. Similarly, Thirumurthi cave temple, Magisashura Mandapam
and         Varaagaperuman  cave  temple  have  been     constructed        in
Mamallapuram and two notable cave temples in Tiruchirappalli Hill.
These cave temples have been constructed without vimanam (upper
most structure). The Thirukokarnam (Gokarneshwarar) temple in
Pudukkottai is another cave temple constructed out of a rock with a
monolithic sivalinga. The manner of construction shows the skill, care
and caution adopted by the sculptors, to not only make it last long for
many hundreds of years, but also ensure that the basic features that
are required for a temple with its traditions and cultures, are not
compromised. But these rock temples are solid with its old traditions,
beauty, elegance and the pillars, reflecting the history of our land as
well the supreme architectural knowledge and skill.
9.9 The temples underwent spectacular and rapid expansion
with the construction of majestic gopuras, vimanas, mantapas with
exquisite sculptures and shrines during the 15thand 16thcenturies. The
rulers paid lavish attention to the temple by gold-plating its vimanas,
gifting it with thousands of pearls, necklaces with diamonds, gold
ornaments, revenue from prosperous villages and hundreds of cows.
The construction of a temple itself is a very difficult endeavour.
Efforts were also taken to preserve and gradually improve the temple
by adding many sub-temples, shrines, structures, tanks, mantapas
with incredibly beautiful sculptures and also maintaining them with
utmost care. The succeeding kings, even if with different lineage,
were magnanimous, tolerant and pious enough not to destroy or alter
the earlier sculptures to bring it to their style, rather they only put up
new structures which were huge and beautiful, portraying with great
elegance, the skill and history of this land.
9.10  There are extraordinary bronze images of the Gods in
our land. Most temples in Tamil Nadu have a moolavar, an idol of the
main deity made of stone and Urchavar, Bronze idol, which is mostly
used during festivals. The age of the Cholas constitutes the most
creative phase of south Indian history and is the one during which
Tamil culture reached a peak. The world renowned sculptor Rodin
considered the Nataraja image to be the most perfect representation
in the world of rhythmic movement. For an artistic appreciation of
south Indian bronzes, one is forced to turn to those few museums
and art galleries that have been able to acquire collections.
9.11 Temple bronzes are treasures of our land as they have
been made with utmost faith to religion, culture and related aspects,
depicting the tremendous talent of the sculptors in making the
vigrahas in whatever form or whatever pose, they wished to see
them. Every idol symbolises the character of the deity and conveys a
message. The perfection in creation is a tribute to the creator himself.
The bronze and panchaloka idols are lively enough to reflect the nine
different emotions of human perception. The bronze idols though
were recognized in ancient scriptures, were put into practice in the
new millennium by the cholas and pallavas. Such idols were often
part of the temple festivals held annually.
9.12 Thus, the prevalence of strong atmosphere of devotion
and reverence in the Tamil Nadu temples are evident from the
architectural excellence. In this connection, it has to be seen that the
culture of the people, their various religious activities, the manner of
worshipping the God, their way of life, devotion to God and hard work
which were all webbed together, have all been embodied in the
sculptures.
10.  Having noted the richness of cultural heritage in the state
of Tamil Nadu as referred to above, which needs to be nurtured,
preserved and retained for future generations, the Government
passed a bill in the legislature on Heritage Commission consisting of
experts         and    representatives   from   various     departments          and
Mamallapuram World Heritage Area Management Authority, however
nothing moved, which led to initiation of this 'pro bono publico'
litigation. After entertaining this case, taking note of the admitted fact
that our land is fortunate to have an ancient civilization and much
heritage value, the temple architecture being highly developed
science, a large number of monuments and temples are stated to be
unprotected          by the Archaeological Survey of India and / or
Government, this Court issued several directions to the respondent
authorities periodically, due to which, various developments took
place. The details of the same in chronological order are narrated as
 On 09.04.2015, keeping in mind the nature of the issue
involved herein and being suo motu proceedings, Mr.P.S.Raman
was appointed as Amicus Curiae to assist this Court, who
furnished details by way of report pointing out the lapses on the
part of the respondents.
 On 12.10.2015, denying the allegation leveled by the fifth
respondent viz., Heritage Conservation Society, commenting
upon the ongoing renovation works carried on in some temples,
the    Commissioner,     HR&CE     Department,       Chennai,       sixth
respondent in W.P.No.574 of 2015, filed a rejoinder stating that
some persons like the fifth respondent are filing petitions before
this Court with an intention to stall and prevent the various
renovation works under the guise of conservation of heritage. It
is the duty of the Government to oversee the proposals for
carrying out all kinds of repair and restoration works and to
give a face lift to the important temples situated in the town of
Kumbakonam. It is further stated that cleaning works are
carried out with abundant caution and they are using smooth
brushes for application of suitable chemicals to rub the stone
surface, in order to avoid more physical and water pressure on
the structures. It is also stated that the damages caused to the
temples were not due to any act of negligence, but only due to
the   ravage    of  time  beyond    the  control     of   the     HR&CE
 On 14.10.2015, this Court passed an order observing that the
heritage is of all the people – all citizens of the Tamil Nadu, of
this country and of the world, keeping in mind the importance
of it; that everything is not hunky dory, which is quite apparent
from the fact that even the list of more than 100 years old
temples with Archaeological significance has not been drawn up
and a study has begun only when the Court intervened in the
matter. It was further observed that the objective of the Court
is clear that the heritage temples with archaeological and
religious significance should be identified, maintained and
renovation be carried out in a manner to ensure that no
damage is caused. It was also observed that the staff of the
Public   Works   Department     (on  deputation      to   the     HR&CE
Department), may not have the expertise to carry out the task;
that even in the renovation of this High Court, this Court had to
take recourse to other agencies to ensure that the renovation
work is carried out in a manner as to maintain the original
glory. It was further observed that the Archaeological Survey of
India has an important role to play in all these in terms of the
input of technology, and the grievance made in the other
proceedings is that they are not even consulted most of the
times, taking note of the submission made by the learned
counsel for the Archaeological Survey of India that they have
expertise in conservation matters. It was also observed that
instead of trying to seclude and exclude others, the objective
should be to have a discussion with those stakeholders, so that
a better future plan is chalked out; if one may say so, there will
be no dearth of financial assistance from different sections of
the society if the Government finds itself short of funds.
Observing so, this Court called upon the HR&CE Department to
hold a discussion with the stakeholders in the Committee
represented before the Court. It was also ordered that the
details can be worked out in these proceedings and a final
picture arrived, which should be placed before this Court as to
how the Government proposes to proceed in the matter.
 A report has been filed by Dr.R.Nagaswamy, former Director of
Archeology, Government of Tamil Nadu, who worked with the
Committee. The Amicus Curiae also submitted his second
report, making certain suggestions. Paragraph-9 of the said
''a. There should be no more cementing or whitewashing
undertaken on the walls and ceilings thereby affecting the
beautiful Murals and Frescos which are in extremely delicate
and deteriorating state. The temples trust/administration
could even consider availing services of some Fresco restorers
so that these can be at least preserved in their present state
without any further deterioration.
b. The artistic antique doors which have been replaced by
modern doors should be attempted to be made reusable
instead of being discarded.
c. The several ancient sculptures and artefacts were seen
strewn around the 1000 pillar mandapam area without any
protection. They need to be immediately catalogued and kept
in safe custody.
d. Wherever flooring has been sought to be repaired,
replacement with new granite slabs should be the last option.
e. The new ramp constructed in the Horseman mandapam
should preferably be removed and instead a small wooden
ramp for use of the disabled may be made. This will prevent
unauthorised vehicular movement to the mandapam.
f.Construction of Stucco sculptures on top of the mandapams
and use of enamel/distemper paint should be avoided. In the
guise of restoration/restoration, nothing new should be added
to the original heritage structure.
g. The temple complex, in several places is being used as a
shed/go down for keeping debris including huge quantities of
wood. Apart from being aesthetically not in keeping with the
environment, the same are potential fire hazard. Steps should
be taken to remove all of them immediately.
h. The outer 3 prahars of the temple is now full of commercial
and residential buildings. The authorities should ensure that
no further construction is put up there and also stop the
existing constructions from adding floors so as to affect the
view of the gopurams.
i. Lastly, some disputes were raised about the processes
involved in the giving of tenders for the renovations. As it is
perceived to be not within the scope of this committee, no
comments are offered other than to state that possibly the fact
that it is almost entirely funded privately, the normal tender
process may or may not have been followed.
The second aspect over which considerable dispute has arisen
is relating to the removal of the Hanuman idol from its pre-
existing location to its present location and the present status
of the main deity (Ranganatha Swamy) which Balalayam is
being undertaken. As both these matters are relating to
agama shastras, this committee is not commenting about the
same. However, if this Hon'ble Court so directs with the
assistance of experts a report on the above can be given.
Nonetheless, it may be added here that when the writ
petitioner objected to the procedure apprehending some
structural changes to the sanctum sanctorum, the temple
authorities   including   the  Joint   Commissioner    gave    an
unconditional oral undertaking to the committee that no
structural changes would be made to the sanctum sanctorum
or the deity himself and that proper agama practices have
been followed for the balalayam.
j.The last general recommendation is that in undertaking
exercises of the present nature, the authorities try to follow
not only the guidelines by UNESCO in respect of this
Srirangam temple itself but also the general principles given
in the Burra Charter referred to by me in my first report."
 On 30.11.2015, this Court, taking into consideration the
aforesaid report, was of the view that the better arrangement
even as per the minutes of the meeting held on 02.11.2015 by
the Commissioner, HR&CE Department, envisages a preparation
of the manual to be formulated by the Expert Committee
appointed by the Government and that there was also an issue
of lack of expertise in respect of the people to carry out the
task. Dr.Nagaswamy's report also referred to the incalculable
harm being done in the process of renovation of inscriptions on
walls and pillars. Finally, this Court observed that necessary
meetings for achieving the objects should be called by the
Commissioner, HR&CE Department, along with the Amicus
Curiae and the team, which will proceed with drawing up of the
future plans of action to be placed before the Court, including
the possible participation of representatives of UNESCO. But,
the said observations have not been given effect to.
 On 25.01.2016, this Court in its order, observed that on one
aspect, there is an agreement that persons who are members
of the Committee, may individually give their suggestions for
computation of a Manual; the suggestions were to be given
within a period of one month; on the suggestions being
received, the Department will do the computation of a Draft
Manual within a period of one month thereafter; and this Draft
Manual will then be placed for discussion before the Committee,
whose meeting will be called by giving a minimum five days
notice in advance. This Court has also observed that the
learned Amicus Curiae and the Department are at free to obtain
suggestions from persons other than the Committee members;
the exercise of how best experts could be involved to carry out
the work should also go on simultaneously; and necessary
assistance can also be provided by the Central Government /
Archaeological Survey of India, on both the issues.
 On 16.04.2016, the sixth respondent viz., HR&CE Department
filed an affidavit pursuant to the order dated 25.01.2016,
stating that a draft manual has been prepared, after having
consultation and discussions with various Agama Experts and
Archaeologists stated therein; since the Experts from UNESCO
are not available in India, Experts in India who have contributed
largely on the structural conservation, have been consulted and
their suggestions have been taken in the preparation of draft
manual; the draft manual has been circulated to all the
stakeholders in the Committee represented before this Court to
express their views and suggestions on 31.03.2016; and a
meeting was attended by them wherein they have expressed
their views. A copy of the minutes of the meeting held on
07.04.2016 and the draft manual has been enclosed along with
the affidavit. The manual recommends that a comprehensive
conservation    management     plan has    to    be    prepared       in
consultation with Experts for temples of high value. The manual
has banned sand blasting and also emphasises water wash to
be done only with approval and supervision.
 On 05.07.2016, the Amicus curiae filed a report stating that a
Working Draft Conservation and Maintenance Manual for HR&CE
Temples has now been made ready and circulated and the
same has also been placed before this Court. In the report, the
Amicus curiae placed certain recommendations as regards the
draft manual, periodic feedback on the recommendations of the
manual, safeguards that must be put in place before any work
is undertaken, listing / enumeration of all the temples in Tamil
Nadu under the purview of HR&CE Department, the need for
trained stapathis and the need to ensure enlistment of trained
cryptographers to undertake recording and explanations of the
various ancient inscriptions in the ancient temples. Taking note
of the same, this Court has passed the following order:
“We have heard different parties at length.
2.The learned Amicus has given certain suggestions and the learned
Advocate General requests for some time to examine the same for
their implementation.
3.There has been some interesting exchange of communication with
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
(UNESCO). In fact, Mr.Rangarajan Narasimhan, who is one of the
petitioners had approached the UNESCO in view of the stand taken
earlier before us on 16.04.2016 in W.P.No.574 of 2015 to the effect
that experts from UNESCO are not available in India. The UNESCO
has unequivocally stated that one of their oldest field offices is
actually in New Delhi since 1948. Not only that, they claim to have
been in touch with the Government of Tamilnadu particularly
between 2008 and 2010 qua the study on Chettinad heritage. Insofar
as to whether the particular person has some credentials with the
UNESCO, the position has been explained. But we need not get into
that issue. Suffice to say that thereafter, the HR & CE Department
addressed a response to the UNESCO's letter on 21.06.2016 and in
response thereto on 04.07.2016, the UNESCO has raised such a
question qua the conservation manual. It is the view of UNESCO that
there may be a need to widen the scope/improve the means of the
consultation process. It is their view that the manual cannot be
validated unless it is tested on the ground and informed by practical
experience and they suggested to take up a small conservation
project as a pilot case. In view of the Department itself expressing its
difficulties due to the lack of staff under the Department, it is opined
that the modalities of monitoring the status of conservation of
temples needs to be visited and there should be reviewing the whole
institutional mechanism of temple conservation. The important part
is   that   UNESCO    has   expressed   its  willingness  to   assist  the
Department in undertaking reviewing of institutional mechanism for
conservation of temples and work out the strategy for improvement.
4.We can thus see no reason why the benefit of the expertise of
UNESCO should not be available, especially in view of their
willingness. In fact, Mr.Rangarajan Narasimhan states that if a
request is made to UNESCO to participate in the proceedings on the
next date, they would be more than willing to do so.
5.We would thus request the representative of the UNESCO, who can
make us more informed on the issue, to be in Court on the next date
of hearing, for which arrangement may be made by the State
6.Mr.Rangarajan Narasimhan seeks to draw our attention to the
order dated 30.11.2015 in W.P.No.574 of 2015 more specifically to
paragraph 12, where we had observed that the HR & CE Department
must go slow in the matter of renovations for the time being till a
proper path is laid ahead since the heritage ought not to be
destroyed in that process. In that context, we had directed stoppage
of any demolition, but observed that the essential works may be
carried out. The petitioner's contention is that the expression
“essential works” is being mis-interpreted, which needs elucidation.
7.In our view, there can be no doubt about what is meant by the
expression “essential works”. This is a reference to works which
cannot brook any delay, as the structure may itself collapse in the
meantime.
8.The learned counsel for the Archaeological Survey of India states
that   there  are   number   of   encroachments    and   movement      of
unauthorised vehicles in front of Mahabalipuram Monument area and
the   Archaeological   Survey   of  India  is  taking   steps.   Certain
suggestions have been made by the learned Amicus in this behalf.
The   Archaeological   Survey    of  India  is  to  inform    the   local
administration as to what steps have to be taken as a precaution,
which shall be duly implemented by the local administration and the
police authorities.
9.Copy of this order be issued to the State Government as well as
Mr.Rangarajan Narasimhan, so that it can be communicated to the
representative of the UNESCO. Copy of this order be also issued to
the learned Amicus.”
 On 23.08.2016, this Court passed a detailed order, which for
better      appreciation     of    the   issue    involved,       is   extracted
The Court is in receipt of a copy of a letter dated 15.07.2016
addressed by the Director and UNESCO Representative to Bhutan,
India, Sri Lanka and Maldives, to the Commissioner, Hindu Religious
and Charitable Endowment Department. The opinion of the UNESCO
as reflected in the letter is that it may be difficult to consider the
manual prepared as a conservation manual as per the common
professional understanding, since it fails to address the basic
principles of such a manual, i.e. the typical conservation manual
should provide who does what, when and how regarding routine
maintenance, time-bound conservation projects and emergency
situation. There are certain other basic questions which have been
raised in an annexure styled as ''Questions related to the Draft
Manual''. An important aspect emphasized is that the service manual
does not solve the problem unless there is adequate institutional
mechanism to ensure the quality of conservation work, something
with which we have been deeply concerned. The UNESCO has
advised to review the current procedures of the department including
those related to decision making for choice of the temples for
conservation work, extent of work, selection of a contractor and
monitoring of its work, etc., as well as the human resource basis of
the department. Simultaneously, the letter also opines that the draft
manual     nonetheless    contains    some    useful    observations      /
recommendations to follow-up, as set out hereunder:
•   Reconcile the principle of Agama Shastra and international
conservation standards, thereby develop a clear guideline for
•   Graded-Inventory of temples on the basis of heritage values;
•   Comprehensive conservation and management plan (for key
•   The first step to be taken have also been set out as
•   Set up of a conservation experts and stakeholders for a fact-
finding mission to identify the issues in conservation
practice through the cases studies of 5 – 6 temples where the
conservation    projects  are   going-on    or   were   recently
•   Expert workshop on Agama Shastra and conservation in
•   Review of the inventory of temples under the responsibility of
your department and its grading methodology.
The UNESCO has expressed its willingness to work with the
department and coordinate such activities provided that expenses for
work and fee for experts are met by the Government.
2.The letter also refers to another aspect, i.e. that two
properties proposed by the Government of Tamil Nadu for a future
World Heritage status and included in the tentative list in April 2014
are Sri Ranganathaswamy Temple, Srirangam and Chettinad Village
Clusters of the Tamil Merchants. In this context, it has been observed
that this successful inscription of a site on the World Heritage list
relies not only on its outstanding universal value, but increasingly on
the ''availability of institutional and legal framework to ensure the
conservation of the site as per the international norm''. Thus, the
future inclusion in the final list of the World Heritage list itself
requires some necessary action. In that context, it has been
observed that review of the current standards and procedure for the
conservation not only of temples but also heritage in general will,
therefore, be the first step. We have penned down these details only
to once again emphasize the importance of the subject matter being
dealt with and the significance of the same for protection and
recognition of the heritage and culture of Tamil Nadu.
3.There    is also   a  subsequent   letter   of  18.08.2016     in
furtherance of the earlier letter requesting the following first steps to
•   Set up a team of conservation experts and stakeholders for a
fact-finding mission to identify the issues in current
conservation practices through the case studies of 5 – 6
temples where the conservation projects are going-on or were
•   Expert workshop on conservation in Agama Shastra;
•   Review of the inventory of temples under the responsibility of
HR & CE Department and its grading methodology
These activities will be important to undertake, and as a next phase,
as in depth review of the management system of HR&CE to set a
baseline, is suggested. UNESCO will be happy to coordinate these
activities provided that the costs are met by the Government of
Tamil Nadu. The request is for these to be examined in the hearing of
the Court scheduled for today.
4.We are of the view that the HR & CE Department should
proceed in terms of the suggestions of the UNESCO as contained in
the letter of 15thJuly, 2016 with the annexure and the letter of
18thAugust, 2016 and hold further discussions and thereafter, file a
status report before this Court as to the progress made and what is
the time schedule within which the remaining aspects has to be
addressed, in a chart form.
5.Learned counsel for the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI)
submits that a letter dated 29.07.2016 was addressed to the District
Collector, Kancheepuram, recommending what action should be
taken followed by a reminder of 11.08.2016. However, nothing is
stated to have been happened despite the direction contained in para
8 of our last order dated 05.07.2016 that on the ASI informing the
local administration as to what steps have to be taken, the same
should be duly implemented by the local administration and the
police authorities.
6.We may note that the ASI has filed photographs before us
which show the extent of the problem where large areas have been
encroached upon even blocking the view of the monuments.
7.A map has also been placed before us showing what the
position is of the area under ASI, the bus stand and the bunk shops
in the prohibited area which are required to be removed.
8.Learned Amicus Curiae has referred to his report dated
25.08.2015 where near the sea, the Mahishasuramardhini monument
and the broken lion rock exist, which are not even enclosed. The
recommendation was to widen the area to enclose these also in the
protected area, with steps being taken to prevent the vehicular traffic
near the monuments. There are certain other photographs also of
broken sculptures in the VarahaMantapam, the damages found on
the Deity and on the Mantapam and a pay and use toilet complex
constructed inside the reserved area.
9.The latter aspect pointed out by the learned Amicus would
have to be addressed by the ASI, which can file a status report in
respect of the same.
10.As far as the first aspect mentioned on the basis of the
report of the ASI is concerned, the District Collector, Kancheepuram,
to take steps and file a status / compliance report.
11.The aforesaid actions be taken within a period of six (6)
weeks.
12.We make it clear that if any litigation is initiated qua the
same, it shall be listed only before this Bench.
13.As a last aspect which we may note is that an affidavit has
been filed by the Executive Officer of the ArulmighuPadalathri
Kancheepuram District, claiming the necessity of certain work to be
carried out qua the Gopuram. We would like the learned Amicus to
look into this issue and give his opinion to us on the next date of
hearing.
14.A copy of the order be issued to the State Government, to
the learned Amicus, to Mr.Rangarajan Narasimhan and also to the
 On 24.10.2016, the second respondent filed a compliance
affidavit pursuant to the order dated 23.08.2016 passed by this
court, in which it is stated that the second respondent –
Archaeological Survey of India, Chennai Circle, Chennai had
visited the monumental site at Mamallapuram on 20.09.2016
along with other supporting staff to assess the status of
particular sculptures which were pointed out by the learned
Amicus Curiae and prepared the status report. As far as the
removal of encroachments and movement of unauthorized
vehicles in front of Mamallapuram Monument, forming part of
parallel road and shifting of bus stand are concerned, so far no
action has been taken by the district administration in spite of
the direction of this Court dated 23.08.2016.
 An affidavit has also been filed on behalf of the sixth
respondent in W.P.No.574 of 2015, stating that in response to
the suggestion of UNESCO, a letter was sent to them on
16.08.2016 with a proposal to conduct workshop in Chennai
with the participation of UNESCO. After deliberations and
discussions, it was agreed to have a pre-workshop meeting.
Agenda for the meeting was also fixed and the meeting was
conducted     on   21.10.2016.    In   the    said     meeting,       the
Commissioner and Additional Commissioner (Tiruppani), HR&CE
Department have participated. Keeping in mind the cases
pending     before   this  Court,    the    Commissioner,           State
Archaeological Department, Egmore and Archaeological Survey
of India, Chennai Circle have been addressed on 09.03.2016 to
send a list of names to form an expanded Committee / Panel to
individually visit and offer expert opinion on the proposals of
renovations from heritage temples under the control of HR&CE
Department of Tamil Nadu. A Screening Committee has been
suggested in the State and Regional levels to study and
approve proposals submitted for any renovation of temple of
heritage value. The sixth respondent stated that after the
meeting, they felt it appropriate to coordinate with UNESCO on
the points suggested by this Court. The affidavit also pointed
out to various improvements undergone and also the steps to
be   taken    in  respect    of   ArulmiguMariamman             Temple,
Kottaimariamman         Temple,       Salem        and        Arulmigu
 On 24.10.2016, an Inspection Report on a group of monuments
in Mamallapuram, was filed stating the conditions prevailing in
the  Kotaikal    Mandapa,    Toilet   Block,   Rock-cut       sculpture
representing a group of elephants, monkeys and peacock,
Ganesh Ratha, Rock-cut Varaha temple containing Varaha and
Vama     incarnations     of     Vishnu      (Varaha        Mandapa),
Mahishasuramardhini rock standing in the sea to the north of
the shore temple and two small carved rocks to the south of
shore temple. Suggestions were also given in the said report to
protect those sculptures.
 On 25.10.2016, this Court passed an order in the miscellaneous
petitions filed in W.P.No.574 of 2015, directing the Amicus
Curiae to look into the issue and make suggestions to this Court
keeping in mind the requirement of essential works both from
the perspective of architecture as well as Agamas. It has also
been observed in the said order that appropriate course would
be to appoint a Committee of Experts who would consider the
individual applications of the temples to decide what would be
the essential work so as to avoid unnecessary delay in this
aspect as well as multiplicity of proceedings.
 On        03.11.2016,    an    affidavit   has  been      filed    by     the
Commissioner, HR&CE Department, Chennai referring to the
order passed by this Court on 25.10.2016, stating that the
State    Government     had     identified  Thiru.K.T.Narasimhan,
of India and nominated him as Consultant for Srirangam
Temple Rampart walls restoration in G.O.Ms.No.93 dated
17.05.2013; thereafter the Government designated him as
Consultant Archaeologist/ Conservationist in G.O.Ms.No.171
dated 29.06.2013, which is under challenge in W.P.No.37619 of
2015. It is also stated that the State Government, vide
G.O.Ms.No.199     dated   08.08.2013,   constituted       an    Expert
Committee consisting of four members with expertise in the
field of conservation to protect the Conservation / Restoration /
Renovation of Ancient Heritage Temples/ Monuments. For
restoration   and   preservation   of murals,    the    Government
constituted an Advisory-cum-Supervisory Committee (Expert
Committee) and Working Committee in G.O.Ms.No.237 dated
11.10.2013 considering the need to restore and preserve the
murals. Many retired personnel have been identified for giving
their recommendations / reports to carry out works for
renovation / repairs. It is also stated that all these works are
being carried out in the temples in accordance with the
Agamas, since those are living temples where devotees worship
everyday in thousands. It is further submitted that for
preparation of a conservation manual, a Committee has also
been formed consisting of experts in different fields. An order in
G.O.Ms.No.264, Tourism, Culture and Religious Endowments
Department dated 01.11.2016 has also been passed forming
the State Level Committee and Regional Level Committee for
carrying out these tasks. Stating so, it has been prayed to
modify the order dated 25.10.2016 insofar as it relates to the
formation of a new Committee overlooking the Committee
already in place.
 On 04.11.2016, this Court, after hearing the parties at length,
passed an order to the effect that all the miscellaneous petitions
filed by the individual temples be referred to a Committee
consisting of the following specializations:
It  was    further  ordered    that   the     Departmental
Representative will act as the Secretary of the Committee for
facilitating its working and for furnishing records and that the
Committee will look into the issue of repairs and renovations to
be carried out in terms of what the Court observed in its order
dated 25.10.2016. It was also ordered that the Committee
would have to give priority depending on the urgency, as some
religious ceremonies have to be performed for which there are
designated days.
 On 07.11.2016, this Court constituted the Expert Committee to
carry out the essential works in the temples.
 On 19.12.2016, the sixth respondent filed an affidavit stating
that    a  letter  dated  26.11.2016    was   issued     to   UNESCO
requesting to send the proposal and in response to the same, a
letter was received from UNESCO stating that UNESCO experts
are going to intervene in the renovation of temples including
Moolavar Deity for 10 temples which has been objected by
several devotees. Since the issues relating to Agamas are
totally religious, intervention by an organisation like UNESCO in
conducting an Agama Workshop would likely to cause lot of
resentment among various sections. It is finally stated that a
letter was issued to UNESCO in this regard and they are
awaiting reply for the same.
 On 22.12.2016, this Court has placed on record the assurance
given by the learned Advocate General that UNESCO would be
assured that they are going to be welcomed to perform their
task which they propose to do. This Court also recorded the
affidavit  filed  by  the  Commissioner,    HR&CE        Department,
specifically   in para-5,   “a  clear  unwelcome       indication      to
UNESCO” and observed that such stand taken in para-5 has to
be rejected in toto and accordingly issued a direction to file a
proper    affidavit  by   the   Commissioner      of    the      HR&CE
 On 10.01.2017, the sixth respondent filed another affidavit
stating that a letter dated 28.12.2016 was issued to UNESCO to
the effect that the earlier letter dated 19.12.2016 sent by the
Department to them shall be treated as withdrawn and that the
Department takes pleasure in welcoming UNESCO and assures
to provide all the necessary support for carrying forward the
fact finding mission and for the conduct of Agama workshop.
 On 12.01.2017, this Court perused the affidavit filed by the
Commissioner, HR&CE Department and observed that progress
would be made in the matter, with collaboration of UNESCO
experts.
 While        so, the   Executive  Officer of  Arulmighu       Meenakshi
Sundareswarar Thirukoil, filed WMP.No.30869 of 2017 in
WP.No.37619 of 2015 (which was by order dated 11.01.2021,
delinked from the said writ petition and tagged along with this
suo motu WP.No.574 of 2015) seeking impleadment and
permission to continue the ongoing renovation works in the said
temple.
 Similarly, Mr.Rangarajan Narasimhan, party-in-person, filed
WMP.No.19652 of 2018 in WP.No.574 of 2015, to issue
necessary directions to the HR&CE Department and the
Executive officer of Sri Ranganatha Swamy Temple, Srirangam,
to furnish certain information relating to the said temple as
requested in his RTI application.
 On 22.06.2018, in W.M.P.No.16006 of 2018 in W.P.No.574 of
2015, filed by the HR&CE Department, praying to restructure
the Expert Committee, this Court held that if any person, who is
working    in  the  Government     College   of    Architecture       and
Sculpture, Mamallapuram, is appointed once again, the element
of bias is likely to be put forth or that he will support the
Government.       Observing     so,    this     Court       felt     that
Mr.K.Dakshinamoorthy       can     be    the     replacement           for
MuthaiahStapathi and accordingly, directed him to take charge
of the traditional Stapathi of the Expert Committee. It was also
held that though the two Agama Experts are not cooperating
with the other members of the Committee, their views have to
be elicited before replacement and accordingly, ordered notices
to the two Agama Experts, viz., Sri.StalaShayanaBhattacharyar
and Dr.S.Arunasundaram, through Court as well as privately
returnable by 09.08.2018.
11.   On 30.11.2018, as per the administrative order of the
Hon'ble Chief Justice, the other writ petitions touching upon the
protection, maintenance and sustenance of the ancient temples, idols,
temple lands, murals and other places / articles, which are also of
archaeological and historical importance, were also listed along with
this suo motu Public Interest Litigation before this Bench under the
caption “specially ordered cases”.
12.   Thereafter, pursuant to the order dated 08.01.2019
passed by a Division Bench of Madurai High Court, WP(MD)No.24178
of 2018 was tagged with this suo motu writ petition batch. The prayer
made in the said writ petition is to issue a mandamus directing the
Secretary         to   Government,    Tourism,    Culture     and      Religious
Endowments Department, Chennai, to appoint all the members as
informed by the Commissioner, Hindu Religious and Charitable
Endowments           Department,   Chennai,    vide    his    letter      bearing
Na.Ka.No.25639/2018/Y2 dated 12.06.2018 to the State Level
Heritage Screening Committee. According to the petitioner therein,
the said Committee is not functioning for want of appointment of
members and the hundreds of temples have been waiting in queue
for years together to get approval of the same for renovation / repair
works.          Referring    to   Damodara    Narayanaperumal          Koil     at
Thirukkannangudi and Mari Mutharamman Thirukoil at Aralwaimozhi,
Kanyakumari District, he stated that in these temples, Balalayam
ceremonies were conducted before five years, but renovation works
are yet to be started for want of approval from the said Committee.
Through the information received from the RTI, he stated that the
said         Committee     consists of   9   members,    viz.,    (i)Additional
(iv)Conservation Architect (v)SE/EE of the Department (vi)Expert
from State Archaeology (vii)Expert from ASI (viii)Agama Expert as
required for the temple and (ix)Expert from history, epigraphy,
iconography and fine arts, out of which, 7 posts are lying vacant.
Therefore, all the vacancies in the Committee need to be filled up
immediately by the Government.
13.   On 04.12.2020, this Bench, taking note of the object
behind the constitution of the Expert Committee that the heritage
temples with Archaeological and religious significance should be
identified and maintained; and restoration be carried out in a manner
to ensure that no damage is caused and also considering the fact that
more number of cases are pending for want of opinion of the Agama
Experts, passed an order in WMP.Nos.16006 of 2018 and 13991 of
2020 in WP.No.574 of 2015, thereby reconstituting the Expert
Committee and issuing certain directions to it, the relevant portion of
“16.That apart, this Court is inclined to issue the following directions
(i)    The   HR&CE    Department      shall   formulate    procedure     for
convening   the   meetings   of   the   Expert    Committee,     with   the
convenience of its members and circulate the required papers with
Agenda, well in advance.
(ii)   The members of the          Committee shall      start functioning
immediately and decide the pending cases at the earliest possible
time and communicate the same to the concerned parties.
(iii)  The Committee shall consider all the required details of
Agama,    Samitha    structural    stability,   historical  aspects    and
archaeological nature for approving the works proposed.
(iv)   All the members shall co-operate and co-ordinate among
themselves and with the HR&CE Department, for smooth and
effective functioning of the Committee.
(v)      The Committee meetings shall not be postponed unnecessarily
and the cases shall be taken up on the basis of their nature and
urgency.
(vi)     In the unavoidable circumstances, the opinion of two Agama
Experts out of four (one from Saiva Agama Expert and another from
Vaishnava Agama Expert) is sufficient for disposal of the cases, where
the opinion of the Agama Experts is essential.
(vii)    The members shall have necessary consultation/cross check
with the religious scriptures before expressing any opinion in respect
of every temple along with the details relating to the petitioning
temples.
(viii)   A detailed questionnaire, to be filled up by the petitioning
temples, shall be placed before the Expert Committee well in advance
before the day fixed for meetings for deliberations, so that the
'Agama perspective' can be considered.
(ix)     The participation of the stakeholders / representative of the
petitioning temples, if required, shall be decided by the Committee.
(x)      The HR&CE Department shall take care of the transport
facilities to the members of the Committee.
(xi)     While   taking  decision,  the    Committee  shall  ensure the
protection and preservation of the monuments and ancient temples
and their heritage and make proper deliberation in this regard.
(xii)    The decision of the Committee shall be final and binding on
the parties.
(xiii)   If there is any grievance, it is always open to the members of
the Committee / HR&CE Department to approach this Court with
necessary petition/memo for appropriate orders.
However, this order is subject to the final order to be passed in the
main writ petition in W.P. No. 574 of 2015.”
14.   After reconstituting the Expert Committee by this Court,
Mr.Rangarajan            Narasimhan,        pointing     out   certain      lapses      and
shortcomings in the effective functioning of the said Committee and
raising allegations against some of its members, has taken out as
many as 7 miscellaneous petitions viz., WMP.Nos.1810, 1814, 1816,
1818, 1819, 1821 an 1822 of 2021 seeking appropriate directions to
the HR&CE Department.
15.   With the above backdrop, we have heard all the parties at
length and perused the affidavits, counter affidavits, rejoinders and
reports along with supportive documents filed in the form of typed set
of papers before this Court. Though this Court has issued many
directions, the respondent authorities, more particularly the HR&CE
department, have not come up with a mechanism to protect the
monuments, temples, temple lands and properties, idols, etc., which
necessitates this Court to ponder for a solution to ensure that a
proper working system is to be formulated, in the interest of the
monuments, temples and public at large.
16. As mentioned earlier, the issues revolved around the
present cases are relating to the protection of historical monuments,
heritage sites, temples and its properties. At the cost of repetition,
there is dire need to manage and conserve our ancient cultural
heritage and monuments employing better advanced technology in
protecting, preserving and nourishing the same.
17. To recapitulate, India is a land united with abundant
diversity in the form of language, culture, tradition, arts, folklore,
music, knowledge, natural resources, etc. Pre-Moghul and Pre-English
history would reveal that the country was ruled by various kings who
though were diverse in their language and culture, were united by
their love for arts in its different forms. The temple culture originated
from this land has spread to many countries. The comparative study
of various ancient religions has brought out several commonalities.
The legends of this land are recognized and accepted throughout the
world. The religious faiths and beliefs and the value of hymns are now
accepted by the people of other countries despite there being an
outcry against the same in our own country for political appeasement.
The knowledge of the ancient people in science and technology was
far superior and advanced. In the entire country, the State of Tamil
Nadu has the highest number of monuments and temples with
heritage value, which are not only a source of identification of the
ancient culture, but also a testimony of pride and knowledge of the
talent in the field of arts, science and sculpture. Even during the rule
of the British, steps were taken to harness, preserve, develop and
utilize the talent and knowledge of the artisans in the state and as a
result, in 1850, the Madras School of Art was established by
Dr.Alexander Hunter with a view to preserve the ancient craft of
sculpture in this state and to provide trained workers needed for
renovation of temples and other works of art.
18. After the Independence,    though    the    temples       were
brought under the control of state, the autonomy of other religious
institutions was preferred. The state of Tamil Nadu is blessed to have
the most ancient temples in the country. It is home to more than
42,000 temples, out of which, more than 38,000 temples come under
the control of the HR&CE Department. The age of some temples go
back to at least 2,000 years. The temples consist of deities in the
form of idols, besides sculptures in the form of idols with marvellous
architecture. The location of the temples, pillars and deities at a
particular place are not without a cause. Similarly, the traditions and
practices have significances of their own. They are as a result of a
spiritual or miraculous event recognised in the legends and agamas.
The sculptors with sound knowledge in the history, legends, etc were
called as Stapathis. The assistance of the Stapathis is required for
construction / renovation / restoration work in the temples. The
in-house mechanism as suggested by UNESCO would require every
temple to have a Stapathi.
19. It is not to be forgotten that even before several
centuries, the sculptors from this land had travelled throughout the
world and built temples with great architectural design and precision.
The temples in Indonesia, Srilanka and Cambodia stand testimony to
the same. They were well versed not only in the art of sculpting, but
also in the customs and were knowledgeable to bring to life, every
deity with precision. Many temples of this state have now been
declared as places of Archaeological importance. Even then, there are
many other temples, yet to be declared and displayed all the
characteristics     of uniqueness  and    ancientness    warranting        such
declaration and protection. The state is now facing an indifferent
situation, where it is riddled with idol thefts on one hand and need to
preserve/repair/resurrect the existing temples including the deities on
the other.
20. The HR&CE Department is the custodian of most of the
temples and the properties including the idols belonging to them. It is
their primary duty to protect, maintain and safeguard the temples
and its valuable idols/antiques, which, this Court with great anguish,
expresses that the department has failed to do. The protection of the
temples would, without saying, go on to imply protection of the
temple lands as well as all the activities associated with the temple
and its tradition. It is startling to find that the HR&CE department
with all its income from major temples has not been able to maintain
historical temples and safeguard the Idols, which in market, have
antique value based on their age. Some temples in the state have
also been recognised by the UNESCO as heritage sites. Many temples
constructed at least 2000 years ago or much before, recognised by
UNESCO, are in ruins. Neither the Archaeology Department nor the
HR&CE Department has shown interest to identify and protect them.
This has also come to the advantage of the miscreants, who have laid
their hands on the Idols. Some of the officials are only interested in
reaping the benefits of their position in the department, without
adhering to the task entrusted to them with devotion.
21. The Tamil  Nadu   Hindu    Religious    and      Charitable
Endowments Act, XXII of 1959 came into force with effect from 28th
April, 1960. It has been 61 years and yet, the HR&CE department has
not even taken inventory of the idols, properties, jewels and other
Articles gifted to and owned by the temples. Further, the department
has not computerised the details of idols, jewels and properties of the
temples and provided adequate ICON Centres with surveillance to
keep safe custody of the valuable idols in the centre and in the
temples. This has led to the advantage of the culprits, who have
aided in smuggling the Idols out of the country. As the theft of
Panchaloka idols worth crores kept on increasing, the Idol Wing, CID,
vide         G.O.Ms.No.2098,         Home      (Police     IV)    Department,         dated
07.10.1983, a first of its kind, was created to investigate and recover
the Idols, but, the steps taken by the department to arrest the theft,
are unsatisfactory. Now, the wing is also effectively ineffective.
22.    It is also the duty of the state to protect the monuments
including Idols and antiques of historical value. That is why Article 49
was incorporated in the Directive Principles of State Policy (Part IV of
the Constitution), which for the sake of reference, is extracted below:
"49. Protection of monuments and places and objects of
national importance. - It shall be the obligation of the State to protect
every monument or place or object of artistic or historic interest,
declared by or under law made by Parliament to be of national
importance, from spoliation, disfigurement, destruction, removal,
According to Article 51A(f), it shall be duty of every citizen of India to
value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture. The
Constitution thus, not only brings an obligation on the state, but also
a duty on every citizen of this country to value and preserve the rich
heritage of the culture of this country, which goes without saying that
it includes temples, arts, sculptures and scriptures. However, it is the
sorry state of affairs that the Government has miserably failed in its
duty not only to protect the places of national importance, but also
the properties of temples, such as idols, lands etc. Therefore, the
Directive       Principles   of State   Policy must be        directed      towards
protection of the ancient monuments and Idols and thwart all
attempts to damage and/or smuggle them.
23.  It is the primary responsibility of the HR&CE Department
to ensure that the properties of all the religious endowments are
under protection. The definition of “religious endowment” under
Section 6(17) and “religious institution” under Section 6(18) include
the Mutts. For better understanding, the statement of objects and
reasons to the enactment of Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and
“A large part of small, ancient and dilapidated temples
which form part of our rich heritage are lying uncared for: Many of
these temples are in ruins: Lack of adequate finance has led to this
situation of neglect. It is, therefore proposed to reorganize the
Hindu    Religious   and  Charitable   Endowments       Administration
Department by the establishment of Temple Administration Board
so as to ensure proper maintenance and administration of the
temples besides observance of worship and rituals in the temples.
The   Endeavour   is  to  have    a    two   tier  system     of
administration, namely Temple Administration Board at the apex
level and a District committee at a District level. The Chief Minister
will be the Chairman ex-officio, of the Temple Administration
Board. The overall superintendence and governance of temples
including appointment of trustees of temples having an annual
income of Rs.1,00,000/- and above are to be vested with the
Temple Administration Board and the power to appoint trustees for
temples having an annual income of less than Rs.1,00,000/- is to
be vested with the District Committees. It is also proposed to
entrust the powers of the Commissioner, Deputy Commissioner
and Assistant commissioner under the Act, except certain powers
of judicial nature, etc. with temple administration Board and
District Committees, suitably.”
Thus, it is clear from the aforesaid statement of objects and reasons
to the Amendment Act, 46 of 1991 that a Board was created with the
Chief Minister of the State at the helm of affairs to take necessary
action to protect the ancient temples.
24.     Section 23 of the HR&CE Act, 1959 deals with the power
and duties of the Commissioner in respect of temples and religious
...Subject to the provisions of this Act, the administration of all
temples (including specific endowments attached thereto) and all
religious endowments shall be subject to the general superintendence
and control of the Commissioner and such superintendence and control
shall include the power to pass any orders which may be deemed
necessary to ensure that such temples and endowments are properly
administered and that their income is duly appropriated for the
purposes for which they were founded or exist :
Provided that the Commissioner shall not pass any order
prejudicial to any temple or endowment unless the trustees
concerned    had   a  reasonable   opportunity    of  making     their
representations.”
As per the above section, it is the duty of the Commissioner to ensure
the object of the HR&CE Act, namely the effective administration of
the temples, which includes the proper maintenance of the temples,
idols, paintings and the properties of the temples.
25.     The Commissioner and the officials are duty bound to
observe the forms and ceremonies of the institution administered,
implying that all the day to day traditional procedures are adhered to.
It      would      also    include     that   the   essential     works      including     the
resurrection of damaged idols, pillars, paintings, etc. are to be carried
out.         It   is    a    proven      with   scientific     result     that    periodical
resurrection/renovation decreases the possibility of damage.
26.     Section 97 enables the Commissioner to create a common
fund through which maintenance of old and needy temples and their
buildings and paintings can be carried out. The said provision is
“Section   97.Creation   of  Hindu   Religious   and   Charitable
Endowments Common Good Fund.—(1) It shall be lawful for the
Commissioner to create a Fund to be called the Hindu Religious
and Charitable Endowments Common Good Fund [hereinafter in
this section referred to as the said Fund], out of the contributions
voluntarily made by the religious institutions from their surplus
funds or by any person for the renovation and preservation of
needy temples       and   their building  and    paintings,   for the
promotion and propagation of tenets common to all or any class
of religious institutions and for any of the purposes specified in
sub-section (1) of section 66.
1-A.The Commissioner may, on a direction from the
Government, transfer to the said Fund, any surplus or such
portion thereof, as may be specified in the direction, remaining
in the Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments
Administration Fund after the repayment of the amounts
specified in sub-section (2) of section 12 and sub-section (2) of
section 96.
(2)The said Fund shall be vested in and such administered
by the Commissioner in such manner as may be prescribed.”
It is to be noted here that the word 'temple' would include with it ‘the
deity’ and ‘the structures’ in the temple. It is also worthwhile to point
out that the funds earned by the temple can be used only for the
fulfilment of the objects of this Act spelled in Section 66, including
maintenance of the same temple and/or other temples and for
propagation of tenets common to all or any class of religious
institution. It cannot be diverted or transferred to even other
departments or to the state exchequer for any other use. There are
many temples in the state which are ruined and unattended; there
are many temples, which though ancient and are of spiritual and
historical value, do not earn any income; and there are many
temples, which have surplus income. It is therefore, the duty of the
department to identify those temples, which require adequate and
immediate attention including allocation of funds for repair/renovation
and for ensuring that the daily rituals are promptly performed.
27.     Emphasizing the importance of maintenance of the
temples, images and paintings, architectures and sculptures, which
cannot be achieved, except by periodical inspection and supervision,
the Government has been empowered to frame rules as per Section
(1) The Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out
the purposes of this Act.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the forgoing power,
(i) all matters expressly required or allowed by this Act to be
(xii) the custody of jewels and other valuables and documents of
religious institutions and the conditions and restrictions subject to
which the jewels and other valuables of religious institutions may
(xvii)   the    preservation,   maintenance,    management        and
improvement      of  the  properties   and  buildings   of  religious
institutions including architectural, sculptural and epigraphic
(xviii) the inspection and supervision of the properties and
buildings of religious institutions, the reports to be submitted by
persons making such inspection and supervision and the fees
leviable for such inspection, supervision and report;
(xix) the preservation of the images in temples;
(xxii)    the preparation   and   sanction   of the    estimates    and
acceptance of tenders, in respect of public works and for supplies
(xxiii) the qualifications to be possessed by the officers and
servants for appointment to offices in religious institutions and
the conditions of service of all such officers and servants;
28.     Accordingly,       the    rules     on     different      subjects       as
enumerated in Section 116 have been framed by the Government,
G.O.Ms.No.275, C.T. & R.E. Department, dated 16th July 1997 -
SRO No. A-102(a) 1987.- In exercise of the powers conferred by sub-
section (4) of section 7 read with sub-section (1) of section 116 of the
Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act 1959
(Tamil Nadu Act 22 of 1959), the Governor of Tamil Nadu hereby
4.The Advisory Committee shall meet at least once in six months
and more often if need be as decided by the Chairman.
12.The Advisory Committee may make recommendations in
3. Establishment and maintenance of University or colleges or
other institutions with special provisions for the study of Hindu
Religion, Philosophy or Sastras or for imparting instructions in
5. Renovation of temples in need of repairs by enlisting the
6. General suggestions in accordance with terms of the Trust
and usage in regard to the better administration of religious
7. The preservation of architectural beauty of temples;
29.     Section 7 of the HR&CE Act and the Advisory Committee
Rules, when read cumulatively, would make it clear that the Advisory
Committee should meet at least once in every six months to take
steps for protection of the temples and images. The Committee is
also empowered to recommend for establishment and maintenance of
University or Colleges or other institutions with special provisions for
the study of Hindu Religion, Philosophy or culture or for imparting
instructions in temple literature. However, no such meetings are
being conducted and as a result of the same, many temples have
been left at lurch. Further, the demolition of ancient temples and
reconstruction of new temples by the officers of HR&CE Department,
without considering their responsibilities to preserve and protect the
same, pave way for loss of heritage and also deny the opportunity for
the generations to come to appreciate the values of these ancient
temples.
30. At this juncture, it is needless to state that the properties
of the temples/religious institutions belonging to them have to be
maintained properly in order to derive more income so as to spend it
for the betterment of the temples. The custodians of the temple
properties are the trustees, HR&CE department and mutts, who must
keep in mind the object and the reason behind such donations made
to the temples. The endowments are created and the lands are
donated in love, in faith and in satisfaction towards the one’s
contribution to the religion they profess, for the temples to be self-
sufficient to perform all every day rituals, to ensure that people who
profess and practice the same ideology and belief, are uplifted
economically and spiritually and for the subsistence of their religion. A
duty is cast on the Commissioner under Section 23, to ensure that
such temples and endowments are properly administered and that
their income is duly appropriated for the purposes for which they
were founded or exist and therefore, whenever any order is passed,
the object of the endowment is not to be forgotten. Section 29 of the
Act lays down the preparation of register for all institutions by the
Commissioner. That apart, the Joint Commissioners are clothed with
the power to retrieve the temple lands from the encroachers by
exercising the powers under Sections 78, 79 and 80. But, the officials
have not properly exercised the power conferred on them and they
are in dereliction of duties and responsibilities assigned to them.
At least from now, the HR&CE Department should act diligently to
retrieve all the properties under the encroachments.
31.1 With regard to sites of archaeological importance, the
legal provisions by which a duty is cast on the central and state
Governments are very clear. 'Heritage site' is an official location
where pieces of political, military, cultural or social history have been
preserved due to their cultural heritage value, whereas a 'historic site'
may be any building, landscape, site or structure that is of local,
regional or national significance.
31.2 In the year 1904, an Act came to be enacted called as
‘the Ancient Monuments Preservation Act’, for preservation of ancient
monuments, archaeological, historical and artistic interests. That
effort has been continued after the independence. In the year 1951,
the Parliament enacted a new legislation called as ‘the Ancient and
Historical       Monuments    and   Archaeological   Sites     and     Remains
(Declaration of National Importance) Act, 1951’. Under the said Act,
various        monuments   were   declared  as  monuments          of   national
importance.        Subsequently,   another  Act    was    enacted       by    the
Parliament called as ‘the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites
and Remains Act, 1958’ on 28th August 1958 for the preservation of
ancient and historical monuments and archaeological sites and
remains of national importance, for the regulation of archaeological
excavations and for the protection of sculptures, carvings and other
like objects.
31.3 Section 2 of the aforesaid Act defines the term 'Ancient
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “Ancient Monument” means any structure, erection or monument,
or any tumulus or place of interment, or any cave, rock-sculpture,
inscription or monolith which is of historical, archaeological or artistic
interest and which has been in existence for not less than 100 years
(iii)such portion of land adjoining the site of an ancient monument as
may be required for fencing or covering in or otherwise preserving
(iv)the means of access to, and convenient inspection of, an ancient
(i) any coin, sculpture, manuscript, epigraph, or other work of art of
(ii)any article, object or thing detached from a building or cave,
(iii) any article, object or thing illustrative of science, art, crafts,
literature, religion, customs, morals or politics in bygone ages,
(iv) any article, object or thing of historical interest, and
(v)any article, object or thing declared by the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette to be an antiquity for the purposes of
this Act, which has been in existence for not less than one hundred
(d) “archaeological site and remains” means any area which contains
or is reasonably believed to contain ruins or relics of historical or
archaeological importance which have been in existence for not less
(i) such portion of land adjoining the area as may be required for
fencing or covering in or otherwise preserving it, and
(ii) the means of access to, and convenient inspection of the area;
(f)“maintain”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions,
includes the fencing, covering in, repairing, restoring and cleansing of
a protected monument, and the doing of any act which may be
necessary for the purpose of preserving a protected monument or of
(i)“protected area” means any archaeological site and remains which is
declared to be of national importance by or under this Act;
(j) “protected monument” means an ancient monument which is
declared to be of national importance by or under this Act.
31.4 Section 19 deals with 'Restrictions on enjoyment of
property rights in protected areas', which runs as under:
“(1) No person, including the owner or occupier of a protected
area, shall construct any building within the protected area or carry on
any mining, quarrying, excavating, blasting or any operation of a like
nature in such area, or utilise such area or any part thereof in any
other manner without the permission of the Central Government:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to prohibit
the use of any such area or part thereof for purposes of cultivation if
such cultivation does not involve the digging of not more than one foot
of soil from the surface.
(2) The Central Government may, by order, direct that any
building constructed by any person within a protected area in
contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1) shall be removed
within a specified period and, if the person refuses or fails to comply
with the order, the Collector may cause the building to be removed
and the person shall be liable to pay the cost of such removal.
31.5 Consequently, ‘the Antiquities and Art Treasures Act,
1972 (Act No. 52 OF 1972)’ was enacted on 9th September, 1972
“An Act to regulate the export trade in antiquities and art treasures, to
provide for the prevention of smuggling of, and fraudulent dealings in,
antiquities, to provide for the compulsory acquisition of antiquities and
art treasures for preservation in public places and to provide for certain
other matters connected therewith or incidental or ancillary thereto.”
31.6 Section 2 of the aforesaid Act deals with 'Definitions',
“(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(1) (i) any coin, sculpture, painting, epigraph or other work of art or
(ii) any article, object or thing detached from a building or cave;
(iii) any article, object or thing illustrative of science, art, crafts,
literature, religion, customs, morals or politics in bygone ages;
(iv) any article, object or thing of historical interest;
(v) any article, object or thing declared by the Central Government, by
notification in the Official Gazette, to be an antiquity for the purposes
of this Act, which has been in existence for not less than one hundred
(II) any manuscript, record or other document which is of scientific,
historical, literary or aesthetic value and which has been in existence
(b) “art treasure” means any human work of art, not being an
antiquity, declared by the Central Government by notification in the
Official Gazette, to be an art treasure for the purposes of this Act
having regard to its artistic or aesthetic value:
Provided that no declaration under this clause shall be made in respect
of any such work of art so long as the author thereof is alive;”
31.7 A conjoint reading of the provisions as extracted above
would illustrate that for a monument to be considered as ‘Ancient
Monument’ or for an article to be declared as ‘Antique’, they must be
in existence for more than 100 years. As per the provisions of the
Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1958,
the mere existence of a historical structure for more than 100 years
is sufficient to come within the purview of this Act which is done by
declaration of the monument as that of national importance, whereas,
the Antiquities and Treasuries Act deals only with the storage and
trade of antiquities. The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites
and Remains Act, 1958 is wider in its scope. It gives the ASI the right
to maintain any site which is of historical importance. The Hon’ble
Apex Court in Sakku Bai v. State of Karnataka [2020 Online SC
167], while dealing with the necessity of existence of a monument to
treat the site as of historical or archaeological importance, held as
“25. In our opinion, the 1961 Act makes two distinct categories
for protected monuments (see Sections 3 to 18) and protected areas
(see Section 19 onwards). While the former relates to “ancient
monuments”, the latter relates to “archaeological site and remains”.
Upon a close reading of the 1961 Act, we find that there is nothing in
the definitions under Sections 2(1) and 2(3) or otherwise under the
scheme of the 1961 Act, that indicates a link between the existence of
“archaeological site and remains” and “ancient monuments”. It cannot
be said that the protection ascribed to archaeological site and remains
must necessarily depend on the existence of a monument. It is
possible for certain areas to be protected independent of the existence
of monuments, if there is a reasonable belief that they contain ruins or
relics of historical or archaeological importance [see Section 2(3)
supra].”
31.8 The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains Act, 1958, gives the right to the ASI to declare any site as a
protected area and remove all unauthorised constructions and
alterations within the protected area. Similar rights under the State
Act are granted to the state. The Act also makes it clear that if the
monument is a shrine or a place of worship, then it shall not be used
for any purpose inconsistent with its character. Therefore, despite
being brought under the ASI, the right of public to worship is
protected. The Big Temple in Tanjore, though declared as a world
heritage site and coming within the protected zone of ASI, still, is a
prominent place of worship under the Control of HR&CE Department
of the state.
31.9 The Supreme Court, in Archaeological Survey of India
v. State of M.P. [(2014) 12 SCC 34 : 2014 SCC OnLine SC
1042], while dealing with the powers of ASI to deny permission to
“56.Since we are concerned with the construction that has
taken place in Bade Baba Temple, it would be necessary to narrate the
condition of this temple that existed from time to time. As per the Jain
Temple Trust, since the structure dates back to 6th-7th century, there
has been natural wear and tear of this temple over a period of time.
The version of the Trust, which is not specifically refuted, is that the
temple which housed Bade Baba idol was in fact earlier demolished
and rebuilt way back in the year 1940. Again in the year 1976, the
dome fell and a new dome had to be constructed. Extensive repairs
were carried out again in the year 1992. However, there was a
recurring damage to the main temple building from time to time.
Significantly, the idol of Bade Baba has remained intact.
57. There is no quarrel up to this, which means that the main
temple building which houses the Bade Baba idol needed repairs. It is
at this juncture that the parties have joined issue as to who is to carry
out the repairs and in what manner. As per ASI, it is ASI under whose
supervision the aforesaid task is to be accomplished whereas the Jain
Temple Trust claims its prerogative to undertake this job. That is an
aspect which we have already dealt with, negating the claim of ASI in
this behalf. Now, we would deal with other aspects, namely, whether
removal of the idol was justified and whether the repairs/construction
carried out by the Jain Temple Trust amounts to vandalising the said
temple or was it permissible to make the construction by the Trust in
the present form.
58. As per the Trust, on account of the repeated cracks which
were occurring in the temple and having regard to the fear that deity
itself was endangered, it was decided that a new temple must be built.
A deity cannot be in a dilapidated structure nor should an idol be
subject to danger. An idol to which energisation rites are imparted
becomes a live deity which has to be worshipped on a continued and
regular basis thereby attracting devotees who come and offer prayers.
Therefore, in order to follow the Agamas and keeping in view the
height of this deity, it was decided that a temple be constructed in
accordance with the “Nagara” style of architecture. According to the
Trust, the said design is completely in conformity with the Agamas and
has been approved by the Acharyas of the Digamber Jain Sect. In fact,
in order to ensure that the idol was correctly removed after proper
ceremonies and was installed at a new place it is stated that the said
installation of the deity was also undertaken in the presence of the
Acharyas and proper ceremonies were performed. In fact, it became
imperative to shift the idol so that outer structure wherein the idol is
housed could be reconstructed. That step was necessary to protect the
idol.”
From the above judgment, it is clear that even in cases where the
monument/temple is under the ambit of ASI, the state or the HR&CE
department is empowered to carry out necessary repairs.
31.10       The Tamil Nadu Ancient and Historical Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act, 1966 pari materia to the
Central Act deals with the Constitution, role and functioning of the
state department. Section 18 of the State Act is pari materia to
Section 19 of the Central Act which is extracted above. In exercise of
the powers conferred by Section 38 of the Tamil Nadu Ancient and
Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act,
1966 (Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1966), the Tamil Nadu Ancient and
Historical Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Rules
were framed in 1971.
31.11 Rule 9 deals with prohibition of certain acts within
protected monuments, which reads as follows:
“9. Prohibition of certain acts within protected monuments. - No person
(a) do any act which causes or is likely to cause damage or injury to
(c) cook or consume food except in areas, if any, permitted to be used
(d) hawk or sell any goods or wares or canvass any customer for such
goods or wares or display advertisement in any form or a show a
visitor round such monument for monetary consideration, except under
the authority of, or under and in accordance with conditions of, a
(f) violate any practice, usage or custom applicable to, or observed in,
(g) bring for any purpose other than the maintenance of the
(ii) any vehicle except in areas reserved for the parking thereof.
31.12      The Ancient Monuments and the Archaeological Sites
and Remains Act, was amended in 2010 and the following provisions
were introduced.
“30A. Punishment for construction, etc., in prohibited area.—Whoever
raises, on and after the date on which the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Bill,
2010, receives the assent of the President ( Assent was accorded on
29.03.2010), any construction in the prohibited area, shall               be
punishable with imprisonment not exceeding two years or with fine
which may extend to one lakh rupees or with both.”
“30B. Punishment for construction, etc., in regulated area.—Whoever
raises, on and after the date on which the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains (Amendment and Validation) Bill,
2010, receives the assent of the President( Assent was accorded on
29.03.2010), any construction in the regulated area without the
previous permission of the competent authority or in contravention of
the permission granted by the competent authority, shall be punishable
with imprisonment not exceeding two years or with fine which may
extend to one lakh rupees or with both.”
“30C. Offences by officers of Government.—If any officer of the Central
Government enters into or acquiesces in any agreement to do, abstains
from doing, permits, conceals or connives at any act or thing whereby
any construction or re-construction takes place in a prohibited area or
regulated area, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may extend three years, or with fine, or with both.”
31.13    A   reading     of   the  above     provisions     would      clearly
demonstrate that the role of the state department is to protect the
monuments            by   carrying     out   appropriate     repair    works      without
damaging the original structures. It is also the duty of the state to
ensure that all illegal encroachments and constructions are removed.
Similarly, it is the duty of the officers of the central Government to
ensure that appropriate action is taken to protect the monument or
sites. Section 30C of the Ancient Monuments and the Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act is an exhaustive provision and when read
together with Sections 30A and 30B, it not only empowers action
against any officer of the central department, who has failed in his
duty, but also indirectly enables the officer of the central department
to take action against any person, be it even an officer under the
state who has acted in detrimental to the interest of the monument or
site in collusion with the perpetrator and any officer of the central
Government. However, the report filed by the UNESCO team referred
to above would clearly indicate that both the central and state
departments have failed in its efforts to safeguard the sites and
remove the encroachments and illegal constructions in and around
many temples and sites of archaeological importance including
Mamallapuram and hence, they are liable to be prosecuted under
31.14 That apart, Rules 10, 30, 31, 38 and 49 of the
Management and Preservation of Properties of Religious Institutions
Rules, 1964 specifically deal with renovation and repairs of antiquities
and buildings having heritage value and archaeological importance
and the same are profitably extracted herein below:
“Rule 10 provides that proposals in regard to works that are not purely
secular shall be framed with due regard to the principles and practice
for traditional architecture and to the need for preserving architectural,
sculptural and archaeological features.
Rule 30 provides that the construction and repairs of any gopuram,
etc., shall, with the sanction of the appropriate authority, be entrusted
to any able stapathi selected from the panel of stapathis approved by
the Government, from time to time.
Rule 31 provides that repairs, alterations etc., shall be carried out by
the   board    of  trustees   only with  the  prior   permission    of   the
commissioner and such permission shall be granted only on obtaining
competent advise thereon.
Rule 38 provides that whenever the Commissioner finds it desirable or
necessary, the Archaeological department shall be consulted regarding
any building work.
Rule   49    says   that  the  Board  of  Trustees   shall  maintain     the
paraphernalia such as car, vahanams, palanquins, chapparams, in
good condition and proposals for their repairs, etc., should be made to
the appropriate authority wherever necessary for sanction at the time
of submission of budget after obtaining the advice of an expert
stapathi from out of the panel approved by the Government.”
Thus, there exists a comprehensive statutory framework for carrying
out repairs and renovation works in temples in the state of Tamil
Nadu while preserving and conserving their Archaeological and
historical heritage.
31.15        There are Rules for custody of jewels and valuables
belonging to the religious institutions called as 'the Religious
Institutions Custody of Jewels, Valuables and Documents and Disposal
Rules', Rule 2 of which, provides for maintenance of register, etc.,
and is for better appreciation, extracted as under:
“The trustee of every religious institution shall maintain a
register in such form as shall be specified by the Commissioner. It shall
contain lists of the jewels, the gold vessels, the silver vessels and other
valuables. The lists shall give a correct description and full particulars
of the jewels and other valuables and also the gems, if any, in the
jewels. The estimated value of jewels and the weight of the jewels and
valuables other than the vahanams, shall be stated in the respective
lists. Where new jewels or valuables are purchased or otherwise
acquired, entries shall be made in the said register then and there.
When any jewel or. valuable is sold, lost, exchanged or altered, an
entry shall be made about it in the register arid any new jewel or
valuable that is substituted shall be entered as a fresh item.”
31.16           Rule 8 of the aforesaid Rules deals with the
procedure to be followed when jewels and valuables are to be
entrusted to an office-holder for use during festival, which is
“Jewels and valuables which are not used daily, but are used
only during festivals on any special occasion may, when they are
required for use, be entrusted to an office-holder after obtaining his
written acknowledgement in a register specially kept for the purpose. A
written undertaking shall also be taken from the office-holder that he
will indemnify the institution against loss or damage of the jewel or
valuable. The acknowledgement and the written undertaking shall be
in the forms contained in the annexure to these rules. The particulars
regarding the jewels and valuable taken out and their serial number in
the register maintained under rule 2 and the duration of the period for
which the custody is entrusted to the office-holder, shall also be
entered in the said register. If the jewel or valuable so entrusted is
required for more than one day, the trustee shall provide facilities to
the office-holder to keep the jewel or valuable in safety. As soon as the
festival or special occasion or the period for which the jewel or valuable
is taken whichever is earlier is over, the office-holder shall return the
jewel or valuable to the person or persons entitled to possession
thereof. Simultaneously with return, a record as to such return shall be
made in the register maintained under rule 2.”
31.17      As per Rule 21(1) of the aforesaid Rules, all the jewels
and valuables of religious institutions shall be appraised by a team of
officers consisting of a Verification Officer in the cadre of Deputy
Commissioner, a Gold-cum-Gem specialist and a Technical Assistant
and they shall have the responsibility of appraisement work in all the
temples in their respective jurisdiction.
31.18 Though the Rules relating to custody of jewels and
valuables are in vogue, proper inventory is not maintained. There is
no central registry, wherein the details of all the valuables, jewels and
documents are maintained, so as to make cross verification and put
culpability on individuals handling them.
32.1 Coming to the case at hand, pursuant to the order of this
Court for setting up of conservation experts and stakeholders for a
fact-finding mission to identify the issues in conservation practice
through the case studies of 5 – 6 temples where the conservation
projects are going-on or were recently undertaken, UNESCO Fact
Finding Mission for Tamil Nadu Temples, 2017, has been set up to
work within the framework of its technical support to the Government
for defining appropriate conservation approach.
32.2 The objective of the mission was to review the nature and
quality of physical interventions recently made to the historic temples
and the process being followed towards that end. The work started by
32.3 Some other temples that were visited to understand the
ritualistic norms and conservation processes are as under:
32.4 The mission primarily focussed on the order of this Court
assigning UNESCO to provide a factual report on the conservation
approach and processes followed in the above temples.
32.5 Based on documentary resources and physical inspection
of the temples, the mission has provided a detailed assessment
report for each of the 10 listed temples. The major issues observed in
conservation of temples as stated by UNESCO in its report, are
“1.HR & CE neither has the capacity nor the qualified experts to
carry out conservation works at such large scale and number.
2.There is no appropriate system or process being followed as per
conservation norms for documenting, assessing, reporting, tendering
etc. of heritage works. There is no empanelment of experts at
various levels or qualified heritage work contractors for such
specialised works.
3.The quality of most of the current regional and local sthapathy's is
questionable as most of them were found incompetent on site. And
this point was also accepted by the Chief Sthapathy of HR & CE.
4.Some of the HR & CE staff members (few JCs and juniors) seem
sensitive to heritage and show potential for being trained as Heritage
Managers for future. However, majority of them lack essential
qualification and expertise and seem totally misfit for such a
responsibility. It needs to be recognised that the HR & CE officials
are primarily in place to manage the day to day affairs of the temple
and do not hold any qualification to oversee technical works like
conservation. This is part of the TN HR & CE Act as per the
Commissioner, HR&CE. However, at times they go beyond their
mandate to take decisions regarding works in the temples, in some
cases even overruling their own expert committee members' opinion.
5.The quality of conservation works at the temples assessed during
the mission varied to a large extent with some good examples, some
mediocre works and some truly shocking scenes of demolition and
massacre of historic temples. Details of each temple assessment and
visuals are included in Section 3 of this report.
6.Despite     involvement    of   experts    such    as   ASI,    Ex-ASI
archaeologists, Chief Sthapathy, Structural experts; it was found
that HR & CE is not following the reports of their own experts at
ground level. A detail of expert reports for each temple and
deviations made are recorded in the individual assessment for each
temple under Chapter 3 in this report.
7.Inputs from Agama Shastras are not to be seen in any of the
conservation     projects. Consultation    with   Agama    Experts   and
justification from religious perspective for the intervention, be it
demolition, conservation, new construction is missing in all temples
inspected. In fact, from HR & CE perspective there seems to be a
disjunction between Agama Shastras and Shilpa Shastras failing to
realise that Shilpa is just and extended arm of the Agama Shastra.
Hence, all that is observed is a very limited attempt to adhere to the
8.Maintenance of record of existing, proposed drawings, historic
research and historic layering of temples is completely missing in
most cases. It is the most essential part and forms the base for any
future conservation works.
9.A Comprehensive Conservation Plan and / or a Detailed Project
Report for the temples are missing, which is essential in any
conservation works. Many decisions for interventions seem to be
taken at the site by few individuals without any holistic process to
assess the urgency, necessity, severity and justification for the
intervention.”
32.6 Quoting Agama Shastras, reference to Shilpa Shastras,
Alignment with Conservation Guidelines as per ASI Policy / ICOMOS
Charter (Venice/Athens/Burra/Nara Document of Authenticity etc.),
adherence to National and State Acts, Scientific Procedures such as
Structural Analysis, Surveys and Detailed Reports for each action and
a completion report after works and also the need for communicating
the Conservation Approach, the mission made final recommendations,
as per which, the temples being handled by the HR&CE Department
are unimaginable and unless a very coherent operational structure
along with an army of experts, skilled stapathis and craft persons are
available on hand, the task of simultaneously conserving / managing
/ repairing temples is not feasible.
32.7 It is further recommended that since the number of
temples handled is high, the HR&CE Department should supervise
and administer the immovable properties as per the Tamil Nadu
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1959, while the
conservation works be assigned to a specialised Department like
Archaeology. Further, a multi-disciplinary approach is required for
conservation of the Tamil Nadu temples. Hence, there is a need for
involving        Agama   Expert,   Sthapathi,  Archaeologist,      Historian,
Management Expert, as per the temple requirements, in the
preparation of a conservation master plan for the temples. Such
Experts should preferably be inducted in the HR&CE organisational
structure to ensure in-house technical expertise, considering the fact
that some of the Joint Commissioners manage anywhere between
500-1000 temples. General conservation guidelines to be followed
and the need for capacity building of staff and officials of the HR&CE
Department have been mentioned in the report. Recommendations
have been made separately for each of the temples mentioned
therein.
32.8 The report also quotes the HR&CE Department and its
functioning and the Act prescribing the rights and duties conferred on
various authorities and the various components involved in Tiruppani
works,        Funds      Management,       Government       Grant,    various       funds
involved in temple renovation / development and also the various
schemes framed by the Government for conducting Tiruppani in the
temples, most particularly in the habitations of Adi Dravida and Tribal
Communities,            and   also   the    importance      of   the    conservation,
renovation and restoration works in the temples of heritage value as
observed by the Archaeological Expert Committee, importance of
restoration and maintenance of murals, approval of Stapathis for
prescribing standards in Agama and Silpa Shastras for temple
renovation / restoration.
32.9 Finally,     the    mission      formulated     the     conservation
guidelines to be followed. The essential components to be covered
under conservation works for any temple, according to the report, are
(a)Documentation including all plans, elevations, sections, architectural
details through advanced techniques such as LiDAR/ AutoCAD.
(b)All surveys – GPR, Total station to understand ground level situation,
geology and drainage systems in the complied. Detailed Condition Assessment of all
building structures and art work is required.
(c)Historic layering and evolution of the temple including application of
Shilpa Shastras, architectural styles, patronage, religious events, rituals and
changes with time.
(d)Comprehensive Conservation Management Plan including Physical
conservation of each area as per Agama Shastras / Shilpa Shastras, landscape,
drainage, services, lighting, visitor management, reuse of spaces, risk management
and association / linkage of the temple with its surroundings / city plan etc.
(e)Phased     implementation    of  the    comprehensive      conservation
management plan on a yearly basis and periodic monitoring for each aspect to
ensure effective work.
(f)Involvement of experts including traditional Sthapathys of highest
calibre, Engineers, Archaeologists, Art Conservators and Conservation Architects
and ensuring that their recommendations are observed at ground level by all
officials and staff.
(g)Complete recording of all works carried within the temple complex
including record of dismantled / removed portions and specifications for new works,
before, during and after photographs.
32.10         It has also been emphasised in the report that
considering the fact that major problems in the temples were found
to be effective on-site implementation, it is important to recognise the
need for capacity building of staff and officials of the HR&CE
Department for conservation works.
33.   Thereafter, the Director of UNESCO Representative for
India, Bhutan, Maldives and Sri Lanka, addressed a letter dated
14.06.2017 to the Hon'ble Chief Justice, in which it is stated that the
field visit by the UNESCO Expert Team confirmed multiple gaps in the
rationale and quality of the physical interventions made to the
heritage        temples,   which  their  report would    detail    out,     with
recommendations. It is also emphasised in the letter that if there is
no will or adequate human resources on the part of the HR&CE
Department to improve the current scenario, the report will be of no
use. The letter also pointed out that the UNESCO team met with
certain incidents wherein aggressive behaviour and unprofessional
attitude of some of the officers of the HR&CE Department, especially
at Srirangam, have been observed.
34.1 Dr.R.Nagaswamy, former Director of Archaeology, who
was appointed by this Court to assist the amicus curiae, filed a memo
stating        that neither  the  HR&CE   Department      nor     the     State
Archaeological Department appears to have done anything to
preserve and /or restore ancient temples of Tamil Nadu. According to
him, the temples are built and worshiped by hundreds of millions of
faithful believers and they are the institutions of long standing faith
and hence, if a part of temple or vigraham is damaged, it must be
repaired and not replaced. It is also stated that the UNESCO charter
lays emphasis on highest academic standards for conservators and
interdisciplinary experts; Stapathi alone is not qualified to alter
ancient structures, because when the same are repaired, they must
be of the same form as in the original one; and therefore, the ancient
temples are in need of experts not only in modern traditional
architecture, but also in the history of architecture.
34.2 It is further seen from the communication sent by
Dr.R.Nagaswamy that conservation, preservation and restoration of
temples are highly scientific in nature and can be carried out only by
specially trained scientists; the Executive Officers, who are now
mostly carrying out these works, are not experts in the field and
hence, they are unable to speak about specialization. It is also stated
that there is no strong unit for conservation and restoration in the
whole country. Thus, according to him, a number of Engineering
candidates should be trained, for which a special institute may be set
up by the state Government with the assistance of UNESCO with
international teachers; and till such time, all structural work in
temples should be prohibited.
35.1 The conservation, renovation and maintenance of the
temples are carried on as per the traditional heritage protection
system in practice among the core community. The rules for
conservation are laid down in the traditional texts. The HR&CE Act
and Rules prescribe the modalities for sanctioning and allocating
funds for proposals whenever a need for conservation occurs due to
religious       motivation or  due   to structural   distresses.      In    the
Government order dated 08.08.2013, the Archaeological Survey of
India has been invited to be actively involved in the conservation of
temples of historic significance. Since 2013, all the conservation
activities are carried on with the participation of the Expert committee
from the ASI, as per the ASI Conservation Manual. However, the ASIs
expertise is limited to the conservation of monuments and ruins and
has limited understanding towards the workings of a living heritage
temple. It is, in this background, pursuant to the order of this Court
dated 25.01.2016, the HR&CE Department, after having consultation
and        discussions  with  various  Experts   and   Archaeologists         and
Conservationists, prepared a draft manual for conservation and
maintenance of temples. The suggestions of the stakeholders were
also called for, vide communication dated 04.02.2016. Consequently,
a meeting was conducted on 07.04.2016, in which, objections/views
raised by the stakeholders were taken into consideration. The said
manual         provides various   aspects of   the  south     Indian      temple
construction and the concepts of conservation and the different
practices involved in the maintenance and diagnosis of structural
defects in temples.
35.2 The manual proposes the classification of temples based
on their heritage values. It includes (i)to understand and highlight the
traditional repair and renewal practice, in order to give an insight into
the religion and heritage protection; (ii)to identify the threats to the
heritage structures; and (iii)to disseminate awareness of maintenance
and        structural conservation  since  damage   due     to   vegetation,
weathering and defects in foundation were the key problems faced in
the conservation of several temples. It also concerns about the
maintenance and preservation of murals and inscriptions within the
temple complexes. The manual is aimed at disseminating awareness
to the Executive officers, PWD Engineers and trustees on the issues
pertaining to heritage conservation and maintenance of the temples.
The manual highlights key issues in conservation of living temples
and aims at initiating a dialogue between the various stakeholders,
for this reason the manual is made available in the public domain in
the department website. The said manual is pending consideration by
the Government, according to the HR&CE Department, whereas it is
dormant, in the opinion of this Court.
36.  While   giving   importance  to    the     issues       under
consideration, extensive submissions were made by the respective
parties, the germane of which is stated hereunder:
36.1.1 Mr.R.Venkataraman, petitioner in WMP.No.20421 of
2020 seeking to implead himself as party to the proceedings in
suo motu WP.No.574 of 2015, stated that despite the order of this
Court in Crl.OP.Nos.8690 and 12060 of 2017, no proper care has
been taken by the HR&CE officials to preserve the heritage and other
salient features of the temples, monuments etc. He further stated
that the HR&CE Department has failed to overcome the malpractices
prevailed in all levels, which resulted in a huge loss to the temples
and Government; and even the top officials are arrayed as accused in
idol theft cases, but they are still administering the management,
thereby allowing them to continue to do the mismanagement. It is
also averred that the HR&CE Department has failed to collect the
huge amount of lease and rental arrears from the properties
belonging to the temples; there is no proper auditing with respect to
the administration of the temples; and referring to various temples,
he made representation to the Commissioner, HR&CE Department,
Chennai, to take action with respect to theft of idols, missing registers
etc, but the same was not considered, till date. With these
averments, he prayed for diversification of the powers vested with
the HR&CE Department. Pointing out various historical significance in
Sri Pasupatheeswarar Temple at Pandanallur, he also sought a
direction to ASI to conduct inspection and file a report so as to find
out the possibilities of declaring the said temple as protected
monument.
36.2.1    Mr.R.Singaravelan, learned Senior Counsel, who in
the larger public interest, came forward to assist this Court,
submitted that this suo motu Public Interest Litigation has taken a
different dimension when it comes to deal with the protection of
ancient temples as it touches the fundamental freedom of conscience
and free profession, practice and propagation of religion including the
freedom to manage the religious affairs as enshrined under Articles
25 and 26 of the Constitution of India. He further submitted that
though         the procedure  under  the   HR&CE   Act,    for   fixation     of
compensation amount to the tenants, who put up super structure or
improved the leased properties in vogue, it is, in public interest, the
Tribunal has to be constituted with the Judicial Officer with a power to
decide all the disputes related to the Religious Institutions, as in
almost, all the sensitive matters, only the Officials under the HR&CE
Act are conferred with the power to decide the same. It is also
submitted that the jurisdiction of the civil Court is barred under
Section 34D of the HR&CE Act, 1959 in important complicated
matters and it is placed in the hands of the officials of the Department
as if they can deal with all the complicated and sensitive disputes
touching the public interest matters like alienation, lease, exchange
and mortgage of the properties of Religious Institutions and in some
matters, the suit remedy is provided under section 70 which would
cause inordinate delay in deciding the right of the temples and the
worshipers and the protection of the temple properties.
36.2.2 According     to    the   learned     Senior       Counsel,
Mr.R.Singaravelan, Section 63 confers wide powers on the Joint
Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner to inquire and decide the
disputes and matters relating to religious institutions, even the status
of the religious institutions, its affairs and the worshippers, which is
not only against the fundamental rights as guaranteed under Articles
25 and 26 of the Constitution of India, but also against the principles
of natural justice i.e. “nemo debetesse judex in propria causa” that
means 'no one should be the judge of their own cause', though the
decision     taken  is subject  to   appeal   and   revision     before     the
Commissioner and then suit to the civil Court. Thus, according to the
learned Senior Counsel, the role of the Government officials and the
Government in the matter of the religious institutions is very limited
in scope. In support of the said contention, he placed reliance on the
decision of the Supreme Court in B.P.Mittal v. Union of India
[(1983) 1 SCC 51], wherein, while dealing with the validity of
Aurovillee     (Emergency   Provisions)  Act,   1960    taking     over     the
management of Aurovillee for a limited period, it was held that the
said Act has taken away the right of management of the property
alone, which is of secular nature and not taking away the right of
management in the matter of religion of a religious denomination
under Article 26(b) of the Constitution. Also, drawing the attention of
this Court to the decision in M.Siddiq (Ram Janmabhumi Temple)
v. Suresh Das [(2020) 1 SCC 1], the learned Senior Counsel
submitted that the places of worship are given both constitutional and
statutory protection and the Government while dealing with the
same, have to keep in mind the basic and fundamental right of
worship available to the worshippers.
36.2.3 Adding   further,    the   learned      Senior      Counsel
Singaravelan strenuously contended that the decision of the disputes
related to the encroachment and taking possession of the properties
is given to the Joint Commissioners and then to the Commissioners as
revisional authority and thereafter to the Tribunal and considering the
need of the hour, a Tribunal in each and every District has to be
constituted to decide the matters dealing with religious institutions;
and any further appeal can be provided to the Division Bench of the
High Court as Special Appellate Tribunal to avoid delay and
conferment of power on the HR&CE officials to deal with their own
actions against the religious institutions. In this regard, he referred to
the decision of the Supreme Court in Rathinasamy v. State of
36.2.4    It is also contended by the learned Senior Counsel
that the appointment of Archakas has to be made without following
the hereditary order, however in accordance with the Agamas and
any deviation of the said age old custom and usage would be an
infringement of a freedom of religion and the right of religious
denominations to manage its own affairs as guaranteed by Articles 25
and 26 of the Constitution. To substantiate the same, he relied upon
the judgments of the Supreme Court in Adi Saiva Sivachariyargal
Nala Sangam [(2016) 2 SCC 725] and Seshammal v. State of
Tamil Nadu [(1972) 2 SCC 11]. The learned Senior Counsel further
contended that there is a Scheme decree for the administration of
temple, as per which, the period for the Committee of trustees is 3
years, which was followed by the Government in G.O(D)No.173,
HR&CE Department, dated 03.07.2012, however the Government
started appointing the trustees only for a period of two years,
pursuant         to G.O(D)No.48     dated  04.03.2016      and     the     latest
Government order in G.O.(D)No.103 dated 23.09.2020, which cannot
be sustainable in law, as the Scheme decree temples cannot be
brought by the HR&CE Department under Section 47 of the HR&CE
Act. He further submitted that in many temples, there are lots of
misuse of Undiyal funds; the temple properties are misused and the
same are let out for lease to other community people and the rent
from those properties is also not properly accounted; and in most of
the cases, the said persons are not even paying the rent properly to
the temple.
36.2.5 Relying on Rule 14 of the Tamil Nadu Government
Servant Conduct Rules, 1973, it is submitted by the learned Senior
Counsel that no person with political background shall be appointed
as a Trustee or an employee of the temple in any cadre. He further
submitted that Section 34 of the HR&CE Act conferring power to grant
lease of the properties of the Religious Institutions beyond 5 years
with the sanction of the Commissioner, have to be read down to
mean inconsonance with the tender period of other Government
properties for only 3 years subject to renewal with 25% increase in
case of no complaint or default. He also stressed for periodical
inspection of the administration of the temples by the higher rank
officials      viz., Commissioner or  Joint Commissioner        of    HR&CE
36.3.1    Dr.S.Padma,  learned   counsel     for     the     fifth
respondent submitted that the mismanagement in administering the
temples, financial crimes, theft, procedural violation and corruption
are the root causes and the ignorance / incompetence of the HR&CE
Department is the secondary reason for the heritage destruction.
According to her, the main function of the HR&CE Department is to
properly administer the movable and immovable properties of the
temples and it has no locus standi to carry out any construction
activities under the guise of renovation. She further submitted that
despite the several orders of the Supreme Court as well this Court to
desist from destructing the heritage of the temples, many of them
have been demolished due to non-declaration of 100 years ancient
temples as monuments. In respect of Meenakshi Amman Temple, this
Court specifically directed the HR&CE Department to perform the
conservation work with the assistance of the ASI Department. Citing
an instance taken place in Sri Moovendhar Easwaran Temple,
Nasiyanur,         Erode   District,   wherein,    the  entire     sixteen      pillar
mandapam was removed, stolen and sold away, for which, no action
was         taken,  the  learned     counsel pointed     out    the   lapses      and
irregularities      in  the   administration    of   temples     by   the     HR&CE
department. It is submitted by the learned counsel that to prevent
destruction of the temples, water bodies etc., scientific approach has
to be adopted by constituting a committee consisting of local ASI
officer and CPWD officer.
36.3.2      The learned counsel also added that due to lack of
diligence and competence in keeping the records of the temples and
its properties, more than 100 years old temples were missing in the
list, due to which, the police department though recovered many
idols, are unable to locate the temple to which those idols belong. It
is pointed out that apart from temple structure, temple tanks, mutts,
temple chariots, jewels, arts, artifacts and sacred groves etc. are also
forming part of the heritage and the same have to be taken into
consideration by proper documentation and grading by the ASI and
Census of India; all the conservation plan and its related documents
should be published in the official website before starting the work
and all the Government orders, circulars, schemes, notices issued etc.
should also be published in the website, to bring transparency in the
HR&CE department; annual archaeological inspection should be done
for all the monuments / temples and surprise visits are to be
conducted; and CAG auditing is absolutely necessary to assess the
damage structurally and evaluate the value of the antique destroyed.
Referring to Sri Narasimha Swamy Temple, Namakkal, the learned
counsel stressed that the ASI Department may be directed to declare
all the temples, which are more than 100 years old, even if a single
idol in a temple, as monument as required under the Directive
Principles of State Policy. According to the learned counsel, the
heritage of the temples should be preserved as it is the responsibility
of the present generation to safeguard and hand it over to future
generation and hence, central idol and antiques wing with ASI Experts
should be constituted to handle the destruction, smuggling and theft
cases; and to document the history, agama and rituals, an Expert
Committee may also be constituted and a representative from
UNESCO shall be considered as part of the said Committee to be
formed. She ultimately submitted that the HR&CE Department should
eradicate all the lapses which are root causes for all the problems and
hence, other Government organizations, such as, ASI, CAG, Census
of India, etc. should be consulted / engaged to protect the heritage of
the temples and its properties; and the practice of leasing out the
temple lands to the private individuals should be stopped. That apart,
the learned counsel prayed that all the employees belonging to the
internal department, such as, hereditary priests, trustees and
employees of various castes/ denominations, who are collectively
called as living heritage, are repositories of vedas, thirumurai,
agamas, music, ayurveda-siddha-local medical streams, arts, dance,
etc., are to be provided with monetary and service benefits as
granted by the Telegana Government recently.
36.4.1 Mr.Rangarajan    Narasimhan,     petitioner      in    the
miscellaneous petitions, as party-in-person, submitted that the
Government cannot interfere in matters of religious affairs of a
religious denomination and deny the right to manage the religious
affairs and administer the properties of the religious institution of the
religious denomination, subject to public order, morality and health;
the Commissioner, HR&CE Department, Chennai, who is having
supervisory control over the temples, has to regulate and supervise
the administration of the religious institutions; according to section
47 of the HR&CE Act, the trustees are permitted to continue to
manage the affairs of the temple and the appropriate authority has
power to appoint non-hereditary trustees / 'fit persons' to perform
the functions of the Board of Trustees, pending constitution of Board
of Trustees, but according to the petitioner, most of the religious
institutions are without trustees and the non-appointment of trustees
to the religious institutions is the fundamental reason or the gross
neglect to the physical structure of the temples as well its wealth. It
is further submitted that 1000s of temples are now managed by the
fit persons, belonging to the HR&CE Department and that the
Executive Officers are given the responsibility to act as Fit persons as
well, for more number of temples, which becomes physically,
mentally and morally impossible for such Executive officers to
discharge the duties truthful to their conscience and the same has
resulted in the loss of several temples, which are ancient, historic and
heritage of the nation. Therefore, he requested this Court to issue
appropriate directions in this regard.
36.4.2 The   petitioner  Mr.Rangarajan      Narasimhan         also
submitted that Thiruppani is fundamentally a religious affair as it is
governed by Agama Shastras ably supported by Shilpa Shastras,
which are required to be protected as per Article 26 of the
Constitution of India; the art of constructing temples is several
millennia old and this art and science is completely ignored by the
Executive Officers, who are unqualified for such a role; not only the
lapses in Thiruppani of temples, but also the administrative affairs of
the temples, directly affect the interest of the temples; and therefore,
steps have to be taken to reduce the burden of the HR&CE
Department. The petitioner further stated that the powers can be
given to appropriate authorities under the HR&CE Act only for the
preservation, maintenance, management and improvement of the
structures of the religious institutions; the fit persons who are
functioning in temples in lieu of the Board of Trustees have been
appointed only for an interim period; and the temple buildings and
premises shall not be used for purposes not connected with or arising
from the worship, usages and observations of such temples. Adding
further, the petitioner submitted that stringent rules on the conduct,
character, interest and knowledge on both religious affairs and
administrative abilities must be enacted to ensure that the right
person is placed to manage the religious affairs of the temples and
the Commissioner can pass such rules in consultation with a
committee to be appointed by this Court; and qualified persons to be
appointed as per the rules framed. It is also submitted that the audit
of the religious institutions shall be done by external agency; the
trustees of the temples be awarded with fixed salary; the HR&CE Act
must be suitably amended by incorporation of penal provisions and
the provisions of the Act, be reviewed by a committee to be formed
to improve its efficacy.
36.5 That apart, various other contentions and grievances /
allegations were raised by the learned Senior Counsel / counsel /
party in person. To substantiate the same, several voluminous typed
set of papers were also filed by them. In order to avoid prolixity, this
Court deems it appropriate to give in a capsule the relevant
averments culled out from the same, which run thus:
(i)It is stated that the ancient temples in Tamil Nadu are
proudly standing as historical monuments having tall towers, beautiful
dome, large corridors and huge walls. It is the state’s bounden duty
to preserve and protect them. The vegetation growing on the old
constructions are heavily damaging them. During 2012-13, the
traditional         method  of  cleansing  the  temple     premises       called
Uzhavarapani once launched by saint Appar Adigal one of the four
leading exponents of the Saiva school, was relaunched with a view to
introduce the spirit of service. Through this programme, eradication
of weeds and vegetation was carried out in 640 temples. Special
attention needs to be given to temples because they are visited daily
with continuous human interface through performance of poojas,
cultural performances and the like. The temple tanks will have to be
protected as per the scheme 'renovation of temple tanks and rain
water harvesting', by the following measures:
.Clearing the encroachments in and around the temple tanks
.Putting up the compound wall around the tanks.
.Deepening and desilting the temple tanks.
.Re-laying the steps of the temple tanks.
.Providing facility for the inflow of rainwater into temple tanks and
overflow channel for surplus water.
Revival of Kaala Poojas in ancient temples was evolved with a view to
set right the setbacks in their performance that are glorified by the
hymns of Alwars and Nayanmars and this scheme provides means for
performing Kaala Poojas at temples utilizing the surplus funds of the
affluent temples. Thus, the temple repair works have to be carried
out with holistic approach and not as separate part of works.
(ii)According to Section 36 of the HR&CE Act, the temple
requiring financial assistance for renovation receives funds from the
surplus funds of the affluent temples by way of diversion. Every year,
the Government granted Rs.3 crores for temple renovation. Out of
voluntary donations given by the individuals and the contributions
made by the Hindu Religious Institutions, a separate fund was
created viz. Common Good Fund in the name of the Commissioner. A
corpus fund of Rs.8 crores was created from the surplus funds of
affluent temples for development. From the interest accruing from
this corpus, financial assistance is rendered for the renovation of
temples of ancient historical significance. Small village temples under
the control of the department are provided with financial assistance
for temple renovations under the Village Temple Renovation Scheme
created           for   this  purpose.   In   respect   of    Palani     Arulmigu
Dandayuthapani swamy temple, a corpus of Rs.2 crores was created
by diversion from the surplus funds. All such allocations must be
timely utilized for the temple.
(iii)It is pointed out that a high powered committee should be
constituted            with    representatives    from      the      Government
(HR&CE/PWD/Tourism)               conservation    specialists,    archaeologists
(including ASI), persons well versed in religious affairs and some
prominent leaders of the community already involved in voluntary
restoration activities. Its members shall be qualified to offer technical
support, including in the fields of chemical and diamond analysis. This
high level team shall engage necessary personnel to draft a
comprehensive conservation manual for the temples of Tamil Nadu
taking note of all world practices in this regard. The manual shall pre-
scribe the qualification required for each member of the committee.
(iv)It is further stated that the administrative officials shall not
be involved in the ecclesial activities of the temples, which are 100 or
more years old. No activities shall be done directly through donors.
All the activities shall be done only through a committee of trustees /
members / officials created for this purpose. Without the approval of
trustees and the temple committee, no temple preservation /
conservation activity shall be sanctioned. The Engineers of the Tamil
Nadu Government construction department and PWD should never be
involved in temple preservation activities. If they are to be involved,
then they must get at least 1 year training in an internationally
accredited institute for the preservation of heritage, conservation and
archaeology before being assigned to the maintenance activities.
(v) It is submitted that the HR&CE Department is reluctantly
attempting a sub standard compliance of the specific direction of this
Court and the draft conservation manual prepared by them contains
very little discussions on conservation of heritage temples, which may
be looked as negative part of the manual. Whereas, according to the
learned counsel, the manual should be indeed with classifying all the
temples in the State as per their age ie., 100 years old, 500 years old
and 1000 years old etc. The manual shall also specify the punitive
actions as per the law (Criminal Procedure Code, Public Property
Protection Act & Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and
Remains Act) against the erring officials. It should contain as to how
damages in the temple are going to be rectified. As there are 8500
temples of more than 100 years old, the conservation manual should
be prepared scientifically. Further, the quality of materials used in the
renovation works should be contained in the manual and the ISI
standard materials should be used while renovation. The bricks, lime
mortars, etc., used are to be incorporated in the manual.
(vi) It is alleged that several ancient temples were neglected in
a dilapidated condition. A study of the various charters and
conventions and recommendations referred therein would indicate the
need for the following to be done as the initial step towards the
protection of the temples: (a)A comprehensive census and a
collection of database has to be instituted in respect of all temples in
the State of Tamilnadu, which at least a hundreds old, are
documented; (b)They should all be declared 'Historically important
temples'; and (c)The temples will thereafter, have to be classified into
various categories based on antiquity, archaeological importance,
special features of statues, idols and murals etc. and susceptibility to
damage both natural causes as well as human interference.
(vii)It is stated that each and every preservation / conservation
activity shall be done as per the plan designed by the central
archaeological department after their inspection and in a manner that
will qualify their certification for operation. Conservation should not
immediately involve renovation/civil works, unless they are required
for the stability of the structures. The need for any civil work should
be considered after checking with the experts who are well versed in
the agamas applicable to that particular temple. Stapathis are to only
execute the clear directions of the experts concerning any repairs or
alterations. No new structures are to be built in Heritage temples. The
Department should send a proposal regarding the civil works planned
to be executed to archaeological survey of India and after obtaining
their guidance and approval only civil works inside and adjacent to a
heritage temple can be taken up. Such works to be monitored by
Conservation Experts who are currently in service in ASI or by expert
deputed by ASI. There are so many cases indicating damages to
ancient structure and hence, basic safety of the works has to be
followed, while doing conservation work. It is pointed out by Heritage
Conservation Society that the demolition work is happening even
without removing the idols and the works are done just above the
idols, which amounts to criminal negligence and lack of common
sense.
(viii) Referring to the report submitted by the conservationist
of ASI, it is also stated that proper preservation and conservation of
the ancient temple as per the norms prescribed in our ancient
architectural texts and using power tools by adopting modern
advanced technique is a sine quo non to achieve the results
acceptable for a world heritage monument. All stone pillars / pilasters
as well as pada (wall) portion need a thorough cleaning to remove the
accumulated dirt and to expose the iconographical features. For most
of the pada (wall) portion, the pointing was made with cement and
hence, it should be removed and apply the ancient lime mortar to
properly maintain it. All polished marbles, tiles, modern inscriptions
etc. laid in the Heritage temples should be removed carefully.
Further, the scientific analysis of the ancient painting composition
may be carried out taking a little sample from the paintings left
bottom, where damage has already occurred and base and pigment
section is exposed. In respect of Thiruvotriyur Adhipureeswarar
Devasthanam,            the  same    has   been   renovated     using     modern
techniques without paying heed to any of the conservation norms that
have been set out. Further, a list of ancient temples was produced,
whose renovation / repair works are pending for want of necessary
orders by the respective committee.
(ix)  It is further stated that the temple renovation works are
not just like building a structure and hence, should be done with more
care without changing the heritage values of the old structures that
they meant for. While renovating the temples, the Sthapathi has to
specify the type of materials used and the methods to be carried out,
which should be followed by all the Engineers and Builders. For any
reason, modern construction materials such as cement, refined oil or
chemical         added    materials  shall  not  be   used    in   any     of   the
constructions, which is more than 100 years old and is surviving the
tests of time and nature. Maintenance activities shall be done only
using the traditional materials such as lime, wood, hand made bricks.
If there is a mandatory need to use modern construction materials
and no traditional alternate is found, then it can be allowed only after
a detailed scientific study. The construction can be done without
changing the heritage values and no construction should be permitted
within a notified distance of all historically important temples.
(x)  It is submitted that every year, as per the archaeological
rules and regulations, the State archaeological department official
shall conduct inspection in and around the temples of 100 years or
more and submit a report to the central archaeological department as
well as the department commissioner for further action and advices.
Before inspection, all those places that must be inspected shall be
listed, documented and shall be used during the future inspections.
Details of the inspection and its reports shall be made available on
the website. Therefore, this department may be directed to inspect all
the important temples irrespective of age, for which, the HR&CE
department may be directed to render necessary assistance.
(xi)  It is stated that though the HR&CE Department issued a
circular directing all the officers to take photographs of metal and
stone idols belonging to temples under the control of HR&CE and
register them in the department's website as well as in the website of
the        Archaeology    department    along   with  details     of   weight      /
measurement etc., the officials are yet to comply with the said direc-
tion.
(xii) It is stated that the Government of India sanctioned a
grant of Rs.90 crores through 13th Finance Commission towards
expenditure         in   connection   with   the   renovation,      repair      and
maintenance of ancient temples and artifact monuments & sculptures
in Tamil Nadu; accordingly, the state Government released the said
amount to the identified 228 ancient temples vide G.O.295 Tamil
Development           Religious  Endowments      and   Information        (RE1-1)
Department dated 10.11.2011 in four installments. However, on
scrutiny of the various documents produced would reveal a lot of
lacunae and lapses in respect of the financial propriety, compliance
and control over the expenditure, viz., the temples which are the
recipient of grant for the year 2011-12, have not commenced the
work till date and the grant has been kept idle in the bank account of
the temples and no action was taken by the department in this regard
and hence, the unutilized amount requires to be recovered as per the
conditions of the grant and credited back to the Government account;
and sanctioning and releasing the grant based on the approximate
estimates without obtaining a technical opinion and the estimate from
the       department Stapathi /  technical people    caused      additional
expenditure and also delay in execution. For example, in respect of
Adhinarayana       Temple  at Pazhaverkadu,   the   temple      authorities
submitted a revised estimate for the rework to be carried out with
lime stone leading to additional expenditure and the expenditure
already incurred becoming unfruitful. It is further submitted that
approving and sanctioning the grant to the temples, without
ascertaining the age/authorized by the Archaeology Department is
against the provisions of the said G.O and the expenditure incurred
by the temples not listed as ancient by the Archaeology Department
is improper; and the portion of the grant was utilized without sanction
for the works of construction and reconstruction of mandapams and
walls and dismantling the existing structure and reconstruction,
instead of renovation and repairs. Poor implementation of Oru Kaala
Pooja Scheme, resulted in non-reaching of intended funds (interest
amount) to the beneficiary temples across the State and hence, steps
be taken to send all the interest payments to the temples through
ECS by getting the bank accounts of the remaining temples; and
allowing          the   temples   to  retain  the   grants    without      incurring
expenditure for the intended purpose for more than a year and non
production of records to verify the correctness of expenditure is
against the provisions of financial propriety.
(xiii)   It is alleged that various representations were received
by the HR&CE department seeking details regarding stolen materials
belonging to the temple etc, property details, revenue records
relating particulars, lease hold details, recovery of arrears for lease
hold properties, maintenance of animal and cattle in the temple, for
maintenance, invariable temple funds spent and details regarding the
theft of jewellery. It is further submitted that a detailed enquiry is to
be conducted for missing of records, theft of idols and other
alienation of immovable properties of the temples.
(xiv) It is stated that no internal audit was conducted. As per
the extract from the CAG audit of the HR&CE Department, enclosed
at page 89 of the typed set in WP.No.574 of 2015, it is seen that as
per the DCB statement for collection of revenue due to religious
institutions for the Falsi Year 1419 (as on March 2010) an amount of
Rs.33651.99 lakhs was due from persons, who had taken temple land
on lease and the said amount was increased to five times now. In
accordance with Section 79C of the HR&CE Act, any money due to
religious institutions may be recovered and for the purpose of such
recovery, the Commissioner of HR&CE Department shall have the
powers of a Collector under the Tamil Nadu Revenue Recovery Act
and hence, he may be directed to take appropriate action in this
regard.
(xv)  It is pointed out that every religious institution shall pay
to the Commissioner annual contribution as prescribed and cost of
auditing its accounts as determined by him, according to sections
92(i) and 92(ii) respectively of the HR&CE Act. The Government in
G.O.No.485 CT&RE Department dated 02.12.1991 prescribed centage
charges at the rate of 1% for preparation of estimate and another 1%
for scrutiny of estimate be collected for the work done by the
Engineering wing of the HR&CE Department and therefore, effective
action be taken to collect the centage charges pending collection and
the fact be intimated to audit.
(xvi) It is alleged that the main deities in the temples have
been altered, without following any procedure, which resulted in
missing of lots of jewels, shalagrams and other precious stones found
inside the same. There are communications relating to demolition of
the temple, change of deity in AmirthavalliNayagiSanadhi and
Sowmya Damodhara Perumal Koil, etc. It is further alleged that
despite the order of this Court dated 30.11.2015, the temple
authorities        of     Sri   Jambugeshwar      Akilandeswari          temple,
ThiruvanaiKoil, Trichy, have demolished portions of ancient structures
of the temple. Similarly, a specification report has been produced, for
the work of dismantling the damaged sannathi relating to Arulmigu
Cellandiamman Thirukoil, Karur District, which is an ancient temple,
but the said temple was stated to have been completely demolished
on 04.11.2020, despite the order of this Court. The parties produced
various photographs and alleged that the moolavar deity was
changed and in some temples, toilet / septic tanks were constructed
inside the temple premises, which is against the norms.
(xvii)   There are certain documents relating to the estimates
for works undertaken in the Srirangam temple between 2014-16 at
Rs.5,66,90,801/-. But the total amount of funds spent by the temple
during          this     period   according    to    Board       Resolution,         is
Rs.20,90,98,368/-. Apart from this, the temple has spent more than
Rs.25 crores for conservation work of Rampart walls on the 5th, 6th
and 7th prakaras and hence, the temple has spent in excess of Rs.50
crores during 2014-16. There are documents depicting the fact that
the Board of trustees of the said temple, have resolved to spend
temple funds for non essential works, which show the depth of
corruption by the trustees appointed.
(xviii)  It is brought to the notice of this Court that the HR&CE
Department officials failed to coordinate with UNESCO team during
the visit to Thiruchendur temple, where they went about doing
sand/water blasting by claiming that UNESCO has approved the work.
The UNESCO has expressed its willingness to assist the department in
undertaking reviewing of institutional mechanism for conservation of
temples and work out the strategy for improvement and hence, the
benefit of the expertise may be utilized by the department.
(xix)  It is emphasized that as the conservation of ancient
temple is absolutely a science, a conservation wing is essentially
required and has to be established with the help of Anna University,
IIT,         Madras,   etc., to  monitor   complete   documentation           and
authenticity for the work done apart from carrying out new
construction works with adaptation of modern scientific methods.
According to the learned counsel, to preserve the historical structures
is a very big science. It should not do any new modifications to
heritage structures and it should be preserved as it originally existing
wherever possible. If the renovation work has to be carried out in a
temple, the same materials what were originally used, be used in old
structures. Science and technology should be used to conserve the
structures and scientific laboratories will help in this regard. That
apart, security measures such as, installing CCTV camera, etc., have
to be taken.
(xx)  It is stated that the temples in Tamil Nadu are the major
tourist attractions. For the welfare of the devotees and tourists
visiting the temples, the temple administration and the tourism
department jointly provide basic amenities such as toilets, bath
rooms, drinking water, dormitories, information centers, approach
roads, high mast lamps, cloak rooms, provision of lawns and parking
facilities.
(xxi)  When documenting, protecting and maintaining the old
temples and water bodies, trees, parks (temple garden) and other
structures, the manual shall clearly quote these rules. For every one
of the rules, its source of documentations shall be referenced and
recorded. In addition, Environmental Regulatory compliance (EIA
Notification & coastal regulation Zone) & compliance of all safety rules
shall be properly documented in the manual and they shall be
implemented for the sacred duties of the temples. The employees,
their qualifications, rights and duties shall be clearly expressed for the
associated         maintenance    of the   temples,  its  surroundings         and
protection. Various temples existing all over the State should be
properly documented covering all the details pertaining to the temple
including the nature of works carried out.
(xxii) It is asserted that the HR&CE Department have a total
extent of 478462.46 acres of land. However, the land records were
not produced to audit and the correctness of the figures and the
custody of the land in possession of temples could not be ensured.
Hence, it is necessary to furnish the information relating to the extent
of land to which pattas are to be transferred to temples from private
persons, the extent of land pattas to be restored in the name of
temples in computerized chitta from private persons, the extent of
lands to be cleared from encroachment and to be restored in the
name of temples, etc. Further, the ancient temples and the lands
surrounding them shall be declared and documented as protected
area, as per the archaeological laws and those lands must be
maintained.
(xxiii)  It is alleged that the gold obtained through change of
gold bond was not sold, but kept in the locker as idle, which caused
monetary loss to the temple. Therefore, it is necessary to update the
register regarding maintenance of jewels, icons, valuables, articles,
antiques, stolen or lost from the temples, besides maintaining register
for theft, missing of valuable gold, silver ornamental items, etc.
(xxiv)  The HR&CE Department should not split the total cost of
renovation/civil works expenses concerning heritage temples into
smaller denominations. The HR&CE Department should also take
immediate steps to remove the toilets built inside the temples.
Further, no shops shall be present or set within the premises of
ancient temples. If shops selling the items for worship and latrines
need to be built, then they must be built outside of the temple as per
the archaeological department advice. That apart, the vehicles
belonging to Government and Government related organizations must
receive        an    evaluation  certificate   from     Central      vehicle      and
maintenance organization and to be sold only by public auction. The
validly appointed trustees by the department and the officials have to
strictly follow the Management and Preservation of Properties of
Religious Institutions Rules, 1964 (as amended) and the Circular
dated 10.06.1979 vide Na.Ka.No.42271/78.
(xxv)       It is pressed into service that maintenance /
preservation activities done for each year, complaints received,
scientific related studies and yearly inspection details etc., shall be
made publicly available. In addition, every 2 years, the regulatory
guidelines shall be reviewed by a group of international archaeological
experts and improved. All the records associated to this review, shall
be publicly available on the website. All the expenses related to the
maintenance / preservation / conservation activities shall be recorded
as per the Government Accounting Rules, 1990 and shall be
subjected         to  auditing. The    auditing   official   shall    inspect     the
maintenance activity, whose costs exceed Rs.1 crore and should audit
the associated expenses and records, at required intervals. All the
associated details have to be made available on the website at once.
The department should make an assessment of damages made to
begin within the last 10 years to heritage temples in Tamil Nadu and
do its best to restore the structures very carefully.
36.6.1  Reiterating the averments made in the latest
affidavit filed on 11.01.2021, Mr.M.Karthikeyan, learned Special
Government Pleader (HR&CE) submitted that there are about 44,121
religious institutions under the control of the HR&CE Department, out
of which, 1966 are Mutts, Charities and Endowments, 42155 are
temples in which nearly 8450 temples are ancient one, which are built
before 100 years; and it was found that nearly 21000 temples need
to be renovated and Kumbabhishegam to be performed in the
upcoming years. It is further stated that the Department has decided
to restore the Heritage Temples in a phased manner with priority to
structures that are degrading due to natural phenomenon; and they
are at present creating a database regarding the present condition of
all the Temples under its supervisory control; and the subordinate
officers of the department are directed to inspect the temples and
upload the present conditions, age of the temple, approximate cost
for restoration, along with the photographs; and till now, the
particulars relating to 40695 temples have been uploaded in the
department website, based on which, the temples will be classified as
Heritage and Non-Heritage and a list will be prepared for the purpose
of preparation of conservation and renovation of temples.
36.6.2 Adding further, the learned Special Government
Pleader (HR&CE) stated that from the database so far collected for
40695 temples, 32935 are stated to be in good condition, while 6414
temples are considered to be having damages that are needed to be
repaired; 530 temples have been identified as partially dilapidated;
and 716 temples have been identified as severely dilapidated; and
steps have been initiated to restore/renovate all the 1246 dilapidated
temples in a phased manner and a unique ID for all the dilapidated
temples has been created in the Tiruppani module of Department
website to give priority for the restoration process. It is submitted
that the proposal for renovation are initiated only after consulting the
experts and the proposal is vetted by an Expert present in the
respective Regional level Heritage Temple Screening Committee
formed as per G.O.No.256 TC&RE Department, dated 01.11.2016;
and hence, there is no violation in whatsoever manner on the part of
this department.
36.6.3     Stoutly refuting the allegations made against the
HR&CE Department, Mr.Karthikeyan, learned Special Government
Pleader (HR&CE) submitted that this Department is very much
cautious in preserving the ancient temples and undertaking the
renovation works in accordance with the Archaeological norms; they
are engaging service of Experts in various fields and various
committees          have   been    constituted,  including      Archaeologist,
Conservationist, Archaeological Chemist, etc.; and the Government
has also constituted a separate renovation and conservation wing for
Tamil         Nadu  HR&CE     Department    vide G.O.(Ms)No.108,          TC&RE
Department, dated 09.08.2019. He further detailed that to scrutinize
the renovation proposal and streamline the work process regarding
the temple renovation the following committees have been formed:
(a)The Hon’ble High Court appointed Expert Committee;
(b)Two State Level Heritage Temple screening Committee;
(c)11 numbers of Regional Level Heritage Temple Screening
(e)Advisory and Expert committee for preservation of Murals
Apart from that, the department has considered to form an Expert
committee at Head office to scrutinize the work estimates regarding
heritage temples. The said committee consists of Conservation
Architect and a Stapathi and it will also supervise the ongoing works
and ensure that the works are done as per the estimates. It is also
submitted that a special mechanism has been adopted to preserve
the heritage temples, such as, identification of temples through
grading process, making condition assessment of the damaged
temple structures and preparing a detailed project report to restore
the temple complex, approval of relevant committees, execution of
the works, training to workers,           monitoring mechanism during
execution of the work, creating public awareness for preservation of
heritage temples, etc. He further reiterated the averment made in the
counter affidavit and submitted that the Chief Minister has announced
on the floor of Assembly to create new offices viz., 9 Joint
Commissioner’s         office,   8    Assistant Commissioner’s         office,    10
verification wing for appraisement of jewels and valuables, creation of
117 posts of Inspector’s in the grassroots level of administration and
creation of 91 Executive Officers post and in the newly announced
offices, post of Engineers, Regional Stapathis and Stapathis will be
created and if necessary, Archaeologist / Conservationist will also be
outsourced;        and    the   craft  persons   are  also    included      in   the
conservation process.
36.6.4     It   is  also   submitted   by   the    learned       Special
Government Pleader (HR&CE) that since the Rules are not sufficient
to conserve and safeguard the heritage temples, it is considered to
amend the existing rule by incorporating various provisions on the
line of National Conservation Policy and various International Charters
regarding conservation of monuments; and the Conservation of policy
of the Department is under preparation and the same will be finalized
with the approval of the Government and a detailed Conservation
Manual containing elaborate procedures for renovation of heritage
temples,     non-heritage  temples   and   village    temples      is    under
preparation and it will be finalized soon. With regard to the safety
measures taken by the HR&CE Department to protect the heritage
structures, idols, icons and valuables belonging to the religious
institutions, it is submitted that to protect the valuable jewels and
idols, strong rooms have been provided in 11512 temples; burglar
alarms have been installed in 5773 temples and this department has
financed 817 needy temples to install burglar alarms from the corpus
fund sanctioned by G.O.Ms.No.17, Tourism, Culture and Religious
Endowments Department, dated 11.02.2014; tell tale clocks have
also been installed in major religious institutions; CCTVs are also
installed in 3602 temples; 34 Icon centers have been built in temples
and police protection has also been provided; night watchmen are
deployed to guard the temple and its strong room etc.; 1000 Grade II
Police constables and 3000 Ex-servicemen are deployed in the
Districts; and safety electronic gadgets like metal detector, digital
video recorder and CCTV within the temple premises, apart from the
strong rooms are also available. He also pointed that the construction
of idol strong rooms for more than 3000 temples will be completed
without further delay. With these submissions, the learned counsel
pleaded that the Expert Committee appointed by this Court may be
made as permanent.
36.6.5        As regards the relief sought in WP(MD)No.24178 of
2018, Mr.Karthikeyan, learned Special Government Pleader (HR&CE)
referred to the statements made in the counter affidavit filed by the
department dated 17.11.2020 and submitted that subsequent to the
filing of this writ petition, two Heritage Screening Committees are
formed, one for the southern region and another for the northern
region,           vide   the     proceedings    of    the     Commissioner           in
RC.No.57789/2015/Y2 dated 27.11.2018 with the following terms:
(i)Preparation and approval of conservation manual
(ii)Selection and empanelment of Experts in different categories
(iii)Training of officials nominated in the District level committee
(iv)carry out field inspection and monitoring the implementation
(v)preparation of format and templates for inspection.
It is further submitted that all the members have been nominated as
prayed by the petitioner and the tenure of the said committees is two
years from 08.11.2018. Hence, he ultimately, submitted that the
allegations pointed out against the department are ill founded and the
department, being the custodian of the temples and its properties
whatsoever, is conscious enough and also taking all the required
steps to bring back the originality and heritage glory of the temples.
Stating so, he prayed for appropriate orders in the writ petitions.
WMP.No.30869/2017,              the  learned   Special   Government          Pleader
(HR&CE) submitted that the suggestions put forth by the Executive
Officer of Arulmigu Meenakshmi Sundareshwarar Thirukoil, Madurai
were considered and the renovation works are almost over and
hence, no order needs to be passed in this petition.
37. From the pleadings and submissions as referred to
above, it is ascertained that most of the old ancient temples have
been damaged because of time, age and absence of proper
maintenance and supervision. Even after the Pallava period, some of
the temples constructed during the Chola period after the 10thCentury
(A.D.) have also been damaged. While renovating the old temples,
the authorities have to take note of the old sculptural works and the
renovating works have to be carried out without causing any damage
to its originality. However, the same are not taken note of while
renovation of the temples even as per the above referred reports of
the amicus curiae, UNESCO and Mr.Rangarajan Narasimhan. The fact
remains that in most of the temples, the repair works have damaged
the original structure and the cultural heritage. This is, as pointed out
in the report of the UNESCO, due to insufficient staff with technical
skills on sculpting, agamas and shastras. Further, it has to be noted
that the old rock inscriptions have to be protected and restored to its
originality, while making renovation of the temples. The original rock
inscriptions reflect the period, time and age of the sculptural work
along with the details as to who has done the same, etc. The
renovation/restoration must be done only by experts so as to ensure
that not only the sanctum is protected but also the architecture value.
Therefore, the need of the hour is to undo the wrong and lapses and
to carry out proper repair works by the HR&CE Department so as to
possibly restore the originality.
38. Similarly, many temples have been constructed by many
Kings with distinct and different features/ characteristics. The value of
the temple/monument is unknown to a layman. It was either the
Government or an expert who would be able to assess the value of
the monument or the period of the temple. Likewise, historians, by
looking at the temples, will be able to identify the period during which
a particular temple was constructed and in whose reign it has been
constructed. Now, with the advent and development of technology,
the information and knowledge can reach the public in few seconds.
Therefore, it will not be out of place to mention here that the officials
of the HR & CE department, to be fully equipped to handle the
temples, require an organisational restructure by including experts
like qualified stapathis in their ranks who are also trained in Agama
and Shilpa Sastras as suggested by the UNESCO team, Engineers,
system operators, etc. It is observed so, only to emphasise that all
these temples are valuable treasures of this land and they have to be
properly maintained without changing or altering the ancientness or
its original value.
39. This Court has exhaustively discussed in the preceding
paragraphs about the role played by the temples in the development
of the society. The temples of Tamil Nadu have embodied the
continuing traditions and living heritage of the Country. It was as
early as from 7thcentury during the Pandya period, thereafter Chola
period to the Vijayanagara and Nayaka periods, because of their
architectural, artistic, archaeological, socio-religious and economic
value, the temples were restructured and constructed, which are now
of great cultural significance and historical value. Since the temples
belong to either of the two main sects, ie., Saivities and Vaishnavites,
they are visited by the local devotees and Hindu pilgrims and they are
immensely valued by historians, researchers, archaeologists etc., as
benchmark of architecture. The shore temple of Mamallapuram and
the Big temple of Brihadeeswarar in Thanjavur, have already been
listed in the World Heritage List. Shri Ranganatha Swamy Temple at
Srirangam is also placed in the tentative list for future nomination as
World Heritage Site. Since it is not just the physical structures of the
temples but also the traditional principles, it is indeed a great
challenge to define a singular conservation approach for the temples
of Tamil Nadu. It is only if the daily rituals are performed and the
temples are preserved, the religion itself could survive. By sheer
numbers and considering the age of the monuments, our country
would be the country with maximum monuments and in India, Tamil
Nadu would be premier state having the number of temples and other
places of historical significance. The secularism and protection as
embodied in the constitutional framework are available to all the
religions and faiths. So, it is the duty of the state to protect, preserve
and maintain all places of archaeological and historical importance.
Miniscule developments have been shown because of the intervention
of this court in the last few years.
40.   History reveals that many temples have been built by the
Kings        with   great   vision. However,   the  authorities      have      not
endeavored to protect the same. As a result, many idols have been
stolen and smuggled out of the country and the temples with
architectural excellence and historical importance have also been left
to become dilapidated. If proper system is adopted to screen the
objects, the smuggling of the Idols out of the country cannot take
place.        The    Idols  cannot   be  smuggled,   unless      there      is   a
mis-declaration, which will warrant action by the DRI and Customs
authorities against the Exporter, CHA, etc. This Court has not come
across with details related to a single case, where the person involved
in smuggling the Idols out of the country, has been independently
prosecuted under the Customs Act, 1962 and the Finance Act, 1994
as the act would be per se constitute an independent offence under
these Acts. Hence, this Court, in R.Venkataraman v. Director
General         of    Police   and   others  [order   dated      21.07.2017
rendered in Crl.OP.Nos.8690 and 12060 of 2017, reported in
2018-2-LW.65], issued a specific direction to the respondent
authorities that the details of the cases, wherein, the Idols have been
smuggled out of the country, must be sent to the Superintendent of
Police, Idol Theft Wing, so as to enable him to issue appropriate
directions for initiation of cases under the Customs Act, 1962.
However, it is reported that the said direction has not been properly
complied with by the respondent authorities.
41. In Department of Customs v. Sharad Gandhi [2019
SCC Online 286], while hearing an appeal on the point as to
whether prosecution under the Customs Act is maintainable, when
there is also a violation of the Antiquities and Treasuries Act, it was
“92.While it may be true that the Antiquities Act is a
comprehensive law, it cannot be treated as a complete or exhaustive
code. Of course, the principles relating to repugnancy have been
expounded in the context of conflicting claims to legislative power
between two legislatures. In this case both the Customs Act 1962 and
Antiquities Act have been made by Parliament.
93.We have expounded the ingredients of Sections 132 and
135(1)(a) of the Customs Act. The view we are taking would give full
play to the Customs Act to the extent that it is not inconsistent with
the Act as contemplated under Sector 4. The view which we are
declaring does not do violence to the provisions of Section 25 of the
Act. The contrary view which has gained acceptance at the hands of
the High Court, in our view, fails to give meaning and full play as
intended to the Customs Act as provided in Section 4 of the Act.
Furthermore, the principle that a transaction or the same set of facts
can give rise to more than one distinct offence provided the legislative
intention in this regard is clear from the provisions which creates such
offences cannot be lost sight of.
94.The upshot of the above discussion is as follows:—
Prosecution under Sections 132 and 135(1)(a) of the Customs
Act, 1962, is not barred in regard to the antiquities or art treasures.
Accordingly, we allow the appeal and set aside the impugned order.
The complaint filed may be proceeded with as per law. However, we
make it very clear that pronouncement of this order shall not come in
the way of the Court deciding the matter on its merits. The Court will
proceed to consider the matter on its own and shall not be influenced
by any observation which may have been made in this order regarding
merits.”
Therefore, the respondent authorities have to necessarily initiate
prosecution under the provisions of the customs Act, whenever an
antique is smuggled, stored or moved without proper licence.
42.     The     noble     object     behind     the     donation        of    the
properties/lands in favour of the temples is only to protect the
temples and to enable it to survive for several long years along with
the heritage and culture of our land to the future generation.
Throwing to winds, the temple properties/lands are being encroached,
misappropriated and mishandled. Though several directions were
issued by this Court, the process of identification of encroached lands
and retrieval have not been undertaken swiftly and the officials are
determined to do away with the lands for political or appeasement
reasons contrary to the object of grant and in detrimental to the
interest of the temples, which can only be termed as a step to slowly
diminish the religious belief, tradition, culture and practices. At this
juncture, it is relevant to quote the lines of the great Tamil poet
Thirumoolar in his book 'Thirumandiram', which reads as follows:
@fl;Ltpj; jhh;kjpw; fy;byhd;Wth';fpoy;
It means, 'none should cause any damage or usurp the properties of
the temple'. But, the statistical record reveals that out of 5.25 lakh
acres of land, only 4.78 lakh acres are available as of now and the
balance acres of land are in the hands of encroachers. It is significant
to mention here that the HR & CE department is the custodian and
administrator of the temples and its properties. But this department,
to the knowledge of this Court, has not purchased even a small
portion of land for the benefit of any temple. As administrator, the
role of this department is much more responsible and the officials are
culpable and liable to be punished in case of breach of their
responsibility. The administrative right to deal with the temple
properties is only to preserve and augment more revenue, implying
that the temple lands ought not be alienated or given away. It is to
be noted that the Government cannot claim right over the temple
lands and the same cannot be a part of any Government scheme,
otherwise, the very object of the creation of the HR & CE department
would get defeated. Considering the need of the same, this Court in
V.Muthusamy v. Superintendent of Police [2018-1-WLR.530 :
2018-2-LW.623], directed the Commissioner, HR&CE Department,
Chennai to act under Section 34A of the Act and to fix the market
rents for all the properties and take further action. Similarly, in
P.Lakshmanan v. Superintendent of Police and others [2018
(3) CTC 493 : (2018) 3 MLJ 202],                 the Commissioner, HR&CE
Department, Chennai was directed to conduct enquiry under Section
78 of the Act and take steps to recover the temple lands. However,
no fruitful efforts were stated to have been made on the part of the
department.
43.  As per the statistics, there are about 413 monuments in
Tamil Nadu under the control of ASI, out of which 403 fall under
Chennai circle and 10 under the Thrissur Circle. The excavations at
various sites have thrown a light on the unanswered questions on the
origin       and  evolution   of  humanity. The     state    department         has
conducted excavation at 40 sites. The excavation at Keeladi has
brought a new dimension to the claim of the people of this land
regarding the ancientness of the language and origin. Though the
State has done commendable work in certain areas like manuscripts,
it has fallen short in the maintenance of heritage sites and temples as
pointed out in the report of the UNESCO team. In this context, it is
relevant to recollect the observation of the Supreme Court in Rajeev
Mankotiav. Secy. to the President of India, [(1997) 10 SCC
441], while dealing with the need to protect the monuments of
national importance, which reads as under:
“19.It is needless to mention that as soon as the Indian
Institute of Advanced Studies vacates the building and hands it
over to the Archaeological Department, the Government should
provide the necessary budget for effecting repairs and restoring to
the building its natural beauty and grandeur. It is also necessary
that its proper maintenance and preservation is undertaken as an
on going process to protect the historical heritage and needed
repairs are effected from time to time. We avail this opportunity to
direct the Government of India to maintain all national monuments
under the respective Acts referred to above and to ensure that all
of them are properly maintained so that the cultural and historical
heritage of India and the beauty and grandeur of the monuments,
sculptures secured through breathless and passionate labour
workmanship, craftsmanship and the skills of the Indian architects,
artists and masons is continued to be preserved. They are the
pride of Indians and places of public visit. The tourist visitors
should be properly regulated and collection of funds by way of
admission/entrance fee should be conscientiously accounted for
and utilised for their upkeep and maintenance under the respective
regulations/rules. Adequate annual budgetary provisions should be
provided. In this behalf, it may not be out of place to mention that
if one goes to Williamsburg in United States of America, the first
settlement of the British therein is preserved as a tourist resort
and though it is one in the row, its originality is maintained and
busying (sic bustling) business activity goes on in and around the
area attracting daily hundreds of tourists from all over the world.
Similar places of interest, though of recent origin, need to be
preserved and maintained as manifestation of our cultural heritage
or historical evidence. Similar efforts should also be made by the
Government of India, in particular the Tourism Department, to
attract foreign tourists and to give them a good account of our past
and glory of the people of India as message to the other countries
and territories. Equally all the State Governments would do well
vis-à-vis monuments of State importance, though given power
under Schedule VII List II Entry 12 to the Constitution. From this
perspective, the petitioner has served a great cause of national
importance and we place on record his effort to have the Viceregal
Lodge preserved and maintained; but for his painstaking efforts, it
would have been desecrated into a five star hotel and in no time
‘We, the people of India’ would have lost our ancient historical
heritage.”
44.     On earlier occasion, by order dated 13.01.2020 in
W.P.No.26896              of  2018,     this    Court   directed     that    the     HR&CE
department             should     utilize    the    stapathis    qualified     from      the
Government college of Architecture and Sculpture at Mamallapuram
by providing them employment in the department and not to utilise
the services of staff deputed from other department. But the said
direction has not yet been fully complied with. At this juncture, the
reports submitted by the UNESCO and the Amicus curiae pointing out
the deficiencies to handle the issues relating to repair and renovation
work         and  the   requirement   of  complete   restructuring       of   the
administrative set up by including stapathis, architectural Engineers,
agama and shilpa experts in the department, cannot be lost sight.
The compliance of the same would go a long way in addressing the
grievances raised in the report filed by the UNESCO team. Only the
appointment of qualified stapathis in the department with traditional
knowledge could fill up the lacunae in addressing the shortfall.
45.  Be it noted, the monumental sites and places of historical
importance are also to be identified, photographed, listed and
preserved. Though the HR&CE department has categorically denied
that the renovation work carried out at their behest is not the cause
for erosion or damage, this Court is of the opinion that the
department should be more sensitive to the concept of archaeology
and historical value of the temples. The department should devise a
permanent         mechanism     by  including experts    of    all   fields    for
consultation before carrying out renovation works, but they are taking
decisions with just a Chief stapathi and senior officials. This Court is
conscious of the controversies surrounding the appointment and
function of the Chief stapathi in collusion with the officials. Contracts
for restoration of idols, pillars, gopuram and other structures are
made as if they are pure civil contracts. Therefore, with the growing
need to protect the temples and its properties, it is ripe time to crack
the whip and issue necessary directions, the compliance of which
alone shall enable the department to carry out the renovation/repair
works in the temples with its originality and ancientness.
46.    In Seshammal v. State of T.N., [(1972) 2 SCC 11],
the Supreme Court, while dealing with the validity of the Tamil Nadu
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowment Act, laid down the
importance of the Agamas, the relevant portion of which is extracted
“12.The Agamas have also rules with regard to the Archakas. In
Saivite temples only a devotee of Siva, and there too, one belonging to
a particular denomination or group or sub-group is entitled to be the
Archaka. If he is a Saivite, he cannot possibly be an Archaka in a
Vaishnavite Agama temple to whatever caste he may belong and
however learned he may be. Similarly, a VaishnaviteArchaka has no
place as an Archaka in a Saivite temple. Indeed there is no bar to a
Saivite worshipping in a Vaishnavite temple as a lay worshipper or vice
versa. What the Agamas prohibit is his appointment as an Archaka in a
temple    of  a   different  denomination.    Dr.Kane    has   quoted     the
Brahmapurana on the topic of Punah-pratistha (Re-consecration of
images in temples) at p.904 of his History of Dharmasastra referred to
above. The Brahmapurana says that “when an image is broken into
two or is reduced to particles, is burnt, is removed from its pedestal, is
insulted, has ceased to be worshipped, is touched by beasts like
donkeys or falls on impure ground or is worshipped with mantras of
other deities or is rendered impure by the touch of outcastes and the
like — in these ten contingencies, God ceases to indwell therein”. The
Agamas appear to be more severe in this respect. Shri R.Parthasarathy
Bhattacharya, whose authority on Agama literature is unquestioned,
has filed his affidavit in Writ Petition No. 442 of 1971 and stated in his
affidavit, with special reference to the Vaikhanasa Sutra to which he
belongs, that according to the texts of the Vaikhanasa Shastra
(Agama), persons who are the followers of the four Rishi traditions of
Bhrigu, Atri, Marichi and Kasyapa and born of Vaikhanasa parents are
alone competent to do puja in Vaikhanasa temples of Vaishnavites.
They only can touch the idols and perform the ceremonies and rituals.
None others, however, high placed in society as pontiffs or Acharyas,
or even other Brahmins could touch the idol, do puja or even enter the
GarbhaGriha. Not even a person belonging to another Agama is
competent to do puja in Vaikhanasa temples. That is the general rule
with regard to all these sectarian denominational temples. It is,
therefore, manifest that the Archaka of such a temple besides being
proficient in the rituals appropriate to the worship of the particular
deity, must also belong, according to the Agamas, to a particular
denomination. An Archaka of a different denomination is supposed to
defile the image by his touch and since it is of the essence of the
religious faith of all worshippers that there should be no pollution or
defilement of the image under any circumstance, the Archaka
undoubtedly occupies an important place in the matter of temple
worship. Any State action which permits the defilement or pollution of
the image by the touch of an Archaka not authorised by the Agamas
would violently interfere with the religious faith and practices of the
Hindu worshipper in a vital respect, and would, therefore, be prima
facie invalid under Article 25(1) of the Constitution.”
47.     In Adhi Saiva Sivachariyargal Nala Sangam v. State
of Tamil Nadu [2016 (2) SCC 725], the Supreme Court further
clarified the legal position with respect to the appointment of
“It is the considered view of the court that the validity or
otherwise of the impugned G.O. would depend on the facts of each
case of appointment. What is found and held to be prescribed by one
particular or a set of Agamas for a solitary or a group of temples, as
may be, would be determinative of the issue. In this regard it will be
necessary to re-emphasis what has been already stated with regard to
the purport and effect of Article 16(5) of the Constitution, namely, that
the exclusion of some and inclusion of a particular segment or
denomination for appointment as Archakas would not violate Article
14 so long such inclusion/exclusion is not based on the criteria of
caste, birth or any other constitutionally unacceptable parameter. So
long as the prescription(s) under a particular Agama or Agamas is not
contrary to any constitutional mandate as discussed above, the
impugned G.O. dated 23.05.2006 by its blanket fiat to the effect that,
“Any person who is a Hindu and possessing the requisite qualification
and training can be appointed as a Archaka in Hindu temples” has the
potential of falling foul of the dictum laid down in Seshammal (supra).
A determination of the contours of a claimed custom or usage would be
imperative and it is in that light that the validity of the impugned G.O.
dated 23.05.2006 will have to be decided in each case of appointment
of Archakas whenever and wherever the issue is raised.”
48.    In the aforesaid decisions, the Apex Court has clearly laid
down the importance of a qualified archaka and knowledge in agama
shastras. The knowledge in agamas is an essential qualification to
decide on the repair/renovation or preservation of the temples. It is
not in dispute that for the 42,155 temples under the control of the
HR&CE department, they do not have enough qualified stapathis. This
Court already in the order passed in W.P.No.26896 of 2018 and also
in the preceding paragraph, recorded the necessity to have qualified
stapathis on the Board. Having qualified stapathis in the role of the
department          has    manifold   advantages      viz.,    (i)availability      of
knowledgeable expert (ii) timely decisions can be taken (iii) nature of
work         required   can   be    easily  identified    (iv)damage        to    the
idol/sculpture can be avoided (v) will help in cutting down the costs
and will facilitate routine surveillance and preservation and (vi)create
employment opportunity to people of the religion with knowledge in
agamas,         tradition,  culture  and   art.  The    HR&CE       Department’s
administrative set up has to be revamped and boarded with stapathis,
in-house qualified architectural engineers, agama experts, chemical
analyst, jewel valuer and experts in epigraphy. The preservation of
the temples includes not only the structures but also the idols,
sculptures, scriptures, paintings and murals. A holistic and combined
effort is required from the experts of various fields. All the
renovation/repair works must be carried out only with the consent of
the experts and stapathis. The renowned experts in Agamas can also
be considered as consultants. Hence, in view of the fact that many
temples in Tamil Nadu are ancient and requires regular visit and
maintenance to avoid deterioration of the structure, idols, murals and
paintings, it is very much essential that at least one qualified stapathi
must be appointed at every District level depending upon the division
of blocks and number of temples in each District.
49. Similarly, the courses offered in the Government College
of Architecture and Sculpture at Mamallapuram must be upgraded
with new scientific skills and computer technology brought in the
syllabus. Post graduate courses must also be offered so as to harness
the skill of interested and qualified personnel. This would ensure that
the age old profession of sculpture is kept alive for generations to
come. This Court opined earlier that an independent stapathi can be
appointed as a traditional stapathi to avoid any bias with the opinion
of the Government in the Expert Committee. However, taking into
account the various directions issued earlier, considering the overall
scheme and scope of the Act and the necessity to have adequate
qualified stapathis in the department itself and only qualified persons
must be permitted to occupy the post of Stapathi in the department
and to avoid any backdoor recruitment, it will only be appropriate
that such traditional stapathi is also a stapathi having necessary
educational qualification and it is necessary that all posts must be
filled up in a transparent manner as per the procedure laid down
under the law.
50. Another important contention that is often raised is non
appointment       of  a  “Trustee”  and  managing    the     temples      with
department staff appointed as “Fit Person”. As per the provisions of
the HR & CE Act, the Commissioner is empowered to appoint a fit
person to administer the temple in the absence of a Trustee and the
same cannot be resorted to as a matter of routine exercise. The word
“Fit” is synonymous to “Appropriate”. The intention of the legislature
is to appoint a person not only with impeccable integrity, devotion,
sincerity, honesty and belief, but also a person with some basic
knowledge in agamas, tradition and administration. The appointment
cannot be mechanical, but it has to be made with application of mind
in a transparent manner. Similarly, only a theist can be permitted to
occupy any post in the temple or in the department as the occupation
of any post not only requires sincerity, but also an interest and belief
to augment the object of the Act. It is needless to state that the
trustees so appointed must also be worthy to such appointments.
Mere political recommendation or a person capable of making huge
donations cannot be a criteria for being appointed as a Trustee. A
true donor would be a person, who makes such donations in
pursuance of his philanthropic or spiritual ideology but not for a
quid pro quo appointment as a Trustee. Therefore, the trustees must
also satisfy the requirements as mentioned above.
51. As discussed earlier, the redemption cannot be achieved
by merely safeguarding the temples and its properties in its physical
form. The object can be achieved only if the temple activities are
restored to its traditional days. It is not out of sight to mention here
that temples are the place, where people receive positive vibes and
peace of mind when traditional music is played. Tamil Nadu is one of
the prominent States where one can see Music is being performed by
artistes during festivities and other important functions in the temples
and its glory and sanctity have to be preserved. The artistes playing
musical instruments such as Tavil, Nathaswaram, Sruthi, Talam,
Miruthangam deserve recognition so as to revive the already sinking
tradition of music. The historic significance of the services of
musicians in the temples of our State has to be preserved without
leaving it to be diminished. The age old and extinguishing arts must
be revived. For the said purposes, the HR&CE department must take
appropriate steps for creation of certain posts, besides making
appointments in accordance with law. Similarly, a person would seek
employment from the Government mainly because it is a matter of
job security during the service and also for retirement benefits.
52.  As envisaged by the reports filed earlier before this Court
and the articles in the newspaper, the heritage sites and the places of
archaeological       importance    have  to     be  properly       maintained.
That apart, the state is to constitute the “Heritage Commission” and
“Mamallapuram World Heritage Area Management Authority” and to
have         a  mechanism   including  a  manual     for    the    process      of
conservation, preservation and maintenance of heritage sites and
monuments, the mode of collection and preservation of data,
number and nature of members of Commission/Authority/Committee,
their qualification and term of office, specific powers, duties and
procedures to be followed, etc., which impelled this Court to pass
orders, in the light of the materials available on record and the
discussion extensively made in the above paragraphs, to the effect
that all places of historical importance, whether religious or not have
to be taken stock, recovered, maintained and celebrated. To fulfil the
above, different wings of the central and state Governments have to
act in tandem to protect the ancient monuments of this land, which is
one of the treasures that have for long been left in lurch. It is also
necessary         that  representatives   from  various    departments         with
experts have to be brought together to ensure that not only the
monuments are preserved, but also to ensure that appropriate repair
works by qualified professionals are carried out to increase the
longevity of the places of archaeological or historical importance,
temples and monuments.
53.   As regards the issues involved herein, the Supreme Court
as well this Court rendered various decisions, a few of which are
(i) In Rajeev Mankotia vs. Secretary to the President of India,
[(1997) 10 S.C.C. 441], the Supreme Court had referred to the preservation of
heritage buildings as a manifestation of our cultural heritage and the protection of
monuments of State importance by the State Governments as well. Paragraphs 4, 5
"4. Before considering whether the Viceregal Lodge should be
declared as historical heritage (monuments), let us have a look at the
legal setting in that behalf. The Ancient Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (for short, the `Ancient Monuments Act')
provides for the preservation of ancient and historical monuments and
archaeological sites and remains of national importance. The Act was
enacted to clarify the legal position that the Central Government
regulates exclusively ancient monuments etc. of national importance,
leaving the field open to the Stable legislatures to enact the law on the
subject, i.e., ancient monuments of State importance. Section 2(a)
defines "ancient monument" to mean "any structure, erection or
monument, or any tumulus or place of interment, or any cave, rock-
sculpture, inscription or monolith, which is of historical, archaeological
or artistic interest and which has been in existence for not less than
one hundred years, and includes (emphasis supplied): (i) the remains
or an ancient monument; (ii) the site of an ancient monument; (iii)
such portion of land adjoining the site of an ancient monument as may
be required for fencing or covering in or otherwise preserving such
monument ; and (iv) the means of access to, and convenient
5. Section 3 of the Act declares that all ancient and historical
monuments and archaeological sites and remains which have been
declared by the Ancient and Historical Monuments and Archaeological
Sites and Remains (Declaration of National Importance) Act 1951, or
by Section 126 of the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, to be of
national importance shall be deemed to be ancient and historical
monuments or archaeological sites and remains declared to be of
national importance for the purpose of this Act. Section 4 empowers
the Central Government to declare any ancient monuments or
archaeological site and remains not included in Section 3 to be of
national importance by giving two months notice of its so declaring.
The Ancient Monuments Preservation Act, 1904 provides for the
preservation of ancient monuments and objects of archaeological,
historical or artistic interest. Section 2(1) defines "ancient monument"
in the same language as Section 2(a) of the Ancient Monuments Act.
Section 2 (4) defines `maintain' and `maintenance' to include the
fencing, covering in, repairing, restoring and cleaning of protected
monument and the doing of any act which may be necessary for the
purpose    of  maintaining     a  protected  monument      or  of   securing
convenient     access    thereto.   Section   3   deals  with    `protected
monuments' and empowers the Central Government, by a notification
in the official Gazette, to declare an ancient monument to be a
protected monument under the said Act. Section 11 enjoins that the
Commissioner shall maintain every monument in respect of which the
Government has acquired any of the rights mentioned in Section 4 or
which the Government has acquired under Section 10 etc.
6. It would, therefore, be manifest that all ancient and historical
monuments and all archaeological sites and remains or any structure,
erection or monument of any tumulus or place of interment shall be
deemed to be ancient and historical monument or archaeological sites
and remains of national importance and shall be so declared for the
purpose of Ancient Monuments Act if they have existed for a century;
and in the case of a State monument, of State importance covered by
the appropriate State Act. The point of reference to these provisions is
that an ancient monument is of historical, cultural or archaeological or
sculptural or monolithic or artistic interest existing for a century and is
of national importance or of State importance. In other words, either of
them are required and shall be protected, preserved and maintained as
national monuments or State monuments for the basis which not only
gives pride to the people but also gives us insight into the past glory of
our structure, culture, sculptural, artistic or archaeological significance,
artistic skills and the vision and wisdom of our ancestors, which should
be preserved and perpetuated so that our succeeding generations learn
the Skills of our ancestors and our traditions, culture and civilization.
They would have the advantage to learn our art, architecture, aesthetic
tastes imbibed by the authors of the past and to continue the same
tradition for the posterity. Preservation and protection of ancient
monuments, is thus the duty of the Union of India and the State
Governments concerned in respect of ancient monuments of national
importance or those of State importance respectively to protect,
preserve and maintain them by preserving of restoring them to their
(ii)In A.A.Gopalakrishnan v Cochin Devaswom Board and
others, [(2007) 7 SCC 482], the Supreme Court held that it is the
duty of the Court to protect and safeguard the properties of religious
and charitable institutions from wrongful claims or misappropriation.
The relevant portion of the said decision is extracted hereunder:-
“The properties of deities, temples and Devaswom
Boards,     require   to   be protected    and  safeguarded     by   their
trustees/archakas/shebaits/employees. Instances are many where
persons entrusted with the duty of managing and safeguarding the
properties of temples, deities and Devaswom Boards have usurped
and misappropriated such properties by setting up false claims of
ownership or tenancy, or adverse possession. This is possible only
with the passive or active collusion of the authorities concerned. Such
acts of fences eating the crops should be dealt with sternly. The
Government, members or trustees of boards/trusts, and devotees
should be vigilant to prevent any such usurpation or encroachment. It
is also the duty of courts to protect and safeguard the properties of
religious     and  charitable institutions  from  wrongful    claims    or
misappropriation.”
(iii)In K.Guruprasad Rao v. State of Karnataka and others
[(2013) 8 SCC 418], it was observed by the Supreme Court as
“15. It was decided that the States should be burdened with the
responsibility of protecting the ancient and historical monuments
within their territories.”
“91. The protection of ancient monuments has necessarily to be kept
in mind while carrying out development activities. The need for
ensuring protection and preservation of the ancient monuments for
the benefit of future generations has to be balanced with the benefits
which may accrue from mining and other development related
activities.
The immense cultural and historic wealth, not to mention the wealth
of information which the temple provides cannot be ignored and every
effort has to be made to protect the temple.
The Court emphasized the need for preservation and protection of
ancient and historical Monuments, more so for it to be a matter of
concern for the Government and private individuals alike. It reiterated
the jurisprudence and the endeavour of the Courts in zealously
protecting and Preserving the National rich cultural heritage including
the monuments, i.e., Taj Mahal; NationalParks; Sanctuaries; water
bodies etc.”
(iv)In Archaeological Survey of India v. State of M.P.
[(2014) 12 SCC 34], it was observed as under:
“The temple cannot be regarded as a 'Monument' under the
aforesaid enactments and consequently, the archaeological department
has no jurisdiction over it. Therefore, the temple, its administration and
properties have to be governed and guided by the provisions of the
HR&CE Act, which are in line with Article 26 of the Constitution of
Mandir Committee, Ujjain (Madhya Pradesh) and others,
[(2018) 17 SCC 112], it was held by the Supreme Court as follows:
“8. Mahakaleshwar Jyotirlingam has so much importance           for
spiritual and other Gains, there is a constitutional duty to protect it as
envisaged in Article 25, Article 26Read with Article 49, at the same
time there is a fundamental         duty under Article 51-A of the
Constitution   to  promote     harmony    and    the  spirit  of   common
brotherhood as Provided in Article 51-A and to value and preserve the
rich heritage of our composite Culture. It is also the duty to strive
towards excellence in all spheres of individual and Collective activity
as provided in Article 51-A(a) to (j).”
(vi)In the Indian National Trust for Architectural and
Cultural Heritage (INTACH) v. The Chennai Metropolitan
Development Authority, [2010 Writ L.R. 836], in respect of a
writ petition filed in public interest to protect and conserve Bharat
Insurance Building from being demolished without applying provisions
of Rule 22 of the Development Control Rules for Chennai Metropolitan
Area, 2004, it was observed by a Division Bench of this Court as
"19. Sometimes, in an enthusiastic effort "to clean up" a
temple or a heritage building, we have seen that the persons who
undertake this effort do sand blasting which actually damages the
quality of the pillars or the structures as such. Therefore, the
Government shall issue rules to prevent persons from undertaking
any repair even under the name of renovation of heritage buildings
without seeking the necessary approval of the Heritage Conservation
Committee whenever an ancient monument, whether it is a structure
or erection of historic, archaeological or artistic value as described in
the   Tamil  Nadu     (25   of  1966).   The    CMDA     must    take   the
recommendation of the Committee for conserving the heritage
buildings in the Chennai Metropolitan Area. The Government shall
also enact rules so that such heritage buildings, wherever in the
State, shall not be demolished except after obtaining the conditions
similar to the ones provided for under the Development Control
From the aforesaid extract, it could be seen that the Government was
directed to enact rules so that such heritage buildings are not
demolished except after obtaining the permissions similar to the ones
provided for under the Development Control Rules.
(Vii)A Division Bench of this Court in K.S.Kuppusamy v.
Commissioner, HR&CE Department, Chennai and others, by
order dated 29.02.2016 in WP.No.1972 of 2015, while dealing
with the issue relating to fixation of rent for the shops and other
establishments in the lands belonging to Temple, observed as under:
“19.To sum up, the Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable
Endowments Department is to safeguard the temples and uphold the
glory at the same time, to respect and satisfy the sentiments of the
people.
(i)    Temples and Mutts in Tamil Nadu own more than 5
lakhs of acres of agricultural and other lands. The tenancy laws in
Tamil Nadu and the non-functioning of Revenue Courts make it
almost impossible for land owner / temple to realize any rent or
revenue from the lands leased.     It cannot be denied that the Hindu
Religious and Charitable Endowments Department takes no credible
steps to realize the rents and arrears of rents. Many of the temples
in Tamil Nadu though capable of earning       huge income, are facing
tremendous loss running to several Crores of Rupees and the
magnitude of the loss is so huge that reflects the failure of existing
mechanism. In such circumstance, to safeguard and protect the value
and valuables of the temples, a Special Court could be formed to deal
with cases relating to Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments
exclusively so that the cases would be cleared in a speedy manner
within the time frame.
(ii)   Though Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments
Department claims to have       been administering only the secular
aspects of temple administration and ensuring that the moneys due
to the institutions are realized and used for the purposes for which
the endowments were made, it sounds lofty but in reality, should say,
(iii)  There is no external audit for many years which makes
it impossible to gauge how much money is recovered and utilized.
Therefore, in the considered opinion of this Court, to have a proper
scrutinization of accounts and for effective control of management,
External Auditors could be appointed. The money recovered thus
should only be used for maintenance of temples and should not be
used for any other purpose.    Several small temples which go without
income for everyday upkeep can be taken care of by the bigger
temples of the area having sufficient and surplus income.
(viii)In N.Dhanasekaran v the Tamil Nadu Government
[2018-2-L.W.216], it was observed by a Division Bench of this
“60. As observed by us at the inception, the temples of Tamil
Nadu are the living heritage of India. The temples have immense
cultural significance, because of their historical, architectural, artistic,
archaeological, socio-religious and economic values. The temples of
Tamil Nadu find a place in World Heritage List. Construction of new
temples in various countries by the Tamil communities itself is a
classic example to the temple architecture tradition of Tamil Nadu.
61. It is a great challenge to define a singular conservation
approach for the temples of Tamil Nadu, considering the complexity as
a living heritage. Unfortunately and admittedly, the HR & CE
Department neither has the capacity nor the qualified experts to carry
out the conservation works at large scale and number. The multiple
stakeholders involved in the functioning of the temple makes it difficult
to have a defined approach. The sentiments of the people, the faith,
historic architectural values and many more are the factors to be
considered in the conservation process. The conservation of the
temples should be in adherence to the Agamasastras, State and
Central Statutes, scientific approach to the structural analysis. To put
it simple, it is a herculean task to involve all the devotees in the
process and sensitize them regarding history and significance of the
temple and explain to them about their contribution in this process.
62. In fact, considering all these aspects, this Court had asked
the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
("UNESCO") to provide a factual report on the conservation, approach
and processes followed in some these temples. After making field
inspection in so many temples and assessing the ground reality, the
final recommendations of the UNESCO qua the role of HR & CE
"The sheer number of temples being handled by HR &
CE is unimaginable and unless a very coherent operational
structure along with an army of experts from various fields,
skilled sthapthys and crafts persons is available at hand, the
task   of  simultaneously    conserving/maintaining/   repairing
temples is not feasible. Either HR&CE should limit itself to the
simple supervision and administration of immovable properties
as per the Tamil Nadu HR&CE Act while the conservation works
are assigned to a specialised department such as Archaeology
or it should re-organise its structure including Technical
experts at various levels and, ensure the empanelment of only
qualified Sthapathis and contractors for such specialised
(ix)In S.Sridhar v. State of Tamil Nadu and others reported in (2020)
8 MLJ 438 : LNINDORD 2020 MAD 150, this Court held as under:
“22.In  view  of the    foregoing  discussions,  the   emerging
conclusions are summed up in seriatim as follows:
i. The temples are entitled to the rights of possession and enjoyment
in respect of the respective disputed lands, subject to the control and
administration of the HR&CE Dept. Needless to say that no trustee /
private individual shall claim right over the disputed lands possessed
and enjoyed by the temples in any manner whatsoever.
ii. The right and title over the disputed lands vest with the
Government. However, the Government shall not utilise/ alienate /
assign / transfer the same and construct permanent structures therein
for the purposes other than the beneficial interests of the temple as
indicated in Rule 13 of the Revenue Standing Order No.26 and the
provisions of the HR&CE Act.
iii. The subject temples under the administration and control of the
HR&CE Dept., are entitled to all the prescriptive rights not only
because of their long possession, but also in view of Rule 13 of the
Revenue Standing Order No.26 and the provisions of HR&CE Act.
54. Lastly, a reference may be made to the decision of
the Supreme Court in Mrinalini Padhi v. Union of India [(2018) 7 SCC
785],        wherein, it was categorically held that ‘the pilgrimage centres
are of religious, social, historical and architectural importance,
representing cultural heritage of our country and hence, not only
Government, whether state or centre, but also the courts may
examine such matter treating it as PIL on the judicial side and issue
appropriate direction considering the factual situation of the case’. For
brevity, the relevant passage of the said decision is reproduced
“7. There is no doubt that proper management of pilgrimage
centres of great importance is a matter of public interest. These
centres are of undoubted religious, social, historical and architectural
importance, representing cultural heritage of our country. Millions of
people visit these centres not only for tourism but also for seeking
inspiration for the righteous values and for their well-being. They also
make huge offerings and donations for advancement of such values.”
“20.The issue of difficulties faced by the visitors, exploitative
practices, deficiencies in the management, maintenance of hygiene,
proper utilization of offerings and protection of assets may require
consideration with regard to all Shrines throughout the India,
irrespective of religion practiced in such shrines. It cannot be
disputed that this aspect is covered by List III Item 28 of the Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution of India and there is need to look into
this   aspect   by    the    Central Government,     apart   from    State
“30.9   Difficulties   faced by  the  visitors,   deficiencies    in
management, maintenance of hygiene, appropriate utilization of
offerings and protections of assets with regard to shrines, irrespective
of religion is a matter for consideration not only for the State
Government, Central Government but also for Courts. Every District
Judge throughout India may examine such matters himself or through
any court under his jurisdiction and send a report to the concerned
High Court so that such report can be treated as PIL on the judicial
side and such direction may be issued as may be considered
necessary having regard to individual fact situation.”
55.    In the ultimate analysis, this Court is of the firm view
that the cultural and heritage value as well as the Archaeological
importance of the historical monuments, sites and temples and its
properties, have to be conserved, preserved and maintained. As
already stated above, this Court has time and again directed the
HR&CE Department to take a list of all the temples, maintain the
same, retrieval of the temple lands and properties from the
encroachers, extent of lands owned by them, occupiers of the same
and the arrears of rent/ lease amount to be recovered, make
inventory of all idols, jewellery and valuables, create strong rooms
and computerise and exhibit the same in the website and appoint
qualified stapathis from the Government college at Mamallapuram for
each District and also other staff and if necessary, get approval for
creation of certain posts, like Oduvars, temple artistes, archakas etc.
however, the department has not fully complied with the same in true
spirit. Further, during the pendency of this suo motu writ petition,
despite the order of this Court, the temple structures have been
demolished and works have been carried on under the guise of
renovation, thereby taking away the originality of the structure. It is
also reported to us that the encroachment in Mamallapuram has not
been removed. Though there are provisions under the Ancient
Monuments and the Archaeological Sites and Remains Act and in the
HR & CE Act to take action against the errant officials, the authorities
concerned have not endeavoured to do so. Such allegations and
complaints would vanish and the demand would subside, if the state
and HR&CE Department are diligent, conscious and sensitive to
protect the heritage of this land. Thus, having regard to the reports of
the UNESCO team and the amicus curiae and also considering the
role of this Court in acting as the capacity of parens patriae to protect
the        historical monuments   including   temples,     idols,    antiques,
manuscripts, murals, etc., which is the root cause for initiation of this
public interest litigation, the following directions are hereby issued to
the respondent authorities for strict compliance:
(1) The respondents shall establish Mamallapuram World Heritage
Area Management Authority to manage and safeguard all the
monuments and the same shall be notified within a period of eight (8)
weeks from today.
(2) The respondents shall constitute the Heritage Commission
consisting of 17 members within a period of eight (8) weeks from
today, which shall act as an advisory body to the Mamallapuram
World Heritage Area Management Authority and the Government as
well.
(3) The Heritage Commission shall consist of 17 members including
the          representatives from Archaeological    Survey       of     India,
representatives from the State Archaeological Department, one
renowned historian or anthropologist, two representatives of PWD
department i.e., one from Building Structural and Conservation Wing
and another from Architectural Wing, one representative from the
HR&CE Department not below the rank of Joint Commissioner, one
Stapathi qualified from the Government College of Architecture and
Sculpture, Mamallapuram or any other college in the state with
similar objectives, two experts in Agamas and Shilpa Shastras and
one chemical analyst. The inclusion of a representative from the
UNESCO shall also be taken into consideration. sha
(4) The Heritage Commission shall identify all the structures,
monuments,       temples,   antiques     with  historical/archaeological
importance within the State of Tamil Nadu, formulate a list with age
of such monuments by categorising them within their period group,
issue appropriate notification, render periodical advices to the State,
supervise the restoration, repair works etc. and maintain the same.
(5) No structural alteration or repair of any monument / temple / idol
/ sculpture / murals of which are notified either under the Central Act
or the State Act, shall take place without the sanction of the Heritage
(6) The State shall reconstitute the State Level Expert Committee,
consisting of a Structural Expert, Archaeological Expert, Conservation
Expert,      a qualified Traditional  Stapathi   preferably       from     the
Government College of Architecture and Sculpture, Mamallapuram, an
Expert from history, epigraphy, iconography and Fine arts and Two
Agama Experts, besides a representative from HR&CE and PWD
Departments. The State Level Expert Committee shall be responsible
for carrying out and according sanctions for the repairs/renovations of
the temples and archaeological sites, on the recommendation of the
(7) The State shall constitute District Level Committees, which will
consist of historical expert, qualified stapathis, Architectural Expert,
Mural Expert, conservative expert, a representative from HR&CE
Department, within a period of eight weeks.
(8) The Committee shall visit all the temples in their respective
District, identify the temples and sculptures which are required to be
brought under the State Act and which require immediate attention
for repairing and prepare a report that is to be forwarded to the
Government for appropriate action under the supervision of the
Heritage Commission or the State Level Expert Committee as the
case may be.
(9) The Committee shall meet at least once in every month and
conduct periodical inspection of the monuments and temples in line
with the objects of the HR&CE Act, Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Act (Central as well as State Acts)
and the Rules framed there under.
(10)         The Government     shall  finalise   the   conservation        manual
containing       the  regulations   for   the   functions     of   the    Heritage
Commission         as  well   the  Mamallapuram        World     Heritage       Area
Management          Authority   and   the    procedures      for    conservation,
preservation and renovation of heritage and non-heritage temples,
monuments and historical sites with the assistance of the officials
attached to the State and Central ASI Departments and HR & CE
Department, within a period of twelve (12) weeks.
(11) The ASI shall conduct state wide field survey of antique temples
of more than 100 years old and estimate the damage and restore the
structure according to its conservation rules to its former glory within
a period of six (6) to twelve (12) months. The assessment document
shall be kept in the official website of the Chennai ASI Circle, after
having scanned and photographed, for the public scrutiny. It is open
to the ASI to create a public portal, enabling the public to pass on
information about historic monuments and temples of their area so as
to enable the respondents to take immediate steps to preserve them.
(12) The conservation plan and its related documents shall be
published    in  the official website   of  ASI    before     starting     the
conservation activity, so as to enable the worshippers to provide the
feedback on the same.
(13) The HR&CE Department with the assistance of ASI, shall grade
the temples, such as listed and non-listed, based on architectural
values, historic importance, year of existence, etc.
(14) Architectural marvels, mural paintings, stone & wall inscriptions,
wooden carving, copper plates, old antique utensils of the temples,
etc, shall be protected, preserved and maintained properly by the
respondents.
(15) The CAG audit shall be done with ASI expertise to assess the
damage structurally and evaluate the value of the antique destroyed.
Further, the compliance audit, financial audit and performance audit
shall also be done every year for managing huge wealthy resources of
the temples.
(16) Periodical inspections shall be made by the higher officials in the
cadre of the Additional Commissioner or Joint Commissioner of
HR&CE Department, to look into the temple related issues and its
properties.
(17)         The ASI shall inspect and declare all the temples which are
more than 100 years old, even if a single idol in a temple, as a
monument according to the Directive Principles of State Policy.
(18) Annual Archaeological inspection should be done for all the
temples and supervisory visits shall also be made.
(19) No structural alteration or repair of any monument, temple or
idol or sculpture or murals or paintings which come within the
purview and control of the HR&CE Department, shall take place
without the sanction of the State Level or District Level Committee
and all pending works shall forthwith be proceeded further, only after
obtaining sanction from the said Committee.
(20) The District Level Committees must identify the temples in which
repair/renovation works have been carried out, wherein cement and
white washing has been done detrimental to the original structure,
inform the same to the State Level committee or the Commission as
the case may be, so as to enable the appropriate authority to redo
the work by restoring the originality. Every restoration without
altering the form or material must be done after a detailed report in
writing supported by adequate photograph and measured by drawing
records.
(21)         The Renovation  and Conservation Wing     for   the     HR&CE
department constituted by the Government, by G.O.(Ms).No.108,
TC&RE Department, dated 09.08.2019, should ensure that the
members of the committee are trained with scientific / technical
knowledge to undertake the works of conservation and should act
strictly for the purpose to which it was constituted.
(22) The HR&CE department shall adopt the scientific technology in
the process of documentation, preservation and conservation of
heritage temples and its properties and valuables.
(23) To maintain the quality of ornamental works, the usage of sand
blasting for cleaning the buildings, must be avoided and the shortfalls
in the repair works done in the temples in violation of Agama and
Shilpa shastras as pointed out in the report of the UNESCO team,
must be attended to and the original position must be attempted to
be restored.
(24) The funds of the temples shall first be utilized for the
maintenance of temples, conducting temple festivals, payment to its
staff including the archakas, oduvars, musicians, folklore and drama
artiste. In case of surplus funds, the same shall be utilized for
attending the repair and maintenance of other temples in the state as
specified under the HR&CE Act and the Rules framed there under and
for propaganda of the tenets of all or any of the religious institutions
under the HR&CE Act.
(25) The State Government shall allocate funds for protection and
preservation of the ancient monuments declared under the State Act
and for the functioning of the Commission as well the State and the
District Level Committees. The State Government shall also make
proper access / roads leading to the monuments. Such exercises shall
be done within a period of six (6) to twelve (12) months from date of
receipt of this order.
(26) The HR&CE Department shall frame standards and procedures
for auditing the fixed and current assets of the temples and its
properties.
(27) The HR&CE Department may permit the stakeholders of the
various religious denominations to participate in the meetings
conducted by the Committees as and when required.
(28) The audit of the religious institutions shall be conducted
periodically by an independent audit wing as required under Section
87 of the HR&CE Act and the same must be ensured by the HR&CE
(29) The funds received from the donors shall be accounted and
registered in the records maintained by the HR&CE Department.
(30) The respondent authorities shall ensure that the officials are
updating the registers for maintenance of jewels, icons, valuables,
articles, antiques, stolen or lost from the temples and also the cases
relating to theft, missing of valuable gold, silver ornamental items,
etc. and necessary action be taken to retrieval of the lost / theft
items.
(31) The District Committees must take stock of the lands of all the
temples within their respective District, list out the total extent with
survey number and door number, vacant or leased, nature of land i.e
agricultural or otherwise, current rent, date of fixation of rent, current
market rent, name of lessee/tenant, duration of lease, whether
authorised by the Commissioner, if the period of lease is beyond 5
years, nature of the lessee whether individual, firm or company and
in case, lessee is an individual, then the religion of such individual,
arrears if any of each lessee with period of default, list of cases
pending before any forum or Court regarding the rent or entitlement
to lease, list of encroachers including sub-tenant and sub-lessees and
status of action taken to remove the encroachers, list of temple lands
conveyed and action taken to retrieve them and status of the criminal
complaint lodged against illegal sale of temple land, if any and
document the same properly. A detailed report also be filed before
this Court within a period of twelve (12) weeks.
(32) The agricultural lands fit for cultivation must preferably be let
out to poor farmers rather than persons already holding with large
extent of lands and for that purpose, a Scheme is to be devised and
only after verification of extent of the land held by the lessee and
obtaining an undertaking, the lands must be leased out in consonance
with the provisions of the HR&CE Act.
(33) The state Government or the Commissioner of the HR&CE
department, who are the Trustee/administrator of the temple lands,
shall not alienate or give away the lands contrary to the wish of the
donor. The lands shall always remain with the temples. The public
purpose theory shall not be invoked in cases of temple lands over
which the interest of the community people of the religious
denomination generally rests.
(34) Insofar as Service inams as per the customary practice is
concerned, only one property shall be given to an individual during
his/her      tenure of  service and    after  his/her     retirement        or
disassociation with the temple, the same shall be recovered.
Wherever more than one property has been given as inam, the same
shall be recovered and given to some other deserving service
providers. In case, the land/property is under the occupation of any
third party, steps must be taken to evict them forthwith.
(35) The encroachment and illegal constructions in the protected
area, archaeological sites, temple lands, etc., must immediately be
removed. The extent of lands owned by the temples must be
identified with the help of the revenue Department by the District
Level Committee. The District Collector of the appropriate District, on
the request of the Heritage Commission or State Committee or
District Level Committees or by any officer of the HR&CE Department,
shall forthwith take steps for the removal of any such illegal
construction or encroachment or unauthorised occupants. Appropriate
action must be taken against the errant Government officials of the
central as well as state department and officers under the HR&CE
department for not removing the encroachments in the protected and
regulated area, within a period of eight (8) weeks on expiry of the
time given.
(36) A list of defaulters with the arrears due from them must be
prepared within a period of six (6) weeks and the same must be
published in the website. Appropriate steps must be taken to evict
them and recover the arrears as per the provisions of the HR&CE Act
and the rules there under.
(37) The respondent authorities shall regulate the period of lease
pertaining to the properties of the religious institutions and renewal of
the same.
(38) The HR&CE Department shall allocate the agricultural lands
belonging to the temples for organic farming and temple animal
husbandry.
(39) The District Level Committees shall take stock of all the idols in
temples which fall within the definition of “Ancient Monument” or
“Antique”, prepare a list of such monuments, take photographs and
computerize the same.
(40)         The HR&CE  Department  and   the  Archaeological         Survey
Department of the Central and the State Governments shall display in
their website about the details relating to number of idols or
monuments or any article of historical importance that have been
stolen from any temple or places of archaeological or historical
importance, whether retrieved, whether FIR launched or not and the
status of the cases.
(41)         The HR&CE Department shall recover the missing moolavar
idols and master property registers, for the purpose of conservation
and heritage of temples.
(42) The HR&CE Department must ensure that all the temples have
strong rooms, which are efficiently secured with latest scientific
technology and must be under 24x7 video surveillance with alarm. All
the existing ICON Centres must be brought under 24x7 video
surveillance with alarm.
(43) The stock of idols in the temples must be computerised and the
same must be maintained in the manual books, if not done earlier.
(44) The respondent authorities shall launch prosecution under the
provisions of the Customs Act against any person who has involved
himself in the theft, storage and movement of antiques / idols without
valid licence.
(45) Central Idol and Antique Wing with ASI experts shall be
constituted under the model of the CBI to handle the destruction,
smuggling and theft cases.
(46) The HR&CE Department shall submit a report to this Court with
a list of idols per ICON centre and about the requirement of the
additional ICON centres, within a period of eight (8) weeks.
(47) The HR&CE Department must appoint adequate number of
Oduvars well trained in Thirumurai and Battargal in Divyaprabandams
for each temple and musicians accustomed the temple tradition and
ensure that Thevara paadasalai and Prabhandha paadasalai are
established in each saiva and vainava temples to impart education
regularly.
(48) The HR&CE Department shall appoint enough number of
qualified and eligible archakas for each temple subject to the
prevailing rules and regulations and ensure that the daily rituals are
duly performed.
(49) The HR&CE Department shall engage poets, folklore and drama
artists, who must exhibit traditional and legendary stories associated
with the temple during festivals. The State Government must also
endeavour to publicise the rich heritage, history and culture of this
land; and for that purpose, organise seminars, tours, competitions,
(50) The HR&CE Department shall appoint qualified stapathis in
temples taking note of the number of temples in each Block and
District; if the sanctioned post is not sufficient, they shall take steps
to get necessary orders from the Government in this regard.
(51) The salary and other service and retirement benefits of all the
staff of the temple including that of the archakas and oduvars must
be fixed as per the provisions of the Minimum Wages Act and on par
with the Government servant.
(52) The terminal benefits of the retired staff in the temples under
the HR&CE Act must be settled within 30 days from the date of their
retirement. A list of cases where terminal benefits have not been
settled must be filed before this court within a period of eight (8)
weeks.
(53) A fixed salary be awarded to the trustees of the temple, which
can be arrived at based on the income of the religious institution to
ensure participation on a full time basis by the selected trustee,
subject to penal and disciplinary provisions of the Act. In a routine
manner, periodical transfer for the staff of the temples must be
made.
(54) The HR&CE Department shall file a report before this Court
within a period of eight (8) weeks listing out the number of temples
without Trustees, the duration of such vacancy, the particulars of the
persons appointed as “Fit Person” and the steps taken by the
Department to appoint trustees.
(55) If no hereditary trustees stake claim, then steps must be taken
to appoint non-hereditary trustees. The non-hereditary trustees must
be from the religious denomination, to which the temple belongs to,
without the political background.
(56)         Stringent rules on the conduct,  character,      interest     and
knowledge on both religious affairs as well as administrative abilities
of the trustees, must be enacted to ensure that the right person is
appointed to manage the religious affairs of the temples.
(57) Keeping in mind that the overall administration shall be with the
HR&CE Department, the authorities shall supervise the affairs of the
religious institutions ensuring that the HR&CE Act is strictly complying
with by the trustees and taking necessary remedial steps for which
they are paid an annual contribution as specified under Section 92.
(58) The disciplinary action shall be taken against the officials, who
are responsible for demolition and reconstruction of the ancient
temples, without necessary approval/ permission from the required
authority.
(59) The respondent authorities shall look into it as to whether
appropriate departmental action is taken against the erring officials of
the HR&CE Department and trustees of the temples under Sections
53 and 66 of the Act against whom, the allegations with regard to the
loss and theft of idols, illegal transfers of the properties / lands owned
by the public religious institutions / temples are made, after
conducting proper enquiry in this regard.
(60) The State Government shall take steps to upgrade the courses
offered      in  Government   College    of   Architecture     and     Sculpture,
Mamallapuram and also offer post graduate courses on par with other
colleges so as to excel in the profession, strengthen the in-house skill
and management of the temples with the help of qualified persons as
pointed out by the UNESCO.
(61) A Special Tribunal shall be formed to exclusively deal with the
matters       relating to the   religious   institutions    come      under     the
provisions of the HR&CE Act, such as, disputes on religious affairs,
culture, tradition, heritage, inams and recovery of pending rent,
validity of lease, illegal encroachment and other temple and mutts
land issues.
(62) Such Tribunal shall be constituted under the Head of the
Working or Retired District Judge as Chairman with two or more
Members from the rank of the retired Subordinate Judicial Officers
with the jurisdiction to decide all the matters related to the nature
and status of the Religious Institutions, privileges and performances
of rituals and poojas in all the religious institutions and their
properties and the right of the worshippers by conducting the cases
like a Civil Court of summary nature within the maximum period of
six (6) months.
(63) All the employees and trustees concerned with the temples are
made to be governed by the Tamil Nadu Government Servants
Conduct Rules. There shall be a prohibition for the person with
political background to be appointed as a Trustee or employee of the
temple in any cadre, in view of Rule 14 of the Tamil Nadu
(64)         The Central Government    shall implement        the     Ancient
Monuments Act in letter and spirit, by declaring all religious structures
more than 100 years old including temples, temples' tanks, mutts,
temple chariots, jewels, art, artefacts, and sacred groves etc.,
including private denomination temples, as ‘national monuments’ with
immediate effect.
(65) A High level committee has to be formed to review the HR&CE
Act once in three years to make necessary amendments, however,
subject to judicial review.
(66) The HR&CE Act must be suitably amended by strict incorporation
of penal provisions as per IPC and the procedures laid down under
the Cr.P.C to cover all the illegal acts done in respect of the temples
for proper action.
(67) Steps be taken to amend the HR&CE Rules by incorporating
various provisions on the line of National Conservation Policy and
International Charters regarding conservation of monuments.
(68) A District wise committee headed by District Ayurvedic head
doctor and Siddha head doctor, trustees, food and safety officer and
devotees shall be constituted for procurement of genuine, traditional
and scientifically declared safer prasadam and abishegam items.
(69) Daily maintenance to upkeep the animals, which are considered
as customs, shall be accorded to scientific and responsible local
Government Veterinary Officers and Forest Department Officials.
(70) Water bodies must be handed over to a scientific committee
consisting   of   Local  ASI   Officer and  local   CPWD       officer,    for
preservation and maintenance.
(71) All the expenses incurred for maintenance by the ASI officers
etc., shall be borne by the HR&CE Department.
(72) The respondent authorities shall maintain transparency in all the
matters.
(73) The HR&CE Department shall display the history of the temple
in the granite board in front of the temples and also fix direction
board guiding route to the temples.
(74) The Government shall provide necessary assistance in all
aspects, to the HR&CE department to comply with the directions of
this Court within the time stipulated.
(75) No litigation in respect of the subject matter of the present
petition shall be entertained by subordinate courts. Incase any suit or
other legal proceedings are filed, the subordinate courts shall refer
the same to this court in view of the           decision rendered by           the
Honble         apex  court  in Mrinalini  Padhi  case   (cited     supra).     For
clarification,if any, the party interested / affected is at liberty to
approach this Bench in the present proceeding itself, as directed by
the Hon’ble Chief Justice, by order dated 23.08.2016.
56.  With the aforesaid directions, this Suo Motu W.P No. 574
of 2015 and W.P.(MD) No.24178 of 2018 are disposed of. Since this
Court has elaborately discussed the issues involved and issued very
many directions touching every aspect, the Miscellaneous Petitions
are liable to be closed and are accordingly, closed. No costs.
57. Post the matter for reporting compliance after twelve (12)
weeks.
58. Before   parting,   this  Court   places     on    record       its
appreciation      for  the  efforts   rendered  by   the    learned      counsel
Dr.S.Padma, learned Senior Counsel Mr.R.Singaravelan, learned
Special         Government     Pleader   (HR&CE)   Mr.M.Karthikeyan           and
party-in-person       Mr.Rangarajan     Narasimhan,   who     have      devoted
considerable time in rendering their assistance and made valuable
suggestions.
Tourism, Culture and Religious Endowment Department,
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowment Department,