1. These three writ petitions, each filed by way of Public Interest
Litigation (PIL), involve a challenge to the impugned notification
dated 11th August 2016 issued by the Commissioner-cum-
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                     Page 1 of 30
Secretary,    Information    and   Public   Relations    Department,
Government of Odisha under Section 24 (4) of the Right to
Information Act, 2005 (RTI Act), and are accordingly being
disposed of by this common judgment. The said notification
provides that nothing contained in the RTI Act “shall apply to the
General     Administration    (Vigilance)    Department”     of    the
Government of Odisha “and its organization”.
Contentions of the Petitioners
2. The main ground of challenge in the aforesaid three writ
petitions to the impugned notification is that it violates Article 19
(1) (a) of the Constitution of India which guarantees to all Indian
citizens the fundamental right to information. It is submitted that
under the RTI Act disclosure is the norm and refusal of
information, the exception. Reliance in this regard is placed on the
decisions in State of Uttar Pradesh v. Raj Narain AIR 1975 SC
865; S.P. Gupta v. President of India AIR 1982 SC 149 and
Union of India v. Association for Democratic Reforms AIR 2002
3. Referring to Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act and, in particular, to
the proviso thereto, it is submitted that the power of exemption
granted to the State Government thereunder is not available even
in the case of intelligence and security organizations where the
allegations pertain to corruption and human rights violations. It is
submitted that inasmuch as the impugned notification seeks to
exempt the entire Vigilance Department in Odisha from the
purview of the RTI Act, irrespective of the proviso to Section 24
(4) of the RTI Act, it is ultra vires Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act.
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                   Page 2 of 30
In other words, it is contended that by the impugned notification
the Government intends to keep away from disclosure to the
public, instances of corruption and human right violations,
notwithstanding the proviso to Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act. It is
further submitted that the notification issued under Section 24 (4)
of the RTI Act or even the Rules made under Section 28 of the
RTI Act cannot exceed the scope of the restriction under Section
24 of the RTI Act. It is submitted that the Rules and the
notifications are meant to carry out the provisions of the RTI Act
and not whittle down or take away what is guaranteed by the RTI
Act. Reliance is placed on the decision in Commissioner of
Income Tax, Bombay v. Gwalior Rayon Silk Manufacturing
Company Ltd. AIR 1992 SC 1782. It is further submitted that the
impugned notification imposes a restriction not envisaged under
Sections 8 and 9 of the RTI Act.
4. In reply to the writ petitions, the stand of the Opposite Parties
(State) is that the activities of the Vigilance Department and its
organizations are similar to that of the Central Bureau of
Investigation (CBI) which is entrusted with the responsibility of
administering anti-corruption laws. It is pointed out that the
Government of India has exempted the CBI from the purview of
the RTI Act since 2011. Likewise, the States of Tamil Nadu,
Madhya Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and Sikkim have issued
notifications exempting their respective Vigilance Departments
from the purview of the RTI Act. It is submitted that the Vigilance
Department of the Government of Odisha and its organization are
functioning as the premier anti-corruption agencies of the State
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                  Page 3 of 30
and are entrusted with the responsibility of implementing an
effective prevention, enforcement and prosecution mechanism
thereby ensuring transparency and good governance for the
benefit of the people. The essential tasks of the Vigilance
Department are stated to be the collection of secret intelligence
and making of secret discreet inquiries on the corrupt activities of
public servants.
5. It has been further elaborated in the written submissions filed
separately by the State on 2nd August, 2021 and again on 9th May,
2022 as well as the separate written notes of submissions of the
State Vigilance Department on 9th May, 2022 that if the Vigilance
Department were not to be exempted from the purview of the RTI
Act then all kinds of information regarding the functioning of the
Vigilance Department would become available to the public and
that would be against the interests of the security and public
interest. In particular, reference is made to the fact that under
Section 8 (1) (h) of the RTI Act, information that is otherwise to
be made available only under the orders of the Court like the
information under Section 91 read with Section 311 of Cr PC; or
under Section 162 of the Indian Evidence Act read with Section
123 thereof, would become easily available to an applicant and
this in turn might impede the progress of investigation or the
prosecution of the case and delay the trial. Reliance in this regard
is placed on the decision in Hemant Goswami v. CBI 2014 SCC
Online P & H 104. It is contended by the Opposite Parties that
premature disclosure of the information, especially file notings,
prior to a final decision being taken in disciplinary action has the
potential to disrupt such proceedings.
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                  Page 4 of 30
6. The State Vigilance Department contends that revealing
confidential information under the RTI Act to an individual, or an
organization or even an aggrieved person at any stage would
impede the entire process of an enquiry into corruption. It is
submitted that Section 8 (1) (h) of the RTI Act does not
adequately cover the confidential process which is undertaken in
order to build up an enquiry against a corrupt person. It is
submitted that the first proviso to Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act
regarding allegations of corruption and human rights violation is
in an entirely a different context and should not be misconstrued
as information regarding corruption which is under investigation.
Reliance is placed on the decision of the Madras High Court in S.
Vijayalakshmi v. Union of India AIR 2011 Mad 275.
7. It is further submitted that any interference with the procedure
mentioned in the Cr PC and the Indian Evidence Act is exempted
under Section 8 (1) (h) of the RTI Act. In this context, the order of
the Chief Information Commissioner in B. Seetharamaiah v.
Commissioner of Customs and Central Excise 2010 SCC
OnLine CIC 6330 is relied upon. Reliance is also placed on the
decision in Chief Information Commissioner v. High Court of
Gujarat (2020) 4 SCC 702, where the Supreme Court had held
that RTI Act cannot be invoked if there is already in place an
effective legal regime for securing information and there is no
lack of transparency. It is submitted that there is sufficient
opportunity available to a party to a Vigilance case or a third party
to obtain relevant information under Sections 91 and 311 of the
Cr PC, Sections 162 and 165 of the Indian Evidence Act and
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                   Page 5 of 30
Sections 4 (3), 5 and 22 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988
8. The Opposite Parties submit that both the Allahabad High
Court in its order dated 25th October, 2010 in PIL No.63607 of
2010 (Saleem Baig v. State of U.P.) and the Madras High Court
in Superintendent of Police v. M. Kannappan (2013) 1 MLJ 348
had upheld the constitutional validity of a similar notification
under Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act keeping the Vigilance
Department out of the purview of the RTI Act and held it not to
be ultra vires the RTI Act. It is submitted that if the Vigilance
Department is not exempted from the scope of the RTI Act, it
would frustrate the intent of the legislature while inserting Section
8 (b) of the RTI Act. It is contended that even under Section 172
of the Cr PC, an accused does not have a right to seek to see the
Case Diary whereas without the impugned notification such
statements may become easily available under the RTI Act.
Reliance is placed on the decisions in Jagannath Rao Dani v.
Emperor AIR 1935 Nag 23 and Emperor v. Dharam Vir AIR
9. The Opposite Parties submit that it was not the intent of the
legislature to reveal the source of information given in confidence
by an individual to the law enforcement agency and this includes
the Vigilance Department. This information stands protected
under Section 8 (g) of the RTI Act. Even under Section 7 of the
PC Act, a person who gives information to the Vigilance
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                   Page 6 of 30
Department about alleged illegal demand of gratification by a
public servant can request that his name be kept anonymous.
10. Relying on the decision in Girish Ramchandra Deshpande v.
Central Information Commissioner (2013) 1 SCC 212, it is
submitted by the Opposite Parties that protection from the probing
eyes of outsiders needs to be provided to vigilance officers in
performing their duties. It is submitted that the performance of an
employee in an organisation is a matter between the employee and
employer which would be governed under service rules falling
under “personal information” under Section 8 (1) (j) of the RTI
Act. It is submitted that the Government issued the impugned
notification after receiving representations from the Vigilance
Department that they were facing difficulties due to queries raised
under the RTI Act. Relying on the decision in Bihar Public
Service Commission v. Sayad Hussain Abbas Rizvi, (2012) 13
SCC 61 it is submitted that denial of information of the person
whose document and information are with the Vigilance
Department on the ground of protecting the person’s fundamental
right to privacy would be justified.
11. While it is not disputed by the Opposite Parties that the right
of information is a fundamental right, it is submitted that it is also
subject to reasonable restrictions. Reliance is placed on the
decision in Harkchand Ratanchand Banthia v. Union of India
(1969) 2 SCC 166, KA Abbas v. Union of India (1970) 2 SCC
780, Dinesh Trivedi v. Union of India (1997) 4 SCC 306 and the
decision in Saleem Baig v. State of U.P. (supra) to contend that
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                   Page 7 of 30
the right to information is subject to reasonable restrictions and
the impugned notification is not ultra vires the RTI Act or for that
matter the Constitution of India.
12. This Court has heard the submissions of Mr. S. P. Das and Mr.
N. Nayak, learned counsel for the Petitioners; Mr. S. N. Das,
learned Additional Standing Counsel for the State and Mr.
Srimanta Das, learned Senior Standing Counsel for the Vigilance
13. Before proceeding to discuss the submissions made, the Court
would like to reflect on the process that led to the enactment of
the RTI Act. The precursor to the RTI Act was the Freedom of
Information Act, 2002, which never became operational. It was
later amended extensively and enacted as the RTI Act in 2005.
The Statement of Objects and Reasons appended to the RTI Act
explains the process thus:
“In order to ensure greater and more effective access to
information, the Government resolved that the Freedom
of Information Act, 2002 enacted by the Parliament needs
to be made more progressive, participatory and
meaningful. The National Advisory Council deliberated
on the issue and suggested certain important changes to
be incorporated in the existing Act to ensure smoother
and greater access to information. The Government
examined the suggestions made by the National Advisory
Council and others and decided to make a number of
changes in the law.
The important changes proposed to be incorporated, inter
alia, include establishment of an appellate machinery with
investigating powers to review decisions of the Public
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                  Page 8 of 30
Information Officers; penal provisions for failure to
provide information as per law; provisions to ensure
maximum disclosure and minimum exemptions,
consistent with the constitutional provisions, and
effective mechanism for access to information and
disclosure by authorities, etc. In view of significant
changes proposed in the existing Act, the Government
also decided to repeal the Freedom of Information Act,
2002. The proposed legislation will provide an effective
framework for effectuating the right of information
recognized under Article 19 of the Constitution of India.”
14. Another key to understanding the main object and purpose
behind the RTI Act, is its Preamble, which reads as under:
“An Act to provide for setting out the practical regime of
right to information for citizens to secure access to
information under the control of public authorities, in
order to promote transparency and accountability in the
working of every public authority, the constitution of a
Central Information Commission and State Information
Commissions and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the Constitution of India has established
democratic Republic;
AND WHEREAS democracy requires an informed
citizenry and transparency of information which are vital
to its functioning and also to contain corruption and to
hold Governments and their instrumentalities accountable
AND WHEREAS revelation of information in actual
practice is likely to conflict with other public interests
including efficient operations of the Governments,
optimum use of limited fiscal resources and the
preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information;
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                   Page 9 of 30
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to harmonise these
conflicting interests while preserving the paramountcy of
the democratic ideal;
NOW, THEREFORE, it is expedient to provide for
furnishing certain information to citizens who desire to
have it.”
15. Thus, it is clear that one of the essential features of the RTI
Act is transparency in public affairs and the need for the public to
know how the government functions. Section 24 of the RTI Act,
which is relevant to the present context, reads as under:
"24. Act not to apply to certain organizations—
(1) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to         the
intelligence and security organisations specified in     the
Second Schedule, being organisations established by      the
Central Government or any information furnished           by
such organisations to that Government:
Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations
of corruption and human rights violations shall not be
excluded under this sub-section:
Provided further that in the case of information sought for
is in respect of allegations of violation of human rights,
the information shall only be provided after the approval
of the Central Information Commission, and
notwithstanding anything contained in Section 7, such
information shall be provided within forty-five days from
the date of the receipt of request.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the
Official Gazette, amend the Schedule by including therein
any other intelligence or security organisation established
by that Government or omitting therefrom any
organisation already specified therein and on the
publication of such notification, such organisation shall
be deemed to be included in or, as the case may be,
omitted from the Schedule.
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                  Page 10 of 30
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (2) shall
be laid before each House of Parliament.
(4) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to such
intelligence     and     security   organisations,    being
organisations established by the State Government, as
that Government may, from time to time, by notification
in the Official Gazette, specify:
Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations
of corruption and human rights violations shall not be
excluded under this sub-section:
Provided further that in the case of information sought for
is in respect of allegations of violation of human rights,
the information shall only be provided after the approval
of     the    State    Information     Commission       and,
notwithstanding anything contained in Section 7, such
information shall be provided within forty-five days from
the date of the receipt of request.
(5) Every notification issued under sub-section (4) shall
be laid before the State Legislature."
16. What is immediately relevant as far as the present case is
concerned, is Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act, which states that the
State Government may by a Notification in the Official Gazette,
specify "such intelligence and security organisations, being
organisations established by the State Government" to which the
RTI Act would not apply.
17. The first proviso is an important check on the above power of
the State Government. It specifically states that information
pertaining to the allegations of corruption and human rights
violations shall not be excluded under sub-section (4) of section
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                   Page 11 of 30
24 of the RTI Act. There could be at least two broad sub-
categories here. One is cases generally concerning allegations of
corruption and human rights violations which are under
investigation by or have been investigated by the concerned
‘intelligence and security organisations, being organisations
established by the State Government’. The other sub-category is
cases concerning allegations of corruption and human rights
violations involving those working for or employed by the
concerned    ‘intelligence   and    security organisations,   being
organisations established by the State Government’. The plain
wording of the first proviso to Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act
makes it clear that it applies to both the sub-categories noted
hereinbefore.
18. Section 24 (1) of the RTI Act is more or less similarly worded
as Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act, with one difference being that
the former relates to ‘intelligence and security organisations,
being organisations established by the Central Government’
whereas Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act pertains to those
established by the State Government. The other difference is that
the prohibition in the main part of Section 24 (1) on the
applicability of the RTI Act is to the organisation specified in the
said Second Schedule to the RTI Act “or any information
furnished by such organisations to that Government”. This
additional phrase “or any information furnished by such
organisations to that Government” is not to be found in Section 24
(4) of the RTI Act. However, the two provisos to both Section 24
(1) as well Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act are identically worded.
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                 Page 12 of 30
In other words, in both instances, “information pertaining to the
allegations of corruption and human rights violations shall not be
excluded” from disclosure. Again, in both instances, where
information that is sought is in respect of allegations of violations
of human rights, the prior approval of the concerned Information
Commission, Central or State, as the case may be, is required.
Plainly the legislative intent is to provide information, and not to
withhold it, particularly when it pertains to allegations of
corruption and human rights violations.
19. The proviso to Section 24 (1) of the RTI Act has been
interpreted by the Delhi High Court in CPIO, Intelligence
Bureau v. Sanjiv Chaturvedi AIR 2017 Del 192, where it was
“29. The plain reading of the proviso shows that the
exclusion is applicable with regard to any information.
The term “any information” would include within its
ambit all kinds of information. The proviso becomes
applicable if the information pertains to allegations of
corruption and human rights violation. The proviso
is not qualified and conditional on the information being
related to the exempt intelligence and security
organizations. If the information sought, furnished by the
exempt intelligence and security organizations,
pertains to allegations of corruption and human rights
violation, it would be exempt from the exclusion clause.
30. The proviso “Provided that the information pertaining
to the allegations of corruption and human rights
violations shall not be excluded under this sub-section”
has to be read in the light of the preceding phrase “or any
information furnished by such organisations to that
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                   Page 13 of 30
31. When read together, the only conclusion that can be
drawn is that, if the information sought pertains to
allegation of corruption and human right violation, it
would be exempt from the exclusion clause, irrespective
of the fact that the information pertains to the exempt
intelligence and security organizations or not or pertains
to an Officer of the Intelligence Bureau or not.”
20. This was reiterated subsequently by the same High Court in
CPIO CBI v. C.J. Karia 2017 SCC OnLine Del 10475 where the
contention of the Petitioner that the CBI was named as an
organization to the Second Schedule to the RTI Act by virtue of
Section 24 (1) of the RTI Act and was, therefore, totally exempted
from its purview, was not accepted by the Delhi High Court. It
“8. It is apparent from the plain reading of the
first proviso to Section 24 (1) of the Act that
information pertaining to allegations of
corruption and human rights violation are not
excluded from the purview.”
21. Thus, it is seen that what cannot be kept outside the purview
of disclosure under the RTI Act as spelt out in the proviso to
Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act is information pertaining to
"allegations of corruption and human rights violations" in both
sub-categories of cases as noted hereinbefore viz., cases generally
concerning allegations of corruption and human rights violations
which are under investigation by or have been investigated by the
concerned intelligence and security organisations established by
the State Government’ or cases concerning allegations of
corruption and human rights violations involving those working
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                  Page 14 of 30
for or employed by the said organisations established by the State
22. At this stage, it is necessary to refer to Section 8 of the RTI
Act which reads as under:
“8. Exemption from disclosure of information.-
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,
there shall be no obligation to give any citizen,-
(a) information, disclosure of which would
prejudicially affect the sovereignty and integrity of
India, the security, strategic, scientific or economic
interests of the State, relation with foreign State or
lead to incitement of an offence;
(b) information which has been expressly forbidden to
be published by any court of law or tribunal or the
disclosure of which may constitute contempt of court;
(c) information, the disclosure of which would cause
a breach of privilege of Parliament or the State
(d) information including commercial confidence,
trade secrets or intellectual property, the disclosure of
which would harm the competitive position of a third
party, unless the competent authority is satisfied that
larger public interest warrants the disclosure of such
(e) information available to a person in his fiduciary
relationship, unless the competent authority is
satisfied that the larger public interest warrants the
disclosure of such information;
(f) information received in confidence from foreign
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                    Page 15 of 30
(g) information, the disclosure of which would
endanger the life or physical safety of any person or
identify the source of information or assistance given
in confidence for law enforcement or security
(h) information which would impede the process of
investigation or apprehension or prosecution of
(i) cabinet papers including records of deliberations of
the Council of Ministers, Secretaries and other
Provided that the decisions of Council of Ministers,
the reasons thereof, and the material on the basis of
which the decisions were taken shall be made public
after the decision has been taken, and the matter is
Provided further that those matters which come under
the exemptions specified in this section shall not be
(j) information which relates to personal information
the disclosure of which has no relationship to any
public activity or interest, or which would cause
unwarranted invasion of the privacy of the individual
unless the Central Public Information Officer or the
State Public Information Officer or the appellate
authority, as the case may be, is satisfied that the
larger public interest justifies the disclosure of such
Provided that the information, which cannot be denied
to the Parliament or a State Legislature shall not be
denied to any person”.
23. This Court is unable to accept the plea of the Opposite Parties
that the information that stands protected from disclosure under
Section 8 of the RTI Act will somehow straightway become
available to an applicant in the absence of the impugned
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                  Page 16 of 30
notification under Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act. One important
factor to be noted is that Section 8 of the RTI Act opens with a
non-obstante clause. The other factor is that the category of
information that is highlighted in the first proviso to Section 24
(1) and Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act viz., “information pertaining
to the allegations of corruption and human rights violations” is not
found mentioned as such in Section 8 of the RTI Act. In other
words, what stands protected by Section 8 of the RTI Act would
remain as such and additionally when such information pertains to
allegations of corruption and human rights violations, the proviso
to Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act would have to be considered as
well. The exercise under Section 8 of the RTI Act would
obviously be on a case-by-case basis. The object of the RTI Act,
as spelt out in its Preamble, and the legislative intent and
emphasis throughout that disclosure is the norm and withholding
of information the exception, will have to be kept in view.
24. In this context, it must be noticed that the 2nd proviso under
Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act provides a second layer of
protection to a public servant, when it states that the information
sought in respect of the allegations of violation of human rights
shall be only be provided “after the approval of the State
Information Commission”. Therefore, it is not as if such
information would be straightway made available to a person
seeking such information. In processing the request by an
applicant seeking information regarding violation of human rights
or involving corruption, regard will be had to Section 8 of the RTI
Act. That is the true purport of the non obstante clause at the
beginning of Section 8 of the RTI Act. In effect, therefore, there is
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                  Page 17 of 30
no conflict between Section 8 on the one hand and the proviso to
Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act on the other.
25. This distinction was noticed by the Kerala High Court in
Joseph M. Puthussery v. State Information Commissioner 2012
SCC OnLine Ker 4133 where it was observed as under:
“3. The Government has issued Ext.P6 and Ext.P7
notifications in tune with Section 24 (4) of the Right
to Information Act, 2005. Several intelligence and
security organisations including various wings of the
Police Department have been exempted from the Act
as per the notifications. The authorities are therefore
well founded in not divulging the information sought
for by the petitioner which are sensitive in nature.
The information sought for do not pertain to
allegations of corruption and human rights violation
so as to fall within the purview of proviso to section
24(4) of the Act. Any report regarding the Goonda-
Police nexus cannot be divulged to the public as it is
likely to be misused. The correctness of such report
is yet to be established and the identity of the
informants cannot be revealed lest it would act as a
deterrent.”
26. It is thus seen that on a case-by-case basis it should be
possible for the PIO or for that matter the State Information
Commission, while considering whether certain information is
governed by Section 8 of the RTI Act and should therefore not be
divulged straightway to also keep in view the first proviso to
Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act. That is sufficient answer to the
apprehension expressed by the Opposite Parties that but for the
impugned notification, the information pertaining to investigation
in criminal cases and other sensitive information concerning
disciplinary inquiries will per force have to be disclosed to an
applicant in terms of the proviso to Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act.
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                  Page 18 of 30
Thus, as regards the process to be adopted in dealing with the
applications under the proviso to Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act,
inasmuch as Section 8 of the RTI Act opens with a non-obstante
clause, if the information sought is covered thereunder it can be
disclosed after satisfying the requirements of Section 8 of the RTI
Act with regard being had to the true purport of the proviso
Section 24 (4). In this context the following observations of the
Delhi High Court in B.S. Mathur v. Public Information Officer
(2011) 125 DRJ 508 are relevant:
“19. The question that arises for consideration has
already been formulated in the Court’s order dated
21st April 2011: Whether the disclosure of the
information sought by the Petitioner to the extent not
supplied to him yet would "impede the
investigation" in terms of Section 8 (1) (h) RTI Act?
The scheme of the RTI Act, its objects and reasons
indicate that disclosure of information is the rule and
non-disclosure the exception. A public authority
which seeks to withhold information available with
it has to show that the information sought is of the
nature specified in Section 8 RTI Act. As regards
Section 8 (1) (h) RTI Act, which is the only
provision invoked by the Respondent to deny the
Petitioner the information sought by him, it will
have to be shown by the public authority that the
information sought "would impede the process of
investigation." The mere reproducing of the wording
of the statute would not be sufficient when recourse
is had to Section 8 (1) (h) RTI Act. The burden is on
the public authority to show in what manner the
disclosure of such information would ‘impede’ the
investigation. Even if one went by the interpretation
placed by this Court in W.P. (C) No.7930 of 2009
[Additional Commissioner of Police (Crime) v. CIC,
decision dated 30th November 2009] that the word
"impede" would "mean anything which would
hamper and interfere with the procedure followed in
the investigation and have the effect to hold back the
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                    Page 19 of 30
progress of investigation", it has still to be
demonstrated by the public authority that the
information if disclosed would indeed "hamper" or
"interfere" with the investigation, which in this case
is the second enquiry.”
27. The above decision is also an answer to the apprehension
expressed by the Opposite Parties that if the RTI Act were to be
made applicable to the Vigilance Department then sensitive
information pertaining to criminal investigation would become
easily available to an applicant. Such requests will obviously be
evaluated on a case-by-case basis, applying, where it is so
warranted, Section 8 of the RTI Act. That, however, cannot be the
justification for exempting the entire Vigilance Department from
the purview of the RTI Act. Strangely, the argument of the
Opposite Parties in support of the impugned notification misses
the point that if the RTI Act is entirely excluded from application,
then the shield of Section 8 of the RTI Act would also not be
available.
28. Not each and every aspect of the functioning of the Vigilance
Department would involve issues concerning security and the
sanctity of investigation. There could be many an instance where
the information concerning an organization would not be
amenable to protection from disclosure. One such information
could be that pertaining to recruitment in the organisation. In
Bipan Modi v. State of Punjab 2012 SCC OnLine P&H 18520,
the Court negatived the plea that information pertaining to
recruitment in the Police Department would be protected from
disclosure. The Court held as under:
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                   Page 20 of 30
“The object of granting exemption to police or allied
departments vide the above reproduced notification is to
protect the confidential, sensitive information pertaining
to the intelligence or Security Organizations in
accordance with Section 24 (4) of the Act. The
notification dated 23.2.2006 (Annexure P-2) issued by the
Government of Punjab has to be construed in the context
of object sought to be achieved by Section 24(4) of the
Act which in no certain terms further provides that
“information pertaining to the allegations of corruption
and Human Rights violations shall not be excluded under
this sub-section”. If there were selections based upon
considerations other than merits, will it not amount to a
kind of ‘corruption’ in the matter of public employment?”
29. Again, in Md. Abid Hussain v. State of Manipur 2015 SCC
OnLine Mani 129, the Manipur High Court had occasion to
examine the scope and ambit of Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act. It
“[15] The legislature in their anxiety to keep certain
organisations which are engaged in activities involving
sensitive information, secrecy of the State, have sought to
keep these organisations away from the purview of the
Act by including such organisations in the Second
Schedule of the Act as far as Central Organisations are
concerned and in the official gazette in respect of State
organisations. It does not, however, mean that all
information relating to these organisations are completely
out of bound of the public. For example, even though the
Central Bureau of Investigations is one of the
organisations included in the Second Schedule to the Act,
it does not mean that all information relating to it are out
of bound of the public. If one looks at the website of the
Central Bureau of Investigation which is in the public
domain, there are so many information about the
organisation which are already voluntarily made open to
the public. This is for the simple reason that disclosure of
these information does not in any way compromise with
the integrity of the organisation or confidentiality of the
sensitive nature of works undertaken by this organisation.
The purpose of excluding all these organisations from the
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                   Page 21 of 30
purview of the Act as provided under Section 24 is to
merely protect and ensure the confidentiality of the
sensitive works and activities undertaken by these
organisations. Therefore, if there are any information
which do not impinge upon the confidentiality of the
sensitive activities of the organisation and if such
information is also relatable to the issues of corruption or
violation of human rights, disclosure of such information
cannot be withheld. Similarly, in respect of the police
organisations in the State of Manipur if anybody seeks
any information which does not touch upon any of the
sensitive and confidential activities undertaken by the
police department and if the said information also can be
related to the issues of any allegation of corruption or
violation of human rights, such information cannot be
withheld. We may further clarify this position by
borrowing the concept of doctrine of “pith and
substance”. … Though this doctrine cannot be invoked to
decide the issue raised in this petition, the principle
behind it may be referred to while deciding the issue at
hand. By doing so, this Court will hold that if any
information relates to the core activity of the organisation
because of which such an organisation has been excluded
from the purview of the Act, any such information can be
withheld except which relates to allegation of corruption
and violation of human rights. Therefore, if there be any
information which does not relate to the principal or the
core function of the organisation which is sought to be
protected by including in Section 24 of the Act, but if it
can have some reference or relatable to corruption or
violation of human rights, such an information cannot be
withheld. It may be observed that the core function of the
police organisation is to maintain law and order, security
of the State and discharge such activities which are
related to and ancillary to these functions. It that context,
undertaking the exercise of a recruitment process is not
part of the core function of the police department. It is
some function which could be outsourced to any other
agency like the Public Service Commission etc. and this
activity does not form part of the core function of the
Police Department which cannot be outsourced to any
other agency. Of course, recruitment of intelligence
officials may form part of the core function. But in the
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                   Page 22 of 30
present case, such is not the case. The recruitment in issue
is the general recruitment process of the personnel of the
police department generally.”
“[11] Thus, a reading of the aforesaid provisions of the
Act would clearly show that what had been taken out
from the purview of the Right to Information Act, 2005
by the main part of sub-Section 4 of Section 24 of the
Act, has been brought back by the proviso as far as
information pertaining to allegations of corruption and
human rights violation are concerned. In other words,
even if any intelligence or security organisations have
been excluded from the purview of the Act on the basis of
notification issued in the official gazette by the State such
exemption would not be applicable as regards information
pertaining to allegations of corruptions and human rights
violence. Hence, if the information sought for pertains to
allegations of corruptions and human rights violence,
even in respect of such intelligence and security
organisations, the provisions of the Right to Information
Act, 2005 will be applicable. In that context, the
expression “information pertaining to allegations of
corruption and human rights violence” needs to be
understood properly for if any information is covered by
the said expression, the authorities are under obligation to
provide the information.
[12] This Court respectfully agrees with the reasoning
and conclusion arrived at for holding that information in
the nature sought for in the said case could not be
withheld and ought to be disclosed. In the present case,
the information sought for relates to the marks obtained
by the successful candidates as well as the petitioner and
it is the case of the petitioner that the information sought
for before this Court is to dispel any doubt over
corruption. Therefore, it can be said that the information
sought for by the petitioner in the present case also
pertains to the allegations of corruption. In this respect, it
may be observed that the expression used in this
provision is about “information pertaining to the
allegations of corruption” and not “information pertaining
to corruption”. The earlier expression is of wider import.
As per the earlier expression which has been used in the
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                    Page 23 of 30
statute, the allegation need not be about a proven
corruption or clearly shows existence of corruption.
Allegation of corruption may or may not result in proving
existence of corruption but there must be indication of the
possibility of existence of corruption. However, it does
not mean that anybody can seek information by making
an allegation of corruption. There must be some
proximity or nexus with the information sought and
possibility of a corruption. In the present case, if it is
found on the basis of the information sought by the
petitioner that persons who do not otherwise qualify in
terms marks obtained by the candidates have been
included in the select list, obviously, the charge of
corruption can certainly be validly raised. To that extent
such information sought for by the petitioner can be said
to be pertaining to allegations of corruption. It is not
necessary that the information so furnished would prove
an instance of corruption. It would be sufficient if the
information so provided leads to a genuine complaint or
allegation about the existence of corrupt practice.
Therefore, this Court would hold that if the information
sought for has a proximate link with the charge of
corruption, such information would be covered by the
expression “information pertaining to allegations of
corruption”. Similar position is with the case where there
is allegation of human rights violation. The information
sought for so provided per se may not establish corrupt
practice or violation of human rights but it forms a valid
and reasonable basis for making allegations of corrupt
practice or violation of human rights, such information
would come within the scope of the expression
“information pertaining to allegations of corruption and
human rights violation”. This Court would hold that if
any such information has the potential to raise a serious
question of the existence of corruption or violation of
human rights, it can be certainly considered to be
“pertaining to allegations of corruption and human rights
violation”. In that event, such information cannot be
withheld, if sought for.
[13] One may look at this issue from another perspective.
The exclusion of certain organisations under the main
provisions of Sub-sections (1) and (4) of Section 24 is to
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                 Page 24 of 30
ensure efficient functioning and operations of the
Government, optimum use of limited fiscal resources,
preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information
and as such other public interest and to protect such other
public interest as clearly mentioned in the Preamble to the
Act. It is a well established principle that provisions of
preamble could be invoked for a proper construction of
the statute if the language used is too general. As already
discussed above, the expression used in the proviso i.e.,
“information pertaining to allegations of corruption and
human rights violence” is of too general and of wide
amplitude which has not been defined in the Act or any
cognate Act. However, giving a too wide interpretation
may defeat the very purpose of ensuring preservation of
the public interests as clearly mentioned in the Preamble.
Therefore, a balanced and reasonable interpretation of the
said expression can be done by referring to the Preamble
as mentioned above. The Preamble is a key to open the
mind of the Legislative and proves the board parameters
of the enactment which impelled the lawmakers to craft
such statutes.” (emphasis supplied)
30. The above nuanced interpretation by the Manipur High Court
of the scope of the proviso to Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act, with
which this Court respectfully concurs, is not to be found in the
earlier decisions of the Allahabad High Court in Saleem Baig v.
State of U.P. (supra) or the Madras High Court in Superintendent
of Police v. M. Kannappan (supra) which purportedly negatived
the challenge to the constitutional validity of similar notifications
under Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act.
31. Again, in First Appellate Authority-cum-Additional Director
General of Police v. Chief Information Commissioner, Haryana
AIR 2011 P&H 168, the Punjab and Haryana High Court
examined the scope of the expression “information pertaining to
allegations of corruption and human rights violation” and in that
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                   Page 25 of 30
context whether information in respect of employment in public
post can be said to be “information pertaining to allegations of
corruption and human rights violation”. While directing
disclosure of the information sought for to be provided, it was
pointed out that public officers should be attentive, fair and
impartial in the performance of their functions and not give undue
preferential treatment to any group or individuals. The
information sought was in respect of number of vacancies and
whether the posts were filled up from amongst the eligible
candidates. Disclosure of such information, according to the High
Court, lead to transparent administration which would be
antithesis of corruption.
32. Turning to the decision of the Madras High Court in S.
Vijayalakshmi (supra) on which considerable reliance has been
placed by the Opposite Parties, the issue there was concerning the
interpretation of Section 24 (1) of the RTI Act granting full
exemption to the CBI as an organisation from the applicability of
the RTI Act. The High Court did not accept the plea that such an
exemption under Section 24 (1) of the RTI Act could be termed as
a blanket exemption. Terming as ‘misconceived’ the contention of
the Petitioner there “that in view of the exemptions contemplated
under Section 8(1) of the RTI Act there would be no necessity for
a blanket exemption under Section 24(1) of the Act”, the Madras
High Court proceeded to explain as under:
“22. Repeated reference has been made by stating that the
exemption under section 24(1) is a blanket exemption or in
other words a whole sale exemption. In the preceding
paragraphs we have reproduced section 24 of the Act. In
terms of subsection (1) of section 24, nothing contained in
the RTI Act shall apply to the Intelligence and Security
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                    Page 26 of 30
organisation specified in the second schedule being
organisations established by the Central Government or any
information furnished by such organisations to that
Government. As noticed above, first proviso to section
24(1) of the Act states that information pertaining to the
allegations of corruption and human right violation shall
not be excluded under section 24 (1) of the Act. In terms of
the second proviso, to sub section (1) of section 24, that in
case of information sought for is in respect of allegations of
violation of human right, the information shall only be
provided after the approval of the Central Information
Commission and notwithstanding anything contained in
section 7 (which deals with the disposal of requests), and
such information shall be provided within 45 days from the
date of receipt of request. Therefore, it can hardly be stated
to be case of a whole sale exemption or a blanket
exemption. If an RTI applicant comes with a query alleging
corruption in any of the Agencies or Organisations, listed
out in the Second Schedule to the RTI Act, such
information sought for is bound to be provided and the
protection under section 24(1) cannot be availed of. Similar
is the case relating to violation of human rights. Therefore,
the safeguard is inbuilt in the Statute so as to ensure that
even in respect of the Agencies or Organisations listed out
in the Second Schedule are not totally excluded from the
purview of the RTI Act.”
33. Thus, the Madras High Court did not find a notification issued
under Section 24 (1) of the RTI Act to be a ‘blanket’ exemption
and gave importance to the first proviso thereto. It clarified that
insofar as the information sought pertained to “allegations of
corruption and human rights violations” its disclosure cannot be
prevented under the shield of a notification under Section 24 (1)
of the RTI Act. In doing so the Madras High Court drew on the
decision of the Supreme Court in Central Board of Secondary
Education v. Aditya Bandopadhyah [2011] (8) SCALE 645
where, it explained, it was held that the RTI Act “seeks to bring
about a balance between two conflicting interests as harmony
between them is essential for preserving democracy” and that
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                       Page 27 of 30
Sections 3 and 4 seek to achieve the first objective i.e. to bring
about transparency and accountability and sections 8, 9, 10 and 11
to achieve the second objective viz. to ensure that revelation of
information does not conflict with other public interest which
include preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information.
Therefore, it was held that “Section 8 should not be considered to
be fetter on the right to information, but as an equally important
provision protecting other public interest essential for the
fulfillment and preservation of democratic ideals.” Later, another
Bench of the Madras High Court in Superintendent of Police v. R
Karthikeyan AIR 2012 Mad 84, held likewise viz., a notification
under Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act would not prevent disclosure
of information “pertaining to allegations of corruption and human
rights violations.”
34. Indeed, information pertaining to allegations of corruption and
human rights violations has been legislatively identified by the
RTI Act as a species as deserving of a different treatment in terms
of disclosure, which is what is highlighted by the first proviso to
both Section 24 (1) as well as Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act. If
Section 8 is read with Section 24 of the RTI Act, as it has to since
no provision can be viewed as otiose, then it becomes apparent
that even while dealing with requests for information falling in the
domain of Section 8 of the RTI Act, if such information pertains
to allegations of human rights violations or corruption, regard will
have to be had to the first provisos to Section 24 (1) Section 24
(4) of the RTI Act.
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                 Page 28 of 30
35. The upshot of the above discussion is that this Court finds that
the impugned notification in so far as it seeks to exempt the entire
Vigilance Department of the Government from the view of the
RTI Act would run counter to the 1st proviso to Section 24 (4) of
the RTI Act. In other words, the notification insofar as it prevents
disclosure of information concerning the General Administration
(Vigilance) Department even when it pertains to allegations of
corruption and human rights violations would be contrary to the
first proviso to Section 24 (4) of the RTI act and, by that
yardstick, would be unsustainable in law. If under the RTI Act
disclosure is the norm, and non-disclosure the exception, then the
impugned notification seeks to take away what is provided by the
RTI Act and is therefore ultra vires the RTI Act.
36. In effect, therefore, by virtue of this decision of the Court, the
General     Administration     (Vigilance)    Department     of    the
Government of Odisha cannot, notwithstanding the impugned
notification dated 11th August 2016, refuse to divulge information
pertaining to corruption and human rights violations, which
information is expressly not protected from disclosure by virtue of
the first proviso to Section 24 (4) of the RTI Act. Also,
information that does not touch upon any of the sensitive and
confidential activities undertaken by the Vigilance Department,
cannot be withheld.
37. For all of the aforementioned reasons, this Court issues a
declaratory writ to the effect that the impugned notification dated
11th August, 2016 issued by the Information and Public Relations
Department, Government of Odisha under Section 24 (4) of the
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                    Page 29 of 30
RTI Act, will not permit the Government to deny information
pertaining to the Vigilance Department involving allegations of
corruption and human rights violations, and other information that
does not touch upon any of the sensitive and confidential
activities undertaken by the Vigilance Department. A further
clarificatory notification to the above effect be issued by the
Government of Odisha within four weeks.
38. The writ petitions are disposed of in the above terms, but in
the circumstances, with no order as to costs.
W.P.(C) Nos.14286, 16718 and 17950 of 2016                 Page 30 of 30