1)     Instant petition has been filed by the petitioner seeking quashment
for FIR No.19/2018 for offences under Section 498A RPC registered at
Police Station, Nigeen Srinagar, and the consequent criminal proceedings
pending before the Court of Special Mobile Magistrate 13th Finance
2)     The case set up by the petitioner is that he was married to one
Mehnaz Siddiqui (the complainant in impugned FIR), who hails from
Karachi Pakistan, as per Muslim Personal Law in the year 2009. It is
contended that some personal differences and dispute arose between the
parties, which ultimately resulted in divorce between the parties on
11.09.2017. It is contended in the petition that the parties filed various
litigations against each other in the form of civil suit, writ petition, petition
under Section 488 Cr. P. C and various other criminal complaints besides
lodging the impugned FIR against the petitioner, which ultimately
culminated into presentation of a charge sheet and the same is pending
before the Court of Special Mobile Magistrate 13th Finance
3)      It seems that during the pendency of all these proceedings, a
compromise was arrived at between the parties and, accordingly, a
compromise deed dated 17th day of November, 2018, was executed by the
parties which has been placed on record and annexed as Annexure-V to
the petition. As per this compromise deed, the parties have settled their
disputes amicably and have also withdrawn the cases pending between
them as they want to live peacefully without involving themselves in
further litigation. It is further stated in the compromise deed that the
complainant does not want to pursue the impugned FIR.
4)      Petitioner has contended that so far as the case arising out of FIR
No.19/2018, which is pending before the Court of Special Mobile
Magistrate 13th Finance Commission(Sub Judge), Srinagar, is concerned,
the same could not be compounded because the offence of which
cognizance has been taken by the learned Court against the petitioner is
non-compoundable in nature. It is in these circumstances that the
petitioner has approached this Court for seeking quashment of the
aforesaid FIR and the criminal proceedings arising there from.
5)     I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record
of the case.
6)     So far as the facts alleged in the petition, particularly those
pertaining to the compromise arrived at between the parties in terms of
compromise deed dated 17th November, 2018, are concerned, the same are
not disputed.
7)     In the backdrop of aforesaid facts, the question arises as to whether
this Court has power to quash the proceedings, particularly when some of
the offences alleged to have been committed by the petitioner are non-
compoundable in nature. The Supreme Court in the case of Gian Singh. v.
State of Punjab & another, reported in (2012) 10 SCC 303, while
considering this aspect, has observed as under:
“57. The position that emerges from the above discussion
can be summarised thus: the power of the High Court in
quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in
exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different
from the power given to a criminal court for compounding
the offences under Section 320 of the Code. Inherent power
is of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has
to be exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in
such power viz; (i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to
prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases
power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or
F.I.R may be exercised where the offender and victim have
settled their dispute would depend on the facts and
circumstances of each case and no category can be
prescribed. However, before exercise of such power, the
High Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity
of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental
depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot
be fittingly quashed even though the victim or victim’s
family and the offender have settled the dispute. Such
offences are not private in nature and have serious impact
on society. Similarly, any compromise between the victim
and offender in relation to the offences under special
statutes like Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences
committed by public servants while working in that
capacity etc; cannot provide for any basis for quashing
criminal proceedings involving such offences. But the
criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-
dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the
purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising from
commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership or such
like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes where the
wrong is basically private or personal in nature and the
parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this category
of cases, High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in
its view, because of the compromise between the offender
and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and bleak
and continuation of criminal case would put accused to
great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would
be caused to him by not quashing the criminal case despite
full and complete settlement and compromise with the
victim. In other words, the High Court must consider
whether it would be unfair or contrary to the interest of
justice to continue with the criminal proceeding or
continuation of the criminal proceeding would tantamount
to abuse of process of law despite settlement and
compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and
whether to secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that
criminal case is put to an end and if the answer to the above
question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well
within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding.."
8)    Similarly, the Supreme Court in the case titled Narinder Singh &
Ors. Vs. State of Punjab & anr, reported in (2014) 6 SCC 466, has laid
down guidelines for quashing of criminal proceedings. The guidelines are
reproduced as under:
“31. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and lay
down the following principles by which the High Court
would be guided in giving adequate treatment to the
settlement between the parties and exercising its power
under Section 482 of the Code while accepting the
settlement and quashing the proceedings or refusing to
accept the settlement with direction to continue with the
criminal proceedings:
(I)   Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to be
distinguished from the power which lies in the Court to
compound the offences under Section 320 of the Code. No
doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court has
inherent power to quash the criminal proceedings even in
those cases which are not compoundable, where the parties
have settled the matter between themselves. However, this
power is to be exercised sparingly and with caution.
(II) When the parties have reached the settlement and on that
basis petition for quashing the criminal proceedings is filed,
the guiding factor in such cases would be to secure:
(i)     ends of justice, or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court.
While exercising the power the High Court is to form
an opinion on either of the aforesaid two objectives.
(III) Such a power is not be exercised in those prosecutions
which involve heinous and serious offences of mental
depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such
offences are not private in nature and have a serious impact
on society. Similarly, for offences alleged to have been
committed under special statute like the Prevention of
Corruption Act or the offences committed by Public
Servants while working in that capacity are not to be
quashed merely on the basis of compromise between the
victim and the offender.
(IV) On the other, those criminal cases having overwhelmingly
and pre-dominantly civil character, particularly those
arising out of commercial transactions or arising out of
matrimonial relationship or family disputes should be
quashed when the parties have resolved their entire disputes
among themselves.
(V) While exercising its powers, the High Court is to examine
as to whether the possibility of conviction is remote and
bleak and continuation of criminal cases would put the
accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme
injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
criminal cases.
(VI) Offences under Section 307 IPC would fall in the category
of heinous and serious offences and therefore is to be
generally treated as crime against the society and not against
the individual alone. However, the High Court would not
rest its decision merely because there is a mention of Section
307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is framed under this
provision. It would be open to the High Court to examine as
to whether incorporation of Section 307 IPC is there for the
sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient
evidence, which if proved, would lead to proving the charge
under Section 307 IPC. For this purpose, it would be open
to the High Court to go by the nature of injury sustained,
whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of
the body, nature of weapons used etc. Medical report in
respect of injuries suffered by the victim can generally be
the guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie analysis,
the High Court can examine as to whether there is a strong
possibility of conviction or the chances of conviction are
remote and bleak. In the former case it can refuse to accept
the settlement and quash the criminal proceedings whereas
in the later case it would be permissible for the High Court
to accept the plea compounding the offence based on
complete settlement between the parties. At this stage, the
Court can also be swayed by the fact that the settlement
between the parties is going to result in harmony between
them which may improve their future relationship.
(VII) While deciding whether to exercise its power under Section
482 of the Code or not, timings of settlement play a crucial
role. Those cases where the settlement is arrived at
immediately after the alleged commission of offence and the
matter is still under investigation, the High Court may be
liberal in accepting the settlement to quash the criminal
proceedings/ investigation. It is because of the reason that at
this stage the investigation is still on and even the charge
sheet has not been filed. Likewise, those cases where the
charge is framed but the evidence is yet to start or the
evidence is still at infancy stage, the High Court can show
benevolence in exercising its powers favourably, but after
prima facie assessment of the circumstances/ material
mentioned above. On the other hand, where the prosecution
evidence is almost complete or after the conclusion of the
evidence the matter is at the stage of argument, normally the
High Court should refrain from exercising its power
under Section 482 of the Code, as in such cases the trial
court would be in a position to decide the case finally on
merits and to come a conclusion as to whether the offence
under Section 307 IPC is committed or not. Similarly, in
those cases where the conviction is already recorded by the
trial court and the matter is at the appellate stage before the
High Court, mere compromise between the parties would
not be a ground to accept the same resulting in acquittal of
the offender who has already been convicted by the trial
court. Here charge is proved under Section 307 IPC and
conviction is already recorded of a heinous crime and,
therefore, there is no question of sparing a convict found
guilty of such a crime.
9)      From a perusal of the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court,
it is clear that the offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry or
the family disputes where the wrong is basically private or personal in
nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute, the High Court
will be within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceedings if it is
known that because of the compromise arrived at between the parties,
there is remote possibility of securing conviction of the accused. In fact,
in such cases, the Supreme Court has clearly observed that it would
amount to extreme injustice if despite settlement having been arrived at
by the parties, the criminal proceedings are allowed to continue.
10)     Adverting to the facts of the instant case, it is clear that the parties
to the matrimonial dispute i.e., petitioner and the complainant, have
entered into a compromise and that compromise has also been acted upon
by the parties, inasmuch as the cases and counter cases lodged by the
parties against each other have been withdrawn/compounded. Merely
because the offences under Section 498A RPC, for which petitioner is
facing trial on the basis of the complaint made by the complainant, is non-
compoundable, if an end is not put to the criminal proceedings, it would
amount to grave injustice to the petitioner and, in fact, it will amount to
frittering away of the fruits of compromise that has been arrived at
between the parties. The continuance of criminal proceedings against the
petitioner, in these circumstances, will be nothing but an abuse of process
of law.
11)     Taking conspectus of the aforesaid discussion, the petition is
allowed. Accordingly, FIR No.19/2013 for offences under Section 498A
RPC registered at Police Station, Nigeen, Srinagar, and the consequent
proceedings emanating there from and pending before the Court of Special
Mobile Magistrate 13th Finance Commission(Sub Judge), Srinagar, are
12)     Petition shall stand disposed of along with connected CMs.
13)     Copy of this order be sent to the Court of learned Special Mobile
Magistrate 13th Finance Commission(Sub Judge), Srinagar, for