1.     Allowed, subject to all just exceptions.
2.     The application stands disposed of.
3.     The instant application under Section 438 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 has been filed on behalf of the petitioner
seeking anticipatory bail in FIR bearing No. 201/2022, registered
at Police Station Jamia Nagar, for offences punishable under
Sections 376D/506/34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860.
4.     It is stated by the complainant, who is the real sister of the
petitioner, that she has lodged a complaint with Police Station,
Jamia Nagar and thereupon an FIR No. 201/2022 under Section
376D/506/34 IPC was registered on 25.4.2022. The incident in
question has allegedly taken place on 10.3.2019. When a query
was put to the learned counsel for the complainant, who is present
in Court and who is assisting the learned APP for the State as well
as the Investigating Officer (IO), regarding reason for the delay in
lodging of the FIR, it was stated that since it was a sensitive
relationship; at the instance of their father who has unfortunately
passed away in October, 2021, the complainant did not lodge any
complaint. The prestige of the family was paramount for her. It is
now stated that after passing away of her father and after
consultation with her husband the present FIR was lodged in April,
2022 i.e. after about three years of the alleged incident. Except this
reason, no other reason has been put forth by the State or the
learned counsel for the complainant. In any case, this is a matter of
trial and may be explained by her when her testimony will be
recorded and will be tested on the touchstone of cross-
examination.
5.     My attention has also been drawn to a statement recorded
under Section 164 Cr.P.C. which was recorded after three years of
the alleged incident. It is mentioned therein by the complainant
that the video of the incident in question had been made and she
had been threatened that in case she will disclose it, the video will
be made public. It is now stated that anticipatory bail should be
rejected since the video is to be recovered. There is no other reason
brought to the knowledge of the court for custodial interrogation
except for the purpose of recovery of the alleged video, which does
not find mention in the FIR.
6.     Having heard learned counsel for the petitioner, learned
APP for the State and the learned counsel assisting the ld. APP on
behalf of the complainant, I am of the considered view that while
deciding this application I have to remain conscious and keep in
mind that the present case involves sexual assault of the real sister
by two brothers and also involvement of the wife of the present
applicant/petitioner who had allegedly stood guard outside the
room where the alleged incident had taken place. It is stated that
earlier there were some disputes in the family regarding their late
father bequeathing his property. However, learned counsel for the
complainant insists that since she had received her share of the
property that cannot be a reason for lodging of the present FIR. I
am of the view that prima facie there is delay of three years in
lodging of the present FIR and in the statement under Section 164
it is mentioned that since her father had requested her not to
disclose the same, she had refrained from lodging the FIR.
7.     Further, I am of the view that in the FIR the complainant has
not made any mention of video recording of the sexual assault.
Learned counsel for the complainant states that since she was
under shock, she had forgotten and therefore she had not disclosed
it to the Police. I am of prima facie view that it is the case of the
complainant herself that after giving careful thought for three
years, she had lodged the FIR. Therefore while the FIR was neither
lodged in a hurry nor under threat, the video recording still did not
find mention in the FIR.
8.      It has been vehemently argued that the nature of the
allegations is serious therefore bail be declined. This is the only
ground on which the bail has been opposed as discussed above.
However, in view of the rulings of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
various cases, it is not merely the seriousness of the allegations
levelled but also the facts and circumstances of the case that need
to be examined, as to whether in case the accused is released on
bail, he would flee from justice or not and if he would cooperate in
the investigation or would attempt to influence the witnesses or
tamper with evidence, and if he would participate as and when the
trial commences.
9.      Matters regarding liberty of a person have to be dealt with
cautiously, a balance has to be struck between respect for his
fundamental rights and free and fair investigation as well.
10.     In this regard, it is useful to discuss the scope and ambit of
anticipatory bail which has been enumerated in detail by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Siddharam Satlingappa
Mhetre vs. State of Maharashtra and Ors (2011) 1 SCC (Cri)
109. A good deal of misunderstanding with regard to the
ambit and scope of Section 438 CrPC could have been
avoided in case the Constitution Bench decision of this
Court in Sibbia case [(1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC
(Cri) 465] was correctly understood, appreciated and
applied. This Court in Sibbia case [(1980) 2 SCC 565 :
1980 SCC (Cri) 465] laid down the following principles
with regard to anticipatory bail:
(a) Section 438(1) is to be interpreted in the light of
Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
(b) Filing of FIR is not a condition precedent to exercise
of power under Section 438.
(c) Order under Section 438 would not affect the right of
police to conduct investigation.
(d) Conditions mentioned in Section 437 cannot be read
into Section 438.
(e) Although the power to release on anticipatory bail
can be described as of an “extraordinary” character
this would “not justify the conclusion that the power
must be exercised in exceptional cases only”. Powers
are discretionary to be exercised in the light of the
circumstances of each case.
(f) Initial order can be passed without notice to the
Public Prosecutor. Thereafter, notice must be issued
forthwith and question ought to be re-examined after
hearing. Such ad interim order must conform to
requirements of the section and suitable conditions
should be imposed on the applicant.
110. The Law Commission in July 2002 has severely
criticised the police of our country for the arbitrary use
of power of arrest which, the Commission said, is the
result of the vast discretionary powers conferred upon
them by this Code. The Commission expressed concern
that there is no internal mechanism within the Police
Department to prevent misuse of law in this manner and
the stark reality that complaint lodged in this regard
does not bring any result. The Commission intends to
suggest amendments in the Criminal Procedure Code
and has invited suggestions from various quarters.
Reference is made in this article to the 41st Report of the
Law Commission wherein the Commission saw “no
justification” to require a person to submit to custody,
remain in prison for some days and then apply for bail
even when there are reasonable grounds for holding that
the person accused of an offence is not likely to abscond
or otherwise misuse his liberty. Discretionary power to
order anticipatory bail is required to be exercised
keeping in mind these sentiments and spirit of the
judgments of this Court in Sibbia case [(1980) 2 SCC
565 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 465] and Joginder Kumar v. State
of U.P. [(1994) 4 SCC 260 : 1994 SCC (Cri) 1172]
Relevant consideration for exercise of the power
111. No inflexible guidelines or straitjacket formula can
be provided for grant or refusal of anticipatory bail. We
are clearly of the view that no attempt should be made to
provide rigid and inflexible guidelines in this respect
because all circumstances and situations of future
cannot be clearly visualised for the grant or refusal of
anticipatory bail. In consonance with the legislative
intention the grant or refusal of anticipatory bail should
necessarily depend on the facts and circumstances of
each case. As aptly observed in the Constitution Bench
decision in Sibbia case [(1980) 2 SCC 565 : 1980 SCC
(Cri) 465] that the High Court or the Court of Session
has to exercise their jurisdiction under Section 438
CrPC by a wise and careful use of their discretion which
by their long training and experience they are ideally
suited to do. In any event, this is the legislative mandate
which we are bound to respect and honour.
112. The following factors and parameters can be taken
into consideration while dealing with the anticipatory
(i) The nature and gravity of the accusation and the exact
role of the accused must be properly comprehended
before arrest is made;
(ii) The antecedents of the applicant including the fact as
to whether the accused has previously undergone
imprisonment on conviction by a court in respect of any
cognizable offence;
(iii) The possibility of the applicant to flee from justice;
(iv) The possibility of the accused's likelihood to repeat
similar or other offences;
(v) Where the accusations have been made only with the
object of injuring or humiliating the applicant by
arresting him or her;
(vi) Impact of grant of anticipatory bail particularly in
cases of large magnitude affecting a very large number of
(vii) The courts must evaluate the entire available
material against the accused very carefully. The court
must also clearly comprehend the exact role of the
accused in the case. The cases in which the accused is
implicated with the help of Sections 34 and 149 of the
Penal Code, 1860 the court should consider with even
greater care and caution because overimplication in the
cases is a matter of common knowledge and concern;
(viii) While considering the prayer for grant of
anticipatory bail, a balance has to be struck between two
factors, namely, no prejudice should be caused to the
free, fair and full investigation and there should be
prevention of harassment, humiliation and unjustified
detention of the accused;
(ix) The court to consider reasonable apprehension of
tampering of the witness or apprehension of threat to the
(x) Frivolity in prosecution should always be considered
and it is only the element of genuineness that shall have
to be considered in the matter of grant of bail and in the
event of there being some doubt as to the genuineness of
the prosecution, in the normal course of events, the
accused is entitled to an order of bail.
113. Arrest should be the last option and it should be
restricted to those exceptional cases where arresting the
accused is imperative in the facts and circumstances of
that case. The court must carefully examine the entire
available record and particularly the allegations which
have been directly attributed to the accused and these
allegations are corroborated by other material and
circumstances on record.
114. These are some of the factors which should be taken
into consideration while deciding the anticipatory bail
applications. These factors are by no means exhaustive
but they are only illustrative in nature because it is
difficult to clearly visualise all situations and
circumstances in which a person may pray for
anticipatory bail. If a wise discretion is exercised by the
Judge concerned, after consideration of the entire
material on record then most of the grievances in favour
of grant of or refusal of bail will be taken care of. The
legislature in its wisdom has entrusted the power to
exercise this jurisdiction only to the Judges of the
superior courts. In consonance with the legislative
intention we should accept the fact that the discretion
would be properly exercised. In any event, the option of
approaching the superior court against the Court of
Session or the High Court is always available.
(emphasis supplied)
11. At the cost of the repetition, the alleged incident has taken
place three years back. It is not the case of the prosecution that
there is probability of petitioner not joining the investigation and
therefore, as per the mandate of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
various cases, it is clear that the provisions of Section 438 CrPC
have their genesis in Article 21 of the Constitution of India, which
deals with liberty of an individual. In any case, ‘A man is
presumed to be innocent till proven guilty’ is a cardinal principle
of criminal jurisprudence.
12. Learned Senior counsel appearing for the petitioner states
that the petitioner is a practicing Advocate and there is no question
of his leaving the country or not abiding with any condition
imposed by this Court in case he is granted bail. Mr. Mathur
further states that he is willing to join investigation and cooperate
with the Investigating Officer.
13. Hence, it is directed that in the event of arrest, the petitioner
be released on his furnishing personal bond in the sum of Rs.
50,000/- with a surety of like amount to the satisfaction of IO/SHO
concerned with the following conditions:
(i)    The petitioner shall join investigation on 27.5.2022 at
4.00 p.m. and shall continue to join as and when required by
the IO.
(ii) The applicant shall remain available on mobile
numbers; shared by him with the Police.
(iii) The applicant shall not leave NCT of Delhi or country
without prior permission of the concerned IO/SHO.
(iv) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly make an
attempt to influence the witnesses or tamper with the
evidence in any manner.
(v) In case of change of residential address/contact
details, the applicant shall promptly inform the same to the
concerned I.O/SHO.
(vi) The applicant shall not approach or contact the
complainant or her close relatives.
14.    The bail application stands disposed of. It is needless to
mention here that the observations made here-in-above will not
tantamount to expression of any opinion on the merits of the case.