Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No.- 22902 of 2021
Counsel for Applicant :- Neeraj Pandey, Om Prakash Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
1.     The instant application under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure (in short "the Code") has been filed to quash
the impugned order dated 7.10.2021 passed by Additional
Sessions Judge Court No. 4, Deoria, in the Sessions Trial No. 40
of 2017 (State v. Bheem Singh and Another) arising out of Case
Crime No. 458 of 2015 under Section 307 of Indian Penal Code
(hereinafter referred as "IPC"), registered at Police Station - Lar,
District   Deoria  by   which   two    applications   filed  by  the
applicant/accused under Section 311 of the Code have been
rejected by a common order dated 7.10.2021.
2.     The prosecution case, in brief, is that the First Information
Report (in short "FIR") dated 25.8.2015 has been lodged by PW-1
Vinod Singh (younger brother of the injured) against the
applicant, Subhash Singh, and two other known persons stating
that on 23.8.2015, elder brother of the first informant, Balindera
Singh went to the market 'Lar' for some personal work by his
motorcycle. After finishing his work, he was returning to his
home and reached 400 meters from Dhamauli Tiraha at about
6:00 P.M. In the meantime, two motorcyclists reached there from
his back side, the applicant and Subhash Singh were sitting as a
pillion rider and both the motorcycles were being driven by
unknown persons. Subhash Singh called Balindera Singh from the
back side. No sooner did the brother of the first informant slow
down his motorcycle and turn behind on exhortation of Subhash
Singh, the applicant shot fire upon Balindera Singh, who fell on
the ground. At the time of the incident, Dhirendra Singh was
roaming in his field situated some distance from the spot and
Girjesh Singh was attending his natural call at that time. On
hearing the gunshot, both rushed to the spot and the accused
persons fled away from the spot rolling firearms in the air to
Bhagalpur. The incident has taken place due to old enmity. The
informant took the injured firstly to Government Hospital, Lar
and then to District Hospital Deoria. Treatment of his brother is
going on in Trauma Centre, Medical College Lucknow. When the
condition of Balindera Singh improved to some extent, he told
him about the incident.
3.     The FIR of the present incident has been lodged by the PW-
1 Vinod Singh at Police Station- Lar District Deoria on 25.8.2015
at 16:30 hours under Section 307 of IPC against the applicant,
Subhash Singh, and two unknown persons after about 46 hours
of the incident on the basis of Tahrir dated 25.8.2015 which are
Annexure-2 and Annexure-3 to the affidavit.
4.     The applicant has filed the statements of PW - 1 Vinod
Dhirendra Singh (as eye-witness), and PW-5 Dr. Rajesh Yadav,
who had conducted the medical examination of the injured on
23.8.2015 at 8:10 P.M. at District Hospital Deoria as Annexure-
4, 5, 6, and 7 to the affidavit. The applicant has also filed the
medical examination report dated 23.8.2015 as Annexure-1 and
two applications which have been filed under Section 311 of the
Code as Annexure- 9 and 10 to the affidavit.
5.     As per the medical report of the injured Balindera Singh
(age about 50 years), he has received injury no. 1 entry wound
of firearm size 1 cm. x 1 cm. right side chest wall at the back
region, 22 cm. below to right side top of the shoulder, 10 cm.
from the middle part of the body, margin are inverted, blackening
and blood oozing is present and injury no. 2 exit wound of
firearm size 1 cm. x 1cm. situated at the middle part of the
chest, 10 cm. from the right nipple and 21 cm. left nipple and
margins are everted.
6.    Two applications have been filed by the applicant under
Section 311 of the Code on 4.10.2021 with a prayer to recall PW-
1 Vinod Singh and PW- 5 Dr. Rajesh Yadav for further cross-
examination to ask 5 specific questions in the statement of PW-1
and four specific question in the statement of PW-5, which are as
cross examination) में किनम्नलिललि1                       प्रश्न पूछा जाना न्यायकिह        में
(iii) आपने बलेन्द्र सिंसह/ पी०डब्लू०-2                     ी injury report (प्रदशl      -3))
7.    Learned counsel for the applicant submits that according to
the statement of PW- 1 Vinod Singh, he got his Tahrir of the
present case written by his friend Suresh Singh at the Bus
Station Lar, Deoria on 25.08.2015. In earlier cross-examination
of PW-1, the question with regard to the identity of said Suresh
Singh had not been asked. PW-2 Balindera Singh stated that
Suresh Singh, son of Rama Shankar, resident of village Ajna was
alive at the time of the incident and he had not written his report.
But Suresh Singh son of Rama Shankar resident of village Ajna
was not alive on 25.8.2015 because he had died on 1.9.2014
before the incident. If the alleged Suresh Singh died about one
year before the incident, the very genesis of the prosecution case
would be proved false.
8.    Learned counsel further submits that the family member of
the applicant did not know about the date of the death of Suresh
Singh. After examination of PW-2, it was revealed that Suresh
Singh has died on 1.9.2014. Due to these reasons, questions
regarding the identity of the said Suresh Singh had not been
asked during earlier cross-examination of PW-1 are essential to
the just decision of the case.
9.    It is further submitted that PW-5 Dr. Rajesh Yadav, who
conducted the medical examination on 23.8.2015 indicates that
the injured was "oriented" but in his evidence, he stated that the
injured was conscious and was recognizing people but unable to
speak which is contrary to the medical report.
10.   He further contended that there is contradiction and
ambiguity between the medical report of the injured, wherein it
has been mentioned that at the time of medical examination
injured was "oriented" and in the cross-examination of PW-5 Dr.
Rajesh Yadav stated that the injured was conscious. Questions
had not been asked in earlier cross-examination to the PW-5 Dr.
Rajesh Yadav with regard to the consciousness of the injured
which are also essential to the just decision of the case. Learned
counsel for the applicant relied upon the judgment of the
Supreme Court of case The State represented by the Deputy
Superintendent of Police v. Tr. N. Seenivasagan, 2021 SCC Online
11.     Learned A.G.A. has supported the impugned order and
vehemently opposed the prayer of the applicant and submitted
that PW-1 Vinod Kumar Singh is not an eye-witness of the
incident. The FIR of the present case has been lodged by PW-1
Vinod Kumar Singh after about 46 hours of the incident on the
basis of information received from the injured. The application for
recalling PW-1 has been filed after about 4 years of recording the
statement-in-chief of PW-1 Vinod Kumar Singh and another
application for recalling PW-5 Dr. Rajesh Yadav has been filed
after about one year of recording the examination-in-chief of PW-
5. Both the applications have been filed when the case was fixed
in defence evidence.
12.    He further submits that as per the police report of the
present case Suresh Singh was not a scribe of the Tahrir of the
complaint and was not an eye-witness of the incident. PW-2
Balindera Singh has disclosed the identity of said Suresh Singh in
his cross-examination that he was resident of his village and was
not posted in police department at Balia. He has died after the
incident. It is not true that the identity of Suresh Singh has not
been disclosed. The evidence of PW-1 Vinod Kumar Singh has
been    recorded   on   5.9.2017,   21.9.2017,   10.10.2017,    and
27.10.2017 and elaborate cross-examination has been done. It
has been disputed that Suresh Singh has died before the
incident, the applicant can lead oral or documentary evidence in
13.    Learned A.G.A. further contended that the applications
have been filed after 8 dates from closing the prosecution
evidence. There is the direction of the Apex Court to conclude the
trial expeditiously. If any material contradiction or ambiguity is
found in the prosecution evidence, the applicant would be
entitled to the benefit of the doubt. The applications for recalling
PW-1 and PW-5 are not bona fide, the reasons assigned are also
not satisfactory and have been filed after a long delay.
14.   Heard, Sri Om Prakash Singh Sikarwar, learned counsel for
the applicant, Sri Manoj Kumar Dwivedi, learned A.G.A for the
State and perused the materials on record.
15.   The trial court by its order dated 7.10.2021 dismissed the
applications   for  recalling  the  witnesses   for  further cross-
examination and rejected the submission urged on behalf of the
applicant on the ground that the defence has elaborately cross-
examined PW-1 and PW-5. The applicant has ample opportunity
to lead oral or documentary evidence in defence. The applicant
can also make an argument on this point. If there is any
contradiction or ambiguity in the prosecution evidence. It is a
settled position of law that the accused would be entitled to
benefit of the doubt.
16.   The order of the trial court has been assailed on two
grounds, firstly; after reading the evidence of PW-1 and PW-2 the
identity of scribe Suresh Singh is not clear. Secondly; if the
complaint has been written by Suresh Singh, son of Rama
Shankar, who died about one year before the incident, in that
case, the genesis of the prosecution case would be proved false.
17.   Before I proceed to examine the weight of the submissions
made by learned counsel for both parties, it would be useful to
notice the law with regard to the scope of Section 311 of the
18.   Section 311 is manifestly in two parts, the first part of the
Section has given discretion to the Court and enables it any stage
of an inquiry, trial, or other proceedings under the Code, (a) to
summon anyone as a witness, or (b) to examine any person in
the Court, or (c) to recall and re-examine any person whose
evidence has already been recorded; on the other hand, the
second part of the Section is mandatory            and imposes an
obligation on the Court, to do one of aforesaid three things if the
new evidence appears to it essential to the just decision of the
case. In order to appreciate the submission of the applicant it will
be worthwhile to refer to Section 311 of the Code, which reads as
"311. Power to summon material witness, or
examine person present.- Any Court may, at any
stage of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding
under this Code, summon any person as a witness,
or examine any person in attendance, though not
summoned as a witness, or recall and re-examine
any person already examined; and the Court shall
summon and examine or recall and re-examine
any such person if his evidence appears to it to be
essential to the just decision of the case."
19.   In this backdrop, it would be useful to make a reference to
certain decisions rendered by the Supreme Court on the
interpretation of Section 311 of the Code, wherein the Apex
Court highlighted the basic principles which are to be borne in
mind while dealing with an application under Section 311 of the
20.   In Natasa Singh v. C. B. I., (2013) 5 SCC 741, the Apex
Court, after referring the various decisions of the Supreme Court,
has observed and held as under: (SCC, p. 748-49, para 15,16)
"15. The scope and object of the provision is to
enable the Court to determine the truth and to
render a just decision after discovering all relevant
facts and obtaining proper proof of such facts, to
arrive at a just decision of the case. Power must be
exercised    judiciously  and   not   capriciously or
arbitrarily, as any improper or capricious exercise
of such power may lead to undesirable results. An
application under Section 311 of Cr.P.C. must not
be allowed only to fill up a lacuna in the case of
the prosecution, or of the defence, or to the
disadvantage of the accused, or to cause serious
prejudice to the defence of the accused, or to give
an unfair advantage to the opposite party. Further,
the additional evidence must not be received as a
disguise for retrial, or to change the nature of the
case against either of the parties. Such a power
must be exercised, provided that the evidence that
is likely to be tendered by a witness, is germane to
the issue involved. An opportunity of rebuttal
however, must be given to the other party. The
power conferred under Section 311 Cr.P.C. must
therefore, be invoked by the Court only in order to
meet the ends of justice, for strong and valid
reasons, and the same must be exercised with
great caution and circumspection. The very use of
words such as 'any Court', 'at any stage', or 'or
any enquiry, trial or other proceedings', 'any
person' and 'any such person' clearly spells out
that the provisions of this section have been
expressed in the widest possible terms, and do not
limit the discretion of the Court in any way. There
is thus no escape if the fresh evidence to be
obtained is essential to the just decision of the
case. The determinative factor should therefore be,
whether the summoning/recalling of the said
witness is in fact, essential to the just decision of
the case.
16. Fair trial is the main object of criminal
procedure, and it is the duty of the court to ensure
that such fairness is not hampered or threatened
in any manner. Fair trial entails the interest of the
accused, the victim and of the society, and
therefore, fair trial includes the grant of fair and
proper opportunities to the person concerned, and
constitutional, as well as a human right. Thus,
under no circumstances can a person's right to fair
trial be jeopardised. Adducing evidence in support
of the defence is a valuable right. Denial of such
right would amount to the denial of a fair trial.
Thus, it is essential that the rules of procedure that
have     been   designed    to   ensure   justice  are
scrupulously followed, and the court must be
zealous in ensuring that there is no breach of the
same." (Vide: Talab Haji Hussain v. Madhukar
Sheikh & Anr. v. State of Gujarat & Ors. 2, Zahira
Habibullah & Anr. v. State of Gujarat & Ors. 3,
Kalyani Baskar (Mrs.) v. M. S. Sampoornam
(Mrs.)4, Vijay Kumar v. State of U.P. & Anr. 5, and
Sudevanand v. State through C.B.I.6)
21.      In Rajaram Prasad Yadav v. State of Bihar, (2013) 14 SCC
461, the Supreme Court held as under: (SCC, p. 473-74, para
"17. From a conspectus consideration of the above
decisions, while dealing with an application under
Section 311 Cr.P.C. read along with Section 138 of
the Evidence Act, we feel the following principles
will have to be borne in mind by the Courts:
17.1. Whether the Court is right in thinking that
the new evidence is needed by it? Whether the
evidence sought to be led in under Section 311 is
noted by the Court for a just decision of a case?
17.2. The exercise of the widest discretionary
power under Section 311 Cr. PC. should ensure
that the judgment should not be rendered on
inchoate,      inconclusive       and      speculative
presentation of facts, as thereby the ends of
justice would be defeated.
17.3. If evidence of any witness appears to the
Court to be essential to the just decision of the
case, it is the power of the Court to summon and
examine or recall and re-examine any such
17.4. The exercise of power under Section 311
Cr.PC. should be resorted to only with the object of
finding out the truth or obtaining proper proof for
such facts, which will lead to a just and correct
decision of the case.
17.5. The exercise of the said power cannot be
dubbed as filling in a lacuna in a prosecution case,
unless the facts and circumstances of the case
make it apparent that the exercise of power by the
Court would result in causing serious prejudice to
the accused, resulting in miscarriage of justice.
17.6. The wide discretionary power should be
exercised judiciously and not arbitrarily.
17.7. The Court must satisfy itself that it was in
every respect essential to examine such a witness
or to recall him for further examination in order to
arrive at a just decision of the case.
17.8.    The   object   of   Section   311  Cr.   PC.
simultaneously imposes a duty on the Court to
determine the truth and to render a just decision.
17.9. The Court arrives at the conclusion that
additional evidence is necessary, not because it
would be impossible to pronounce the judgment
without it, but because there would be a failure of
justice without such evidence being considered.
17.10. Exigency of the situation, fair play and
good    sense   should   be   the  safeguard,   while
exercising the discretion. The Court should bear in
mind that no party in a trial can be foreclosed
from correcting errors and that if proper evidence
was not adduced or a relevant material was not
brought on record due to any inadvertence, the
Court should be magnanimous in permitting such
mistakes to be rectified.
17.11. The Court should be conscious of the
position that after all the trial is basically for the
prisoners    and    the   Court     should   afford  an
opportunity    to   them     in   the  fairest   manner
possible. In that parity of reasoning, it would be
safe to err in favour of the accused getting an
opportunity rather than protecting the prosecution
against possible prejudice at the cost of the
accused. The Court should bear in mind that
improper    or    capricious    exercise   of   such  a
discretionary power, may lead to undesirable
17.12. The additional evidence must not be
received as a disguise or to change the nature of
the case against any of the party.
17.13. The power must be exercised keeping in
mind that the evidence that is likely to be
tendered, would be germane to the issue involved
and also ensure that an opportunity of rebuttal is
given to the other party.
17.14. The power under Section 311 Cr.PC. must
therefore, be invoked by the Court only in order to
meet the ends of justice for strong and valid
reasons and the same must be exercised with
care,   caution    and   circumspection.    The    Court
should bear in mind that fair trial entails the
interest of the accused, the victim and the society
and, therefore, the grant of fair and proper
opportunities to the persons concerned, must be
ensured being a constitutional goal, as well as a
22.    In Swapan Kumar Chattarjee v CBI, (2019) 14 SCC 328,
the Supreme Court observed as under: (SCC p. 331, para 11 &
"11. It is well settled that the power conferred
under Section 311 should be invoked by the court
only to meet the ends of justice. The power is to
be exercised only for strong and valid reasons and
it should be exercised with great caution and
circumspection. The court has wide power under
this section to even recall witnesses for re-
examination or further examination, necessary in
the interest of justice, but the same has to be
exercised after taking into consideration the facts
and circumstances of each case. The power under
this provision shall not be exercised if the court is
of the view that the application has been filed as
an abuse of the process of law.
12. Where the prosecution evidence has been
closed long    back   and   the  reasons   for non-
examination    of   the  witness   earlier  are   not
satisfactory, the summoning of the witness at
belated stage would cause great prejudice to the
accused and should not be allowed. Similarly, the
court should not encourage the filing of successive
applications for recall of a witness under this
23.    Section 311 of the Code gives a wide power to the court to
summon a material witness or to examine a person present in
court or to recall a witness already examined. It confers a wide
discretion on the court to act as the exigencies of justice require.
The word "just" cautions the court against taking any action
which may result injustice either to the accused or to the
prosecution. Where the court exercise the power under the
second part, the inquiry cannot be as to whether the accused has
brought anything suddenly or unexpectedly but whether the court
is right in thinking that the new evidence is needed by it for a
just decision of the case. If the court has acted without the
requirements of a just decision, the action is open to criticism but
if the court's action is supportable as being in aid of a just
decision the action cannot be regarded as exceeding the
jurisdiction. [Vide: Jamatraj Kewalji Govani v. The State of
24.   The discretion given by the first part is very wide and its
very width requires a corresponding caution on the part of the
court. But the second part does not allow any discretion; it binds
the court to examine fresh evidence and the only condition
prescribed is that this evidence must be essential to the just
decision of the case. Whether the new evidence is essential or
not must of course depend on the facts of each case and has to
be determined by the presiding Judge. (Vide: Ram Jeet and 8
others v. State of U.P., AIR 1958 All 439)
25.     In the case of The State represented by the Deputy
Superintendent of Police v. Tr. N. Seenivasagan, in this case, the
prosecution had sought to produce a copy of the Approval order
granted the authority on record and had it marked as an exhibit
in the evidence, for which purpose witnesses were sought to be
recalled. In its applications, the prosecution noted that the
witnesses were required to mark the relevant document, which
was crucial for the decision of the case. It was submitted that
Exhibit. P-1 the order of sanction itself shows that the order was
issued by the Board and at the time of filing the charge sheet the
Investigation Officer had obtained the Approval Order of the
Board but not submitted it before the court. With great respect to
the judgment of the Apex Court, which does not help the
applicant in the present case, because the documentary evidence
had been obtained at the time of filing of charge sheet which had
not been filed before the court.
26.   Keeping in mind the position of law, now I revert back to
the facts of the present case. It is admitted case that PW-1 Vinod
Kumar Singh is not an eye-witness of the incident; the FIR has
been lodged by PW-1 after about 46 hours of the incident on the
basis of information received from the injured PW-2 Balindera
Singh; the name of said Suresh Singh has not been mentioned in
the Tahrir of the present case.
27.   The application for recalling PW-1 has been filed after about
4 years of recording the statement-in-chief of the PW-1 Vinod
Kumar Singh and another application for recalling PW-5 Dr.
Rajesh Yadav has been filed after about one year of recording the
examination-in-chief of PW-5. It has been informed by the
learned counsel for the applicant during the argument that the
applicant is in judicial custody. It is appropriate to mention here
that PW-2 Balindera Singh stated in his cross-examination that
Suresh Singh son of Rama Shankar was not his friend and he was
resident of his village and he died after the incident. The identity
of said Suresh Singh has been disclosed by PW-2 in his
statement. There is no occasion to appreciate the prosecution
evidence in detail at this stage.
28.   In view of the facts and circumstances and keeping in mind
the position of law I am of the considered opinion that learned
trial judge    gave     well-founded    reasons   for  rejecting the
applications. Therefore, the order dated 7.10.2021 passed by the
learned trial court is liable to be affirmed for the following
(i) The applications for recalling the witnesses PW-1 and
PW-5 have been filed after a long delay of 4 years, 1 year
after recording the chief-examination of PW-1 and PW-5
respectively,    and    the  reasons   assigned   therein are
unsatisfactory.
(ii) The trial of the present case is pending since 2015 and
the applicant is in judicial custody and the trial is pending
for defence evidence.
(iii) The identity of scribe Suresh Singh has been disclosed
by PW-2 Suresh Singh and he was not an eye-witness.
(iv) The applicant has an opportunity to produce oral or
documentary evidence with regard to the fact that Suresh
Singh has died before/or after the incident.
(v) The FIR has been lodged about 46 hours after the
incident on the basis of information received from the
injured PW-2 Balindera Singh.
(vi) According to PW-1 Vinod Kumar Singh, Suresh Singh
was scribe of the complaint (Tahrir). However, this fact has
not been disclosed in the Tahrir.
29.   For the aforesaid reasons, impugned order dated 7.10.2021
passed by the trial court is affirmed. Accordingly, the present
application is dismissed along with the applications filed by the
applicant under Section 311 of the Code.
30.   Before parting with the judgment, it is made clear that the
observations made in this judgment are limited to the purpose of
determination of this application and will in no way be construed
as an expression on the merits of the case. The trial court will
adjudicate the matter on its own merits uninfluenced by any of
the observations made therein.
Location: High Court of Judicature at