1.            Briefly stated, facts of the case are that plaintiff
Smt.Bhirawan Bai and others had filed a civil suit against defendants
Rattan Singh and three others seeking possession of land situated at
village Hansi, Tehsil Hansi, District Hisar said to be in illegal possession
of defendants and such encroachment by defendants over the land
belonging to the plaintiffs came out as a result of demarcation carried out
by revenue authorities on an application having been filed by the
plaintiffs. The defendants have got their agricultural land adjoining to land
of plaintiffs. The plaintiffs requested the defendants to vacate the
possession but to no effect. As such, the plaintiffs brought the suit in
2.            On notice, the defendants appeared and filed written
statement contesting the suit taking various legal objections, on merits
denying that they have encroached upon any portion of land belonging to
the plaintiffs, rather stating that the demarcation report dated 6.1.2011
submitted by Iqbal Krishan, Kanungo is against law and facts since the
demarcation was carried out in violation of instructions of Financial
Commissioner, Haryana and no notice was given to the defendants before
carrying out demarcation. In the end, the defendants prayed for dismissal
of the suit.
3.            Issues on merits were framed. The parties were afforded
adequate opportunities to lead evidence.
4.            After hearing arguments, Civil Judge (Jr.Divn.), Hansi vide
judgment and decree dated 3.7.2014 allowed the claim of the plaintiffs,
resultantly the suit filed by the plaintiffs against the defendants was
decreed and plaintiffs were found entitled to get possession of the suit
land from the defendants.
5.            Feeling aggrieved, the defendants had preferred an appeal
before the Court of District Judge, Hisar, which was assigned to learned
Additional District Judge, Hisar, who vide judgment and decree dated
8.5.2018 dismissed the appeal affirming the judgment and decree passed
by the trial Court.
6.            Thereafter,   the   plaintiffs/decree-holders   had filed  an
execution petition in the Executing Court of Civil Judge (Jr.Divn.), Hansi
seeking execution of decree passed in their favour. Notice of the execution
petition was given to respondents/JDs. JDs No.2(k, kh, g & gh) had not
put in appearance despite service and they were proceeded against ex-
parte. Similarly JD No.1 had not appeared despite due service and was
proceeded against ex-parte. The execution petition had been filed in the
Court on 15.12.2020 and on getting notice JD No.4 had put in appearance
on 12.4.2021 and had been getting adjournments. No reply to the
execution petition nor objections were filed by such JD till passing of the
impugned order on 8.8.2022. Therefore, observing that Appellate Court
has not stayed the execution of the decree and decree-holders cannot be
deprived of fruits of their success, placing reliance upon two judgments
concluded that no further opportunity for filing of reply/objections was
justified and directed that warrants of possession be issued for 29.8.2022.
On that date the warrants of possession were received back unexecuted
and fresh were ordered to be issued for 19.9.2022. On 19.9.2022 warrants
of possession could not be executed and fresh were ordered to be issued
for 6.10.2022 and SHO concerned was directed to provide necessary
police help under the supervision of Tehsildar being Duty Magistrate so
that the warrants could be executed. On that date, an application for
setting aside of ex-parte order dated 8.8.2022 was filed, which was
adjourned to 6.10.2022. On 6.10.2022 again warrants of possession were
received back unexecuted. An application was filed on behalf of the JDs
for not handing over the possession of suit land to the decree-holders. For
filing reply to the application, case was adjourned to 10.10.2022. On
10.10.2022, case was adjourned to 20.10.2022 for consideration on both
the applications. On 20.10.2022, the case was adjourned to 26.10.2022; on
26.10.2022, case was adjourned to 2.11.2022, then to 10.11.2022 and then
7.           The JD Rattan Singh @ Rattan Lal by way of filing the
present revision petition is seeking setting aside of order dated 8.8.2022
vide which the petitioner had been proceeded against ex-parte.
8.           I have heard learned counsel for the petitioner besides going
through the record.
9.           I find that the revision petition is totally devoid of any merit.
The plaintiffs had approached the Civil Court way back on 4.8.2012
complaining that their neighbouring owners, the defendants had
encroached upon a part of land belonging to them. They had successfully
proved their case in the Court and a decree was passed in their favour on
3.7.2014. Although an appeal was preferred against that judgment and
decree but it was dismissed on 8.5.2018. An execution petition was filed
about two years earlier but till date, the possession of the encroached
portion could not be got delivered to the decree-holders, which speaks
volumes for working of our judicial system, which is painfully slow and
sluggish creating frustration amongst the people seeking justice. JDs
having lost the litigation in the trial Court as well as in First Appellate
Court with no stay order being there in their favour have successfully
stretched the proceedings getting one adjournment after the other on one
pretext or the other and the Executing Court seems to be granting liberal
adjournment without being sensitive to the plight of the decree-holders,
who are waiting justice for long more than 10 years. The Executing Court
needs to take strong and stringent action in the matter so as to ensure that
warrants of possession are executed rather than passing orders in a
mechanical manner that warrants of possession had been received back
unexecuted, fresh be issued for the next date of hearing. That rather shows
insensitive approach of the Executing Court.
10.           Thus, finding no merit in the civil revision petition, the same
stands dismissed.
11.           It is hoped and expected that the Executing Court would
realize its responsibility and get the decree executed at the earliest.