SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                      Page 1 of 55
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                     Page 2 of 55
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                     Page 3 of 55
Mr. Prashant Bhushan, Ms. Alice Raj, Ms. SuroorMander, Advocates in
Mr. K N Jayasankar, Ms. Beena Nair, Advocates in W.P.(C) Nos.
Mr. Ashish Mohan, Mr. Samarth Chaudhary, Advocates in W.P.(C)
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                     Page 4 of 55
Mr. Arunava Mukherjee, Advocate in W.P.(C)10422/2022
Ajay Singh, Advocates in W.P.(C) 11011/2022 & W.P.(C) 11014/2022
Arora, Advocates in W.P.(C) 10231/2022 & W.P.(C) 10748/2022
Mr. Dinesh Kr. Goswami, Senior Advocate with Mr. Rohit Pandey,
Mr.Adhyam Gupta, Ms. Nisha Thakur, Advocates in W.P.(C) 11012/2022
Mr. Manohar Lal Sharma, Ms. Suman, Advocates in W.P.(C) 11013/2022
Tiwari, Advocates in W.P.(C) 12034/2022
Mr. Ram Naresh Yadav, Advocate in W.P.(C) 11364/2022
Mr. Kamal Kapoor, Advocate in W.P.(C) 14509/2022.
Mr. Virendra Rawat, Advocate in W.P.(C) 14596/2022
Saloni Sharma and Mr. Sumit Kulkarni, Advocates
Sharma and Mr. Divesh Gupta, Advocates for the Petitioners in W.P.(C) No.
Wg. Cdr. Pradeep Kumar S Pillai (Retd.) - in person in W.P.(C)
Mr. B. Aloor and Mr. Sathesh K. R., Advocates in W.P.(C) 16695/2022
For the Respondents.
Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, Additional Solicitor General and Mr. Chetan Sharma,
Additional Solicitor General with Mr. Anurag Ahluwalia, CGSC, Mr. Harish
Alexander Mathai Paikaday, Ms. Aishwary Mishra and Mr. Aditya Singh
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                          Page 5 of 55
Chauhan, Mr. Nitinjya Chaudhary, Mr. Sagar Mehlawat and Mr. Aman
Sharma, Advocates along with Colonel Gurpreet Kaur Dayal, Major Partho
Commander Vishal Chopra and Captain Sirdhar Jayasankar in all the
matters.
1.      A batch of twenty-one Writ Petitions being, W.P.(C) Nos.
13912/2022, 13913/2022, 14596/2022, 15171/2022, 15174/2022 and
15319/2022 were heard analogously and were reserved on 15.12.2022.
Thereafter, W.P.(C) 17302/2022 came up for hearing on 19.12.2022 and was
heard and reserved for judgment. W.P.(C) 16695/2022 was received on
transfer from the High Court of Kerala at Ernakulum and came up for
hearing on 19.12.2022 on which date there was no appearance on behalf of
the Petitioner and the matter was adjourned to 17.02.2023. On 17.02.2023
the matter was heard and reserved for judgment.
2.      While some Writ Petitions challenge the constitutional validity of the
Agnipath Scheme (hereinafter referred to as 'the Impugned Scheme'), in
others, the grievance of the Petitioners is that they went through the
recruitment process for the Armed Forces that was prevalent prior to the
Impugned Scheme. It is stated that they have been shortlisted but have not
been appointed because of the Impugned Scheme and, thereby, have been
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                             Page 6 of 55
prejudiced. Some Writ Petitioners have challenged both - the Scheme and
the prejudice caused to them by the introduction of the Impugned Scheme.
This judgment is, therefore, divided into two parts - Part A deals with the
validity of the Impugned Scheme and Part B deals with the grievances of the
Petitioners that the Impugned Scheme has taken away their rights insofar as
they have participated in the recruitment process and many of them have
been shortlisted but have not been appointed due to the Impugned Scheme.
3.      The Ministry of Defence, Union of India came up with a scheme for
recruitment of personnel below the rank of commissioned officers for the
Indian Army, Indian Air Force and Indian Navy (hereinafter referred to as
the “Indian Armed Forces”) for a period of four years. The recruited soldiers
have been titled as „Agniveers‟. As per the scheme, individuals aged
between 17.5 years to 21 years are eligible to apply for recruitment as
Agniveers. Upon being recruited, such individuals would get trained for a
period of 6 months and will be in active service for a period of 3.5 years and
post that 25% of such Agniveers will be retained as soldiers under the
permanent commission and the rest of the Agniveers will be permitted to
return to the civilian life. As per the scheme, Agniveers are given a salary of
about Rs. 4.76 lacs per year to begin with, which can be increased to about
Rs. 6.92 lacs by their fourth year in service. The Agniveers, in case of a
mishappening or an accident, are liable to receive a non-contributory life
insurance cover of about Rs. 48 lacs, additional ex-gratia of Rs. 44 Lacs for
death attributable to service, and salary for the unserved portion of the four
year service. At the end of the four year tenure, each Agniveer will leave the
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                             Page 7 of 55
service with a corpus of about Rs. 11 lacs. Many of the Agniveers who are
not retained in the army will be absorbed in the paramilitary forces. The
Agniveers who are not retained will also be given certificates of experience
of the nature of work rendered by them which will facilitate them to get jobs
in private sector.
4.      Ms. Kumud Lata Das, learned Counsel appearing for the Petitioner in
W.P.(C)110011/2022, contends that the period of 3.5 years may be too short
in the Indian milieu to gain the physical and psychosocial experience of
having served in the Armed Forces. She submits that as per the Scheme, no
pension will be provided to Agniveers which is contrary to schemes of other
countries after which the Impugned Scheme has been modelled. Further, it
has been submitted that the life insurance cover, as envisaged under the
Impugned Scheme, is less than that of a regular soldier.
5.      Ms. Das has also made detailed submissions comparing the Impugned
Scheme with other comparable schemes floated by Armed Forces of other
nations to highlight that although the Impugned Scheme has been built upon
such schemes, it does not extend the same benefits to the soldiers. In light of
these submissions, it is prayed that directions be issued to the Union to
reconsider the Impugned Scheme.
6.      The learned Counsel for the Petitioner in W.P.(C) 11012/2022 has
stated that the Impugned Scheme is discriminatory and arbitrary, and it
ought to be set aside. Apart from the grounds raised by Ms. Das, an
additional ground with regards to the lack of provisions for employment of
Agniveers after the period of 4 years, has been raised. She contends that the
feeling of camaraderie motivates a soldier to put one‟s life in danger to save
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                            Page 8 of 55
other‟s life and it is the hall-mark of a good Army. She contends that a
period of four years is not sufficient to inculcate such a feeling of
camaraderie amongst the soldiers. It is stated that the Agniveers who are
recruited will be posted in frontline and without a feeling of camaraderie or
the motivation to put one‟s life in danger to save life of the other soldier, the
morale and the character of the Indian Army will be affected. It is further
contended that 75% of the Agniveers, who would not be recruited in the
regular army, would not be in a position to get alternate employment and
there is a major possibility that these young persons, who are trained in
arms, can go astray and can create law and order problems in the country.
Petitioners in W.P.(C) 11013/2022, W.P.(C) 11904/2022,            and W.P.(C)
14596/2022 have not raised any additional grounds to assail the validity of
the Impugned Scheme.
7.      Per contra, Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned ASG, states that the
recruitment process is essentially a policy decision taken by the Central
Government in exercise of its sovereign functions and, hence, is not
amenable to judicial review. Ms. Bhati states that the Impugned Scheme was
enacted taking into account the peculiar border situation and incessant
threats made by hostile neighbouring nations to infiltrate the border of India.
Attention has also been drawn to the terrain of our nation, which includes
mountain ranges, swampy marshes, jungles, deserts, riverine, and glaciated
regions, as well as isolated island territories. The terrain, hence, is
unpredictable and non-linear, making the task of a solider with the Armed
Forces all the more difficult. In light of this, the government felt the need to
establish a more youthful, agile, and physically fit Armed Forces, which is
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                               Page 9 of 55
well equipped to deal with such terrains. Learned ASG has also placed on
record figures to substantiate this need. She states that upon an analysis, it
emerged that the average age of officers of the Armed Forces was 32 years,
as opposed to the global average of 26 years. Hence, the object sought to be
achieved by the Impugned Scheme is to have a force of young Jawans,
Sailors or Airmen between the age of 18-25 years as Agniveers, supervised
by the experienced regular cadre personnel.
8.      Ms. Bhati has also contended that the Impugned Scheme is the result
of various studies and deliberations such as the Kargil Review Committee,
which proposed the retention of soldiers for a shorter duration of time, as
opposed to the existing structure of 15 to 20 years. Due to this, the military
intake and retention models of the United States, United Kingdom, Canada
and France were considered by experts to analyse the efficiency and
organizational benefits of short term military engagement.
9.      Heard the learned Counsel for the Petitioners and Respondent, and
perused the material on record.
10.     The short question before this Court pertains to the constitutional
validity of the Agnipath Scheme, with the Petitioners having prayed for
directions to either reconsider the Impugned Scheme or to declare it wholly
unconstitutional.
11.     Material on record indicates that the Impugned Scheme was
announced by the Government of India on 15th June 2022 to enable the
Indian youth to join Indian Armed Forces for a term of four years. It is
stated that Agniveers form a distinct rank in the Indian Armed Forces,
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                            Page 10 of 55
different from any other existing rank and, on completing their engagement
period, the Agniveers will go through a selection process and 25%
Agniveers of each batch will be enrolled in regular cadre and remaining
75% will exit into the civil domain.
12.     Material on record further shows that after completion of four years,
the Agniveers will be provided with skill certificates as per their trade in the
Indian Army to apply for various jobs in the Government Sector as well as
in Private Sectors. For example, a person working as a Driver in the
Armoured Corps and driving fighting vehicles or mechanical transport
vehicles will be given driver-cum-mechanic certificates; a person working as
Operator Fire Controller or a person working as a General Duty in the
infantry would be provided with certificates of Gym Assistant, Warehouse
Operator, Fireman, etc.; similarly, a person working as a Gunner in Artillery
would be provided with a certificate of Fire Tech and Safety Manager,
Fireman, Surveyor, Data Entry Operator, etc.
13.     Material on record also indicates that the Impugned Scheme has been
prepared after studying the military 'intake and retention' model of several
countries. It is stated that most of the countries in the world have their own
military and the method used for enrolment in Armed Forces vary from one
country to another. The various types of recruitment are voluntary
enlistment where citizens choose the military as their employer and serve
their country as their job or career, and mandatory service where citizens of
certain age must serve their country compulsorily for a minimum amount of
time ranging from one year to five years. The material on record further
shows that based on detailed deliberations, a model comprising well
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                              Page 11 of 55
experienced permanent cadre with operational and technical skills supported
by youthful and a well-equipped support cadre, the Impugned Scheme has
been envisaged by the Government of India.
14.     Much has been said about this Court‟s power to review policy
decisions, especially those that relate to issues of national security. Without
adding to burgeoning jurisprudence in this regard, this Court will advert to
the pre-existing standards laid down by the Apex Court, as well as this
15.     It has been settled in a catena of cases that the scope of judicial review
accorded to this Court does not extend to excessively questioning the policy
decisions of the government, unless they are arbitrary, discriminatory or are
based on irrelevant considerations. In State of Orissa v. Gopinath Dash,
(2005) 13 SCC 495, the Apex Court has held as under :-
“7. The policy decision must be left to the Government
as it alone can adopt which policy should be adopted
after considering all the points from different angles.
In the matter of policy decisions or exercise of
discretion by the Government so long as the
infringement of fundamental right is not shown the
courts will have no occasion to interfere and the Court
will not and should not substitute its own judgment for
the judgment of the executive in such matters. In
assessing the propriety of a decision of the Government
the Court cannot interfere even if a second view is
possible from that of the Government.
5. While exercising the power of judicial review of
administrative action, the Court is not the Appellate
Authority and the Constitution does not permit the
Court to direct or advise the executive in the matter
of policy or to sermonise qua any matter which
under the Constitution lies within the sphere of the
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                Page 12 of 55
legislature or the executive, provided these
authorities do not transgress their constitutional
limits or statutory power. (See Asif Hameed v. State
of J&K [1989 Supp (2) SCC 364 : AIR 1989 SC
1899] and Shri Sitaram Sugar Co. Ltd. v. Union of
The scope of judicial enquiry is confined to the
question whether the decision taken by the
Government is against any statutory provisions or it
violates the fundamental rights of the citizens or is
opposed to the provisions of the Constitution. Thus,
the position is that even if the decision taken by the
Government does not appear to be agreeable to the
Court, it cannot interfere.”
16.     The Apex Court in Centre for Public Interest Litigation v. Union of
India, (2016) 6 SCC 408, wherein the Petitioner had challenged the decision
of the Government of India to allow voice telephony to Reliance Jio
Infocomm Ltd., has summarised the principles in this regard as under:-
“22. Minimal interference is called for by the courts, in
exercise of judicial review of a government policy
when the said policy is the outcome of deliberations of
the technical experts in the fields inasmuch as courts
are not well equipped to fathom into such domain
which is left to the discretion of the execution. It was
beautifully explained by the Court in Narmada
BachaoAndolan v. Union              of    India [Narmada
BachaoAndolan v. Union of India, (2000) 10 SCC 664]
and reiterated in Federation of Railway Officers
Assn. v. Union of India [Federation of Railway
Officers Assn. v. Union of India, (2003) 4 SCC 289] in
the following words: (SCC p. 289, para 12)
“12. In examining a question of this nature where a
policy is evolved by the Government judicial review
thereof is limited. When policy according to which
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                Page 13 of 55
or the purpose for which discretion is to be
exercised is clearly expressed in the statute, it
cannot be said to be an unrestricted discretion. On
matters affecting policy and requiring technical
expertise the court would leave the matter for
decision of those who are qualified to address the
issues. Unless the policy or action is inconsistent
with the Constitution and the laws or arbitrary or
irrational or abuse of power, the court will not
interfere with such matters.”
26. It cannot be doubted that the primary and central
purpose of judicial review of the administrative action
is to promote good administration. It is to ensure that
administrative bodies act efficiently and honestly to
promote the public good. They should operate in a fair,
transparent, and unbiased fashion, keeping in forefront
the public interest. To ensure that the aforesaid
dominant objectives are achieved, this Court has added
new dimension to the contours of judicial review and it
has undergone tremendous change in recent years. The
scope of judicial review has expanded radically and it
now extends well beyond the sphere of statutory
powers to include diverse forms of “public” power in
response to the changing architecture of the
Government [ [See: Administrative Law: Text and
York, 2011) by Beatson, Matthews, and Elliott.]] .
Thus, not only has judicial review grown wider in
scope; its intensity has also increased. Notwithstanding
“it is, however, central to received perceptions of
judicial review that courts may not interfere with
exercise of discretion merely because they disagree
with the decision or action in question; instead, courts
intervene only if some specific fault can be
established—for example, if the decision reached was
procedurally unfair [Ibid.] ”.
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                              Page 14 of 55
27. The raison d'être of discretionary power is that it
promotes the decision-maker to respond appropriately
to the demands of a particular situation. When the
decision-making is policy-based, judicial approach to
interfere with such decision-making becomes
narrower. In such cases, in the first instance, it is to be
examined as to whether the policy in question is
contrary to any statutory provisions or is
discriminatory/arbitrary or based on irrelevant
considerations. If the particular policy satisfies these
parameters and is held to be valid, then the only
question to be examined is as to whether the decision
in question is in conformity with the said policy.”
17.     Recently, the law related to judicial review in policy decisions has
been reiterated in State of Maharashtra v. Bhagwan, (2022) 4 SCC 193, in
the following manner:-
“28. As per the settled proposition of law, the Court
should refrain from interfering with the policy
decision, which might have a cascading effect and
having financial implications. Whether to grant certain
benefits to the employees or not should be left to the
expert body and undertakings and the court cannot
interfere lightly. Granting of certain benefits may
result in a cascading effect having adverse financial
consequences.”
18.     It emerges that there is a catena of cases which have reiterated the
basic principle: that unless a policy decision taken by the Government is
demonstrably capricious or arbitrary or if it suffers from the vice of
discrimination or infringes any statute or provisions of the Constitution, this
Court is not to question the propriety of such a policy decision. This Court
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                 Page 15 of 55
does not concern itself with whether a more comprehensive decision could
have been taken by the Government, as this Court must show deference to
the decision reached by experts [Refer to: Krishnan Kakkanth v. Govt. of
Kerala, (1997) 9 SCC 495; Food Corpn. of India v. Bhanu Lodh, (2005) 3
SCC 618; Govt. of Orissa v. Haraprasad Das, (1998) 1 SCC 487; State of
Orissa v. Bhikari Charan Khuntia, (2003) 10 SCC 144; Delhi Pradesh
Registered Medical Practioners v. Director of Health Services, (1997) 11
19.     This scope for judicial interference is further constrained when the
Scheme or policy decision pertains to the national security of our nation.
The Apex Court in Ex-Armymen's Protection Services (P) Ltd. v. Union of
India, (2014) 5 SCC 409, has even stated that what qualifies as national
security is not a question of law, but is rather a question of policy, to be
determined by the executive which is entrusted with such matters. Having
stated the above, it goes without saying that the present issue, i.e. the
recruitment of soldiers in the Armed Forces, most definitely qualifies as one
falling under the ambit of „national security‟.
20.     This Court has first looked at Council of Civil Service Union and
Others. v. Minister for the Civil Service, 1984 3 WLR 1174, wherein the
House of Lords had the occasion to adjudge the propriety of the Government
of the United Kingdom‟s decision to ban the employees of the Government
Communications Headquarters from joining any trade union due to issues of
„national security‟. While generally allowing for judicial review of royal
prerogatives, the House of Lords carved an exception for matters of national
security, stating that Courts are inadequate to sit over appeal on the
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                            Page 16 of 55
Government‟s views on issues pertaining to national security. The following
has been observed in this regard:-
“The question is one of evidence. The decision on
whether the requirements of national security outweigh
the duty of fairness in any particular case is for the
Government and not for the courts; the Government
alone has access to the necessary information, and in
any event the judicial process is unsuitable for
reaching decisions on national security. But if the
decision is successfully challenged, on the ground that
it has been reached by a process which is unfair, then
the Government is under an obligation to produce
evidence that the decision was in fact based ongrounds
of national security. Authority for both these points is
found in The Zamora (1916] 2 A.C.77. The former
point is dealt with in the well-known passage from the
advice of the Judicial Committee delivered by Lord
Parker of Waddington, at p. 107:"Those who are
responsible for the national security must be the sole
judges of what the national security requires. It would
be obviously undesirable that such matters should be
made the subject of evidence in a court of law or
otherwise discussed in public.”
21.     Closer to home too, there have been several authoritative
pronouncements with respect to judicial review in matters of national
security. In Indian Rly. Construction Co. Ltd. v. Ajay Kumar, (2003) 4 SCC
579, the Apex Court has referred to the „doctrine of immunity‟ applicable to
classes of cases which relate to inter alia deployment of troops. The
following observations of the Apex Court in this regard are being
reproduced as under:-
“14. The present trend of judicial opinion is to restrict
the doctrine of immunity from judicial review to those
class of cases which relate to deployment of troops,
entering into international treaties etc. The distinctive
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                               Page 17 of 55
features of some of these recent cases signify the
willingness of the courts to assert their power to
scrutinize the factual basis upon which discretionary
powers have been exercised…The effect of several
decisions on the question of jurisdiction has been
summed up by Grahame Aldous and John Alder in
their book Applications for Judicial Review, Law and
“There is a general presumption against ousting the
jurisdiction of the courts so that statutory provisions
which purport to exclude judicial review are construed
restrictively. There are, however, certain areas of
governmental activity, national security being the
paradigm, which the courts regard themselves as
incompetent to investigate, beyond an initial decision
as to whether the Government's claim is bona fide.In
this kind of non-justiciable area judicial review is not
entirely excluded, but very limited. It has also been
said that powers conferred by the Royal Prerogative
are inherently unreviewable but since the speeches of
the House of Lords in Council of Civil Service
Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service [(1984) 3 All
ER 935 : 1985 AC 374 : (1984) 3 WLR 1174 (HL)] this
is doubtful. Lords Diplock, Scarman and Roskill
appeared to agree that there is no general distinction
between powers, based upon whether their source is
statutory or prerogative but that judicial review can be
limited by the subject-matter of a particular power, in
that case national security. Many prerogative powers
are in fact concerned with sensitive, non-justiciable
areas, for example, foreign affairs, but some are
reviewable in principle, including the prerogatives
relating to the civil service where national security is
not involved. Another non-justiciable power is the
Attorney-General's prerogative to decide whether to
institute legal proceedings on behalf of the public
interest.”
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                              Page 18 of 55
(Also see Padfield v. Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries
and Food [1968 AC 997 : (1968) 1 All ER 694 : (1968)
2 WLR 924] .)”                        (emphasis supplied)
22.     Recently, in Manohar Lal Sharma v. Narendra Damodardas Modi,
(2019) 3 SCC 25, which pertained to the procurement of aircrafts by the
Indian Government, in common parlance referred to as the Rafale deal, the
Apex Court stated that the parameters of judicial review in cases which deal
with defence procurement is narrow, due to the sensitive nature of the work
undertaken by the State. The following has been observed by the Apex
“6. Keeping in view the above, it would be
appropriate, at the outset, to set out the parameters of
judicial scrutiny of governmental decisions relating to
defence procurement and to indicate whether such
parameters are more constricted than what the
jurisprudence of judicial scrutiny of award of tenders
and contracts, that has emerged till date, would
legitimately permit.
9. We also cannot lose sight of the tender in issue. The
tender is not for construction of roads, bridges, etc. It
is a defence tender for procurement of aircrafts. The
parameter of scrutiny would give far more leeway to
the Government, keeping in mind the nature of the
procurement itself. This aspect was even emphasised
in Siemens Public Communication Networks (P)
Ltd. v. Union of India [Siemens Public Communication
Networks (P) Ltd. v. Union of India, (2008) 16 SCC
215] . The triple ground on which such judicial
scrutiny is permissible has been consistently held to be
“illegality”,        “irrationality”    and   “procedural
impropriety”.
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                 Page 19 of 55
10. In Reliance Airport Developers (P) Ltd. v. Airports
Authority of India [Reliance Airport Developers (P)
Ltd. v. Airports Authority of India, (2006) 10 SCC 1]
the policy of privatisation of strategic national assets
qua two airports came under scrutiny. A reference was
made in the said case (at SCC p. 49, para 57) to the
commentary by Grahame Aldous and John Alder in
their book Applications for Judicial Review, Law and
“57. … „There is a general presumption against
ousting the jurisdiction of the courts, so that
statutory provisions which purport to exclude
judicial review are construed restrictively. There
are, however, certain areas of governmental activity,
national security being the paradigm, which the
courts regard themselves as incompetent to
investigate, beyond an initial decision as to whether
the Government's claim is bona fide. In this kind of
non-justiciable area judicial review is not entirely
excluded, but very limited. It has also been said that
powers conferred by the Royal Prerogative are
inherently unreviewable but since the speeches of
the House of Lords in Council of Civil Service
Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service [Council of
Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil
this is doubtful. Lords Diplock, Scaman and Roskili
(sic.) [ To be read as “Roskill”.] appeared to agree
that there is no general distinction between powers,
based upon whether their source is statutory or
prerogative but that judicial review can be limited
by the subject-matter of a particular power, in that
case national security. Many prerogative powers are
in fact concerned with sensitive, non-justiciable
areas, for example, foreign affairs, but some are
reviewable in principle, including the prerogatives
relating to the civil service where national security
is not involved. Another non-justiciable power is the
Attorney General's prerogative to decide whether to
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                Page 20 of 55
institute legal proceedings on behalf of the public
interest.”
11. It is our considered opinion/view that the extent of
permissible judicial review in matters of contracts,
procurement, etc. would vary with the subject-matter of
the contract and there cannot be any uniform standard
or depth of judicial review which could be understood
as an across the board principle to apply to all cases of
award of work or procurement of goods/material. The
scrutiny of the challenges before us, therefore, will
have to be made keeping in mind the confines of
national security, the subject of the procurement being
crucial to the nation's sovereignty.”
23.     In Esab India Ltd. v. Special Director of Enforcement, (2011) 178
DLT 569, this Court adjudged the constitutional validity of Section 24, read
with Second Schedule of the Right to Information Act, 2005, which
effectively exempted certain intelligence and security organisations from
furnishing information under the Right to Information Act, 2005. After
summarising the Supreme Court‟s jurisprudence with regards to judicial
review in such matters, this Court did not interfere with Section 24 on the
ground that questions of national security were involved, and hence, this
Court was not the proper forum to weigh the matter. It was categorically
stated by this Court that the Executive is the sole arm of the State
responsible for national security, and hence, must make such decisions.
24.     In Lt. Col. P.K. Choudhary v. Union of India and Others, 2020 SCC
OnLine Del 915, wherein a direction was sought to be issued to inter alia
the Union to withdraw their policy to the extent that it banned the Petitioner
and other members of the Indian Army from using social networking
platforms like Facebook and Instagram, a Division Bench of this Court,
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                               Page 21 of 55
while taking note of the judgments of the Apex Court in Central Public
Information Officer, Supreme Court of India v. Subhash Chandra Agarwal,
(2020)      5    SCC        481;     Esab   India   Ltd. v. Special  Director       of
Enforcement, (2011)          178     DLT    569;Mehmood      Pracha v. Intelligence
Ltd. v. Union of India, (2019) 4 SCC 451; and State of N.C.T. of Delhi Vs.
Sanjeev,(2005) 5 SCC 181, has refused to exercise its discretion vested
under Article 226 and has observed as under:-
“19. Supreme Court in Union of India v. Rajasthan
High Court, (2017) 2 SCC 599 was concerned with the
directions issued by a High Court, to include the Chief
Justices and Judges of the High Court in the list of
persons exempted from pre-embarkation security
checks at airports. While setting aside the said order of
the High Court, it was held that (i) the High Court had
evidently transgressed the wise and self-imposed
restraint on the power of judicial review; matters of
security ought to be determined by the authorities of
the government vested with the duty and obligation to
do so; (ii) gathering of intelligence information,
formulation of policies of security, deciding on steps to
be taken to meet threats originating both internally and
externally, are matters on which Courts singularly lack
expertise; (iii) it was not for the Court, in the exercise
of its power of judicial review, to suggest a policy
which it considered fit and the formulation of
suggestions by the High Court for framing a National
Security Policy travelled far beyond the legitimate
domain of judicial review; (iv) formulation of such a
policy is based on information and inputs which are
not available to the Court; and, (v) the Court is not an
expert in such matters.
20. More contemporaneously, in the context of
procurement of Rafale Fighter Jets for Indian Air
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                 Page 22 of 55
Force, it was reiterated that though there is a general
presumption against ousting the jurisdiction of the
Courts, there are however certain areas of
governmental activity, national security being the
paradigm, which the Courts regard themselves as
incompetent to investigate, beyond an initial decision
as to whether the government's claim is bona
fide. Comparatively recently, in Central Public
Information          Officer,    Supreme      Court      of
India v. Subhash Chandra Agarwal, (2020) 5 SCC 481,
in the context of disclosure under the Right to
Information Act, 2005, the proceedings of the
Collegium System for appointment and elevation of
Judges to the Supreme Court and High Court, the
Supreme Court held (i) if the inner working of the
government machinery is needlessly exposed to public,
it would hamper frank and forthright views, thoughts
or options on sensitive matters; (ii) therefore the level
of deliberations of that class or category of documents
get protection, in particular, on policy matters; (iii) the
Court would be willing to respond to the executive
public interest immunity to disclose such documents
where national security or high policy, high sensitivity
is involved; (iii) there are several limitations on
complete disclosure of governmental information,
especially in matters relating to national security; and,
(iv) there is also a need to accept and trust the
government's decision makers. Yet again in The
Secretary, Ministry of Defence v. BabitaPuniya, AIR
2020 SC 1000, in the context of grant of permanent
commission to women in the Indian Army, it was
reiterated that the Courts are indeed conscious of the
limitations viz. issues of national security and policy,
imposed on the judicial evolution of doctrine in matters
relating to armed forces.”
25.     Upon perusing the above cases, it is exceedingly clear that this Court
does not interfere with policy decisions pertaining to national security in
normal course, as this Court is not best placed to take such decisions.
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                 Page 23 of 55
26.     Policy decisions with regard to national security are taken after
careful consideration of the socio-political scenario of the country, along
with the socio-political scenario of the border countries. Further, a measured
analysis is undertaken when it comes to application of schemes propounded
by other countries to the conditions in India. The Courts cannot and should
not delve into the appropriateness of such policy decisions and, thus,
endanger one of the most important aspects of the basic structure doctrine,
i.e., the principle of separation of powers.
27.     Coming to the issues at hand, this Court finds it appropriate to first
analyse the salient features of the Impugned Scheme. The Impugned
Scheme, as stated, is a recruitment-generation scheme which will satisfy a
large number of unemployed Indian youth and 25% of the Agniveers will be
allowed to continue in the Armed Forces beyond the period of 4 years.This
has been done by the Government in order to meet the objective of creating
an Armed Force which is agile, youthful, physically fit, and mentally alert.
This will bring the Indian Armed Forces in line with nations such as the
inter alia United States, United Kingdom, and France. The importance of
creating such a force has also been brought to the attention of this Court.
28.     The Agniveer Scheme will increase the „leader to led‟ ratio from 1.1
to 1.28; a ratio that would aspire confidence, and would ease the pressure of
the forces on ground. Expert opinions have also been sought on the
Impugned Scheme; who have in fact suggested the revamping of the existing
in-take and retention scheme as well. Considering the fact that the laudable
objective of maintaining national security is at the heart of the Impugned
Scheme, this Court does not find it arbitrary, capricious or devoid of reason.
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                              Page 24 of 55
29.     As our collective memory serves us, there have been several border
skirmishes in the recent past. Such transgressions exacerbate the need to
have a leaner and fitter Armed Force which is capable of handling the
mental and physical distress that accompanies service in the Armed Forces.
30.     Further, as stated earlier, a number of Agniveers will be absorbed by
Public Sector Undertakings and other Government establishments on
various posts. The Agniveers would also be given various certificates which
would enable them to secure a job in the Government and Public Sector
Undertakings. Working with the Army for four years will definitely instil a
feeling of nationalism in the Agniveers which is important for the youth of
the country. This feeling of nationalism will be a major deterrent for these
persons from resorting to crime in the future.
31.     A perusal of material on record shows that the scheme is a well
thought out policy decision by the Government of India. The candidates
selected under the Impugned Scheme would be enrolled as Agniveers which
forms a distinct rank in Armed Forces. During the period of four years, the
Agniveers would be given training, including weapon training etc., and they
would also be placed at various sectors/avenues. On completion of four
years they would be given appropriate certificates for the experience they
have gained while working as Agniveers. 25% of the selected candidates
will also be appointed in the regular Army Cadre and out of the rest 75%
Agniveers who would not be able to make it to the regular Army Cadre,
many of them can be absorbed in Paramilitary Forces, and further with
various skill certificates, Agniveers will be in a better position to gain
meaningful employment in the avenues in which they possess a skill
certificate. Needless to state that four years training period would also instil
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                             Page 25 of 55
a sense of nationalism in these personnel that would more or less prompt
them to use their skills and focus on the development of the country. Such
advantages cannot be overlooked and dislodged on the basis of the
apprehension that after four years such individuals may be unemployed or
the mere apprehension that they may take to illegal or unethical activities,
after being trained in the Army. This Impugned Scheme cannot be interfered
with by this Court only on the basis of such apprehensions and bald
averments.
32.     Another major grouse of the Petitioners is that Agniveers would not
be given pension at the end of four years. Such pension, it has been
contended, is being extended to soldiers from other nations which have
deployed similar short term services in the Armed Forces. However, the
Petitioners have failed to realise that a principal distinction between nations
such as Israel, which have deployed such a policy, and India, is that the
Indian Government has not made it mandatory for the youth of the nation to
serve in the Armed forces.
33.     This Court also finds no force in the argument of the Petitioner that
the Government has failed to make provisions for the meaningful
employment of Agniveers in the future. As stated earlier, the Government
has in fact sought to extend entrepreneurship financial schemes such as
MUDRA and Start-Up India to Agniveers as well. Furthermore, the
Government has avowed to give Agniveers priority in government
organisations; 10% reservation has been made for Agniveers in the
Department of CAPF under the Ministry of Home Affairs, 10% in all the
Departments under the Ministry of Defence, and 5% in all the Departments
under the Railways. Material on record also discloses that the Impugned
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                              Page 26 of 55
Scheme will not only provide opportunity for youth to serve the country but
will also result in the Armed Forces having the most capable individuals
who will be rewarded with a decent financial package and a bright future.
34.     This Court is of the opinion that rather than focusing on the alleged
political motives of the Impugned Scheme, it is necessary to focus on the
benefits that are being provided by the said Scheme. As stated earlier, the
Agniveers who are not recruited in the regular army would be given skill
certificates which will enable them to get employment in the private sector.
A Scheme such as the one impugned herein will not only help in the
personal development of the individuals who are recruited at a young age,
but it will also equip the youth of the country with necessary skills that can
aid them to secure better paying opportunities in fields to which they are
specifically suited. The Scheme would, therefore, benefit in the growth and
betterment of an individual which will only help in the growth and
betterment of the nation. It is through this prism that one must assess the
35.     Needless to say, despite the bona fide intentions of the Government,
the instant Scheme is susceptible to meeting obstacles, like any other
initiative of the State. The possibility of this too has been taken care of as
the       Government            of      India    vide    MOD     Letter       No.
DMA/JS/(N&DS)/2021/Agnipath-01 dated 15.06.2022 has assured that
“any operational issues arising during the implementation of the scheme
shall be resolved with approval of the MoD, whenever necessary, with
concurrence of MoF under the provisions laid down.”
36.     Aside from this, as stated above, this Court, while exercising its
powers under Article 226 of the Constitution of India cannot consider
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                              Page 27 of 55
alternatives to the Impugned Scheme. The formulation of the Scheme is an
exercise of the „sovereign policy-making functions‟ of the Central
Government, which ought not to be interfered with unless on the settled
principles discussed above.
37.     To conclude, this Court finds it apposite to reiterate that policy
decisions, particularly those which have wide-ranging implications on the
nation‟s health and security, should be decided by bodies best suited to do
so. It appears that the Government has been considering, for a long time, the
possibility of creating an Armed Forces which consists of more youthful,
agile, and physically adept individuals. Upon considering the opinions of
experts bodies, defence personnel, and carefully studying the models
adopted by other nations, it has decided to finally replace the prior mode of
recruitment with the recruitment envisaged by the Agnipath Scheme.
Considering that the stated objective of the Government is neither
discriminatory nor mala fide, or arbitrary, this Court finds no reason to
interfere with it.
38.     The issue which come to fore for the consideration of this Court in the
rest of the Writ Petitions is as to whether the Union‟s actions attract the
principles of promissory estoppel and legitimate expectation, thereby
mandating it to complete the recruitment process under the „Common
Entrance Examination‟ (hereinafter referred to as „the CEE‟) and 2019
Notification for the Indian Army and Air Force respectively?
Facts pertaining to the recruitment to the Indian Air Force
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                             Page 28 of 55
39.     The Indian Air Force, the air arm of the Indian Armed Forces, back in
December 2019, invited online applications from the candidates to join as
airmen in certain categories under „Group X‟ and „Group Y‟ trades for the
intake in 01/2021 Batch.
40.     As per the Notification, the Indian Air Force had envisaged this
process in the following three stages: the candidates first had to undergo an
online test; persons shortlisted from the first round were to be called at
Airmen Selection Centre for document verification, followed by physical
fitness tests, group discussion, and adaptability tests; and candidates who
qualified the 2nd phase were to be issued the appointment letter for the
medical examination. Upon the conclusion of this process, the list of
candidates finally selected was to be published on 10.12.2020.
41.     Accordingly, on 20.01.2020, the online registration commenced. The
Petitioners, akin to other aspirants, applied under vacancies in various posts.
42.     It is stated that the Petitioners, much like other aspirants, also waited
for the first phase of online examinations to be conducted from 19.03.2020
to 23.03.2020. However, in the interim, as the COVID-19 pandemic brought
the functioning of the nation to a standstill, these online exams were
postponed indefinitely.
43.     Clarity was provided to the Petitioners vide a Notification issued by
the „Central Airmen Selection Board‟ in October 2020 notifying the conduct
of the exam from 04.11.2020 to 08.11.2020. A provisional admit card was
also issued to the applicants, and the exams were successfully conducted on
these dates.
44.     On 26.11.2020, the result of the first phase was declared, and the
Petitioners emerged successful in this phase. For the second phase, to be
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                Page 29 of 55
held from 11.01.2021 to 25.01.2021, the Petitioners were issued admit cards,
and accordingly they prepared for the various tests envisaged under the
second phase. It is stated that the Petitioners emerged successful in this
round as well.
45.     Between 03.02.2021 till July 2021, the Petitioners were subjected to a
medical examination. Some Petitioners qualified in this round and were
found to be medically fit to serve in the Indian Air Force.
46.     Accordingly, a provisional selection list containing the name of the
candidate, cut-off marks, and position of the candidate was published by the
Central Airmen Selection Board. This list categorically stated that the
enrolment list containing names of the selected candidates would be
published on 10.06.2021.
47.     In September 2020, Central Airmen Selection Board issued
notifications in Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Haryana, and Bihar inviting
applications for the post of Airmen in Group X trades („2020 Notification‟),
as were also invited under the 2019 Notification. Under the 2020
Notification, all the three stages were to be conducted on one single day, as
opposed to the three phases envisaged under the 2019 Notification.
48.     The results for this Notification were announced on 25.01.2021,
25.02.2021 and 16.03.2021, according to which 5062 candidates were
selected; 3756 through rally recruitment and the remaining 1306 from the
waiting list of intake of 2/2020 Batch, i.e. from the Notification prior to the
49.     It is stated that between 10.07.2021 and 31.05.2022, Central Airmen
Selection Board gave various reasons, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, and
administrative reasons, for delaying the publication of enrolment list of the
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                            Page 30 of 55
50.     On 14.06.2022, a Notification was issued by the Government of India
introducing a new scheme titled „Agnipath‟ for recruitment to the Indian Air
Force. Agnipath Scheme envisaged a term of 4 years for candidates and only
25% of candidates were to be retained after the 4-year tenure. The stated
rationale for Agnipath Scheme was the reduction of the Army‟s expenditure
on pension and salaries. After declaration of Agnipath Scheme, pending
recruitments in the Air Force stood cancelled.
51.     The Petitioners upon being aggrieved by the introduction of the
Agnipath Scheme have approached this Court.
Facts pertaining to the recruitment to the Indian Army
52.     These Writ Petitions pertain to the recruitment of Personnel‟s Below
Officer Rank, such as soldier clerk, store keeping assistant, etc., in the
53.     The recruitment for Personnel‟s Below Officer Rank (PBOR) in the
Indian Army is conducted through „rallies‟, followed by medical, physical,
and written examination known as the „Common Entrance Examination‟
(hereinafter referred to as „the CEE‟).
54.     In June 2020, the Indian Army issued a Notification for the
recruitment for the post of Solider (General), Soldier (Technical), Soldier
55.     The Petitioners participated in the first three rounds of the recruitment
process and emerged successful. Thereafter, the Petitioners waited for the
Union to conduct the CEE which was originally scheduled to be conducted
on 30.05.2021, however, citing the COVID -19 pandemic, the CEE was
delayed by the Union repeatedly.
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                Page 31 of 55
56.     In June 2022, the Union notified the Agnipath Scheme, which
subsumes the preexisting forms of recruitment. As this Scheme has
effectively nullified the recruitment of the Petitioners, the Petitioners have
approached this Court.
57.     Mr. Prashant Bhushan, learned counsel for the Petitioners in these set
of matters, has made two principal submissions. Firstly, he argued that the
actions of the Union are hit by the principle of promissory estoppel as the
Petitioners, upon being selected for the Indian Air Force, decided to forgo
other job opportunities to their detriment. Mr. Bhushan has stated that the
Petitioners have been hopeful of gaining employment with the Indian Army
and Navy for about 3 years now and have lost prime years of their life. In
this regard, Mr. Bhushan has placed reliance on judgments of the Apex
Court in Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of U.P., (1979) 2
SCC 409 and State of Bihar v. Kalyanpur Cement Ltd., (2010) 3 SCC 274.
Secondly, he has contended that the Petitioners having participated in the
selection process, are entitled to a legitimate expectation that the results
would be declared. Mr. Bhushan has stated that such expectation flows from
a) that the recruitment was initiated in accordance with the relevant rules; b)
that the Notification of 2019 has the sanction of law; and c) the Respondent
in fact carried out the recruitment process for the Indian Navy in three
phases.
58.     Mr. Bhushan has also argued that the Union‟s arbitrariness is writ
large from the fact that recruitment was successfully concluded in the Indian
Navy even during the pandemic, as opposed to the Indian Army and Indian
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                             Page 32 of 55
Air Force. It has been argued that this act of „cherry-picking‟ is violative of
Article 14 of the Constitution.
59.     Other than this, the Mr. Bhushan has also argued that the recruitment
of candidates through rally recruitment in the Indian Army and Air Force,
despite the written process of recruitment being underway is discriminatory
and arbitrary, falling foul of Article 14 of the Constitution. In this regard,
reliance has been placed on Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport
Authority of India, (1979) 3 SCC.
60.     In addition to the above grounds, the Petitioners in the „Army CEE
Matters‟ have argued that the inaction of the Union of India in holding the
CEE examination is arbitrary, whimsical, and violative of Article 14 of the
Constitution of India. The Petitioners have also placed reliance upon
Shankarsan Dash v. Union of India, (1991) 3 SCC 47, to argue that the State
cannot act in an arbitrary manner while making appointments in State
employment.
61.     Per contra, the Ld. ASG, appearing for the Respondents, has argued
that it is a well settled position of law that no vested rights could possibly
have accrued in favour of the Petitioners during the recruitment process. In
this regard, reliance has been placed upon the following judgments:
Shankarsan Dash v. Union of India, (1991) 3 SCC 47; Babita Prasad v.
State of Bihar, 1993 Supp (3) SCC 268; A.P. v. D. Dastagiri, (2003) 5 sec
373; Union of India v. S. Vinodh Kumar, (2007) 8 SCC 100. Ld. ASG,
appearing for the Respondent No. 1 has further argued that the decision to
change the mode and method of recruitment falls under the purview of
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                             Page 33 of 55
„sovereign policy-making functions‟ of the Central Government, thereby
rendering the scope of judicial review extremely limited. This is especially
true for the appointment to the Armed Forces, as it relates directly to issues
of national security.
62.     It has also been argued that the Agnipath Scheme was necessitated
due to the peculiar border situation, the incessant threats and attempts to
infiltrate the said borders by hostile neighboring countries and non-state
actors. It is stated that upon an analysis of the existing structure of the below
„officer‟ rank divisions of the Indian Army, it was observed that the average
age of the Indian Armed Forces personnel was 32 years. This was in stark
contrast with the global position of armies which showed that the average
age of Armed Forces across the world was 26 years. This is true for the
Navy and Air Force as well. Hence, the object sought to be achieved through
the Agnipath Scheme is to have a blend of young jawans, sailors or airmen
between the age of 18-25 years as Agniveers, supervised by experienced
regular cadre personnel.
63.     Ld. ASG has also argued that the Indian Navy was constrained to
culminate its recruitment process as it is a leaner force as compared to the
Indian Army and Air Force. She has corroborated this by pointing out that
the Indian Navy has very few bases only in coastal cities and had a
manpower shortage of about 12,500 sailors already. It is further stated that
there was already a shortage of about 16.5% in 2020, and any further delay
in the recruitment would have resulted in an increased manpower shortage
of 20%. This shortage would only get exacerbated with every passing year.
Hence, it was solely in national interest that the Indian Navy had to continue
its recruitment process and induct two batches, while the Indian Army and
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                Page 34 of 55
Indian Air Force did not. It is submitted that if the same was not done, the
functioning of the Indian Navy would have been severely compromised.
64.     It has also been placed on record by the Ld. ASG that the rally
recruitment cannot be equated with the regular recruitment process of the
Indian Army and Air Force. With regards to recruitment in the Air Force,
the Ld. ASG stated that recruitment rallies were conducted in various
locations to increase intake from tribal, hilly and remote areas of the
country, so as to maintain demographic balance in the Air Force. It has
further been stated that rallies, as opposed to the previous recruitment
method, are a fast-track process and hence, cannot be equated with the
regular recruitment process. It is stated that such rallies were conducted and
concluded back in December 2020, as opposed to the regular recruitment
which was supposed to be carried out well into 2021. Hence, due to the
marked difference in process and timelines, the Petitioners cannot be
equated with individuals inducted through rally recruitment. Further, with
regard to the Indian Army, it has been stated that due to the COVID-19
pandemic, only four rallies could be conducted as opposed to about 80
rallies which were conducted prior to the pandemic. The Ld. ASG has
argued that the Armed Forces needed to recruit officers urgently considering
that the normal course of recruitment is a multi-prong process. In
summation, it has been argued by the Ld. ASG that the Petitioners cannot
claim parity with rally recruits, as this mode of recruitment was conducted in
different circumstances, and to serve the particular purpose of inter alia
maintaining the demographic balance.
65.     The first question before this Court is whether the Union‟s actions
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                             Page 35 of 55
attract the principles of legitimate expectation thereby mandating it to
complete the recruitment process under the CEE and 2019 Notification for
the Indian Army and Air Force respectively.
66.     The principle of legitimate expectation has been dealt with in great
detail by the Apex Court as well as by this Court. After briefly dealing with
the jurisprudence developed under the principles, this Court will test their
applicability to the case at hand. The principle of legitimate expectation has
two facets: procedural and substantive. While procedural legitimate
expectation relates to the chance of a representation or hearing before a
particular decision is made, substantive legitimate expectation relates to
promise of a benefit of a substantive nature to be granted to an individual
(Refer to: Punjab Communications Ltd. v. Union of India, (1999) 4 SCC
67.     The doctrine of legitimate expectation, which has its genesis in
administrative law, is invoked to hold the government accountable and good
to its word. This doctrine is invoked if an individual is aggrieved by the
alteration of rights or obligations, which deprive such individual of any
benefit or advantage and affects such individual adversely. However, such
doctrine, as elucidated in Union of India v. Hindustan Development Corpn.,
(1993) 3 SCC 499, is too nebulous to form the basis to invalidate a law. In a
similar vein, considerations of public interest outweigh the legitimate
expectation of an individual. In other words, the Executive is well within its
powers to change policies for reasons which are not arbitrary, mala fide, or
when taken in public interest. Only if a decision to change a policy is
arbitrary or capricious, it may be struck down (Refer to: M. Ramesh v.
Union of India, (2018) 16 SCC 195; Kerala State Beverages (M&M) Corpn.
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                            Page 36 of 55
Ltd. v. P.P. Suresh, (2019) 9 SCC 710).
68.     The Petitioners in all the matters before us contended that they had
sought recruitment in the Armed Forces. It is stated that the recruitment was
halted at the fag end of the recruitment process inasmuch as a select list has
been brought out which included the names of many of the Petitioners
herein and due to the expectation that they would be gainfully employed by
the Armed Forces, they failed to seek employment elsewhere. However, due
to the initiation of the Impugned Scheme, they find themselves in a lurch;
neither did they seek employment elsewhere, nor can they enter the Armed
Forces through the pre-existing schemes anymore. It is stated that they have
become over-aged to be considered for appointment elsewhere also.
69.     The doctrine of legitimate expectation cannot come to their rescue. It
is true that some of the Petitioners have cleared certain rounds of the
recruitment process and have merely been waiting to get their appointment
letters. The principal contention of the counsel appearing for the Petitioners
is that the Petitioners, after having gone through the recruitment process for
appointment to the Army under the erstwhile process, have already been
shortlisted and were included in the provisional list but Appointment Letters
were not issued to them due to the Impugned Scheme. It is well settled that
individuals who were merely waiting to be issued Appointment Letters,
cannot claim to have a vested right to gain employment. It is well settled
position of law that nobody has an indefeasible right to claim employment.
The issue as to whether any right inures in a candidate without an
appointment order being issued in their favour has been crystallized by the
Apex Court in a number of judgments. A Constitution Bench of the Apex
Court in Shankarsan Dash (supra) has observed as under:
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                            Page 37 of 55
"7. It is not correct to say that if a number of
vacancies are notified for appointment and adequate
number of candidates are found fit, the successful
candidates acquire an indefeasible right to be
appointed which cannot be legitimately denied.
Ordinarily the notification merely amounts to an
invitation to qualified candidates to apply for
recruitment and on their selection they do not acquire
any right to the post. Unless the relevant recruitment
rules so indicate, the State is under no legal duty to
fill up all or any of the vacancies. However, it does
not mean that the State has the licence of acting in an
arbitrary manner. The decision not to fill up the
vacancies has to be taken bona fide for appropriate
reasons. And if the vacancies or any of them are filled
up, the State is bound to respect the comparative
merit of the candidates, as reflected at the recruitment
test, and no discrimination can be permitted. This
correct position has been consistently followed by this
Court, and we do not find any discordant note in the
decisions in State of Haryana v. Subash Chander
(1974) 1 SCR 165] , Neelima Shangla v. State of
or Jatinder Kumar v. State of Punjab [(1985) 1 SCC
(emphasis supplied)
70.     In Raghuveer Singh Yadav, (1994) 6 SCC 151), the Apex Court has
"5. It is not in dispute that Statutory Rules have been
made introducing Degree in Science or Engineering or
Diploma in Technology as qualifications for
recruitment to the posts of Inspector of Weights and
Measures. It is settled law that the State has got power
to prescribe qualifications for recruitment. Here is a
case that pursuant to amended Rules, the
Government has withdrawn the earlier notification
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                 Page 38 of 55
and wants to proceed with the recruitment afresh. It
is not a case of any accrued right. The candidates
who had appeared for the examination and passed
the written examination had only legitimate
expectation to be considered of their claims according
to the rules then in vogue. The amended Rules have
only prospective operation. The Government is
entitled to conduct selection in accordance with the
changed rules and make final recruitment. Obviously
no candidate acquired any vested right against the
State. Therefore, the State is entitled to withdraw the
notification by which it had previously notified
recruitment and to issue fresh notification in that
regard on the basis of the amended Rules."
(emphasis supplied)
71.     In Jai Singh Dalal v. State of Haryana, 1993 Supp (2) SCC 600, the
Apex Court, after placing reliance on the Constitutional Bench Judgment of
the Apex Court in Shankarsan Dash (supra), has observed as under:
"7.       ..... In the background of these facts this Court
came to the conclusion that the mere fact that the
candidates were chosen for appointment in response to
the advertisement did not entitle them to appointment.
To put it differently, no right had vested in the
candidates on their names having been entered on the
select list and it was open to the Government for good
reason not to make the appointments therefrom and fill
in the vacancies. In a recent decision in Shankarsan
Dash v. Union of India [(1991) 3 SCC 47 : 1991 SCC
(L&S) 800 : (1991) 17 ATC 95] the Constitution Bench
of this Court reiterated that even if a number of
vacancies are notified for appointment and adequate
number of candidates are found fit, the successful
candidates do not acquire any indefeasible right to
appointment against the existing vacancies. It was
pointed out that ordinarily the notification merely
amounts to an invitation to qualified candidates to
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                 Page 39 of 55
apply for recruitment and on their selection they do not
acquire any right to the post. The State is under no
legal duty to fill up all or any of the vacancies by
appointing candidates selected for that purpose. Albeit,
the State must act in good faith and must not exercise
its power mala fide or in an arbitrary manner. The
Constitution Bench referred with approval the earlier
decision of this Court in Subash Chander [(1974) 3
Therefore, the law is settled that even candidates
selected for appointment have no right to
appointment and it is open to the State Government at
a subsequent date not to fill up the posts or to resort
to fresh selection and appointment on revised
criteria……."                          (emphasis supplied)
72.     The Apex Court in M. Ramesh (supra), after placing reliance on Jai
Singh Dalal (supra) & Shankarsan Dash (supra), has observed as under:
"21. The first issue that arises is whether the
petitioners have any vested right to claim that the
result must be declared and if the petitioners are
selected, they should be appointed. This Court in Jai
Singh Dalal v. State of Haryana [Jai Singh Dalal v.
State of Haryana, 1993 Supp (2) SCC 600 : 1993 SCC
(L&S) 846] held that merely because the Government
had sent a requisition to UPSC to select the candidates
for appointments, did not create any vested right in the
candidate called for the interview to be appointed. It
was also held that the authority which has the power to
specify the method of recruitment must be deemed to
have the power to revise and substitute the same. The
Court, however, also laid down that at best the
Government may be required to justify its action on the
touchstone of Article 14 of the Constitution. This view
has been followed in a large number of cases. In Vijay
Kumar Mishra v. High Court of Patna [Vijay Kumar
Mishra v. High Court of Patna, (2016) 9 SCC 313 :
(2016) 2 SCC (L&S) 606] , this Court held that there
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                Page 40 of 55
is a distinction between selection and appointment. It
was held that a person, who is successful in the
selection process, does not acquire any right to be
appointed automatically. Such a person has no
indefeasible right of appointment.
22. It is, thus, well settled that merely because a person
has been selected, does not give that person an
indefeasible right of claiming appointment. As far as
the present cases are concerned, results have not been
declared and even the selection process is not
complete. As such, there is no manner of doubt that the
petitioners have no enforceable right to claim that the
result should be declared or that they should be
appointed if found meritorious." (emphasis supplied)
73.     In addition to these settled principles of law, the material on record
also weighs heavily against the Petitioners. The instructions for candidates
published in PSL dated 31.05.2021 also stated that “Candidates whose
names appear in Provisional Select List are NOT (R) NOT guaranteed
enrolment.” The fact that no right was created in favor of individuals
selected in the provisional list is also borne out from the fact that the
provisional list states at the very beginning that the said Provisional Select
List was valid only up to 30.11.2021. Pertinently, the advertisement dated
21.12.2019, published for the recruitment to the Air Force also stated that
“the terms and conditions given in the advertisement are guidelines only
and orders issued by the Government as amended from time to time will
apply for the selected candidates.” These caveats weigh heavily against the
claim of the Petitioners to indicate that the Petitioners cannot claim to have
an enforceable right to gain employment [(Refer to: M. Ramesh (supra); Jai
Singh Dalal (supra)]. Further, there exists a distinction between selection
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                Page 41 of 55
and appointment. Simply because an individual was successful in the
selection process, it does not mean that they have acquired a right to be
appointed. There exists no indefeasible right of appointment in favour of
such an individual (Refer to: Vijay Kumar Mishra v. High Court of Patna,
(2016) 9 SCC 313; State of M.P. v. Raghuveer Singh Yadav, (supra).
74.     There is another irreconcilable factor weighing against the Petitioners:
public interest. As has already been stated, a recruitment process can be
changed by the State midway, if the same is in public interest. The Agnipath
Scheme seems to adequately pass this test as well. The stated objective of
the scheme is to reduce the age of the Armed Forces; this will make the
forces leaner, agile and will be greatly beneficial for border security. It has
also been stated that the Impugned Scheme, by reducing the average age of
soldiers, will bring our Armed Forces at par with other nations, as the
average age of Armed Forces across the world is 26 years. The stated
objective of the Impugned Scheme is to have a blend of young Jawans,
Sailors or Airmen between the age of 18-25 years as Agniveers, supervised
by an experienced regular cadre having the age of 26 years. To achieve this
goal, the State has also been consistently decreasing the age bracket of
officers. As dealt with in the first part of this judgment, such stated
objectives of the Government cannot be said to be arbitrary, whimsical or
mala fide; they serve a definite public interest.
75.     This Court will now adjudge whether the principle of promissory
estoppel is applicable to this case. Like the doctrine of legitimate
expectation, promissory estoppel too is simply a shield and not a sword. In
Motilal Padampat Sugar Mills Co. Ltd., (supra) it was held that even if
larger public interest is in favour of the changed policy, it would not be
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                             Page 42 of 55
enough for the Government to state that public interest would suffer if the
Government were required to honour its obligation. Recently, the Supreme
Court in Union of India v. Unicorn Industries, (2019) 10 SCC 575, was
confronted with whether the Union of India be estopped from withdrawing
the exemption from payment of excise duty in respect of certain products,
due to the principle of promissory estoppel. After referring to multiple
judgments, and tracing the evoluation of the principle of promissory
estoppel, the Apex Court observed that Courts must not bind the
Government to policy decisions for all times to come, irrespective of how
such policy decisions may affect public interest. In this regard, the following
“15. It could thus be seen that, this Court has
clearly held that the doctrine of promissory
estoppel cannot be invoked in the abstract and
the courts are bound to see all aspects including
the objective to be achieved and the public good
at large. It has been held that while considering
the applicability of the doctrine, the courts have to
do equity and the fundamental principle of equity
must forever be present in the mind of the Court
while considering the applicability of the doctrine.
It has been held that the doctrine of promissory
estoppel must yield when the equity so demands
and when it can be shown having regard to the
facts and circumstances of the case, that it would
be inequitable to hold the Government or the
public authority to its promise, assurance or
representation. After considering the earlier
judgments on the issue, which have been heavily
relied upon by the assessees, this Court has
observed thus: (Kasinka Trading case [Kasinka
Trading v. Union of India, (1995) 1 SCC 274] ,
SCC pp. 287-88, para 21)
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                              Page 43 of 55
“21. The power to grant exemption from
payment of duty, additional duty, etc. under the
Act, as already noticed, flows from the provisions
of Section 25(1) of the Act. The power to exempt
includes the power to modify or withdraw the
same. The liability to pay customs duty or
additional duty under the Act arises when the
taxable event occurs. They are then subject to the
payment of duty as prevalent on the date of the
entry of the goods. An exemption notification
issued under Section 25 of the Act had the effect
of suspending the collection of customs duty. It
does not make items which are subject to levy of
customs duty, etc. as items not leviable to such
duty. It only suspends the levy and collection of
customs duty, etc., wholly or partially and subject
to such conditions as may be laid down in the
notification by the Government in “public
interest”. Such an exemption by its very nature is
susceptible of being revoked or modified or
subjected to other conditions. The supersession or
revocation of an exemption notification in the
“public interest” is an exercise of the statutory
power of the State under the law itself as is
obvious from the language of Section 25 of the
Act. Under the General Clauses Act an authority
which has the power to issue a notification has the
undoubted power to rescind or modify the
notification in a like manner.”(emphasis supplied)
18. It has been observed, that the withdrawal of
exemption in public interest is a matter of policy
and the courts would not bind the Government to
its policy decisions for all times to come,
irrespective of the satisfaction of the Government
that a change in the policy was necessary in the
public interest. It has been held that, where the
Government acts in public interest and neither
any fraud or lack of bona fides is alleged much
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                            Page 44 of 55
less established, it would not be appropriate for
this Court to interfere with the same. Ultimately,
this Court came to the conclusion that the
withdrawal of the exemption was in the public
interest and, therefore, refused to interfere with
the order of the Delhi High Court dismissing the
petitions.
23. Another three-Judge Bench of this Court
in Mahaveer            Oil    Industries [State    of
Rajasthan v. Mahaveer Oil Industries, (1999) 4
SCC 357] has taken a similar view. In Shree
Ltd. v. State of U.P., (2011) 3 SCC 193] , this
Court was considering the question with regard
to validity of the notification which withdrew
33.33% of the hill development rebate, on the
total amount of electricity bill, granted under the
earlier       notification.    This    Court    while
considering the similar challenge observed thus:
(Shree Sidhbali Steels Ltd. case [Shree Sidhbali
Steels Ltd. v. State of U.P., (2011) 3 SCC 193] ,
“33. Normally, the doctrine of promissory
estoppel is being applied against the Government
and defence based on executive necessity would
not be accepted by the court. However, if it can
be shown by the Government that having regard
to the facts as they have subsequently transpired,
it would be inequitable to hold the Government
to the promise made by it, the court would not
raise an equity in favour of the promisee and
enforce          the      promise      against    the
Government. Where public interest warrants, the
principles of promissory estoppel cannot be
invoked.The Government can change the policy
in public interest. However, it is well settled that
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                              Page 45 of 55
taking cue from this doctrine, the authority cannot
be compelled to do something which is not
76.     The law regarding promissory estoppel has also been summarised in
Kasinka Trading v. Union of India, (1995) 1 SCC 274, in the following
“12. In our opinion, the doctrine of promissory
estoppel cannot be invoked in the abstract and the
courts are bound to consider all aspects including the
results sought to be achieved and the public good at
large, because while considering the applicability of
the doctrine, the courts have to do equity and the
fundamental principles of equity must for ever be
present to the mind of the court, while considering
the applicability of the doctrine. The doctrine must
yield when the equity so demands if it can be shown
having regard to the facts and circumstances of the
case that it would be inequitable to hold the
Government or the public authority to its promise,
assurance or representation.
13. The ambit, scope and amplitude of the doctrine of
promissory estoppel has been evolved in this country
over the last quarter of a century through successive
decisions of this Court starting with Union of
India v. Indo-Afghan Agencies Ltd. [(1968) 2 SCR 366
:AIR 1968 SC 718] Reference in this connection may
be made with advantage to Century Spg. & Mfg. Co.
Ltd. v. Ulhasnagar Municipal Council [(1970) 1 SCC
Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of U.P. [(1979) 2 SCC 409 :
Shiv Kumar v. State of Haryana [(1981) 1 SCC 11 :
(1980) 3 SCR 689] ; Union of India v. Godfrey Philips
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                             Page 46 of 55
; Indian Express Newspapers (Bom) (P) Ltd. v. Union
of India [(1985) 1 SCC 641 : 1985 SCC (Tax) 121]
; Pournami Oil Mills v. State of Kerala [1986 Supp
Industries v. State of Gujarat [(1987) 1 SCC 31 : 1987
CCT v. Dharmendra Trading Co. [(1988) 3 SCC 570 :
Ltd. v. State of Punjab [(1992) 2 SCC 411] and Union
of India v. Hindustan Development Corpn. [(1993) 3
Ltd. [(1985) 4 SCC 369 : 1986 SCC (Tax) 11] this
Court opined: (SCC p. 388, para 13)
“We may also point out that the doctrine of
promissory estoppel being an equitable doctrine, it
must yield when the equity so requires; if it can be
shown by the Government or public authority that
having regard to the facts as they have transpired, it
would be inequitable to hold the Government or public
authority to the promise or representation made by it,
the Court would not raise an equity in favour of the
person to whom the promise or representation is made
and enforce the promise or representation against the
Government or public authority. The doctrine of
promissory estoppel would be displaced in such a case,
because on the facts, equity would not require that the
Government or public authority should be held bound
by the promise or representation made by it.”
14. In Excise             Commissioner,       U.P. v. Ram
1976 SC 2237] four learned Judges of this Court
observed: (SCC p. 545, para 19)
“The fact that sales of country liquor had been
exempted from sales tax vide Notification No. ST-
1149/X-802 (33)-51 dated 6-4-1959 could not operate
as an estoppel against the State Government and
preclude it from subjecting the sales to tax if it felt
impelled to do so in the interest of the revenues of the
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                Page 47 of 55
State which are required for execution of the plans
designed to meet the ever-increasing pressing needs of
the developing society. It is now well settled by a
catena of decisions that there can be no question of
estoppel against the Government in the exercise of its
legislative, sovereign or executive powers.”
23. The appellants appear to be under the impression
that even if, in the altered market conditions the
continuance of the exemption may not have been
justified, yet, Government was bound to continue it to
give extra profit to them. That certainly was not the
object with which the notification had been issued. The
withdrawal of exemption “in public interest” is a
matter of policy and the courts would not bind the
Government to its policy decisions for all times to
come, irrespective of the satisfaction of the
Government that a change in the policy was
necessary in the “public interest”. The courts, do not
interfere with the fiscal policy where the Government
acts in “public interest” and neither any fraud or lack
of bona fides is alleged much less established. The
Government has to be left free to determine the
priorities in the matter of utilisation of finances and
to act in the public interest while issuing or modifying
or withdrawing an exemption notification under
Section 25(1) of the Act.”            (emphasis supplied)
77.     Hence, it emerges that this Court cannot bind the Government to its
policy decision, if the same is changed due to overarching concerns of
public interest. Furthermore, Courts are less likely to interfere when such
concerns of public interest intersect with matters concerning national
security (Refer to: Centre for Public Interest Litigation v. Union of India,
(2016) 6 SCC 408; Indian Rly. Construction Co. Ltd. v. Ajay Kumar,
(2003) 4 SCC 579; Lt. Col. P.K. Choudhary v. Union of India and Others,
2020 SCC OnLine Del 915; Axiscades Aerospace and Technologies Pvt.
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                Page 48 of 55
Ltd. v. Union of India &Ors., 2018 SCC OnLine Del 9320; ESAB India
Limited v. Special Diriector of Enforcement & Anr., 2011 SCC OnLine Del
78.     The Petitioners have claimed that they have let go of other
opportunities while awaiting the recruitment process to resume. It is their
contention that due to this, they suffered on account of the sudden change in
policy initiated by the Government. Hence, they claim that the Government
being bound by the principle of promissory estoppel will have to bring the
recruitment process to its logical conclusion. This argument also does not
find favour with this Court, firstly, as there was no vested right in claiming
appointment even after a selected list has been declared, and secondly on
account of the larger public interest weighing strongly in favour of the
Agnipath Scheme. This Court has already analysed other aspects of the
Impugned Scheme in detail in the first part of this judgment, and reached the
unequivocal conclusion that the Impugned Scheme is not arbitrary,
capricious or devoid of reason. On the contrary, it squarely falls within the
ambit of „public interest‟. As emerges from the various cases reproduced
above, Courts have not evoked the principle of promissory estoppel when
faced with a change of policy necessitated by public interest. The
Government in this case cannot be held to be bound by the recruitment
process initiated by it. Further, as dealt with already, the Petitioners, who are
at various stages of the recruitment process, have no vested right to claim
such recruitment.
79.     The contention of the learned Counsel for the Petitioners that the
persons who have been appointed in Navy have been given preferential
treatment via-a-vis the recruitment of Soldiers and Airmen in the Army and
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                               Page 49 of 55
the Air Force respectively also cuts no ice. A perusal of the material, as
submitted by the learned ASG, shows that due to COVID-19 Pandemic,
there was no recruitment in the Indian Air Force and, therefore, 02/2020
Batch was declared as a Batch holiday. The learned ASG has also submitted
that before the onset of COVID-19 and the ensuing lockdown, the written
examination of the candidates of 02/2020 Batch had been completed and the
merit list had been prepared and all the candidates of 02/2020 Batch were
treated as 01/2021 Batch. It has also been submitted by the learned ASG that
the recruitment of Sailors, which is the entry level appointment in the Indian
Navy, is much lesser as compared to the Indian Army and the Indian Air
Force. It has been submitted by the learned ASG that the total strength of
Sailors in Indian Navy is approximately 60,000 and due to COVID-19
Pandemic, the Indian Navy has a manpower shortage of approximately
12,500 Sailors. The learned ASG has further submitted that there was a
short-fall of 16.5% Sailors in the Indian Navy in 2020 due to delay in
recruitment process and not recruiting Sailors in the Indian Navy would only
make the situation worse. Resultantly, the Indian Navy had to, in national
interest, continue its recruitment process. In view of the reasons given by the
learned ASG, this Court does not find any force in the contention of the Ld.
Counsel for the Petitioners that if the Indian Navy could continue
recruitment, so could the Indian Army and the Indian Air Force.
80.     The contention of the learned Counsel for the Petitioners that the
Petitioners who took part in the regular recruitment process should be placed
at par with individuals who were recruited through rallies also does not hold
water. Rally recruitment was conducted for both, the Indian Army and the
Indian Air Force, under different circumstances, and on differing scales.
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                             Page 50 of 55
81.     With respect to the Indian Army, the rally recruitment was undertaken
to increase intake of the people from tribal and hilly areas in the Armed
Forces so as to maintain a demographic balance, rallies were conducted at
various locations in the country to recruit young people in the Armed
Forces. A chart detailing the recruitment rallies conducted by the Army
Recruiting Offices (AROs) has been submitted by the Ld. ASG which
shows that the recruitment rallies during the COVID-19 Pandemic were
conducted in ARO Ludhiana at Khanna from 07.12.2020 to 22.12.2020; in
ARO Lansdowne at Kotdwar from 20.12.2020 to 02.01.2021; in ARO
Silchar at Agartala from 12.01.2021 to 20.01.2021 and in ARO Siliguri at
Sevoke Road Mil Station from 13.01.2021 to 21.01.2021. The said chart
further shows that out of 47 rallies that were to be conducted only four
rallies could be conducted between December 2020 & January 2021 as
compared to about 80 rallies which were conducted throughout the year in
pre-pandemic. As explained by the Ld. ASG, the method of recruitment of
soldiers by way of written examination and the method of recruitment of
soldiers by way of rallies are different and the time taken in both the
processes is also different; while the rallies are a fast-track method of
recruitment, the regular mode of recruitment was multi-pronged, and took
longer, especially during the pandemic. By the time the normal recruitment
process in the Army was concluded, the Government had already taken the
policy decision to bring in the new Agnipath Scheme.
82.     Hence, due to these marked differences in rally recruitment and the
erstwhile method of recruitment, the contention of the Petitioners that the
normal method of recruitment through examinations must be concluded,
does not hold any water. In any event, it cannot be said that the Government
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                            Page 51 of 55
ought not to have recruited any candidate, other than through CEE, as the
same would result in massive shortage of soldiers in the Indian Army.
Article 14 cannot be invoked to state that soldiers must have been recruited
by both the processes, i.e. by CEE and by conducting rallies, and appointing
soldiers through only one of the source is violative of Article 14 of the
Constitution of India.
83.     Similarly, for the Indian Air Force too, due to delay in recruitment
through examination mode, i.e. STAR, rallies were conducted at various
places in the country to cater to the intake of Air Force. The rallies for
recruitment in the Air Force were conducted between January and February,
2020 and from September to December, 2020.
84.     The recruitment process to conduct STAR has been explained in a
chart, which reads as under:
Publication         of   21 Dec 2019      ----   Planned for Jan 2021 course with
Advertisement      for                           3770 enrolment vacancies
Registration       for 02 Jan to 20 Jan 444888   Written exam planned to be
STAR 01/2020 for              20                 conducted in 260 centres across 75
intake 01/2021                                   cities.
Planned to conduct       19 Mar to 23      --    STAR 01/2020 for intake 01/2021
STAR 01/2020 to             Mar 20               could not be conducted in Mar 2020
Intake to 01/2021                                due to outbreak of Covid-19 and
postponed to Aug 2020
Planned to conduct       22 Aug to 26      --    STAR 01/2020 for intake 01/2021
STAR 01/2020 to             Aug 20               could not be conducted in Aug 2020
Intake to 01/2021                                due to restrictions imposed on large
Planned to conduct         Sep 2020        --    With the prolonged uncertainty wrt
STAR 02/2020                                     lockdown restrictions and remote
possibility of conducting all India
Shifting of STAR          09 Oct 20        --    A Corrigendum to Advertisement
01/2020 from Intake     (Corrigendum)            published on 21 Dec 2019 was
01/20212 to Intake                               issued stating the new Schedule for
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                        Page 52 of 55
02/2021                                          STAR 01/2020 Phase-I exam &
Enrolment         was     23 Jul 21        --    Following GOI instructions
85.     From a perusal of the above chart, it appears that by the time the
results were published on 31.05.2021, the Agnipath Scheme was already in
horizon. Akin to the Indian Army, by this time the rally recruitment which is
a shorter method meant to maintain the demographic balance had already
been concluded. Hence, much like the Indian Army too, the Petitioners
cannot claim appointment simply because their counter parts have been
recruited by way of rallies. Further, it is apposite to state that no one
prevented the Petitioners from participating in the rallies and gaining
employment in either the Indian Army or the Air Force.
86.     The Petitioners, during the course of hearing, also sought to argue that
the stated objective of maintaining demographic balance in the Armed
Forces through the rallies is misconceived since such rallies were also
conducted in Delhi and Bhopal. This argument too does not find favour with
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                                        Page 53 of 55
this Court as we cannot take a myopic view of the objective sought to be
achieved by the rally recruitment. During the pandemic, we were confronted
with unprecedented and uncertain times. Such unprecedented times
warranted that certain decisions be taken in public interest to ensure that the
Armed Forces could function optimally. It is in such public interest that a
handful of rallies were conducted in cities. This by itself does not mean that
the purpose of rallies, which is to maintain demographic balance, was
abandoned by the Government. This Court does not find any fault with this
decision of the Government, which was carried out in good faith, and in
larger public interest.
87.     We have gone through the genesis of the two principles of equity, and
the jurisprudence governing their applicability. We have also had the
occasion to go through certain cases, with similar facts; wherein a
recruitment process was halted midway. It emerges that firstly, the
Petitioners have no vested right to seek such recruitment, and secondly, that
promissory estoppel and legitimate expectation find themselves severely
restricted by the overarching concerns of public interest.
88.     We have extensively gone through the Agnipath Scheme, and can
conclusively state that this Scheme was made in national interest, to ensure
that the Armed Forces are better equipped. Due to this, this Court finds that
the Petitioners have no vested right to claim that the recruitment under the
2019 Notification and CEE Examination needs to be completed.
Furthermore, both promissory estoppel and legitimate expectation cannot be
applied in the instant case to force the Government to complete the
recruitment keeping in mind larger public interest.
89.     In light of this, all the Writ Petitions stand dismissed, along with the
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                               Page 54 of 55
pending application(s), if any.
SINGH KIRMOLIYA            W.P.(C) 11011/2022 etc.                                          Page 55 of 55