Counsel for Petitioner :- Vijay Tripathi
Counsel for Respondent :- Ashish Mishra,Rahul Agarwal
1.      Heard Sri Vijay Tripathi, learned counsel for the petitioner and Sri
Rahul Agarwal, learned counsel for the High Court-respondents.
2.      The petitioner has prayed for the following reliefs:
"I. issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of certiorari quashing the
impugned rejection order dated 22/10/2021 (Annexure No.1 to this writ
II. issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus commanding
and directing the respondents to allow the petitioner to participate in
selection process of U.P. Higher Judiciary Services, 2020.
III. to issue any other writ, order or direction which this Hon'ble court may
deem fit and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case."
3.      The facts in nutshell for our purpose are that the petitioner applied for
being appointed as a Judicial Officer in the U.P. State Higher Judicial
Services, the clinching aspect which is under challenge is that the High
Court after the petitioner had cleared the preliminary exam, she was not
permitted to appear for final exams, on the ground that on interpretation of
the rules and placing reliance on the judgment of the Apex Court in Deepak
Aggrawal v. Keshav Kaushik and others, (2013) 5 SCC 277 the
committee found that the petitioner does not have continuous practice for
seven years on date of exam/filling form. The High Court on its
administrative side conveyed to the petitioner that she was not qualified as
per rules.
3.     Shri Jitendra Kumar holding brief of the counsel appearing on behalf
of petitioner has contended that the petitioner has passed preliminary exams
and is practicing as a public prosecutor since 2019. Learned counsel for
petitioner also places reliance on the judgment of the Apex Court in Deepak
4.     At this juncture, it would be relevant for us to verbatim refer to
paragraphs no.101 and 102, of decision titled Deepak Aggawal (Supra)
which we verbatim reproduce as under:
"101. The Division Bench has in respect of all the five private appellants –
Assistant District Attorney, Public Prosecutor and Deputy Advocate General
– recorded undisputed factual position that they were appearing on behalf of
their respective States primarily in criminal/civil cases and their
appointments were basically under the C.P.C. or Cr.P.C. That means their
job has been to conduct cases on behalf of the State Government/C.B.I. in
courts. Each one of them continued to be enrolled with the respective State
Bar Council. In view of this factual position and the legal position that we
have discussed above, can it be said that these appellants were ineligible for
appointment to the office of Additional District and Sessions Judge? Our
answer is in the negative. The Division Bench committed two fundamental
errors, first, the Division Bench erred in holding that since these appellants
were in full-time employment of the State Government/Central Government,
they ceased to be ‘advocate’ under the 1961 Act and the BCI Rules, and
second, that being a member of service, the first essential requirement under
Article 233(2) of the Constitution that such person should not be in any
service under the Union or the State was attracted. In our view, none of the
five private appellants, on their appointment as Assistant District
Attorney/Public Prosecutor/Deputy Advocate General, ceased to be
‘advocate’ and since each one of them continued to be ‘advocate’, they
cannot be considered to be in the service of the Union or the State within the
meaning of Article 233(2). The view of the Division Bench is clearly
erroneous and cannot be sustained.
102. As regards construction of the expression, “if he has been for not less
than seven years an advocate” in Article 233(2) of the Constitution, we
think Mr. Prashant Bhushan was right in his submission that this expression
means seven years as an advocate immediately preceding the application
and not seven years any time in the past. This is clear by use of ‘has been’.
The present perfect continuous tense is used for a position which began at
some time in the past and is still continuing. Therefore, one of the essential
requirements articulated by the above expression in Article 233(2) is that
such person must with requisite period be continuing as an advocate on the
5.     While perusing the grounds of challenge, it is clear from the factual
data that petitioner cannot seek appointment as Judicial Officer/District
Judge in this calendar year as the petitioner does not fulfill the criteria fixed
as per provisions of Articles 233, 234 and 236 of the Constitution of India
and the rules for. The question is whether the break in practice of the
petitioner can be condoned? The decision in Deepak Aggarwal (supra) will
not help the petitioner as in our case the Rules categorically mention and has
been interpreted to mean seven years in Satish Kumar Sharma v. Bar
Counsel of HP, (2001) 2 SCC 365 will have to be looked into. In our case,
the petitioner herein from a period of 2017 to 2019 was employed and so
there is brake in a legal practice. The Rules framed have to be construed so
as to see that the purpose of the legislation is not withered down.
6.     The term used "has been" is interpreted to mean seven years and has
to be in present perfect continuous tense and not has been seven years during
any period. This interpretation will not permit us to entertain this petition
and grant the mandamus to permit the petitioner to appear in the exam.
7.      The recent decision of the Division Bench of this Court titled
Shashank Singh and others v. Hon'ble High Court of Judicature at
Allahabad and another, Writ-A No.27120 of 2018 decided on 3.12.2021 is
also pressed in service by Shri Rahul Agarwal, learned counsel for the High
Court-namely respondents where in it is held:
“The subject matter of the writ petition relates to the process of Direct
Recruitment to the U.P. Higher Judicial Services-2018 (Part II). The Allahabad
High Court issued a Notification dated 12.11.2018 inviting applications for direct
recruitment to the Uttar Pradesh High Judicial Service-2018 (Part-II);
For appreciating the arguments raised on behalf of the writ petitioners, it would
be appropriate to refer to Rule 5 of the U.P. Higher Judicial Service Rules 1975,
which is reproduced as under:-
"5. Sources of recruitment.- The recruitment to the Service shall be made-
a) by promotion from amongst the Civil Judges (Senior Division) on the basis of
Principle of merit-cum-seniority and passing a suitability test.
b) by promotion strictly on the basis of merit through limited competitive
examination of Civil Judges (Senior Division) having not less than five years
c) by direct recruitment from amongst the Advocates of not less than seven years
standing as on the last date fixed for the submission of application forms.
The U.P. Higher Judicial Service Rules, 1975 have been framed in exercise of
the power conferred by the Proviso to Article 309 read with Article 233 of the
Constitution of India.
The Article 233 of the Constitution of India has been recently interpreted by the
Hon'ble Apex Court in the Civil Appeal No.1698 of 2020 (Dheeraj Mor Vs.
Hon'ble High Court of Delhi) arising out of SLP (C) No.14156 of 2015 and other
connected matters vide decision dated February 19th, 2020 reported in 2020
SCC online SC 213. The Hon'ble Apex Court after considering all aspects of the
matter observed as under:-
"59. In view of the aforesaid interpretation of Article 233, we find that rules
debarring judicial officers from staking their claim as against the posts reserved
for direct recruitment from bar are not ultra vires as rules are subservient to the
provisions of the Constitution.
(i) The members in the judicial service of the State can be appointed as District
Judges by way of promotion or limited competitive examination.
(ii) The Governor of a State is the authority for the purpose of appointment,
promotion, posting and transfer, the eligibility is governed by the Rules framed
under Articles 234 and 235.
(iii) Under Article 232(2), an Advocate or a pleader with 7 years of practice can
be appointed as District Judge by way of direct recruitment in case he is not
already in the judicial service of the Union or a State.
(iv) For the purpose of Article 233(2), an Advocate has to be continuing in
practice for not less than 7 years as on the cut-off date and at the time of
appointment as District Judge. Members of judicial service having 7 years'
experience of practice before they have joined the service or having combined
experience of 7 years as lawyer and member of judiciary, are not eligible to apply
for direct recruitment as a District Judge.
(v) The rules framed by the High Court prohibiting judicial service officers from
staking claim to the post of District Judge against the posts reserved for
Advocates by way of direct recruitment, cannot be said to be ultra vires and are
in conformity with Articles 14, 16 and 233 of the Constitution of India.
(vi) The decision in Vijay Kumar Mishra (supra) providing eligibility, of judicial
officer to compete as against the post of District Judge by way of direct
recruitment, cannot be said to be laying down the law correctly. The same is
hereby overruled.
61. In the case of Dheeraj Mor and others cases, time to time interim orders
have been passed by this Court, and incumbents in judicial service were
permitted to appear in the examination. Though later on, this Court vacated the
said interim orders, by that time certain appointments had been made in some of
the States and in some of the States results have been withheld by the High
Court owing to complication which has arisen due to participation of the ineligible
in-service candidates as against the post reserved for the practising advocates.
In the cases where such in-service incumbents have been appointed by way of
direct recruitment from bar as we find no merit in the petitions and due to
dismissal of the writ petitions filed by the judicial officers, as sequel no fruits can
be ripened on the basis of selection without eligibility, they cannot continue as
They have to be reverted to their original post. In case their right in channel for
promotion had already been ripened, and their juniors have been promoted, the
High Court has to consider their promotion in accordance with prevailing rules.
However, they cannot claim any right on the basis of such an appointment
obtained under interim order, which was subject to the outcome of the writ
petition and they have to be reverted.”
8.      In case on hand, the petitioner ceased to be an Advocate under the
Advocates Act, 1961 in August 2017 when she got selected as EXAMINER
OF TRADE MARK & G.I. It is submitted by learned counsel at that time
she surrendered her practicing licence. Thereafter in the year 2019, she was
selected as Public Prosecutor in CBI where she is still working. The
petitioner is a Public Prosecutor at present but as Public Prosecutor, she has
not put in continuous service of 7 years.
9.      Hence, Deepak Aggarwal (supra) cannot be made applicable to this
case. Paragraph 102 of the said decision which has been quoted above will
not permit us to grant writ of mandamus for permitting the petitioner in the
exam, as she is not qualified practicing period just when she applied in
pursuance to the advertisement issued by the present respondents.
10.     In view of these facts, this petition fails and is dismissed.
11.     We are thankful to both the learned counsels for the parties for ably
assisting us.