This Writ Petition was filed for the issue of Writ of Mandamus directing the
respondents to provide protection to the petitioner and others who visit the Temple to
offer their worship.
2.This Court Suo moto impleads the 8th respondent in this Writ Petition.
W.P.No.37524 of 2015
3.This Writ Petition was filed in the year 2015 and ultimately it came up for
final hearing on 23.08.2022. This Court directed the learned Additional Government
Pleader to take instructions on the present status of the atmosphere that is prevailing
in the village with respect to the subject temple.
4.The matter was again taken up for final hearing today. The learned
Additional Government Pleader produced the written instructions received from the
Tahsildar, Modakurichi, namely the fourth respondent in this Writ Petition. It is seen
from the report that there has been repeated clashes between the parties whenever an
attempt was made to conduct any function or festival in the temple. It is seen that
peace committee meetings were called during various occasions and there seems to
be no agreement between the parties. In one such meeting, a decision was taken on
13.05.2022, by the fourth respondent after hearing both the parties and they were
requested to conduct the festival in a peaceful manner and the festival was slated to
be held between 09.06.2022 to 11.06.2022. Once again there was a clash between the
parties and hence, the Temple was locked on 11.06.2022 at about 8.10.P.M. in the
presence of the Tahsildar and Inspector of Police. Considering the gravity of the
situation, it was decided that the Temple will not be reopened till the situation
returns back to normalcy.
5.This Court heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and also the learned
counsel appearing on behalf of the sixth and seventh respondents. After hearing
them, this Court is not confident that the parties will be able to reach any settlement
and every time there is going to be a clash / disturbance and the Police and the
Revenue Authorities will be spending their energy and time in restoring peace.
6.A temple is a place which is reached out by God believers in search of peace.
It is believed to be a structure designed to bring human beings and Gods together
through worship, sacrifice and devotion. Unfortunately, in many cases, the Temple
itself becomes a cause for disturbance and law and order problem and as a result, the
whole purpose of a Temple is lost. This Court is flooded with Writ Petitions of this
nature and the Police and Revenue authorities are made to spend their time in
resolving the dispute between the parties. A Temple must create an environment to
subside the ego of a person and on the contrary it is becoming a breeding ground for
clash of ego between persons and God is pushed to the back seat. In such cases, the
best course of action will be to close down such Temples so that peace and normalcy
is restored in the locality. It is a paradox that closure of a Temple actually leads to
7.In the facts and circumstances of the given case, this Court is of the
considered opinion that the Assistant Commissioner of HR & CE must immediately
step in and appoint a fit person for the Temple. The administration of the Temple
must be handed over to the fit person and he will ensure that all are allowed inside
the Temple to make their prayers. This will sufficiently take care of the ego clash
between the parties and no one will feel superior than the other when the Temple is
under the control of the Executive Officer / Fit person. This process shall be
completed by the Assistant Commissioner of HR & CE within a period of ten days
from the date of receipt of copy of this order. The Temple shall be reopened only
after the appointment of the fit person and it shall be ensured that no one indulges in
act of violence resulting in a law and order problem and if any such incidents takes
place, the Superintendent of Police shall immediately take charge and action shall be
initiated against the concerned persons.
8.In the result, this Writ Petition is disposed of in the above terms. No costs.
Consequently, connected Writ Miscellaneous petition is closed.
Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowment,