.        The principal question that arises for consideration in this
petition is as to whether the impugned award passed by the
learned arbitrator is liable to be set aside on the ground that
disputes arising out of nine contracts were consolidated and
single statement of claim filed on behalf of the respondent
(original claimant) was entertained and allowed in favour of the
respondent. The petitioner claims that the learned arbitrator had
no power to consolidate disputes arising out of the nine contracts
and in the absence of such power to consolidate, particularly
Mamta Kale                                                      page 1 of 26
when the petitioner had not consented for such consolidation, the
impugned award is vitiated, being opposed to the fundamental
policy of Indian Law and therefore, liable to be set aside.
2.      The facts in brief leading to filing of the present petition are
that the petitioner had entered into nine contracts for purchasing
cotton bales from the respondent, which is a Government of
India undertaking engaged in the business of sale and purchase of
cotton as per the policies and directions of Government of India.
In the present case, nine contracts executed between the parties
pertained to supply of cotton bales from three branches of the
respondent – Corporation at Sirsa, Sriganganagar and Bhilwara.
The nine contracts pertained to the period between 24/1/2011 to
3.      It was the case of the respondent – Corporation before the
learned arbitrator that the petitioner was supposed to purchase
26449 cotton bales in terms of the contract. But, it lifted only
1300 cotton bales and failed to lift the remaining 25149 cotton
bales, thereby committing breach of the contracts executed
between the parties. The respondent – Corporation claimed that
the petitioner had failed to make payments and did not lift the
contracted cotton bales, giving rise to cause of action for the
respondent to proceed against the petitioner.
Mamta Kale                                                         page 2 of 26
4.      Each of the nine contracts contained an arbitration clause,
which specified that in case of disputes arising between the
parties, the same would be referred to an arbitrator, other than an
employee of the respondent-Corporation, to be appointed by the
Director (Marketing) or a Director (Finance) of the respondent-
5.      In the light of the allegations of the respondent-
Corporation that the petitioner had committed breach of the
aforesaid contracts, the parties exchanged communications and
after issuing notice to the petitioner invoking arbitration, the
Director    of    the   respondent-Corporation,      on   9/12/2011,
appointed a retired Judge of this Court as the sole arbitrator for
resolution of disputes between the parties. Since the appointment
of the arbitrator and initiation of arbitral proceedings was prior to
coming into force of the amendments of the year 2015 in the said
Act, the aspect of unilateral appointment of the arbitrator is not
relevant for the present case.
6.      There is no dispute about the fact that the respondent filed
a single claim pertaining to the disputes that arose from all the
nine contracts executed between the parties. The respondent
claims that the terms of the contract, the format thereto and the
mutual obligations recorded therein were identical in all the nine
contracts. It is submitted that only facts and figures pertaining to
Mamta Kale                                                      page 3 of 26
each contract differed, but otherwise there was no distinction
between the nine contracts.
7.      The petitioner filed its written statement / statement of
defence before the learned arbitrator. Apart from contesting the
claims made by the respondent on merits, the petitioner did raise
an objection to consolidation of claims raised under the nine
contracts. As a consequence of the said objection raised on behalf
of the petitioner, the learned arbitrator framed a specific issue
concerning the same. It is relevant that the petitioner filed its
counter claim and the same was also a single counter claim in
respect of the reliefs claimed by the petitioner in respect of all the
nine contracts. The learned arbitrator framed as many as 11
issues pertaining to the claim and the counter claim filed on
behalf of the rival parties.
8.      Issue No.2 pertained to the question as to whether the
reference was proper and legal in the light of nine distinct claims
arising out of nine distinct contracts being consolidated in one
single reference. The parties led evidence in support of their
respective stands.      After recording of evidence and hearing
arguments in the matter, the learned arbitrator by the impugned
award dated 24/7/2017, held in favour of the respondent. The
petitioner was directed to pay a sum of Rs.25,59,88,023/- to the
respondent. The petitioner was further directed to pay interest
Mamta Kale                                                      page 4 of 26
@13.5% per annum from 1/2/2012 till the date of the award on a
specific sum of Rs.24,34,495.15.       The petitioner was further
directed to pay interest @ 18% per annum from the date of award
till realization on the sum of Rs.24,34,495.15, apart from paying
cost of Rs.7,50,000/- to the respondent. The counter claim of the
petitioner was dismissed.
9.      Aggrieved by the impugned award, the petitioner filed the
instant petition. On 15/3/2021, the petition was admitted. This
Court was of the view that a prima facie case was made out by the
petitioner on the question as to whether the learned arbitrator
had the power to consolidate the disputes arising out of
independent and distinct contracts.
10.     Mr. Gaurav Joshi, learned Senior counsel appearing for the
petitioner submitted that the impugned award deserved to be set
aside on various grounds, but primarily on the ground that
distinct disputes arising from separate and independent contracts,
could not have been consolidated without consent of the
petitioner. It was submitted that the arbitrator had no power to
consolidate such independent and distinct disputes, thereby
demonstrating that the arbitral award was vitiated due to
erroneous exercise of jurisdiction on the part of the learned
11.      The learned Senior counsel submitted that under the nine
contracts the respondent-Corporation was supposed to supply
cotton bales from three branches located in Sirsa, Sriganganagar
and Bhilwara.      As a consequence, the causes of action were
separate and distinct, pertaining to each independent contract
and hence, the claims pertaining to each such dispute or cause of
action ought to have been separate and distinct. In the present
case, admittedly, the respondent filed one single claim while
seeking reliefs in the context of causes of action that allegedly
arose from the said nine separate and distinct contracts. One
single claim filed on behalf of the respondent-Corporation ought
not to have been entertained by the learned arbitrator. Since the
petitioner had raised a preliminary issue on the aforesaid aspect of
the matter, the learned arbitrator had framed a specific issue
regarding the same as issue No.2.       It was submitted that the
learned arbitrator rejected the contentions raised on behalf of the
petitioner on the said issue, by relying upon judgment of this
Court in the case of Jayant Industrial Packaging Ltd. Mangrol and
Ors. Vs. Saraswat Co-operative Bank Ltd. Mumbai and Anr.                    1
which was wholly irrelevant to the aforesaid issue.              It was
submitted that the said judgment does not deal with the question
of consolidation at all.
12.      The learned Senior counsel submitted that the learned
arbitrator erred in holding that no prejudice was caused to the
petitioner by consolidating such disputes, when the real question
raised on behalf of the petitioner was, as to whether the learned
arbitrator had power and jurisdiction at all to consolidate such
separate disputes arising from independent and distinct contracts.
It was submitted that merely because the petitioner had filed a
common counter claim, it could not have been a ground to reject
the fundamental issue raised on behalf of the petitioner that the
learned arbitrator had no jurisdiction to consolidate the separate
references pertaining to independent and distinct contracts. The
learned Senior counsel emphasized on the aspect that the
petitioner had never agreed for such course to be adopted. On
this aspect, the learned Senior counsel relied upon judgment of
the Supreme Court in the case of Duro Felguera, S.A. Vs.
13.       The learned Senior counsel submitted that prejudice was
certainly caused to the petitioner since separate and distinct
alleged acts of breach of contracts were not taken into
consideration by the learned arbitrator while holding in favour of
the respondent-Corporation. It was submitted that the petitioner
was prejudiced in leading evidence to repudiate the claims made
on behalf of the respondent. It was further submitted that the
learned arbitrator in this context did not appreciate that the
respondent-Corporation had no right to unilaterally extend the
contract and carry forward delivery period.
Mamta Kale                                                    page 7 of 26
14.     It was further submitted that the learned arbitrator erred in
relying upon letters that were not proved. It was sought to be
contended that the invocation of arbitration in the present case
was invalid. On this basis, the learned Senior counsel submitted
that the impugned award deserved to be set aside.
15.     On the other hand, Mr. Purohit, learned counsel appearing
for the respondent-Corporation submitted that the petitioner is
not justified in contending that the impugned award deserves to
be set aside on the ground that the learned arbitrator had no
jurisdiction to consolidate the disputes arising out of nine
contracts executed between the parties. It was submitted that the
material on record would show that separate contracts executed
between the parties pertained to supply of cotton bales, which the
petitioner had agreed to purchase. All the terms of contract were
identical, save and except the figures stated therein. On this basis,
the learned counsel appearing for the respondent-Corporation
submitted that when the respondent filed the statement of claim,
details of each separate claim arising out of each separate contract
were specifically stated. The petitioner was clearly aware about
the claims raised on behalf of the respondent-Corporation in the
context of each separate contract. The petitioner responded to
the same and the manner in which the evidence was appreciated
by the learned arbitrator demonstrated that each such transaction
Mamta Kale                                                      page 8 of 26
was taken into consideration separately and the claims made on
behalf of the respondent-Corporation were determined on the
basis of evidence and material on record.        Therefore, it was
submitted that although a single statement of claim was filed
before the learned arbitrator, it pertained to separate contracts
and the facts and figures therein clearly demonstrated the nature
of claims raised on behalf of the respondent – Corporation
pertaining to each such separate contract.
16.       The learned counsel further submitted that the reasoning
adopted by the learned arbitrator was sound and it was found that
even otherwise, the petitioner suffered no prejudice in the matter.
17.       As regards, the other grounds raised on behalf of the
petitioner, the learned counsel appearing for the respondent –
Corporation submitted that such grounds amounted to asking
this Court exercising jurisdiction under Section 34 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, to re-appreciate the
evidence and to enter into the merits of the award, which is
clearly prohibited as per the law laid down by the Supreme Court
in the case of SSangyong Engineering and Construction Co. Ltd.
Vs. National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) ,3 particularly
in the light of the amendment of Section 34 of the said Act by the
Amending Act of 2015. The learned counsel for the respondent-
Corporation specifically relied upon judgment in the case of P. R.
Mamta Kale                                                    page 9 of 26
Shah Shares and Stock Brokers Private Limited Vs. B. H. H.
Gulabi Devi & Ors.5 and Sanjay Suganchand Kasliwal Vs.
Jugalkishor Chhaganlal Tapadia6, in support of its contention as
regards the principal ground of challenge raised on behalf of the
18.       The learned counsel submitted that reliance placed on
behalf of the petitioner on the judgment of Supreme Court in the
case of Duro Felguera, S.A. Vs. Gangavaram Port Limited (supra)
was misplaced for the reason that the said case was clearly
distinguishable on facts from the present case. On this basis, the
learned counsel submitted that the present petition deserved to
be dismissed.
19.       Having heard the learned counsel for the rival parties,
before considering the principal ground of challenge and the
other grounds raised on behalf of the petitioner, this Court is of
the opinion that it would be appropriate to examine the scope
and extent of jurisdiction available to this Court while exercising
power under Section 34 of the said Act. The said provision
pertains to the grounds on which this Court can set aside an
arbitral award.
20.     It is necessary to note that by the Amending Act of 2015,
significant amendments were brought about in Section 34 of the
aforesaid Act. The said provision, post amendment, reads as
34. Application for setting aside arbitral award.—(1)
Recourse to a Court against an arbitral award may be
made only by an application for setting aside such
award in accordance with sub-section (2) and sub-
section (3).
(2) An arbitral award may be set aside by the Court
(a) the party making the application '[establishes on
the basis of the record of the arbitral tribunal that]-
(i) a party was under some incapacity; or
(ii) the arbitration agreement is not valid under the
law to which the parties have subjected it or, failing
any indication thereon, under the law for the time
(iii) the party making the application was not given
proper notice of the appointment of an arbitrator or of
the arbitral proceedings otherwise unable to present
his case; or or was otherwise unable to present his case
(iv) the arbitral award deals with a dispute not
Mamta Kale                                                        page 11 of 26
contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the
submission to arbitration, or it contains decisions on
matters beyond the scope of the submission to
Provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to
arbitration can be separated from those not so
submitted, only that part of the arbitral award which
contains decisions on matters not submitted to
arbitration may be aside; or
(v) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the
arbitral procedure was not in accordance with the
agreement of the parties, unless such agreement was in
conflict with a provision of this Part from which the
parties cannot derogate, or, failing such agreement,
was not in accordance with this Part; or
(i) the subject-matter of the dispute is not capable of
settlement by arbitration under the law for the time
(ii) the arbitral award is in conflict with the public
policy of India.
[Explanation 1.-For the avoidance of any doubt, it is
clarified that an award is in conflict with the public
policy of India, only if,-
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by
Mamta Kale                                                     page 12 of 26
fraud or corruption or was in violation of section 75
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of
morality or justice.
Explanation 2.-For the avoidance of doubt, the test as
to whether there is a contravention with the
fundamental policy of Indian law shall not entail a
review on the merits of the dispute.]
[(2-A) An arbitral award arising out of arbitrations
other than international commercial arbitrations, may
also be set aside by the Court, if the Court finds that
the award is vitiated by patent illegality appearing on
the face of the award:
Provided that an award shall not be set aside merely
on the ground of an erroneous application of the law
or by re-appreciation of evidence.]
(3) An application for setting aside may not be made
after three months have elapsed from the date on
which the party making that application had received
the arbitral award or, if a request had been made under
section 33, from the date on which that request had
been disposed of by the arbitral tribunal:
Provided that if the Court is satisfied that the
Mamta Kale                                                     page 13 of 26
applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from
making the application within the said period of three
months it may entertain the application within a
further period of thirty days, but not thereafter.
(4) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1),
the Court may, where it is appropriate and it is so
requested by a party, adjourn the proceedings for a
period of time determined by it in order to give the
arbitral tribunal an opportunity to resume the arbitral
proceedings or to take such other action as in the
opinion of arbitral tribunal will eliminate the grounds
for setting aside the arbitral award.
[(5) An application under this section shall be filed by
a party only after issuing a prior notice to the other
party and such application shall be accompanied by an
affidavit by the applicant endorsing compliance with
the said requirement.
(6) An application under this section shall be disposed
of expeditiously, and in any event, within a period of
one year from the date on which the notice referred to
in sub-section (5) is served upon other party.]
21.     In the case of SSangyong Engineering and Construction
Co. Ltd. Vs. National Highways Authority of India supra , the
Supreme Court specifically took into consideration the position
Mamta Kale                                                        page 14 of 26
of law prior to the amendment brought about in Section 34 of
the said Act in the year 2015, and the manner in which the scope
and jurisdiction of the Court under the said provision stood
narrowed down, post amendment. In fact, the Supreme Court in
the said judgment referred to the 246 th report of the Law
Commission, which suggested amendment to the aforesaid Act
particularly to Section 34 thereof.      The Supreme Court also
referred to the statement of objects and reasons of the Arbitration
and Conciliation (Amendment) Bill, 2015. It was found that the
Amendment Act of 2015 had to be enacted, interalia, for the
reason that interpretation of provisions of the said Act by the
Courts in some cases had resulted in delay in disposal of
arbitration proceedings and the interference of the Courts in
arbitration matters had the tendency of defeating the very object
of the Act. Thus, the amendment brought about in the year
2015, was for the purpose of diluting the effect of certain
judgments wherein liberal interpretation was given to certain
parts of Section 34 of the said Act. The Supreme Court analyzed
the same and deliberated upon the effect of amendment to
Section 34 of the said Act and the manner in which earlier
judgments were to be applied. It was held as follows:
34. What is clear, therefore, is that the expression
"public policy of India", whether contained in Section
34 or in Section 48, would now mean the
"fundamental policy of Indian law" as explained in
Mamta Kale                                                    page 15 of 26
paras 18 and 27 of Associate Builders i.e. the
fundamental policy of Indian law would be relegated
to "Renusagar" understanding of this expression. This
would necessarily mean that Western Geco expansion
has been done away with. In short, Western Geco, as
explained in paras 28 and 29 of Associate Builders
would no longer obtain, as under the guise of
interfering with an award on the ground that the
arbitrator has not adopted a judicial approach, the
Court's intervention would be on the merits of the
award, which cannot be permitted post amendment.
However, insofar as principles of natural justice are
concerned, as contained in Sections 18 and 34(2)(a)
(iii) of the 1996 Act, these continue to be grounds of
challenge of an award, as is contained in para 30 of
35. It is important to notice that the ground for
interference insofar as it concerns "interest of India"
has since been deleted, and therefore, no longer
obtains. Equally, the ground for interference on the
basis that the award is in conflict with justice or
morality is now to be understood as a conflict with the
"most basic notions of morality or justice". This again
would be in line with paras 36 to 39 of Associate
Builders, as it is only such arbitral awards that shock
Mamta Kale                                                     page 16 of 26
the conscience of the court that can be set aside on
this ground.
36. Thus, it is clear that public policy of India is now
constricted to mean firstly, that a domestic award is
contrary to the fundamental policy of Indian law, as
understood in paras 18 and 27 of Associate Builders,
or secondly, that such award is against basic notions of
justice or morality as understood in paras 36 to 39 of
Associate Builders, Explanation 2 to Section 34(2)(b)
(ii) and Explanation 2 to Section 48(2)(b)(ii) was
added by the Amendment Act only so that Western
Geco, as understood in Associate Builders, and paras
28 and 29 in particular, is now done away with.
37. Insofar as domestic awards made in India are
concerned, an additional ground is now available
under sub-section (2-A), added by the Amendment
Act, 2015, to Section 34. Here, there must be patent
illegality appearing on the face of the award, which
refers to such illegality as goes to the root of the matter
but which does not amount to mere erroneous
application of the law. In short, what is not subsumed
within "the fundamental policy of Indian law",
namely, the contravention of a statute not linked to
public policy or public interest, cannot be brought in
by the backdoor when it comes to setting aside an
Mamta Kale                                                         page 17 of 26
award on the ground of patent illegality.
38. Secondly, it is also made clear that reappreciation
of evidence, which is what an appellate court is
permitted to do, cannot be permitted under the
ground of patent illegality appearing on the face of the
award.
39. To elucidate, para 42.1 of Associate Builders,
namely, a mere contravention of the substantive law of
India, by itself, is no longer a ground available to set
aside an arbitral award. Para 42.2 of Associate
Builders, however, would remain, for if an arbitrator
gives no reasons for an award and contravenes Section
31(3) of the 1996 Act, that would certainly amount to
a patent illegality on the face of the award.
40. The change made in Section 28(3) by the
Amendment Act really follows what is stated in paras
42.3 to 45 in Associate Builders, namely, that the
construction of the terms of a contract is primarily for
an arbitrator to decide, unless the arbitrator construes
the contract in a manner that no fair-minded or
reasonable person would; in short, that the arbitrator's
view is not even a possible view to take. Also, if the
arbitrator wanders outside the contract and deals with
matters not allotted to him, he commits an error of
jurisdiction. This ground of challenge will now fall
Mamta Kale                                                      page 18 of 26
within the new ground added under Section 34(2-A).
41. What is important to note is that a decision which
is perverse, as understood in paras 31 and 32 of
Associate Builders, while no longer being a ground for
challenge under "public policy of India", would
certainly amount to a patent illegality appearing on
the face of the award. Thus, a finding based on no
evidence at all or an award which ignores vital
evidence in arriving at its decision would be perverse
and liable to be set aside on the ground of patent
illegality. Additionally, a finding based on documents
taken behind the back of the parties by the arbitrator
would also qualify as a decision based on no evidence
inasmuch as such decision is not based on evidence
led by the parties, and therefore, would also have to be
characterised as perverse.
22.     Hence, it becomes evident that arbitration awards cannot
be lightly interfered with, as the Court does not exercise appellate
jurisdiction. The Court is prohibited from re-appreciating the
evidence and the findings on merits in the arbitral award cannot
be gone into. The scope of interference is limited and unless the
specific grounds stated in the aforesaid provision are satisfied, the
Court in ordinary course cannot interfere with an arbitral award.
Mamta Kale                                                     page 19 of 26
23.     The principal contention raised on behalf of the petitioner
is that the award deserves interference as consolidation of
disputes arising from nine contracts, without the consent of the
petitioner, was entirely without jurisdiction and that therefore,
the learned arbitrator could not have proceeded with the matter.
It is submitted that such a specific objection was raised in the
statement of defence / written statement and a specific issue was
also framed. The sheet anchor of the contention raised on behalf
of the petitioner is the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case
of Duro Felguera, S.A. Vs. Gangavaram Port Limited supra.
According to the petitioner, disputes arising out of distinct
contracts pertaining to purchase of cotton bales from three
different locations of the respondent, could not have been made
subject matter of a single arbitral proceedings, particularly in the
absence of consent on the part of the petitioner for such course of
action. Therefore, it would be necessary to consider the law laid
down by the Supreme Court in the case of Duro Felguera, S.A.
Vs. Gangavaram Port Limited supra.
24.     In order to appreciate the same, it is necessary to first
consider the backdrop in which the said case was decided by the
Supreme Court and the nature of questions that arose for
consideration. A perusal of the said judgment shows that the first
question framed by the Supreme Court concerned the aspect as to
whether a memorandum of understanding executed between the
Mamta Kale                                                    page 20 of 26
parties covered split up contracts and whether a composite single
reference to an arbitral tribunal was justified, particularly in the
backdrop that it was an international commercial arbitration.
The second question that arose for consideration was as to
whether there ought to be multiple tribunals for each of the five
split up contracts awarded to a foreign company. It is in the
backdrop of the specific facts of the said case, which concerned
contracts that were entered into with a foreign company and
involved international commercial arbitration that the Supreme
Court found that a composite reference before a single arbitral
tribunal could not have been undertaken. It was specifically
found that since there were five separate contracts, which had
independent existence and also because one of the contracts was
with a foreign company requiring international commercial
arbitration, there could not be a single arbitral tribunal.
25.     It is to be understood that in the present case, the facts are
distinguishable, for the reason that the nine contracts in question
were executed between the same parties, consisting of identical
arbitration clauses and the only difference was with regard to the
actual figures of sale and purchase. The nature of dispute arising
from the nine contracts was identical and accordingly reference to
arbitration to the learned sole arbitrator was made in the context
of dispute arising from the nine contracts, essentially for the same
26.     The learned arbitrator found that in the statement of
claims, the respondent raised specific distinct claims pertaining to
the nine contracts, to which the respondent placed its defence on
record. It is significant that the witnesses for the respondent
(original claimant) deposed in respect of each separate distinct
contract and the extent of claim that arose from the dispute
pertaining to such separate contracts. This is particularly evident
from observations made by the learned arbitrator in the
impugned award wherein reference is made to charts graphically
setting out requisite details pertaining to the claims made on
behalf of the respondent about the amounts due, the interest
claimed thereon and the related charges as per each contract.
Such evidence was found to be creditworthy and it was not
disturbed in cross examination.
27.     Although it may not be a deciding factor, but the learned
arbitrator cannot be said to have erred in observing that the
petitioner had also raised a composite counter claim. The facts of
the present case do indicate that the ratio of the judgment of the
Supreme Court in the case Duro Felguera, S.A. Vs. Gangavaram
Port Limited supra, is not applicable.
28.     The Supreme Court in the case of P. R. Shah Shares and
Mamta Kale                                                    page 22 of 26
Limited (supra) considered a question as to whether single
arbitration could be undertaken in a manner that would not only
be convenient, but necessary for avoiding multiplicity of
proceedings and possibility of conflicting decisions. Although
the said observations were made in a different set of facts, they are
relevant for considering the specific contention raised on behalf
of the petitioner herein. The relevant portion of the aforesaid
judgment of the Supreme Court reads as follows:
19.    If A had a claim against B and C, and there was
an arbitration agreement between A and B but there
was no arbitration agreement between A and C, it
might not be possible to have a joint arbitration
against B and C. A cannot make a claim against C in
an arbitration against B, on the ground that the claim
was being made jointly against B and C, as C was not a
party to the arbitration agreement. But if A had a
claim against B and C and if A had an arbitration
agreement with B and A also had a separate arbitration
agreement with C, there is no reason why A cannot
have a joint arbitration against B and C. Obviously,
having an arbitration between A and B and another
arbitration between A and C in regard to the same
claim would lead to conflicting decisions. In such a
case, to deny the benefit of a single arbitration against
B and C on the ground that the arbitration agreements
Mamta Kale                                                      page 23 of 26
against B and C are different, would lead to
multiplicity of proceedings, conflicting decisions and
cause injustice. It would be proper and just to say that
when A has a claim jointly against B and C, and when
there are provisions for arbitration in respect of both B
and C, there can be a single arbitration.
29.     In this situation, it was sought to be contended on behalf of
the petitioner that since objection was specifically raised on
behalf of the petitioner, the same learned arbitrator ought to have
undertaken nine separate arbitral proceedings for the nine
contracts in question, particularly when consent of the petitioner
was a sine qua non for consolidating the arbitral proceedings
pertaining to all the nine contracts. This Court is of the opinion
that when specific claims pertaining to each of the nine contracts
were placed distinctly in the statement of claim filed on behalf of
the respondent, to which the petitioner had ample opportunity to
respond and the fact that the petitioner also chose to file a
consolidated counter claim pertaining to all the nine contracts, it
cannot be said that the learned arbitrator committed a
jurisdictional error in proceeding with the arbitration.
30.     It is in this context, that the question of prejudice does
become relevant. It was not even forcefully argued on behalf of
the petitioner that there was any prejudice caused to it, due to the
Mamta Kale                                                       page 24 of 26
manner in which the arbitral proceedings were undertaken by the
learned arbitrator. The emphasis was on the aspect that in the
absence of consent on the part of the petitioner, the learned
arbitrator could not have conducted the consolidated arbitral
proceedings pertaining to the dispute that arose, as regards all the
nine contracts.     This Court is not impressed with the said
contention, primarily for the reason that in the facts and
circumstances of the present case, distinct claims arising out of all
the nine separate contracts were set out by the respondent.
Evidence was specifically led in respect thereof, in the context of
which, the petitioner had ample opportunity to cross examine the
witnesses and to lead its own evidence. The counter claims were
also raised in a consolidated manner by the petitioner, thereby
indicating that it was in the interest of justice that the learned
arbitrator chose to proceed in the said manner. Therefore, the
principal contention raised on behalf of the petitioner is found to
be without any substance.
31.     As regards the other contentions raised on behalf of the
petitioner, that the respondent-Corporation had no right to
unilaterally extend the contract and carry forward delivery period
and that the learned arbitrator erred in relying upon letters that
were not proved, suffice it to say that these do not amount to any
substantial grounds for this Court to exercise limited jurisdiction
available under Section 34 of the said Act, to interfere with the
Mamta Kale                                                    page 25 of 26
impugned award.        In the light of the nature and scope of
jurisdiction now available after the amendment to the said Act in
the year 2015, and its effect considered and laid down by the
Supreme Court in the case of SSangyong Engineering and
Construction Co. Ltd. Vs. National Highways Authority of India
(NHAI) supra, quoted hereinabove, this Court is of the opinion
that sufficient grounds are not made out for interfering with the
impugned award, either under the head of the award being
opposed to public policy of India or it being patently illegal.
32.     The other grounds of challenge noted hereinabove
essentially pertain to appreciation of evidence and challenge to
the merits of the award, which this Court cannot go into as the
quantity and quality of evidence is within the domain of the
learned arbitrator and interpretation placed on terms of contract
is also within the domain of the learned arbitrator. Even if any
term is erroneously interpreted, it does not give rise to sufficient
ground to exercise jurisdiction under Section 34 of the said Act.
33.     In view of the above, this Court is of the opinion that no
ground for interference with the impugned award is made out.
34.     Accordingly, the petition is dismissed with no order as to
costs. Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.