Police Commissioner, Ahmedabad City, the application of the petitioner
for renewal of the arm license has been rejected in view of the
involvement in the criminal offence. The appeal filed against the
aforesaid order under the provisions of Section 18 of the Arms Act, 1959,
is also rejected.
4.      At the outset, learned advocate Mr.Bomi Sethna appearing for the
petitioner has submitted that there were four accused including the
present petitioner against whom the aforesaid offences were registered. It
is submitted that by the judgment and order dated 03.06.2017 passed by
the learned Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Ahmedabad in
Criminal Case No.700425 of 2012, the present petitioner along with four
accused have been acquitted in the criminal offence. He has invited the
attention of this Court to the order dated 08.07.2020 renewing the arm
license of one Vijay M. Goswami, who was also arraigned as an accused
no.4 along with the present petitioner. Thus, he has submitted that the
respondents cannot discriminate the present petitioner by considering his
application for renewal of arm license and denying the same in view of
the involvement in the criminal offence. It is submitted that since the
petitioner has been acquitted and the co-accused has been granted
renewal of the arm license, similar treatment should have been extended
to the petitioner.
5.      Per contra, learned AGP Mr.Hardik Mehta has submitted that the
impugned orders may not be interfered with since the petitioner has been
acquitted in view of the compromise arrived at between the parties before
the trial court.
6.      I have heard the learned advocates appearing for the respective
7.      It is not disputed that the petitioner along with other three persons
were arraigned as an accused for the criminal offence under the
provisions of Sections 323, 294B, 506(1) and 114 of the IPC, which
culminated into Criminal Case No.700425 of 2012. By the judgment and
order dated 03.06.2017, the Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate,
Court No.7, Ahmedabad acquitted all the accused including the present
petitioner. The application filed by the present petitioner for getting his
arm license renewal has been rejected by the Assistant Police
Commissioner, Ahmedabad City solely relying upon his involvement in
the criminal offence. The appeal filed by the petitioner is also rejected by
the Appellate Authority by the order dated 01.01.2021. The Appellate
Authority has considered the judgment of the trial court and has opined
that since acquittal of the petitioner has been premised on the
compromise entered between the parties, the petitioner is not entitled for
getting his renewal of arm license. It is not disputed that the co-accused
Vijay M. Goswami had also filed an application for renewal of arm
license and the same has been considered by the very same authority and
by the order dated 18.07.2020, the arm license of the co-accused Vijay M.
Goswami has been renewed, whereas, a contrary stand has been taken in
the case of the present petitioner and the application for renewal of arm
license has been rejected despite the acquittal.
8.      This Court is not expressing any opinion with regard to acquittal of
the petitioner, however, the petitioner is entitled to the same treatment,
which has been extended to the co-accused Vijay M. Goswami. The
petitioner, who has been arraigned as an accused no.2, and the accused
no.4-Vijay M. Goswami has been granted the renewal of the arm license,
whereas a discriminatory treatment has been meted out to the petitioner
for denying renewal of the arm license. It is pertinent to note that the
same authority, who has granted renewal of the arm license to the co-
accused Vijay M. Goswami, has rejected the case of the petitioner by
taking shelter of the criminal offence registered against the petitioner.
9.      In light of the aforesaid undisputed facts, the impugned order dated
orders dated 01.01.2021 passed by respondent no.2-Additional Secretary,
Home Department, Gandhinagar and the order dated 20.08.2019 passed
by respondent no.3-Assistant Police Commissioner, License Branch,
Ahmedabad City are quashed and set aside. The matter is remanded to the
respondent authority. The respondent no.3 shall pass necessary orders
with regard to renewal of the arm license of the petitioner and shall
specifically consider the order dated 18.07.2020 passed in case of Vijay
M. Goswami. Necessary orders shall be passed within a period of one
month from the date of receipt of the writ of this order.
10.     If any adverse order is passed, it will be open for the petitioner to
revive this petition by filing a simple note before the Registry of this