2. The appointment of the first respondent herein as a Member of the Maharashtra State
Board of Waqfs, by a notification dated 13.09.2019, was cancelled by a subsequent
notification dated 04.03.2022, but the said cancellation was set aside by the High Court
of Judicature at Bombay as arbitrary, in a writ petition filed by the first respondent, forcing
the State of Maharashtra to come up with the above appeal.
3. We have heard Mr. Sachin Patil, learned standing counsel for the State of
Maharashtra, Mr. Nishant R. Katneshwarkar, learned counsel appearing for the first
respondent and Mr. Siddharth Bhatnagar, learned senior counsel appearing for the
second respondent who has been appointed in the place of the first respondent.
4. The notification dated 13.09.2019 issued by the Minorities Development Department
of the State of Maharashtra appointing the first respondent as a Member of the
“…In exercise of the powers conferred by subsection (9) and clause (c) subsection (1) of section 14
of the Waqf Act, 1995 (43 of 1995), and in supersession of all earlier notifications issued in this
behalf in so far as they related to the nomination of a person amongst Muslims, who has professional
experience in town planning or business management, social work, finance or revenue, agriculture
and development activities, the Government of Maharashtra hereby appoints from the category of
“who has professional experience in town planning or business management, social work, finance
or revenue, agriculture and development activities”, Shri Mahemud Mahebub Shaikh as a Member
on the Maharashtra State Boards of Waqfs, having its headquarters at Panchakki, Aurangabad for
a period of five years from the date of publication of this notification or until further orders, whichever
is earlier…”
5. The relevant part of the notification dated 4.03.2020 issued by the State, cancelling
“…And whereas, the Government of Maharashtra considers it expedient to cancel the appointment
Now, therefore in exercise of the powers conferred by subsection (9) read with clause (c) of
subsection (1) of section 14 of the Waqf Act, 1995 (43 of 1995) and of all other powers enabling it
in that behalf, the Government of Maharashtra hereby cancels the appointment of Shri Mahemud
Mahebud Shaikh of the said Board…”
6. The High Court, by the order impugned in this appeal, set aside the cancellation of
appointment on the ground inter alia, (i) that Section 15 of the Waqf Act, 1995 prescribes
a fixed tenure of five years, which can be curtailed only if the member is disqualified in
terms of Section 16 or removed in terms of Section 20; (ii) that there is no place for the
doctrine of pleasure and such appointments cannot be cancelled at the whims and
fancies of the Government; (iii) that the reliance placed upon the State Government upon
Rule 15 of the Rules of Business in support of their contention that the appointment of
the respondent required the approval of the Chief Minister, but as a matter of fact such
approval was not obtained, cannot have any application to the case since the position of
the Member of the State Waqf Board cannot be equated to that of a statutory tribunal;
and (iv) that the cancellation of appointment of the first respondent was arbitrary,
warranting the interference of the High Court.
7. At the outset we should point out that the High Court was right in holding that the post
of Member of the Waqf Board cannot be equated to that of a Member of the Tribunal and
that Item No.23 under Rule 15 of the Rules of Business of the Maharashtra Government
issued in terms of Article 166 of the Constitution has no application to the case on hand.
8. But the findings of the High Court (i) that the term of office of a Member of the Board
stipulated under Section 15 of the Waqf Act cannot be curtailed except in the case of
disqualification under Section 16 or removal under Section 20; and (ii) that the
cancellation of appointment was arbitrary, are incapable of being upheld. The reasons
are not difficult to be deciphered. While Section 13 of the Act deals with the establishment
of a Board of Waqfs (now the nomenclature is changed as Board of ‘Auqaf’ under
Amendment Act 27 of 2013), Section 14 deals with the composition of the Board, election
of members and the manner of election of the Chairperson of the Board. Broadly, the
appointment of the Members of the Board shall be by two different methods namely, (i)
election from each of the electoral colleges as stipulated in clause (b) of subsection (1)
of Section 14; and (ii) nominations by the State Government in terms of clauses (c), (d)
and (e) of subsection (1) of Section 14.
9. It is relevant to point out that the appointment of the first respondent was by the method
of nomination by the State Government in terms of clause (c) of subsection (1) of Section
14. The appointment under both categories (election or nomination) should be by a
notification issued by the State Government and published in the official Gazette. This is
by virtue of subsection (9) of Section 14. Subsection (9) of Section 14 reads as follows:
(9) The members of the Board shall be appointed by the State Government by notification in the
10. It is true that Section 15 prescribes a term of office of five years for the members of
the Board, from the date of the notification issued under Section 14(9). This Section 15
“15. Term of office. —The members of the Board shall hold office for a term of five years from the
date of notification referred to in subsection 9 of section 14.”
11. Though Section 14(9) is common to the appointment under both categories and
though Section 15 speaks about the term of office of members appointed by a notification
under Section 14(9), nomination always stands on a slightly different footing than
election. Perhaps, as per the scheme of the Act, it may not be possible for the State
Government to breach the process of election from each of the electoral colleges under
clause (b) of subsection (1) of Section 14, by curtailing the term of office of such elected
members. But the same logic cannot be extended to nominated members. In other
words, it may not be possible to hold that there is no elbow space for the State
Government in the cases of nomination covered by clauses (c), (d) or (e).
12. It must be noted that under clause (e) of subsection (1) of Section 14, an officer of
the State Government not below the rank of Joint Secretary to Government may be
nominated to the Board. If Section 15 is construed in the manner in which the High Court
has construed, such a nominated officer of the State Government may have to be allowed
to continue, even if he reaches superannuation before completing five years of tenure.
Therefore, it is not possible to accept the view of the High Court that the term of office
prescribed under Section 15 cannot be curtailed. This is so at least in respect of a
nominated member.
13. For holding that the cancellation of appointment of the first respondent was arbitrary,
the High Court did not really have any material. The only reason why the High court held
it to be arbitrary is that the order of cancellation of appointment did not contain any reason
and that the cancellation went against Section 15. For holding the action of the Executive
to be arbitrary, there must be a factual basis. It did not exist in this case.
14. It was contended by the learned counsel for the first respondent that the notification
of cancellation of appointment was issued in exercise of the powers conferred by
subsection (9) read with clause (c) of subsection (1) of Section 14. Since these provisions
deals only with appointment and not with removal, it was contended by the learned
counsel for the first respondent that the notification of cancellation was not in accordance
with law.
15. But the above contention loses sight of the fact that the power to appoint would
include the power of cancellation of appointment. Therefore, the said contention is liable
to be rejected.
16. It was next contended by the learned counsel for the first respondent that the
procedure prescribed under Section 20 of the Act for the removal of the respondent was
not followed. But this contention is unsustainable, in view of the fact that the respondent
was not removed from the office of membership of the Waqf Board. His appointment was
cancelled by the notification impugned in the writ petition. Therefore, Section 20 has no
application to the case.
17. In view of the above, we find that the order of the High Court is unsustainable.
Therefore, the appeal is allowed and the impugned order of the High Court is set aside.
The writ petition filed by the respondent before the High Court shall stand dismissed.