:    (Per the Hon’ble the Chief Justice Satish Chandra Sharma)
The appellant before this Court has filed this present
writ appeal being aggrieved by the order dated 19.08.2019
passed by the learned Single Judge in W.P.No.17619 of
The facts of the case reveal that the appellant
institution is undisputedly an educational institution and
the respondent No.3/employee was appointed in the year
1985 as an Attender in the Nutrition Lab Department. She
tendered her resignation on 18.12.2009 and service dues
were also settled.
The respondent No.3/employee preferred an Appeal
before the Assistant Labour Commissioner, Labour Circle-
IV, Authority under Telangana Shops and Establishments
Act, 1988 stating that she was illegally terminated by the
appellant institution and the said Appeal was preferred with
a delay of more than 2500 days. The appellant institution
filed a counter affidavit. It was stated before the appellate
authority that it was the respondent No.3/employee who
had tendered her resignation, her dues have been settled
and Appeal deserves to be dismissed. It was further
contended by the appellant institution before the appellate
authority that the Appeal preferred by the respondent
No.3/employee under Section 48(1) of the Shops and
Establishments Act, 1988 is not maintainable. In spite of
the aforesaid ground, the Appeal was allowed by an Order
dated 24.07.2019 directing the appellant institution to
reinstate the respondent No.3/employee with full back
wages. The appellant institution preferred a writ petition
stating    that   the   appellant     institution    is   not   an
establishment and is not covered under the provisions of
the Shops and Establishments Act. However, the learned
Single Judge dismissed the writ petition on the ground of
availability  of   alternative   remedy     before   the   Deputy
Commissioner of Labour under Section 48(3) of the Shops
and Establishments Act. The Order passed by the learned
Single Judge is under challenge.
Heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and
perused the records.
The    undisputed    facts   reveal   that   the   appellant
institution before this Court is an educational institution
and the respondent No.3/employee was appointed in 1985.
She tendered resignation on 18.12.2009.
The basic question which requires to be answered in
the present case is whether an educational institution is
covered within the meaning and definition ‘establishment’
as defined under Section 2(10) of the Telangana Shops and
Establishments Act, 1988. Section 2(10) of the said Act is
“2(10) ‘Establishment’ means a shop, restaurant, eating-
house, residential hotel, lodging house, theatre or any place of
public    amusement    or    entertainment   and    includes   a
commercial establishment and such other establishment as
the Government may, by notification, declare to be an
establishment for the purposes of this Act.”
Undisputedly, the institution in question is governed
by the provisions of the Telangana Education Act, 1982 and
the said Act provides for redressal of grievance of the nature
involved in the present writ appeal.
Whether an educational institution falls within the
meaning of ‘establishment’ or not, has been looked into by
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Ruth Soren v.
Managing      Committee1.     In the aforesaid case, a similar
definition under the Bihar Shops and Establishments Act,
1953 was considered. Section 2(6) of the Bihar Shops and
Establishments Act is reproduced as under:-
“2(6) “establishment” means an establishment which carries
on any business, trade or profession or any work in
connection with, or incidental or ancillary to any business,
(i)     Administrative or clerical service appertaining
(ii)    A shop, restaurant, residential hotel, eating
amusement or entertainment; and a society
Registered under Societies Registration Act,
1860    charitable    or   other   trust,    whether
registered or not which carries on any business,
trade or profession or work in connection with
or incidental or ancillary thereto, journalistic
establishments,      contractors      or    auditors
establishments, educational or other institution
run for private gain and premises in which
business of banking, insurance, stocks and
shares   brokerage     or  produce     exchange   is
(iii)   Such    other    establishment      as   the   State
Government may, by notification, declare to be
an establishment to which the Act applies; but
undertaking’ as defined in clause (g) of Section
2 of the Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961 (27
of 1961).
The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Ruth Soren
(supra), in paragraphs 2 to 5 has held as under:-
“2. Two contentions were put forth before the appellate
court, firstly that Respondent 1 is not an establishment for
the purposes of the Act and, therefore, the application filed
by   the     appellant  is  incompetent      and   secondly    that
Respondent 1 terminated her services after giving salary for
a period of three months as provided in the relevant rules
and, therefore, was not liable to be interfered with by the
Labour Court even if it were to be held that Respondent 1 is
an establishment. The High Court, after adverting to several
decisions, in particular to Unni Krishnan, J.P. v. State of
A.P. [(1993) 1 SCC 645] took the view that an establishment
running an educational institution or imparting education
does not carry on a business, trade or profession and came
to the conclusion that the Labour Court, therefore, had no
jurisdiction to interfere with the order of Respondent 1 and
allowed the appeal on the first contention after noticing that
it was not necessary to deal with the second submission.
3. For the conclusion the High Court reached, the High
Court wholly depended on the observations made by this
Court in Unni Krishnan case. In that case, at para 66,
Mohan, J., while concurring with the majority view, started
the discussion by stating that in the cases before them,
depending     upon    the  statute,  either  “occupation”    or
“business” has come to be defined and it cannot be
contended that establishment of an educational institution
could be “business”. Nor again, could that be called trade
since no trading activities are carried on. Equally it is not a
profession and it is one thing to say that teaching is a
profession but, it is a totally different thing to urge that
establishment of the category of occupation provided no
recognition is sought from the State or affiliation from the
University is asked on the basis that it is a fundamental
right. However, while analysing the decision in Bangalore
Water Supply & Sewerage Board v. A. Rajappa [(1978) 2 SCC
213 : 1978 SCC (L&S) 215] the learned Judge concluded that
while considering as to what would constitute an industry
under the Industrial Disputes Act, the observations made
therein is that an educational institution is an industry and
nothing could stand in the way of that conclusion and
certainly that is very different from claiming a fundamental
right under Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution. To a similar
effect B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J. also stated that the context in
which the observations were made in Bangalore Water
Supply & Sewerage Board case would have no application in
the present case. A Bench of seven-Judge of this Court
examined this question and held that we have to look at
educational activity from the angle of the Act, and so viewed
the ingredients of industry are fulfilled and education is,
therefore, an “industry” and nothing could stand in the way
of that conclusion. The basis upon which this conclusion is
reached is that an educational institution renders service
and, therefore, falls within the concept of an industry, as
was noticed by Isaacs, J. in an Australian case, Federated
Municipal     &    Shire    Council  Employees'    Union    of
Australia v. Melbourne Corporation [(1919) 26 CLR 508].
4. An “establishment” for the purposes of the Act means
an establishment which carries on any business, trade or
profession or any work in connection with, or incidental or
ancillary thereto. Concept of industry, as defined under the
Industrial Disputes Act, would include any business, trade,
undertaking, manufacture or calling of employers and
includes any calling service, employment, handicraft, or
industrial occupation or avocation of workmen. There is an
organised activity between employers and employees to
impart education. Such an activity, though may be industry
will not be a profession, trade or business for the purposes
of Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution, would not be one
falling within the scope of “establishment” under the Act.
Therefore, the view taken by the Division Bench of the High
Court is unexceptionable. The High Court did appreciate
that Unni Krishnan case itself made a distinction between
what was stated in Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage
Board case.
5. In Corporation of City of Nagpur v. Employees [(1960) 1
LLJ 523 : AIR 1960 SC 675] , LLJ at p. (540) this Court held
the Education Department of the Corporation to be an
industry. The reason given is that imparting education
amounts to service and can be done by a private person
also. In University of Delhi v. Ram Nath [(1963) 2 LLJ 335 :
AIR 1963 SC 1873] this Court held that imparting education
is not an industry as the work of the University cannot be
assimilated to the position of trade, calling, business or
service and hence cannot be an industry. The majority view
in Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage Board a decision of
seven-Judge Bench, is that in the case of an educational
institution, the nature of activity is “exhypothesi” and
imparting education being service to community is an
industry. Various other activities of the institution such as
printing press, transport department, clerical, etc. can be
severed from teaching activities and these operations either
cumulatively or separately form an industry. Even so, the
question for consideration is whether educational institution
falls within the definition of “establishment” carrying
business, trade or profession or incidental activities thereto.
“Establishment”, as defined under the Act, is not as wide as
“industry” as defined under the Industrial Disputes Act.
Hence reliance on Bangalore Water Supply & Sewerage
Board case for the appellant is not of any help.”
The Hon’ble Supreme Court keeping in view the
definition ‘establishment’ under the Bihar Shops and
Establishments Act, which is similar to the definition under
the Telangana Shops and Establishment Act has held that
an educational institution does not fall within the scope of
establishment     under     the    Act   and    therefore,     in   the
considered opinion of this Court once the Hon’ble Supreme
Court has held that an educational institution is not an
establishment, though it may fall within the meaning
‘industry’, but will certainly not fall within the meaning and
term ‘establishment’, the Order passed by the Appellate
Authority dated 24.07.2019 and the Order passed by the
learned Single Judge deserves to be set aside.
The Kerala High Court has also taken a similar view in
the case of Sree Narayana Educational Institution v. Assistant
In the considered opinion of this Court once the Hon’ble
Supreme Court has held that an educational institution is
not an establishment, the Order passed by the respondent
No.2/Assistant Commissioner of Labour, on an Appeal
preferred       by  the  respondent    No.3/employee,    dated
24.07.2019 deserves to be set aside and subsequently
Order       passed   by the   learned   Single   Judge,  dated
19.08.2019, in W.P.No.17619 of 2019 also deserves to be
set aside and are accordingly set aside.
The learned Single Judge has also observed that the
ground       raised  by the  appellant   institution that  the
respondent No.2/Assistant Commissioner of Labour lacks
jurisdiction can be looked into by the appellate Authority,
i.e., the Deputy Commissioner of Labour under Section
48(3) of the Telangana Shops and Establishments Act. In
the considered opinion of this Court, once this Court has
arrived at a conclusion that the Order passed by the
respondent No.2/Assistant Commissioner of Labour is
without jurisdiction, this Court can certainly interfere with
the same even though there is an alternative remedy of
Appeal before the Deputy Commission of Labour (Whirlpool
Corporation v. Registrar of Trade Marks3).
Resultantly, the Writ Appeal is allowed by quashing
the Order passed by the learned Single Judge, dated
19.08.2019 in W.P.No.17619 of 2019. Consequently, the
order dated 24.07.2019 passed by the second respondent is
quashed. Miscellaneous petitions, pending if any, shall
stand dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.