Through instant petition under Section 482 of Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, the petitioner is seeking quashing of order dated
09.09.2022 (Annexure P-5) passed by learned Additional Sessions Judge,
Ludhiana whereby bail bonds furnished by the petitioner have been
cancelled and non-bailable warrants of arrest are issued against the
petitioner in FIR No. 0015 dated 17.01.2017, under Section 365 IPC and
(Sections 302/328/201/34 IPC and Section 21 of NDPS Act, 1985 added
later on) registered at Police Station City Jagraon, District Ludhiana.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that petitioner
was extended concession of regular bail vide order dated 11.05.2022
passed by this Court in CRM-M-1577-2021. The petitioner failed to
appear before trial Court and on 09.09.2022, learned Additional Sessions
Judge ordered to cancel bail bonds and further issued non-bailable
warrants of arrest.
Learned State counsel fairly does not dispute the facts,
however, prays for imposition of costs.
Intent of arrest and reason of denial of bail is to secure the
appearance of the accused at the time of trial. A person who seeks to be
liberated must take judgment and serve sentence in the event of his
conviction. The nature of the crime charged, severity of punishment
prescribed, prime facie available evidences, history & background of the
accused may indicate that any amount of bond and surety is not going to
secure presence of accused, at the time of conviction.
The object of arrest is neither punitive nor preventive.
Detention or arrest not only deprives a person from his fundamental right
of personal liberty guaranteed by Article 21 but also freedom guaranteed
by Article 19(1) of our Constitution. Life of every human being is most
precious gift of God and everyone has very limited span of life which
cannot be spoiled on account of incompetence, personal grudge,
vengeance of someone; or brutal, illegal, unethical action of the State
machinery. Except habitual offender, commoners living simple life after
arrest lose self-respect and confidence within himself as well State. It has
become very common to put criminal law in motion even though dispute
involved is purely contractual or civil in nature. Many times arrest entails
deprivation of source of income of entire family besides forever stigma
in a closely knit society like ours. There is neither mechanism to
compensate a man who is later on found innocent nor acquittal can return
valuable time, energy, status, future of family members especially
children which is lost on account of incarceration of bread earner of the
family. Imprisonment before conviction is a sort of punishment
especially when rate of conviction in our country is abysmally low.
i)     The object of cancellation of bond or declaration of
anyone as proclaimed offender/person is to secure his
presence. The petitioner has come forward to face
trial and undertakes to appear before trial court on
each and every date, thus, his presence would meet
ii)    The Petitioner for wasting valuable time and energy
of courts as well prosecution is willing to pay costs of
iii)   The Petitioner is ready to furnish bond/surety to the
satisfaction of the trial court;
iv)    The petitioner is resident of Jagraon and trial is
pending at Ludhiana, thus jurisdictional court and
police authorities have direct access over the
activities of the petitioner.
v)     The petitioner was initially granted regular bail by
this Hon'ble High Court;
vi)    Trial is pending since 2017 and petitioner is ready to
face trial, thus, no prejudice is going to cause to
prosecution or complainant;
this court is of the considered opinion that present petition
needs to be allowed, and accordingly, petition is allowed. The petitioner
is directed to appear before Trial Court on 09.12.2022 and furnish fresh
bail bond/surety bond to its satisfaction. The petitioner, as agreed shall
pay costs of Rs.10,000/- to be paid to the District Legal Services