Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Shravan Kumar Pandey,Shyam Narain
Heard learned counsel for the petitioner, learned standing counsel for
respondent no. 1, Sri Yashwant Singh, learned counsel for respondent nos. 2
and 3 and Sri S.N. Pandey, learned counsel for respondent no. 4.
Present petition has been filed with following prayers;
“(i). Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus
directing the respondents to decide the representation dated 01.12.2021 for
compassionate appointment of the petitioner within a month.
(ii). Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus
directing the respondents to grant compassionate appointment to the
Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that father of petitioner
was working on the post of “Safai Karmchari Ward 99/107” at Nagar Nigam,
Kanpur and during the course of service, he died. After his death, brother of
petitioner (son of deceased- employee) has been granted appointment on
compassionate ground under the provisions of U.P. Recruitment of
Dependents of Government Servants Dying in Harness Rules, 1974
(hereinafter referred to as “Rules, 1974”) as “Safai Karmchari” to cater the
need of all family members dependent upon deceased- employee including
petitioner- sister. Unfortunately, in a road accident, brother of petitioner also
died on 16.10.2021. After his death, her mother has given consent for
appointment of petitioner on compassionate ground. Petitioner has filed
representation dated 01.12.2021 before respondent no. 2 for appointment,
which is pending for decision, therefore, a direction may be issued to
respondent no. 2 to decide the same and appoint the petitioner on
compassionate ground under the provisions of Rules, 1974 amended vide The
Uttar Pradesh Recruitment of Dependants of Government Servants Dying In
Harness (Twelfth Amendment) Rules, 2021 (hereinafter referred to as “Rules,
Learned counsels for the respondents objected the submissions raised
by learned counsel for the petitioner and submitted that as per Rules, 1974
readwith amended Rules 2021, definition of family is given in order of
hierarchy. After death of deceased- employee, first right goes to husband or
wife, second right goes to sons/ adopted sons, third right goes to daughters
(including adopted daughters) and widowed daughter-in-law and fourth right
goes to unmarried brothers, unmarried sisters and widowed mother dependent
on the deceased Government servant, if the deceased Government servant was
unmarried. He next submitted that in the present case, there is no dispute that
deceased- employee was married and his wife has also raised a claim for
appointment on compassionate ground after death of her husband. Therefore,
as per Rules, 1974 readwith amended Rules 2021, petitioner has no right of
appointment after death of deceased- employee and respondent no. 4 is only
having right to be appointed on the compassionate ground after death of her
Learned counsel for the petitioner could not dispute the aforesaid facts
and only submitted that earlier appointment was given to her brother to cater
the need of all family members dependant upon her father, therefore,
petitioner is also entitled to get appointment after death of her brother.
I have considered the rival submissions raised by learned counsel for
the parties as well as perused the record and Rules, 1974 readwith amended
Rules 2021. Language of Rules is very much clear, which provides that first
right of appointment on compassionate ground goes to husband or wife as the
case may be in case of death of Government employee. For ready reference,
Rules, 1974 is being quoted hereinbelow;
In the present case, there is no dispute of fact that deceased- employee
was married and his wife is alive and also claiming appointment on
compassionate ground. Therefore, under the Rules, she is only entitled for
appointment and no relief can be granted to petitioner- sister, which is at
Serial No. 4 in order of hierarchy given in Rules, 1974 readwith amended
Rules 2021, in case deceased Government employee is unmarried. Therefore,
petition is having no force and liable to be dismissed.
So far as claim of petitioner about her maintenance is concerned, it is
open for her to seek appropriate remedy against respondent no. 4, if any Rule
provides for the same.
Accordingly, writ petition is dismissed with aforesaid observations. No
order as to costs.