2. These appeals are against various orders of Delhi High Court connected to the
AmazonFuture dispute. Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C) No. 1354748 of 2021 and
SLP (C) No. 1355657 of 2021, impugns order dated 02.02.2021 and 18.03.2021
passed in OMP (ENF) (Comm) 17 of 2021 and Civil Appeals arising out of SLP (C)
Nos. 18089 and 18080 of 2021, are against impugned orders dated 29.10.2021
passed in Arb. A (Comm.) No. 63 of 2021 and I.A. No. 14285 of 2021 in Arb. A
(Comm.) No. 64 of 2021 respectively.
3. At the outset, it is necessary for this Court to have a brief background before
indulging in analyzing the issue at hand. On 22.08.2019, Amazon entered into
Shareholder and ShareSubscription Agreements with Future Coupon Private Limited
(FCPL). Through these instruments, Amazon intended to acquire 49% stake in FCPL.
The aforesaid agreements contained an arbitration agreement, wherein parties
resolved to settle their disputes in accordance with the Arbitration Rules of the
Singapore International Arbitration Center (SIAC). The parties had further resolved to
have the seats at New Delhi.
4. On 12.08.2019, FCPL and its promoters entered into a Shareholder Agreement
with Future Retail Limited (FRL). Through this Agreement, FCPL was granted certain
protective rights. One such right is produced as under:
10.1 As of the Execution Date, the Company has set up an aggregate of at least 1,534 (one
thousand five hundred and thirty four) retail outlets/formats including without limitation the Small
Store formats across India and such retail outlets/stores are an integral part of the business
conducted by the Company representing a significant and substantial part of the business conducted
by the Company. The Existing Shareholders and the Company further agree, covenant and
undertake to FCL that the Company shall be the sole vehicle for the conduct of such current
business comprising of a widespread network of the retail outlets/formats including without limitation
the Small Store formats that the Company has established and is operating across India and
consequently such business shall continue to be an integral part of the Company’s business.
10.2 Accordingly, any sale, divestment, transfer, disposal, etc., of such retail outlets/ formats
including without limitation the Small Store Formats shall be in accordance with this Agreement, and
the company and the Existing shareholders covenant and undertake that during the subsistence of
this Agreement, the company shall not transfer, or dispose off the Retail Assets except as otherwise
mutually agreed between the Company, the Existing Shareholders and FCL in writing.
10.3 Notwithstanding anything contained herein, the Company and the Existing Shareholders agree
that the Retail Assets shall not be transferred, Encumbered divested, or disposed of, directly or
indirectly, in favour of a Restricted Person.
There is no dispute that one of the restricted persons included the Reliance Group.
5. As in March 2020, FRL submitted that there was business downturn due to Covid19
lockdowns as there were restrictions on retail sale through brickandmortar shops. In
light of the same, the Board of FRL decided to sell, retail businesses and assets to
Reliance, for a consideration in excess of Rs. 25,000 crores. Further, it is contended
by FRL that there were outstanding loans of about Rs.20,000 crores with a serious
and tangible risk of becoming insolvent. It is submitted that it was in this context that
the subsequent transaction was entered into to alleviate its financial position and
protect employment of around 25,000 employees of the Future Group.
6. Aggrieved by the aforesaid sale transaction, Amazon initiated arbitration
proceedings before the SIAC. Amazon filed an application for emergency relief with
the Registrar of the SIAC Court of Arbitration seeking interim prohibitory injunction to
prevent FRL and FCPL from taking further steps in the aforesaid transaction with the
Reliance Group. Parallelly, FRL filed a suit before the Delhi High Court registered as
CS(COMM) No. 493 of 2020, against Amazon for tortious interference in the Scheme
for the sale of assets.
7. On 25.10.2020, the Emergency Arbitrator passed an Interim Award in favor of
Amazon. It may be noticed that the Emergency Arbitrator and the Single Bench came
to diametrically opposite conclusions which are juxtaposed herein below:
Order of Emergency Arbitrator dated                Order of Single Judge Bench in I.A. No. 10376
25.10.2020                                         of 2020 in CS (COMM) No. 493 of 2020 dated
285. In the result, I award, direct, and order as 12.3 Thus the trinity of the principles for grant of
follows:                                           interim injunction i.e. prima facie case,
(a) the Respondents are injuncted from taking irreparable loss and balance of convenience are
any steps in furtherance or in aid of the Board required to be tested in terms of principles as
Resolution made by the Board of Directors or noted above. Since this Court has held that
FRL on 29 August 2019 in relation to the prima facie the representation of Amazon based
Disputed Transaction, including but not limited on the pea that the resolution dated 29th August,
to filing or pursuing any application before any 2020 of FRL is void and that on conflation of the
person, including regulatory bodies or agencies FCPL SHA and FRL SHA, the ‘control’ that is
in India, or requesting for approval at any sought to be asserted by Amazon on FRL is not
permitted under the FEMA FDI Rules, without
(b) the Respondents are injuncted from taking FRL has made out a prima facie case in its
any steps to complete the Disputed Transaction favour for grant of interim injunction. However,
with entities that are part of the MDA Group;      the main tests in the present case are in respect
(c) without prejudice to the rights of any current of “balance of convenience” and “irreparable
Promoter Lenders, the Respondents are loss”. Even if a prima facie case is made out
injuncted from directly or indirectly taking any by FRL, the balance of convenience lies both
steps to transfer/dispose/alienat e/encumber in favour of FRL and Amazon. If the case of
FRL’s Retail Assets or the shares held in FRL FRL is that the representation by Amazon to the
by the Promoters in any manner without the statutory authorities/regulators is based on
prior written consent of the Claimant;             illegal premise, Amazon has also based its
representation on alleged breach of FCPL SHA
(d) the Respondents are injuncted from issuing and FRL SHA, as also the directions in the EA
securities of FRL or obtaining/securing any order. Hence it cannot be said that the balance
financing, directly or indirectly, from any of convenience lies in favour of FRL and not in
Restricted Person that will be in any manner favour of Amazon. It would be a matter of trial
contrary to Section 13.3.1 of the FCPL SHA;        after parties have led their evidence or if decided
(e) the orders in (a) to (d) above are to take by any other competent forum to determine
effect immediately and will remain in place until whether the representation of Amazon that the
further order from the Tribunal, when transaction between FRL and Reliance being in
constituted; and                                   breach of the FCPL SHA and FRL SHA would
(f) the Claimant is to provide within 7 days from Further in case Amazon is not permitted to
the date hereof a crossundertaking in damages represent its case before the statutory
to the Respondents. If the Parties are unable to authorities/Regulators, it will suffer an
agree on its terms, they are to refer their irreparable loss as Amazon also claims to have
differences to me qua EA for resolution; and       created preemptive rights in its favour in case
(g) the costs of this Application be part of the the Indian law permitted in future. Further there
costs of this Arbitration.                        may not be irreparable loss to FRL for the reason
even if Amazon makes a representation based
8. In the meanwhile, CCI and SEBI approved the composite Scheme proposed by
FRLReliance. Thereafter, FRL filed for sanction of the composite Scheme of
arrangement under the provisions of Sections 230 to 232 of the Companies Act, 2013
9. Amazon filed a Petition for enforcement of the Emergency Arbitrator Award, under
Section 17(2) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, before the Delhi High Court
on 25.01.2021 and the same was heard for the first time on 28.01.2021. As the
appellants herein challenge the impugned order on the ground of failure to adhere to
the principles of natural justice, it is apt to reproduce certain procedural orders passed
by the learned Single Judge, Justice Midha, in OMP (ENF) (COMM) No.17 of 2021.
On 28.01.2021, the following order was passed:
“1. The hearing has been conducted through video conference.
2. Arguments partly heard.
3. List for continuation of the arguments on 29th January, 2021 at the end of the Board.
4. The order be uploaded on the website of this Court forthwith.”
On 29.01.2021, the following order was passed:
“1. The hearing has been conducted through video conference.
2. Issue notice. Learned counsels for respondents accept notice.
3. Further arguments heard from 02:45 PM to 04:30 PM.
4. List for continuation of the arguments on 01st February, 2021.
5. Both the parties have submitted brief note of submissions.
6. Learned senior counsel for the respondent No.2 submits that he shall file additional note of
submissions on the factual aspect by tomorrow afternoon with advance copy to the counsel for the
petitioner by tomorrow evening. Respondent No.2 shall also respond to the brief note of submissions
of the petitioner relating to the facts.
7. The order be uploaded on the website of this Court forthwith.”
On 01.02.2021, the following order was passed:
“1. Respondent No.2 has filed additional submissions to which the petitioner has filed the response.
2. Learned senior counsels for the respondents have concluded the oral arguments.
3. List for rejoinder submissions of the petitioner on 02nd February, 2021.
4. It is clarified that no further written submissions shall be filed by any of the parties.”
10. On 02.02.2021, the first substantive order [1st impugned Order] was passed in
“8. This Court is of the prima facie view that the Emergency Arbitrator is an Arbitrator; the Emergency
Arbitrator has rightly proceeded against the respondent No.2; the order dated 25th October, 2020
is not a nullity; the order dated 25th October, 2020 is an order under Section 17(1) of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act. This Court is of the view that the order dated 25th October, 2020 is appealable
under Section 37 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act. This Court is of the clear view that the order
dated 25th October, 2020 is enforceable as an order of this Court under Section 17(2) of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act. The detailed reasons shall be given in the reserved order.
9. This Court is satisfied that immediate orders are necessary to protect the rights of the petitioner
till the pronouncement of the reserved order. In that view of the matter, the respondents are directed
to maintain status quo as on today at 04.50 P.M. till the pronouncement of the reserved order. The
respondents are directed to file an affidavit to place on record the actions taken by them after 25th
October, 2020 and the present status of all those actions, within 10 days. All the concerned
authorities are directed to maintain status quo with respect to all matters in violation of the order
dated 25th October, 2020 and shall file the status report with respect to the present status within 10
days of the receipt of this order. The other prayers of the petitioner shall be considered in the
reserved order.
10. Copy of this order be given dasti under signatures of the Court Master to counsels for the parties.
Copy of this order be also given dasti under signatures of the Court Master to Mr. Kirtiman Singh,
learned Central Government Standing Counsel who shall send the same to all the concerned
authorities dealing with the actions initiated by the respondents in violation of the order dated 25th
October, 2020. The petitioner shall send the list of all the authorities to Mr. Kirtiman Singh, learned
Central Government Standing Counsel within three days.”
11. Aggrieved by the stay order granted by the learned Single Judge, while reserving
the matter, FRL filed an intracourt appeal before the Division Bench in FAO OS
(Comm.) No. 21 of 2021. The Division Bench vide Order dated 08.02.2021, passed
“12. It is made clear that the observations made in this order are only a prima facie view for the
purpose of grant of interim relief and shall not come in the way of the learned Single Judge in passing
the final order in OMP(ENF)(Comm) No.17/2021 and needless to state that the order shall be
passed uninfluenced by any observations made hereinabove.”
12. Amazon appealed against this Order before the Supreme Court in SLP (C) No.
285657 of 2021. Vide order dated 22.02.2021, this Court interalia held as under:
“In the meantime, the NCLT proceedings will be allowed to go on but will not culminate in
any final order of sanction of scheme.”
13. Again on 18.03.2021, the learned Single Judge in OMP (ENF) (COMM) No.17 of
2021, passed the 2 nd impugned order with aforesaid directions:
“188. The Emergency Arbitrator is an Arbitrator for all intents and purposes; order of the Emergency
Arbitrator is an order under Section 17(1) and enforceable as an order of this Court under Section
17(2) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act.
190. The respondents have raised a vague plea of Nullity without substantiating the same. The
interim order of the Emergency Arbitrator is not a Nullity as alleged by respondent No.2.
191. Combining/treating all the agreements as a single integrated transaction does not amount to
control of the petitioner over FRL and therefore, the petitioner’s investment does not violate any law.
192. All the objections raised by the respondents are hereby rejected with cost of Rs.20,00,000/to
be deposited by the respondents with the Prime Minister Relief Fund for being used for providing
COVID vaccination to the Below Poverty Line (BPL) category senior citizens of Delhi. The cost be
deposited within a period of two weeks and the receipt be placed on record within one week of the
193. The respondents have deliberately and wilfully violated the interim order dated 25th October,
2020 and are liable for the consequences enumerated in Order XXXIX Rule 2A of the Code of Civil
194. In exercise of power under Order XXXIX Rule 2A(1) of the Code of Civil Procedure, the assets
of respondents No.1 to 13 are hereby attached. Respondents No.1 to 13 are directed to file an
affidavit of their assets as on today in Form 16A, Appendix E under Order XXI Rule 41(2) of the
Code of Civil Procedure within 30 days. Respondent No.1, 2, 12 and 13 are directed to file an
additional affidavit in the format of Annexure B1 and respondents No.3 to 11 are directed to file an
additional affidavit in the format of Annexure A1 to the judgment of M/s Bhandari Engineers &
Builders Pvt. Ltd. v. M/s Maharia Raj Joint Venture, (supra) along with the documents mentioned
therein within 30 days.”
14. In the interregnum, the FCPL and FRL approached the Division Bench of the Delhi
High Court in FAO (OS) (COM) No.50 and 51 of 2021 respectively against the 2nd
impugned order passed by the learned Single Judge which was stayed vide Order
15. Subsequently, Amazon filed SLP (C) Nos. 61136114 of 2021 before this Court
against the order dated 22.03.2021 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court.
16. This Court consolidated all the appeals filed by Amazon before this Court, heard
the matters together and passed a final judgment dated 06.08.2021, answering only
the following two legal questions:
i. Whether an Emergency Arbitrator’s Award can be said to be within the contemplation of the
ii. Whether an order passed under Section 17(2) of the Arbitration Act, in enforcement proceedings,
is appealable under Section 37 of the Arbitration Act?
17. This Court answered the first question in the following manner:
“41. We, therefore, answer the first question by declaring that full party autonomy is given by the
Arbitration Act to have a dispute decided in accordance with institutional rules which can include
Emergency Arbitrators delivering interim orders, described as “awards”. Such orders are an
important step in aid of decongesting the civil courts and affording expeditious interim relief to the
parties. Such orders are referable to and are made under Section 17(1) of the Arbitration Act.”
The second question was answered thus:
“76. The second question posed is thus answered declaring that no appeal lies under Section 37 of
the Arbitration Act against an order of enforcement of an Emergency Arbitrator’s order made under
Section 17(2) of the Act. As a result, all interim orders of this Court stand vacated. The impugned
judgments of the Division Bench, dated 8th February, 2021 and 22nd March, 2021, are set aside.
The appeals are disposed of accordingly.”
18. It may be noted that this Court, in the aforesaid judgment of 06.08.2021, did not
adjudicate upon the merits of the case and limited its reasoning only to answer the
legal questions which arose therein. On a reading of this judgment, the contention of
the learned Senior Advocate Mr. Gopal Subramanium, that this Court has upheld the
Emergency Arbitrator Award and did not interfere with the enforcement orders in OMP
(ENF)(Comm.) No. 17 of 2021, on merits, is not correct. Although, the judgment
narrates the facts leading up to the appeal, the Court neither returned any findings on
facts, nor adjudicated on merits of the Order passed by Justice Midha in the
enforcement proceedings. It is this gap which has led to the current round of litigation
on merits of the case for the second time before this Court.
19. In the meanwhile, FRL filed an application under Para 10 of Schedule 1 of the
SIAC Rules for vacating the Award of the Emergency Arbitrator before the Arbitral
Tribunal. The oral submissions on the vacate petitions were heard between 12th16th
of July 2021 and orders were reserved.
20. Contemporaneously, aggrieved by the merits of the orders of the Single Judge
dated 02.02.2021 and 18.03.2021, FCPL and FRL preferred appeals directly before
this Court in SLP (C) No. 1354748 of 2021 and SLP (C) No. 1355657 of 2021,
respectively. On 09.09.2021 the following interim order was passed by this Court:
“Heard learned senior counsel for the parties at length and carefully perused the material placed on
Taking into consideration the submissions advanced by the learned senior counsel for the
parties and particularly the fact that the parties have approached the Singapore International
Arbitration Centre for vacating the Emergency Award passed by the Emergency Arbitrator
and the arguments in the said matter have been ssconcluded and the order is going to be
pronounced shortly, we think it fit to balance the interest of both the parties by staying all further
proceedings before the Delhi High Court for the time being. Ordered accordingly. We further direct
to all the authorities i.e. NCLT, CCI and SEBI not to pass any final order for a period of four
weeks from today. This order has been passed with the consent of both the parties.
List these matters after four weeks.”
21. Thereafter, the applications filed by FRL and FCPL for vacating the award of the
Emergency Arbitrator was dismissed by the Arbitral Tribunal by Order dated
22. The aforesaid order of the Arbitral Tribunal, rejecting the vacate petition, was
challenged by FCPL and FRL before the Delhi High Court in Arb. Pet. No. 63 of 2021
and Arb. Pet. No. 64 of 2021. In Arb. Pet. No. 64 of 2021, FRL had filed IA No.
14285/2021, seeking the following prayers:
a. Stay the operation of the impugned Order dated 21.10.2021 passed by the Hon’ble Arbitral
b. Alternatively, pass an order allowing the Appellant to take steps pursuing the scheme, subject to
the condition that it shall not invite the passing of any final orders of approval of the scheme by the
23. While issuing notice in both matters, by orders dated 29.10.2021 (3rd impugned
Order), the Delhi High Court (Justice Suresh Kumar Kait) refused any immediate relief
“15. During the course of hearing, this Court time and again referred that when the subject matter
of this appeal is pending subjudice before the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Special Leave Petition
(Civil) No. 1354748/ 2021 and infact, by virtue of order dated 09.09.2021 proceedings before this
Court have been stayed and also directions have been passed to NCLT, CCI, SEBI to not pass any
final order, then how interim relief, that too without therebeing any hearing or any reply from side
opposite on record, application for interim stay can be heard and orders be passed. Upon this, Mr.
Harish Salve, learned senior counsel submitted in such eventuality, this Court may dismiss the
16. In view of the above, the application seeking interim stay being IA No. 14285/2021 (u/S 151
CPC) is accordingly dismissed.”
24. Aggrieved by the aforesaid order, FCPL and FRL have approached this Court in
SLP (C) Nos. 18089 and 18080 of 2021 respectively.
25. Mr. Harish Salve, learned Senior Counsel appearing for FRL submitted that the
orders in the enforcement proceedings have been rendered while completely
disregarding the order dated 21.12.2020 passed by the learned Single Judge of the
Delhi High Court in CS(Comm) No. 493 of 2020, particularly, the finding that FRL does
not have any arbitration agreement with the respondent. He further submitted that
although an appeal has been filed against the aforesaid order of the learned Single
Judge, there is no stay operating against the said order.
26. The learned Senior counsel also submitted that the impugned orders passed in
the enforcement proceedings merit setting aside as the said proceedings have been
conducted contrary to the principles of natural justice. He submitted that the procedure
adopted has caused serious prejudice to the appellants as, after denying them an
opportunity to file a reply affidavit, the impugned orders in the Enforcement
proceedings recorded that FRL had not made any plea on the issue as to why were
the orders of the Emergency Arbitrator a nullity.
27. Thirdly, the learned Senior counsel contended that the impugned orders passed
in the Enforcement proceedings extended beyond the scope of the Emergency
Arbitrator’s interim Award, by directing recall of the approvals granted by the Statutory
28. Lastly, while relying upon the Singapore Arbitration Rules, learned Senior counsel
submitted that the Tribunal’s interim order dated 21.10.2021, overrides the
Emergency Arbitrator’s interim Award which are the subject matter of the impugned
enforcement proceedings. As a result, the enforcement proceedings and the
impugned order have lost their relevance due to the subsequent events.
29. Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned Senior Counsel appearing for FCPL and their
promoters, while supplementing the submissions of Mr. Salve, specifically contended
that the impugned order merits setting aside due to grave injustice caused to the
appellants due to the principles of natural justice being given a goby. No opportunity
was granted for filing of any response which has resulted in various factual and legal
errors creeping in the impugned order. He further submitted that considering the
procedure followed by it, the penal orders passed by the High Court in the impugned
order, merit a reconsideration.
30. Learned Senior counsel further submitted that no prejudice would be caused to
Amazon by setting aside the impugned order passed in the enforcement proceedings
or by the passing of an interim measure allowing continuation of the proceedings
before the NCLT. In fact, this Court, vide order dated 22.02.2021, has already created
an interim arrangement by allowing the NCLT proceedings to continue with a direction
to the NCLT not to pass any final order. On the other hand, the impugned order dated
18.03.2021, directed recall of the approvals granted by the statutory authorities.
31. Mr. Gopal Subramanium, learned Senior Counsel appearing for Amazon,
submitted that the appellants, by their conduct have demonstrated willful and
intentional disobedience of the Emergency Arbitrator’s interim Award, after agreeing
for the Emergency Arbitrator. While he fairly stated that Amazon is not interested in
pursuing the punitive directions imposed on FCPL and others, he submitted that the
Emergency Arbitrator’s interim Award stands confirmed by the Arbitral Tribunal, which
must be abided by the appellants. Learned Counsel argued that when no stay has
been granted against the interim protection afforded to them by the Arbitral Tribunal,
the appellants cannot operate in contravention of the same and proceed to effectuate
the scheme before the NCLT. He lastly submitted that pending any challenge, the
interim orders passed by the Tribunal needs to be maintained and given effect to, so
as to uphold the effectiveness and sanctity of the arbitration process.
32. Mr. Aspi Chinoy, learned Senior Counsel appearing for Amazon contended that
the appellants’ reliance on the order dated 21.12.20, passed by the learned Single
Judge of the Delhi High Court in the suit proceeding is misplaced. He submitted that,
in the first instance, the suit instituted by FRL before the Delhi High Court was of the
nature of an antiarbitration suit and a collateral challenge to the arbitration
proceedings which is in contravention to Section 5 of the Arbitration Act. He further
submitted that the observations being relied upon by the appellants were made in an
order declining the relief sought by them before the Delhi High Court. Finally, the
learned Senior counsel submitted that no relief should be granted to the appellants
by this Court as they have not approached this Court with clean hands having failed
to comply with any judicial order that has been passed.
33. Having heard learned counsel for both the parties and on perusing voluminous
documents submitted before the Court, the following questions arise for our
I. Whether the orders dated 02.02.2021 and 18.03.2021, passed by the learned Single Judge in
OMP (ENF) (COM) No.17 of 2021, are valid in law?
II. Whether the orders dated 29.10.2021, passed by the learned Single Judge in Arb. A (Comm.)
No. 64 and 63 of 2021, is valid in law?
34. The orders of the learned Single Judge [Justice Midha] in OMP (ENF) (COMM)
No.17 of 2021, is impugned on the grounds of lack of an opportunity granted to FCPL
and FRL to file a counter to establish their defense. Mr. Rohatgi, learned Senior
Advocate appearing on behalf of FCPL and its promoters has submitted that no time
was granted by the learned Single Judge to respond. He added that a 200page order
has been passed without any reply being filed on record and holding everyone guilty
of contempt of court. He has further submitted that punitive directions could not have
been passed even in contempt jurisdiction without affording the party a proper
opportunity of filing a reply.
35. In this context, our attention has been drawn to a catena of procedural orders
passed by the High Court in OMP (ENF) (COMM) No.17 of 2021. From the record,
we observe that FRL and FCPL were not provided sufficient time or opportunity to file
their counter or raise their defense. On 29.01.2021, they were allowed to file a brief
note of submission within twentyfour hours, before orders were passed on
36. On a perusal of the orders, we find that serious procedural errors were committed
by the learned Single Judge. Natural justice is an important facet of a judicial review.
Providing effective natural justice to affected parties, before a decision is taken, is
necessary to maintain the Rule of law. Natural justice is usually discussed in the
context of administrative actions, wherein procedural requirement of a fair hearing is
read in to ensure that no injustice is caused. When it comes to judicial review, the
natural justice principle is built into the rules and procedures of the Court, which are
expected to be followed meticulously to ensure that highest standards of fairness are
afforded to the parties.
37. It is well known that natural justice is the sworn enemy of unfairness. It is expected
of the Courts to be cautious and afford a reasonable opportunity to parties, especially
in commercial matters having a serious impact on the economy and employment of
thousands of people. Coming to the facts herein, the opportunity provided to the
appellants herein was insufficient, and cannot be upheld in the eyes of law.
38. Whenever an order is struck down as invalid being in violation of the principles of
natural justice, there is no final decision of the case and fresh proceedings are left
open. All that is done is to vacate the order assailed by virtue of its inherent defect.
Such proceedings are not terminated and are usually remitted back. [See Canara
Bank v. Debasis Das, (2003) 4 SCC 557] However, in this case, much water has
flown under the bridge, since the passing of the order by the learned Single Judge,
which has now been rendered redundant, for the following reasons :
had allowed proceedings to continue before the
aforesaid order of the Single Judge, which was taken in appeal again before this Court.
on the merits of the matter.
through interim order dated 09.09.2021, allowed continuation of proceedings before the NCLT,
without final authorization on the scheme.
39. One aspect which may be highlighted is the punitive directions ordered by the
learned Single Judge in the order dated 18.03.2021, which are extracted below:
“192. All the objections raised by the respondents are hereby rejected with cost of Rs.20,00,000/to
be deposited by the respondents with the Prime Minister Relief Fund for being used for providing
COVID vaccination to the Below Poverty Line (BPL) category senior citizens of Delhi. The cost be
deposited within a period of two weeks and the receipt be placed on record within one week of the
193. The respondents have deliberately and wilfully violated the interim order dated 25th October,
2020 and are liable for the consequences enumerated in Order XXXIX Rule 2A of the Code of Civil
194. In exercise of power under Order XXXIX Rule 2A(1) of the Code, the assets of the respondents
No.1 to 13 are hereby attached. Respondents No. 1 to 13 are directed to file an affidavit of their
assets as on today in Form 16A, Appendix E under Order XXI Rule 41(2) of the Code of Civil
Procedure within 30 days. Respondent No. 1, 2, 12 and 13 are directed to file an additional affidavit
in the format of Annexure B1 and respondents no. 3 to 11 are directed to file an additional affidavit
in the format of Annexure A1 to the judgment of M/s. Bhandari Engineers & Builders Pvt. Ltd. v.
M/s. Maharia Raj Joint Venture, (supra) along with the documents mentioned therein within 30
40. Our attention is drawn to the fact that the learned Single Judge had relied on M/s.
Bhandari Engineers & Builders Pvt. Ltd. v. M/s. Maharia Raj Joint Venture, 2019
SCC Online Del. 11879, which has been overruled by a Division Bench order in Delhi
Chemical and Pharmaceutical Works Pvt. Ltd. & Anr. v. Himgiri Realtors Pvt.
Ltd. & Anr., EFA (OS) (Comm.) No. 4 of 2021.
41. Viewed differently, contempt of a civil nature can be made out under Order XXXIX
Rule 2A CPC not when there has been mere “disobedience”, but only when there has
been “wilful disobedience”. The allegation of wilful disobedience being in the nature
of criminal liability, the same has to be proved to the satisfaction of the court that the
disobedience was not mere “disobedience” but “wilful” and “conscious”. This Court in
the case of Ram Kishan v. Tarun Bajaj, (2014) 16 SCC 204, considering the
implication of exercise of contempt jurisdiction, held that the power must be exercised
with caution rather than on mere probabilities. While delineating the conduct which
can be held to be “wilful disobedience”, this Court held that:
“12. Thus, in order to punish a contemnor, it has to be established that disobedience of the order is
“wilful”. The word “wilful” introduces a mental element and hence, requires looking into the mind of
a person/contemnor by gauging his actions, which is an indication of one's state of mind. “Wilful”
means knowingly intentional, conscious, calculated and deliberate with full knowledge of
consequences flowing therefrom. It excludes casual, accidental, bona fide or unintentional acts or
genuine inability. Wilful acts does not encompass involuntarily or negligent actions. The act has to
be done with a “bad purpose or without justifiable excuse or stubbornly, obstinately or perversely”.
Wilful act is to be distinguished from an act done carelessly, thoughtlessly, heedlessly or
inadvertently. It does not include any act done negligently or involuntarily. The deliberate conduct of
a person means that he knows what he is doing and intends to do the same. Therefore, there has
to be a calculated action with evil motive on his part. Even if there is a disobedience of an
order, but such disobedience is the result of some compelling circumstances under which it
was not possible for the contemnor to comply with the order, the contemnor cannot be
punished. “Committal or sequestration will not be ordered unless contempt involves a degree of
default or misconduct.”
42. Considering the fact that in the suit instituted by FRL, the learned Single Judge
had earlier allowed FRL and Amazon to continue their pursuit before various
regulatory authorities, and in view of the interim orders of this Court dated 22.02.2021
and 09.09.2021, and the Courts below, we are inclined to setaside aforesaid
directions as the precondition of ‘sufficient mental element for wilful disobedience’ is
not satisfied. Moreover, Mr. Gopal Subramanium, learned Senior Advocate appearing
for Amazon, has fairly stated that Amazon is not interested in proceeding with the
punitive directions. Taking note of the aforesaid submission, we set aside the punitive
directions issued in the impugned orders of learned Single Judge dated 02.02.2021
43. Coming to the merits of the case, we would like to mention a disconcerting aspect
wherein the interim order enforcing the Emergency Award has adopted a standard
beyond ‘prima facie view’, as required under law. It is expected of Courts to be
cautious while making observations on the merits of the case, which would inevitably
influence the Arbitral Tribunals hearing the matters on merit.
44. Therefore, we set aside the order of the learned Single Judge dated 02.02.2021
and 18.03.2021 passed in OMP (ENF) (COMM.) No.17 of 2021.
45. At the outset, it is agreed by learned advocates appearing on both side that the
impugned order dated 29.10.2021 in IA No. 14285/2021 moved in Arb. A (Comm.)
No. 64 of 2021, needs to be set aside for non -consideration of the orders of this Court
in the proper perspective. Our order dated 09.09.2021, imposed no bar on the High
Court to adjudicate the issue concerning legality of the vacate application order by the
Arbitral Tribunal. In our opinion, adjudication of the applications under Section 37(2),
Arbitration Act filed by the appellants before the Delhi High Court are distinct from the
earlier appeals filed before this Court.
46. Further, certain important questions of law concerning the effect of the award of
an Emergency Arbitrator and the jurisdiction of an Arbitral Tribunal qua such awards
arise in the present matter. Therefore, these matters need to be remitted back for
adjudication on its own merits.
I. Setting aside of impugned orders dated 02.02.2021 (1st impugned Order) and
18.03.2021 (2nd impugned order) in OMP (ENF)(Comm.) No. 17 of 2021.
II. Setting aside of 3rd impugned order dated 29.10.2021 in Arb. A. (Comm.) No. 64
and 63 of 2021.The learned Single Judge shall reconsider the issues and pass
appropriate orders on its own merits, uninfluenced by any observation made herein.