Case :- CAPITAL SENTENCE No. - 1 of 2000
Appellant :- State of U.P.
Respondent :- Krishna Murari alias Murli and others
Counsel for Appellant :- From Addl.Session Judge,G.A.,Shitla
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.,Anuj
Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 14 of 2000
Appellant :- Krishna Murari and 3 others
Respondent :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Appellant :- Smt.S.Bala,Shailesh Tiwari
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.,A.R.Siddiqui
Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 25 of 2000
Counsel for Appellant :- From Jail,Shitla Prasad Tripathi,Umesh
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.
Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 26 of 2000
Appellant :- Krishna Murari Verma alias Murli
Respondent :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Appellant :- From Jail,Smt. Sarojini Bala
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.
Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 27 of 2000
Counsel for Appellant :- From Jail,Shitla Prasad Tripathi,Smt.
Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 28 of 2000
Counsel for Appellant :- From Jail,Shitla Prasad Tripathi,Umesh
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.
Case :- CRIMINAL REVISION No. - 14 of 2000
Counsel for Revisionist :- A.R. Siddiqui
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Govt. Advocate,Dinesh Chandra,Om
(The judgment is pronounced in terms of Chapter VII Sub-
rule (2) of Rule (1) of the Allahabad High Court Rules, 1952
(1)   The six accused persons, namely, Krishna Murari Verma
alias Murli, Kashi Ram Verma, Raghav Ram Verma, Ram
Milan Verma, Ram Kripal Verma and Ram Tilak Verma,
were tried by the X Additional District & Sessions Judge,
Faizabad in Sessions Trial No. 85 of 1995 : State Vs. Krishna
Murari and others, arising out of Case Crime No. 156 of 1994,
under Sections 148, 302, 120B I.P.C., Police Station Tarun,
(2)   Vide judgment and order dated 21.12.1999, X Additional
District & Sessions Judge, Faizabad, while acquitting accused
Ram Tilak Verma and Ram Kripal Verma of the charge of
offence punishable under Section 120-B I.P.C, convicted and
sentenced other accused persons, namely, Krishna Murari
Verma alias Murli, Kashi Ram Verma, Raghav Ram Verma and
Ram Milan Verma in the manner as stated hereinbelow :-
“(i)  Under Section 302 I.P.C. read with
Section 149 I.P.C. to be hanged
(ii)   Under Section 148 I.P.C. to undergo
imprisonment for one year R.I.”
(3) Aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and order of their
conviction and sentence,       four accused persons, namely,
Krishna Murari Verma alias Murli, Kashi Ram Verma, Raghav
Ram Verma and Ram Milan Verma, have preferred, in this
Court, four separate criminal appeals, bearing Nos. 25 of 2000,
26 of 2000, 27 of 2000 and 28 of 2000, respectively, from jail
and Criminal Appeal No. 14 of 2000 through their counsels,
whereas informant/revisionist Rama Kant Verma has filed
Criminal Revision No. 14 of 2000 against the judgment and
order dated 21.12.1999 of acquittal of Ram Kripal Verma and
(4) Capital Sentence Reference No. 1 of 2000 arises out of the
Reference made by the learned trial Court under Section 366
(1) of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to this Court for
confirmation of the death sentence of four convicts/appellants
Krishna Murari Verma alias Murli, Kashi Ram Verma , Raghav
Ram Verma and Ram Milan Verma.
(5) Since the above-captioned capital sentence reference, appeals
and revision arise out of a common factual matrix and
impugned judgment dated 21.12.1999, we are disposing them
of by this judgment.
(6) It is pertinent to mention here that vide judgment and order
dated 21.12.2000, a Co-ordinate Bench of this Court, while
dismissing the criminal revision no. 14 of 2000 preferred by the
informant Rama Kant Verma and rejecting the Reference,
allowed the above-mentioned criminal appeals preferred by
convicts/appellants.
(7) Feeling aggrieved by the aforesaid judgment and order dated
21.12.2000, informant Rama Kant Verma and the State had
preferred Criminal Appeal Nos. 934-939 of 2001 : Rama Kant
Verma Vs. State of U.P. and others and Criminal Appeal Nos.
1202-1206 of 2001, respectively, before the Hon’ble Supreme
Court and the Hon’ble Supreme Court, vide judgment and order
dated 02.12.2008, allowed the aforesaid criminal appeals and
remitted the matter to the High Court for hearing the cases
afresh and dispose them of in accordance with law.
(8) In the intervening night of 10/11.11.1994, at about 02:30 a.m.,
informant Rama Kant Verma and his cousin Girish Chandra
Verma son of Ram Naresh Verma were sleeping in the room of
the Tube-well by closing the door of it. His grand-father Shri
Sukai Verma son of Pachu and his uncle Shri Ram Naresh
Verma     son of Sri Sukai Verma      were sleeping under the
Chhappar (thatch) near the tube-well and his another uncle Shri
Ram Dev Verma son of Shri Sukai Verma was sleeping under
the southern Chhappar (thatch). His younger brother Uma Kant
Verma (P.W.2) was sleeping inside the Saria for looking after
the cattle.
His grand-father (Sukai Verma) and his uncle (Ram Naresh
Verma) raised alarm and asked for help, then, he (Rama Kant
Verma) and his cousin (Girish Chandra Verma) came out of the
tube-well room after opening its door and saw that Krishna
Murari Verma alias Murli son of Ram Jagat Verma, Kashi Ram
Verma son of Tidi Verma armed with Gandasa and Raghav Ram
Verma son of Nanhaku, Ram Milan Verma son of Ram Awadh
armed with Banka, and 2-3 other persons, who had
muffled/covered their faces by means of cloth, were beating
and cutting the head of his grand-father Sukhai Verma and his
uncle Ram Naresh Verma with Gandasa and Banka.
Ram Dev, another uncle of the informant, was sleeping south of
the tube-well under the Chhappar. Rama Kant (P.W.1), Uma
Kant (P.W.2) and Girish (deceased) tried to rescue the deceased
persons, but the assailants attacked Girish (deceased) and Ram
Dev (deceased) also with their weapons. Rama Kant (P.W.1)
and Uma Kant (P.W.2) escaped and ran into the field of
sugarcane and also they raised alarm. It was night time 2.30
a.m.   on 11.11.1994 (in intervening night of 10th and 11th
November, 1984). Due to their cries and alarm, Ram Tej, father
of informant, and several villagers came with lathis and torches.
The assailants ran away towards the south.
It was further alleged that the four appellants were seen and
identified by Rama Kant (PW l), Uma Kant (PW 2), Ram Tej
and villagers in the light of the torches and the electric light. It
was also alleged that litigation regarding land had been going
on between the victims and appellant Krishna Murari alias
Murli. The cattle of Krishna Murari were sent to Ram Kripal
ten days before the occurrence and he had also sent his family
out of the village to his wife's house in another village. Rama
Kant further alleged that in the morning Daljeet Singh (PW3),
Jaising Mau and Hari Om (PW4) told him that on 10.11.94 at
9.00 p.m. the appellants were seen by them, consuming non-
vegetarian food alongwith Ram Tilak and Ram Kripal at the
shop of Ram Kripal. Rama Kant therefore, alleged his suspicion
against Ram Kripal and Ram Tilak as the persons who were
instrumental in the commission of this crime conspiring with
the appellants. All four victims had died instantaneously on the
spot. Then in the morning, the informant scribed his F.I.R.
(Exhibit Ka-1). Along with Manik Ram Verma , Munna Lal
Verma, one other person and the informant P.W.1 (Rama Kant
Verma ) proceeded to Police Station Tarun, where he lodged his
(9)  The evidence of H.C. Ram Harsh Yadava P.W. 12 shows that on
11.11.1994, he was posted as Head Moharrir at Police Station
Tarun. On the basis of the written report of Rama Kant Verma
(P.W.1), he registered the F.I.R. and prepared the chik F.I.R on
11.11.1994 at 06:30 a.m. and on its basis, Case Crime No. 156
of 1994, under Sections 147, 148, 149, 302, 120B I.P.C. was
registered against the accused persons Krishna Murari alias
Ram Kripal Verma and Ram Tilak Verma at police station
Tarun, district Faizabad.
(10) It is pertinent to mention that a perusal of the chik F.I.R. also
shows that the distance between the place of incident and the
police station was 6 kilometres.
(11) The investigation of the case was entrusted to the Station
Officer of the Police Station Tarun, namely, Sudhakar Pandey
(PW 10), who, in his examination-in-chief, had deposed before
the trial Cout that on 11.11.1994, he was posted as Station
Officer at Police Station Tarun and case crime no. 156 of 1994
was registered on 11.11.1994, at 06:30 a.m. in his absence and
at the time of registering the case, he was busy in his duty at
Ayodhya in “PkkSng dksslh ifjdzek" and on receiving information of
this case, he reached Police Station Tarun and obtained a copy
of the FIR and other relevant papers from the Police Station and
reached the spot of occurrence in village Barauli at about 9.00
a.m., wherein he found that SSI Sri Ramjirai, police station
Bikarpur, SI Riaz Khan of P.S, Haiderganj, and SI Sifate Haider
(PW13) of Police Station Tarun were already reached there
along with other police personnel. Thereafter, he directed S.I.
Riaz Khan to get the inquest proceeedings of the deceased
Sukai Verma and Ram Naresh and S.I. Sifate Haider (P.W.13)
to get the inquest proceedings of the deceased Ram Dev and
Girish Chandra Verma.        On his direction and under his
supervision, the inquest reports of the deceased Sukai Verma,
Ram Naresh, Ram Dev and Girish Chandra Verma were
prepared by them. After that, the dead bodies were sealed in a
separate clothes and sent the dead bodies for post mortem
examination to Faizabad by Constable Ramjeet Rawat and
Constable Chandra Prakash Singh. He prepared the duplicate
C.D. of Panchayatnama.         Thereafter, he took down the
statements of Rama Kant Verma (P.W.l), Uma Kant Verma
(P.W.2), Manik Lal Verma (P.W.7) and Munna Lal Verma (P.W.
8). He, thereafter, inspected the place of occurrence at the
instance of the witnesses of fact and prepared the site map (Ext.
Ka 6). He found the dead body of Sukai on a Cot upon which
dFkjh and pn~nj were sheeting and one jtkbZ was also there, on
which stained blood of the deceased was present and blood was
splattered on the wall at the head of the cot. After scratching
the blood stained brick of the wall, he sealed it in a separate
container and cloth was sealed in a separate container and
prepared its recovery memo (Ext. Ka.7).
Similarly, the dead body of Ram Naresh Verma was on a
cot with an Angocha, a Kathri, a Chadar, another coloured
chadar and one bush-shirt stained with blood. There were stains
of blood on the wall and the memo (Ex Ka 8) thereof was also
prepared and articles with blood on walls were sealed
In the same manner, dead body of Ramdev was found on
the Cot with kathri, chadar, banyan and gamchha stained with
blood, and blood was also found on the ground near the Cot.
These articles were sealed and blood stained and sample earth
were taken and sealed them separately and recovery memo
(Ex.Ka9) was prepared by him. The bedding consisting of
Kathri, Rajai and two chadars and Tehmad of deceased Girish
was found on the cot stained with blood.
The dead body of Girish was found in a pit (gaddha)
where his blood had also fallen. Blood stained and plain earth
were taken into possession and were sealed separately by the
I.O. and memo of this and other articles were prepared (Ext. Ka
10). Then statements of witnesses of recovery were taken
On the same day, he searched for the accused persons but
they were not present at their homes. When he returned from
there, an information was received from an informer and on this
information, he arrested accused Kashi Ram Verma, Raghava
Ram and Ram Tilak on the same day and recorded their
statements. He was, after that, transferred from Tarun P.S, on
In his cross-examination, P.W.10 has deposed before the
trial Court that firstly, he came to the police station from
Ayodhya at 08:40 a.m. and reached the place of occurrence at
08:55 a.m. He did not record the statement at the police station
and when he reached the place of occurrence, S.I. who was
present there, was asked by him to do panchayatnama.
Approximately, three hours have taken for preparation of
panchayatnama. After completing panchayatnama, he prepared
the duplicate C.D. of panchayatnama, recorded the statements
of the witnesses and prepared the site plan. About 3:00 p.m., he
has prepared the site plan. Thereafter, he prepared the recovery
memo as deposed in his examination-in-chief. He stayed at the
place of occurrence till 05:00 p.m. and sent the dead bodies for
post-mortem at 12:15 p..m. by a tractor. Along with the dead
bodies of the deceased, some persons were also gone. He
restrained the informant and his brother. The informant and his
brother were along with him at the time of inspection of the
place of occurrence. He found the dead bodies of the deceased,
except deceased Girish on the cot. He also found the blood
beneath one cot but he did not find any blood beneath the other
Cot. He did not find any blood in the field. He denied the
suggestion that he falsely implicated the accused persons on the
dictate of the informant.
P.W.10 has further deposed in his cross-examination that
he did not mention the distance from the place of incident to
police station, F.I.R. number and weapon of assault in the
panchayatnama but he mentioned only case crime number in
the Panchayatnama. He further deposed that on 11.11.1994, he
recovered a live cartridge of 315 bore during the inspection of
the place of occurrence near the cot of Sukai and he took it and
prepared recovery memo (Ext. Ka. 38), in which the signatures
of witnesses Ram Shanker and Manik Ram were taken.
(12) The evidence of P.W.13 S.I. Sidne Haider shows that on
11.11.1994, he was posted as II officer at police station Tarun
District Faizabad. Before the incident i.e. 08.11.1994, he was
busy in his duty at Ayodhya in “ PkkSng dksslh ifjdzek" and on
11.11.1994, he received information of this case and on
receiving it, he reached the Police Station Tarun, from where he
reached the place of occurrence village Barauli, Police Station
Tarun, wherein police personnel of police station Haiderganj
and police station Bikapur and other employees were present at
the place of occurrence. At that time, Sri Riyaz Khan had
prepared the panchayatnama of the deceased Sukhai and Ram
Naresh. SO Sudhakar Pandey had also reached there and on his
direction, he prepared the panchayatnama of accused Ram Dev
and Girish Chandra. He filled the panchayatnama of the
deceased Ram Dev at 09:00 a.m. and thereafter, sealed the dead
body of deceased Ram Dev in a cloth and prepared the
document in this regard (Ext. Ka.18). On the dead body of the
deceased Ram Dev, one blood stained dhoti and a wrist watch
on the left hand were present. Thereafter, he prepared the photo
lash of the deceased Ram Dev (Ext. Ka. 20). Subsequently, he
conducted the panchayatnama of the deceased Girish Verma.
He started to conduct the panchayatnama of the deceased Girish
Verma on 11.11.1994 at 10:40 a.m. On the dead body of the
deceased Girish Verma, he found a sweater, on which blood
was present. One bushart and a underwear were also present on
the dead body of the deceased Girish Verma. He thereafter
sealed the dead body of the deceased Girish Verma in a cloth
and prepared the documents in this regard. After completion of
all formalities, the dead bodies of the deceased were sent for
post-mortem along with Constable Ram Deen and Chandra
In cross-examination, P.W.13 has stated that while
conducting Panchayatnama, he did not write the number of chik
FIR regarding the incident nor wrote thereon the titled “State
vs.   Whose”.     He   further   deposed    that  while   filling
panchayatnama, he did not give the description of the used
weapon. In the panchayatnama, the distance from the place of
occurrence to the police station has not been mentioned, for
which he did not state any reason. He did not find any mud or
clay on the body of the deceased Girish and if it is found, the
same would have been written in the Panchayatnama.
(13) The evidence of P.W.14-Constable Ram Narayan Pandey shows
that he was posted along with S.I. Riyaz Khan at police station
Haiderganj in 1996-97.       He had seen S.I. Riyaz Khan for
reading and writing and he knows his handwriting and
signature very well. Ext. Ka. 25 form no. 13 is in his
handwriting and his signature.       S.I. Riyaz Khan died on
08.01.1997. The sample seal (Ext. Ka.26) is in the handwriting
and signature of Sri Riyaz Khan. Photo lash (Ext. Ka.27), Ext.
Ka. 28 and Ext. Ka. 29 are in the handwriting and signature of
late Riyaz Khan.      Panchayatnama (Ext. Ka 30) is in the
handwriting and signature of Late Riyaz Khan. The sample
seal of deceased Sukai Verma (Ext. ka. 31) is in the handwriting
and signature of late Riyaz Khan. Photo lash of the deceased
Sukai (Ext. Ka.32) and letters to CMO (Ext. Ka. 32 and 33) are
in the handwriting and signature of Late Riyaz Khan.
(14) After transfer of S.I. Sudhakar Pandey (P.W.10) from police
station Tarun, the investigation was conducted by his successor
Ashutosh Sharma (PW 11), who arrested Ram Milan and
recorded the statements of remaining witnesses and then
submitted charge-sheet (Ext. Ka.15) against the six named
persons.
In cross-examination, P.W. 11 has deposed that he took the
investigation of the case on 14.11.1994.
(15) Going backward, the post-mortem of the dead bodies of
deceased Ram Dev, Ram Naresh, Sukhai and Girish was
conducted on 12.11.1994, at 11:00 a.m., 11:45 a.m., 12:30 p.m.
and 01:00 p.m., respectively, in District Hospital, Faizabad by
Dr. O. P .Khattri (PW-9), who found the ante-mortem injuries
on their person as enumerated hereinbelow :-
“Ante-mortem injuries of the deceased Ram
Dev, aged 65 years :-
right side fore-head 6 cm away from the
eye-brow.
2.     Abraded contusion 4 cm x 1.5 cm on the
right side forehead 1 to 1½ cm below
right side of face at the root of the nose
upto right ear. Clear cut margins.
4.     Incised wound 14 cm x 4 cm x bone deep
on right side face 1 1/2 cm away from
injury no.3 on left side of face. Bone cut.
Parellel to injury no.3 from left to right.
Clear cut margins. Bone cut.
on right side of face 1 cm below injujry
no.4.
on right side of face 1 cm below injury
no.5. Jaw fractured.
below the jaw. Spindle shaped. Clear cut
margins.
deep on right side Neck parallel to injury
no.7 and 1.5 cm below injury no.7.
right side clavicle clear cut margins. Bone
fractured. Going downwards
10.  Incised wound 7 cm x 7 cm x bone deep
on the right shoulder. Humerus bone
11.  Incised wound 10 cm x 1 cm x bone deep
on left fore-arm. Bone clear cut
12.  Incised wound 1.5 cm x 1 cm x bone deep
on the left fore-arm 1 cm above injury
no.11.
13.  Incised wound 1.5 cm x 1 cm x muscle
deep above 1 cm from injury no.12.
14.  Incised wound 1 cm x 0.5 cm x muscle
deep left hand, 1 cm above injury no.13.
15.  Incised wound 4 cm x 1 cm x bone deep
on right fore-arm. Bone underneath clear
cut. Wound was on the back of the upper
part of the forearm.”
As per the opinion of Dr. O.P. Khattri (P.W.9), deceased
Ram Dev died due to shock and haemorrhage on account of
ante-mortem injuries.
“Ante-mortem       injuries of deceased Ram
Naresh, aged 55 years
1.  Incised wound 8 cm x 1 cm x bone deep on
left side head 5 cm from ear. Spindle
deep on left side head 1 cm above the eye
brow. Spindle shaped.
3.  Incised wound 1 cm x 2 cm on left side of
head 2 cm below injury no.2.
left side face 2 cm above the middle of
jaw. Vertically.
5.  Incised wound 17 cm x 2.5 cm x muscle
deep left side Neck in the middle. Blood
vessel and trachea cut.
6.  Incised wound 16 cm x 4 cm x muscle deep
on left side Neck. 2.5 cm below injury
no.5.
lower fore-arm (right). Bone underneath
8.  Incised wound 4 cm x 1.5 cm x muscle
9.  Incised woound 4 cm x 1 cm x bone deep
left fore-arm 4 cm above the joint of
10. Incised wound 5 cm x 4 cm x bone deep
left wrist.
11. Incised wound 5 cm x 1.5 cm x bone deep
left hand.
12. Incised wound 4 cm x 1 cm left hand. 1.5
cm below injury no.11.
13.   Incised wound 3 cm x 1.5 cm x bone deep
left hand 2 cm below injury no.11
As per the opinion of Dr. O.P. Khattri (P.W.9), deceased
Ram Naresh died due to shock and haemorrhage on account of
ante-mortem injuries.
“Ante-mortem injuries of deceased Sukhai,
1.    Incised wound 23 cm x 7 cm x bone deep on
right side of neck starting from the upper lip
to the back of Neck. AI bones vervical
verterae cut.
2.    Incised wound 6 cm x 3 cm x bone deep right
fore-head 3 cm above the right eye brow.
3.    Incised wound 8 cm x 3 cm x muscle deep on
right side face. Extending from the middle
of nose upto right ear below 4 cm. Margins
clear cut. Spindle shape.
4.    Incised wound 4 cm x 1 cm x bone deep on
right fore-head. Rt. Clavicle, Right side 2 nd to
7th ribs fractured. Membrances of Lungs
torn. Right lung cut 7 cm x 4 cm.
As per the opinion of Dr. O.P. Khattri (P.W.9), deceased
Sukhai died due to shock and haemorrhage on account of ante-
mortem injuries.
“Ante-mortem injuries of deceased Girish,
1. Incised wound 14 cm x 8 cm x muscle
cervical bone. Brain matter was coming
2.  Incised wound 10 cm x 1.5 cm x bone
deep on left side of head 7 cm above the
left ear. Spindle shape.
lower part of left fore-arm. There was cut
of bone 2 cm above the ulna bone.
4.  Incised wound 2 cm x 1 cm x muscle deep
front of left hand.
5.  Incised wound 3 cm x 1 cm x muscle deep
front of left hand.
6.  3 incised wounds 10 cm x 7 cm on right
shoulder. The biggest wound being 6 cm x
1 cm and smallest 2 cm x 1 cm x skin
7.  Incised wound 2.5 cm x 2 cm muscle deep
on right upper arm 3 cm below injury
8.  Incised wound 2.5 cm x 2 cm x bone deep
right upper arm 4 cm above the elbow.
10. Incised wound 4 cm x 1.5 cm x muscle
deep on right fore-arm on inferior side 4
cm above the elbow.
11. Several incised wounds in an area of 10
cm x 6 cm exterior of right hand skin
12. Incised wound 7 cm x 4 cm x muscle deep
on right palm.
13. Incised wound 4 cm x 2 cm x bone deep
right palm.
14. Incised wound 4 cm x 2 cm x bone deep
right palm upto index finger.
15. Incised wound 7 cm x 3 cm x bone deep
left knee exterior side.
As per the opinion of Dr. O.P. Khattri (P.W.9), deceased
Girish died due to shock and haemorrhage on account of ante-
mortem injuries.
(16) It is significant to mention here that Dr. O.P. Khattri (P.W.9) in
his deposition before the trial Court had reiterated the aforesaid
cause of death of deceased Ram Dev, Ram Naresh, Sukhai and
Girish and deposed that on 12.11.1994 when he was posted as
Medical Officer in District Hospital, he conducted the post-
mortem of the dead bodies of the deceased Ram Dev, Ram
Naresh, Sukhai and Girish, which were brought by Constable
Chandra Prakash and Ramdeen Rawat of police station Tarun in
sealed clothes. He deposed that on internal examination of the
dead body of deceased Ram Dev, he found that the right
clavicle 4 ribs (3 to 7) on right side chest were fractured; lung
was cut; semi-digest food was present in the stomach; and
faecal matter was in intestines. On internal examination of the
dead body of the deceased Ram Naresh, he found that left
clavicle was fractured; right side ribs (3rd to 6th) were fractured;
both bones of right hand were fractured; semi-digested food
was in the stomach; faecal matter was also in intestines. On
internal examination of dead body of deceased Sukhai, he
found that right clavicle, right side 2nd to 7th ribs were fractured;
membrances of lungs were torned; right lung cut 7 cm x 4 cm;
semi digested food and faecal matter was found in stomach and
intestines. On internal examination of dead body of deceased
Girish, he found that occipital bone back side fractured upto 3
inches; brain matter was coming out; semi digested food and
faecal matter were found present.
(17) The case was committed to the Court of Sessions by the learned
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Faizabad, where the accused Krishna
Murari alias Murli, Kashi Ram Verma , Raghava Ram Verma ,
Ram Milan were charged for offence punishable under Sections
302, 149, 148 I.P.C. and against accused persons Ram Kripal
Verma and Ram Tilak Verma were charged under Section 120-
B I.P.C. They pleaded not guilty to the charges and claimed to
be tried. Their defence was of denial.
(18) During trial, in all, the prosecution examined fourteen
witnesses, namely, P.W. 1-Rama Kant Verma, who is the
informant; P.W.2 Uma Kant Verma, who is the brother of the
informant; P.W.3 Daljeet Singh, P.W.4 Hari Om Singh, P.W.5
Amar Jeet Singh, P.W.6 Mithai Lal, P.W.7 Manik Ram, and
P.W.8 Munna Lal, who were examined to prove the factum of
occurrence and the circumstances; P.W.9 Dr. O.P. Khattri, who
conducted the post-mortem of the dead bodies of four persons;
P.W.10 Sudhakar Pandey and P.W. 11 Ashutosh Sharma, who
were the Investigating Officers of the case; P.W.12 Ram Harsh
Yadava, who was the Head Moharrir and was examined to
prove FIR and GD; and P.W.13 Sibte Haider and P.W.14 Ram
Narain Pandey, who were examined to prove the inquest reports
of the four persons. In defence, Head Constable Nahar Singh
of the C.B.C.I.D. Dog Squad Head Quarter, Lucknow was
examined as D.W.1.
(19) We would first like to deal with the evidence of informant
Rama Kant Verma P.W.1. Since in paragraph-8, we have set
out the prosecution story primarily on the basis of recitals
contained in his examination-in-chief, for the sake of brevity,
the same is not reiterated.      P.W.1 Rama Kant Verma had
deposed     before the trial Court that the incident is of
intervening night of 10/11.11.1994 at about 02:30 a.m. He was
sleeping in Tubewell’s room. Alongwith him, his cousin Girish
Chandra Verma was also sleeping. They were sleeping afer
closing the door of the tubewell room from inside. The name
of the father of Girish Chandra Verma is Ram Naresh Verma.
His grand-father Sukai and his uncle Ram Naresh were sleeping
under the Chhappar on separate cots on the west side of the
tube-well. Ram Dev Verma was sleeping under the Chhappar
situated on the south-west side of the tube-well. His brother
Uma Kant Verma (P.W2) was sleeping on the cot in the west of
the Sariya on the way (rasta) adjacent to the Chhappar where
Ram Naresh, Sukhai were sleeping. His uncle Sukhai and Ram
Naresh raised alarm cpkvks cpkvks (save, save). On hearing this,
he and his brother Girish awoke and saw on opening the door
that Krishna Murari @ Murli son of Ram Jagat and Kashi Ram
son of Tidi armed with Gandasa, and Raghav Ram son of
Nanku and Ram Milan son of Ram Awadh armed with Banka
were cutting his uncle and grand-father. Besides these, 2-3
other persons who had covered their faces by cloth were also
cutting his uncle and his grand-father with Gandasa (halberds).
They (Girish and Rama Kant Verma) raised the alarm and ran
to save their lives. Then, all the appellants had also assaulted
his brother Girish. Thereafter, Ram Dev Verma was assaulted
by these assailants with Gandasa (halbreds) and Banka.        He,
thereafter, ran towards the northern side of tubewell in the
sugarcane field to save his life and his brother Uma Kant Verma
ran into the field adjacent to the Sariya by raising alarm. The
electricity is available to his tubewell. On a branch of ‘Neem’
tree situated in the south-west of the tubewell, electricity bulb
was burning and on its south direction of a branch of another
Neem tree, electricity bulb was burning. He saw the occurrence
in the light of electricity bulb and identified the accused
persons very well. Thereafter, on hearing the alarm, his father
Tiwari, Babu Lal Harijan and others came with Lathi and
torch. On arriving of these witnesses, all the accused ran
towards south direction. On account of the assault of these
accused persons, his uncle Ram Naresh Verma, his grand-father
Sukai, Ram Dev and his brother Girish Chandra Verma died
Before the incident i.e. since 1990, civil litigation of land
was going on between the father of Krishna Murari, namely,
Ram Jag and his family members Ram Dev, Ram Tej, Ram
Naresh. He did not go to lodge the FIR in the night due to fear.
In the morning, when he was going to Police Station Tarun on a
bicycle along with P.W. 7- Manik Ram, P.W. 8-Munna Lal
Verma and one another person, then, on the way, Daljeet Singh
Master (P.W.3) of village Jaisingh Mau and Hari Om Singh
(P.W.4) of village Tikri met him, then, he narrated the whole
incident happened at home to them, thereupon, they told him
that last evening at about 9 PM in the night, at the shop of Ram
Kripal Verma in Lal Ganj Bazar, he had seen Ram Tilak Verma
alongwith Krishna Murari and 2-3 other persons were
consuming non-vegetarian food. On their information, he was
convinced that Ram Tilak Verma, Ram Kripal Verma, Krishna
Murari took the food and committed the murder of his family
members. He wrote the written report of the incident at Tarun
Bazar, reached the Police Station Tarun at about 6:30 a.m. and
handed over the written report to the Munshi. It was marked as
Amar Jeet Singh and Mithai Lal came to his residence
after 3-6 days of occurrence. They told him that in the night of
occurrence, they had also heard alarm coming from Barauli and
on hearing it, they were standing near their house. After some
time, they had seen that Ram Tilak and Ram Kripal armed with
Gandasa and Banka, respectively, were coming from Barauli
and blood was in their hands and weapons. On lighting the
torch, they (Ram Tilak and Ram Kripal) asked who were there,
then, they (Amarjeet Singh and Mithai Lal) hid by fear.
Mithai Lal Verma (PW 6) and Amar Jeet Singh (PW 5)
were the residents of village Balli Kripal Pur and Amar Jeet is
also his distant relation. They had come to his place for
mourning. Thereafter, he went to Police Station Turun and told
these facts to the Inspector but the Inspector told him that he
had already taken the statements of Mithai Lal (P.W.6) and
Amar Jeet Singh (P.W.5). Accused had a gang and they all are
clever, on account of which, Manik Ram, Munna Lal, Babulal
Harijan, Daljit Singh, Amarjeet and Mithai Lal got scared by
the accused persons and met them.
In cross-examination, P.W.1-Rama Kant Verma had
deposed before the trial Court that he had orally stated the
Inspector about the factum as stated by witness Amarjeet and
Mithai Lal. The witnesses Amarjeet and Mithai Lal came to his
residence after 5-6 days of the incident. He further deposed that
he did not remember whether Amarjeet and Mithai Lal were
coming at his house on the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th day of the incident.
He further deposed that he did not recognize Ram Kripal Verma
and Ram Tilak Verma at the time of occurring the incident,
because of which, he did not name them in the FIR. During the
incident, he did not sustain any injury. His brother Uma Kant
Verma was also not assaulted by the accused persons. During the
incident, witnesses Manik Ram, Munna Lal, Babulal Harijan and
his father Ram Tej were not assaulted by the accused persons.
P.W.1 has further deposed that he knew accused Ram Tila
prior to the incident as he was a Master of Junior High School
situated at Vankatta. Before the incident, he had no enmity with
accused Ram Tilak. He also knows accused Ram Kripal prior to
the incident and he had no enmity with the accused Ram Kripal
prior to the incident. Accused Ram Tilak was arrested on the
date of incident. He also deposed that in the examination-in-
chief, though he had stated that the accused persons are having a
gang and they are clever, this fact was not stated to the Inspector
and the reasons for not saying this to Inspector have not been
P.W.1 has also stated that he did not remember as to
whether the night of the incident had moonlight or darkness but it
was slightly cold. He did not remember whether electricity light
is prevailing at the shop of Ram Kripal or near the shop of Ram
Kripal. P.W.1 has further deposed that he saw the shop where
Daljeet Singh, on the date of incident, had narrated the factum at
Lalganj Bazar but he did not remember whether there was light
or not. He had seen the house of witness Amarjeet. He did not
see the house of witness Mithai Lal and accused Ram Tilak but
he knows that they are the residents of village Kripalpur. He
never went to the house of Ram Tilak. He did not tell whether
any person of his family went to the house of Ram Tilak or not.
He had listened that gangster case was going on in the Court
against Ram Kripal. The Inspector recorded his statement at his
residence after panchayatnama. He went from house at 05:00
a.m. for lodging the report. When he left the house, the sun was
not coming out. When he went to lodge the report, there was
neither light nor dark. He was going on a cycle for lodging the
report. 12-15 minutes were taken for reaching the place from
home where he met with witness Daljeet Singh. Thereafter, he
talked with Daljeet Singh for about 10-12 minutes. Witnesses
Daljeet Singh and Hari Om Singh were met on the way and told
him about accused Ram Tilak and Ram Kripal. These witnesses
did not come with him to the police station for lodging the report.
After talking with them for 10-12 minutes, he moved forward.
The facts, which Daljeet Singh and Hari Om Singh stated, were
not noted by him.      25-30 minutes had taken for writing the
written report. 20-25 minutes had taken for reaching Tarun from
the place where he met with Daljeet. A bench was lying in a
shop of Tarun Bazar, upon which he sat and wrote down the
report. At the time of writing report, Manik Ram, Munna Lal and
one person were present there.        Witnesses Manik Ram and
Munna Lal did not see the incident.        He reached the police
station at 06:30 p.m.
P.W.1 had also stated that when he came from the police
station, the police were already present at the place of occurrence.
The Inspector had reached the place of occurrence at about 09:00-
09:45 a.m. The dead bodies of the four deceased persons were
sent for post-mortem between 2:30 p.m-3:00 p.m.
P.W.1 has stated that he saw the accused persons running
away. He further stated the villagers did not see the accused
persons running away and none of the villagers had told him that
they saw Ram Tilak and Ram Kripal running away. On the night
of    incident, he was having torch but he did not remember
whether it was written in the FIR. Thereafter, FIR was read, then,
P.W.1 has stated that he did not say any reason as to why the
factum that he was having torch, was not written in the F.I.R. In
the statement recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C., the factum that
he was having torch on the night of incident, has not been written.
He has also stated that he did not tell whether his brother Uma
Kant was having torch on the night of incident. Though he
showed the torch to the Inspector but he did not tell as to whether
the Inspector has written it or not. There is no record concerning
the recovery memo of his torch or the torch of his brother Uma
P.W.1 had also stated that two electricity bulbs hanging and
lighting on the branches of two neem trees, have not been written
in the FIR. He did not explain why this fact has not been written
in the FIR. The electricity bulb was lighting at the tube-well but
if this fact has not been written in the FIR, he could not tell the
reason. He did not think it appropriate to mention the names of
the person(s), who was carrying the torches at the time of the
incident as he thought that these were small things. They did not
recognize the accused, who covered their faces with cloth, at the
time of incident. He also deposed that his brother Uma Kant, his
father Ram Tej and witnesses of his village did not tell him that
they saw accused Ram Tilak and Ram Kripal at the time of
incident, until submission of charge-sheet. He further stated that
his house was situated at the distance of about 200-250 meters
from the place of occurrence in the middle of village on the
western side.     In the said house, women of his family were
sleeping and no male member of the family was sleeping there at
the time of incident. He had two tubewells; one is at the place of
the incident; and the other is situated in the outskirt of his village.
The distance between the two tubewells is 400 meter. His father
was sleeping on the second tubewell and he did not sleep on the
tubewell situated at the place of occurrence. The tubewell, which
is situated at the place of occurrence, was in the name of Sukhai
and second tubewell was in the name of Ram Dev. There was
only field in the sorrounding of the place of occurrence and there
was no residential area there. The residential area is started by
moving 70 metre on foot on western-northern side from the place
of occurrence. In the middle of this residential area, his house is
situated. After the incident, about 50-100 persons were gathered
there and they all reached at the place of occurrence at about
03:00 am- 03:45 am. In his village, about 50-55 houses were built
and the population of his village was about 250 people. When the
accused persons fled away from the place of occurrence, villagers
were coming with lathis and torches.
P.W.1 had stated that at the time of incident, he and his
brother Uma Kant hid in a field of sugarcane and both of them
were hiding at different places in the field of sugarcane. The
sugarcane field is situated at 5-6 steps north side from the place
of occurrence. Both of them were not burning their torches and
only they raised alarm ‘Save save’. His brother Uma Kant hid at
a distance of 6-7 steps where he hid.
P.W.1 had further stated that he, his brother Uma Kant and
his cousin brother Girish went to the tubewell at about 09:00-
09:45 p.m. after taking dinner from his house and others Sukai,
Ram Naresh, Ramdev and Ram Tej went to the tubewell at about
10:45 p.m. After 5-6 minutes, Ram Tej went to another tubewell.
His grandfather Sukai, uncle Ram Naresh and uncle Ram Dev
were murdered on the cots, whereas Girish was killed outside
the tubewell's pit and thrown into the pit. Girish was not
killed on Cot. Girish was killed outside the tubewell.
(20) P.W 2 Uma Kant Verma, the brother of P.W.1, also stated that
the incident is of the night of 10.11.1994 at 2:30 p.m. He was
sleeping in front of Sariya on the way (rasta) adjacent to the
Chhappar. On the western side of Sariya, there is a field of
sugarcane. His Chhappar of vkslkjk is adjacent to eastern side of
his Sariya. The way, upon which he was sleeping, was in
between the Sariya and Chhappar towards north-south. This
way (rasta) leads up to the northern chak road. In the east of
the Sariya, there is his Osara having two rooms in which
chaff/straw and grains are being kept. On that night, his uncle
Ram Naresh and grand-father Sukai were sleeping on           the
separate Cots in that Osara (vkslkjk). There is tube-well on the
east side of Osara, and in between a Rasta runs which also leads
to the chak-road. On the night of incident, his brother Rama
Kant and his cousin Girish Chandra Verma were sleeping inside
the tube-well, whereas in the south of Chhappar, which also
belonging to him, his grand-father Ram Dev was sleeping.
There is a neem tree in the western side of his tubewell. On the
date of incident, one electricity bulb was burning on the branch
of the neem tree      connected with tube-well.    In the south
direction of the Chappar, in which his grand-father Ram Dev
was sleeping, there is an open ground and thereafter, his
chappar is there. The eastern side of this chappar, there is a
neem tree. On the date of incident, an electricity bulb was
burning in a branch of the tree, which was also connected to the
This incident is of intervening night of about 02:30 a.m.
He heard the noise of cpkvksa cpkvks (save-save) and on hearing
this noise, he woke up. This noise was of his uncle Ram Naresh
and his grand-father Sukai. On woke up, he saw that appellants
Krishna Murari and Kashi Ram armed with Gandasa and
Raghava Ram and Ram Milan armed with Banka were causing
hurt to his grand-father Sukai and his uncle Ram Naresh and
apart from them, there were 2-3 other persons also who had
covered their faces. They were also causing hurt to Ram Naresh
and Sukai. At that time, his brother Rama Kant and his cousin
Girish came out of the room of tubewell. They all raised alarm.
Thereafter, the said accused persons ran towards his brother
Rama Kant and cousin Girish for assaulting and started
assaulting. In the western-southern side of the tubewell of
Girish, Ram Dev was sleeping and they all ran for assaulting
and started assaulting. Thereafter, he (P.W.2) and Rama Kant
(P.W.1) ran towards north in the sugar-cane field by raising
alarm and hiding in the sugarcane.        On raising alarm and
hearing noise, his father Tej Ram Verma, Manik Ram. Munna
Lal, Lallan Prasad Tewari, Babu Lal and other persons of his
village came with lathi and torch whereupon the accused ran
towards south. On the assault of the accused, his uncle Ram
Naresh, his grand-father Sukai, Ram Dev and cousin Girish
Chandra Verma died on spot.
Prior to the incident i.e. since 1990, litigation of land is
going on in between Krishna Murari and his family. There was
enmity in respect of land, on account of which, the accused
persons killed the members of his family, which was seen and
recognized by him in the light of the electricity bulb very well.
On account of fear, FIR of the incident was not lodged in the
night, however, his brother went to lodge the FIR at about 5
A.M. in the morning. Accused persons Krishna Murari, Kashi
Ram, Raghav Ram and Ram Milan belong to his village. In the
morning after the occurrence, he came to know that Krishna
Murari had shifted his cattle to Ram Kripal's house and his
family members are also not in the house. This incident had
occurred in connivance with Ram Kripal. Ram Kripal has
talking terms with Krishna Murari and they are friends. A
gangster case is going on against Ram Kripal. Accused persons
had a gang.
In his cross-examination, P.W.2 stated that after the
incident, all the family members were gathered and talked to
each other regarding the incident.     He did not remember
whether the conversation with regard to lodging the report took
place amongst them or not.       However, a conversation took
place between his brother and family members with regard to
lodging of a report against whom. The conversation about
lodging the report against Krishna Murari, Kashi Ram, Ram
Milan and Raghav took place and not against any other persons.
He did not remember whether conversation about lodging the
report against Ram Kripal and Ram Tilak happened or not.
P.W.2 has further deposed that his uncle Ram Dev was
killed on the cot. Accused had assaulted Ram Dev for about
1/2-1 minute. When his grandfather and uncle were assaulted,
Girish and Rama Kant had came out from the tubewell room.
His grandfather and his uncle were assaulted at a distance of 5-
7 steps from the tubewell. After coming out from tubewell
room, they an towards the field of sugarcane and not standing
there. He also ran towards the field of sugarcane but he ran in
other way. When Sukai and Ram Naresh were beaten, they ran
towards the field of sugarcane. After hiding themselves in the
field of sugarcane, how much time the accused stayed at the
place of the incident, he did not tell because nothing was
visible from the field of sugarcane.
P.W.2 had further deposed that his brother was going on
by a cycle to lodge the report. He did not remember whether
any person along with his brother went to lodge the report or
not. The accused who inovlved in the incident did not hide their
faces. Accused came to the place of incident silently and they
did not challenge anyone.
P.W.2 had further stated that the Inspector had seen the
place where he was sleeping and at the time of performing the
Panchayatnama of the deceased, he was present there. At the
time of Panchayatnama, he told the Inspector about the
electricity bulb burning at the time of incident.      When the
police came to the place of incident in the morning, witnesses
Munni Lal, Manik Ram, Munna Lal, Babu Lal and his brother
Rama Kant were present. He stated the weapons of assault
used in the commission of crime to the Inspector during
investigation. He further stated that at the time of the incident,
Sukai, Ram Dev, Ram Naresh, Girish, Rama Kant and Uma
Kant were sleeping at the same tubewell, whereas Ram Tej was
sleeping at the second tubewell which is situated at a distance
of 15 meters from the place of occurrence.         In the house
situated in the village, only women were sleeping and not a
single man was sleeping there. He also stated that ten minutes
would take to reach from his house to tubewell. He has stated
to the Inspector about burning of electricity bulbs at two places
hanging on neem trees and if it is not written in his statement,
he cannot tell the reason for not writing the same in his
statement. Neither he nor his brother was having a torch at the
time of incident. Except the light of electricity bulb, there was
no other source of light.
(21) P.W. 3-Daljeet Singh had deposed before the trial Court that
he knows Rama Kant of Barauli village and four members
of his family were killed prior to 2½- 3 years in the night.
On the next day of the incident, he did not meet Rama Kant
in the morning. However, he had gone to his house only
the next day in the morning on knowing the incident where
40 - 50 persons were coming and going. He further stated
that he did not tell Rama Kant that prior to one day of the
incident, Ram Kripal, Ram Tilak and Krishna Murari were
present at the shop of Ram Kripal. He has also not told to
Rama Kant that he and Hari Om Singh were staying in
front of the shop of Ram Kripal for filling air in his
motorcycle.
In his cross-examination, Ram Kripal had a fair price
shop on the road of Lalganj Market. When he went to the
house of Rama Kant in the morning, then the Inspectors
and Police were present there and at that time, the Inspector
had neither interrogated him nor recorded his statement.
Thereafter, statement recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C.
by the Inspector was narrated to him (P.W.3), then, he
stated that he never made any such statement. He further
stated that he did not know about the incident nor the
accused person(s) involved in the incident.
(22) P.W.4-Hari Om Singh also deposed before the trial Court that
he is the resident of village Tikari, Police Station Tarun, District
Faizabad. Before the incident, he was doing the work of Jeevan
Bima Nigam Ltd. He knows Rama Kant Verma of Barauli
village and the incident of killing the family members of Rama
Kant was happened in the year 1994 and for this he had
knowledge.     After the night of incident,       he was going to
Sultanpur in the morning and when he reached his house, four
persons were enjoying the bone fire sitting beneath Chapper
situated in front of his house; name of such persons did not
remember by him; they had stated him about killing of four
persons of the family of Rama Kant; and at that time, it was
about 05:00 a.m. After knowing this incident, he went to
Sultanpur and when he reached Jaisingh Mau village, then,
Daljeet Singh Master met him there. On seeing Daljeet Singh
Master, he stayed there, then, Daljeet Singh Master had also
told him the hearing about this occurrence. When he and
Daljeet Master were talking to each other, at that moment,
Rama Kant and 2-3 other persons had met him and told about
the occurrence. Daljeet Singh Master had informed that a day
before Krishna Murari etc were sitting at the shop of Ram
Kripal and were talking. He has also told him that when he was
returning at 09:00 p.m. in the night from Faizabad, he also saw
that 3-4 persons were sitting at the shop of Ram Kripa but he
did not know who were sitting there. No other person was
sitting on his motorcycle. Master Daljeet was talking to some
person just near the shop of Ram Kripal. He stayed there on
account of filling the air in his motorcycle. The filling of air
shop was at a distance of 5-6 latha in front of the road and shop
of Krishna Mururi. He went to the air filling shop but the shop
was closed. Thereafter, he returned from there and on the way,
Master Daljeet Singh met him, he told him that he was
returning from Faizabad. Thereafter, they went to their house.
He had not gone to the shop of Ram Kripal. He did not see
Ram Kripal, Krishna Murari and Ram Tilak at the shop of Ram
In his cross-examination, P.W.4     stated that when he
reached Rama Kant’s tubewell where the incident occurred,
Master Daljeet was present. First of all, the Inspector
interrogated Daljeet Singh and thereafter the Inspector
interrogated him. Ram Kripal is the friend of Krishna Murari
and both of them were often seen roaming around on a
motorcycle. He further deposed that before the incident, he did
the insurance of Rama Kant and one of his brothers. He denied
the suggestion that on account of relation with Rama Kant, he
has been made the witness in the instant case.
(23) PW5 Amar Jeet has deposed that he did not meet any one at
about 3 a.m. on that morning and he came to know about this
incident only in the morning when Ram Sumer had told the
incident.
In his cross-examination, P.W.5 has deposed that he is the
relative of Rama Kant. He came to know about the murder of
family members of Rama Kant at about 08:00 a.m. He reached
at the house of Rama Kant at about 09:00 a.m. He was stayed at
the house of Rama Kant for about one hour and at that time, he
did not know as to who had killed the family members of Rama
Kant. Within an hour, someone told him there who had killed
them.
(24)  P.W.6-Mithai Lal had deposed before the trial Court that he did
not hear any noise at the time of occurrence from the place of
occurrence.
(25) PW.7 had deposed before the trial Court that he did not hear any
noise at the time of occurrence and did not go to the tube-well
room and did not see any one running.
(26) PW.8 Munna Lal also deposed before the trial that he did not
hear any noise and did not see any one running.
In his cross-examination, P.W.8 has deposed that on the
night of incident, he was at his house in the village and about
05:30 a.m., news was spread in the village that family members
of Rama Kant and Uma Kant were killed in the night by
someone and the name of killer was not taken by anyone.
(27) From the defence side, Head Constable Nahar Singh was
examined as D.W.1. In his deposition, he has stated that on
11.11.1994, he was posted as Constable in the Dog Squad of
C.B.C.I.D. Headquarter, Lucknow. On demand of the police of
police station Tarun, District Faizabad in relation to Case Crime
No. 156 of 1994, under Sections 302/120 I.P.C., he reached
with dog at Faizabad at about 03:00 p.m.           Thereafter, he
reached at about 04:00 p.m. with local police at the place of
occurrence, where dog Neera was given the smell of the mark
of foot. On smelling, dog Neera went near the tubewell, took a
round there and returned without success. He proved the
relevant entries and report in this respect Ext. Kha.1 and 2. He
has further deposed that in cases where the accused are named
in the FIR, there is no necessity to bring the dogs to trace the
culprits. He stated that the dog squad is required only when the
culprits have to be traced.
(28) In the statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C., all the accused
persons claimed to be innocent and denied the allegations
levelled against them and stated that witnesses Rama Kant
Verma and Uma Kant Verma had falsely implicated them on
account of enmity.
Accused Krishna Murari alias Murli had stated in his
statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C. that civil litigation was
going on between him and the informant; unknown miscreants
had killed the deceased in the night; no one had seen incident;
when the son of the informant went to the place of the incident,
then, he found that his family members were killed; and after
that, on consultation and on account of enmity, he was falsely
implicated in the case so that he would not pursue civil
litigation.
Accused Raghava Ram Verma had stated in his statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. that Uma Kant Verma, at page-8 of
his statement before the trial court, has deposed that his brother
Rama Kant Verma, on consultation with the family members in
the morning, lodged the report against him, Krishna Murari,
Ram Milan and Kashi Ram.
Accused Kashi Ram has stated in his statement under Section
313 Cr.P.C. that Rama Kant Verma and Uma Kant Verma, after
consultation with the family members, had falsely implicated
him, Krishna Murari, Raghavaram and Ram Milan and
witnesses had not given any evidence.
Accused Ram Tilak Verma has stated in his statement under
Section 313 Cr.P.C. that there was no evidence against him.
Accused Ram Kripal Verma has stated in his statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. that no circumstantial or oral
evidence has been given against him by any witnesses and no
witness has given against him direct evidence. At the time of
the incident, he was the owner of fair price shop and sugarcane
situated at Walikripalpur and on account of this reason, the
police and other persons have falsely implicated them.
(29) The learned trial Court believed the evidence adduced by Rama
Kant Verma (P.W.1) and Uma Kant Verma (P.W.2) and
disbelieved the defense plea and convicted and sentenced
Krishna Murari alias Murli, Raghava Ram, Kashi Ram and
Ram Milan and acquitted Ram Kripal Verma and Ram Tilak
Verma in the manner stated in paragraph-2.
(30) Hence, these appeals, revision and reference.
(31) On behalf of the convicts/appellants, Shri Umesh Pratap Singh
and Sri Shitla Prasad Tripathi, learned Counsel have argued that
(I)    The FIR is ante-timed. According to him, FIR number,
distance of police station from the place of occurrence,
weapon of assault, title of the case have not been
mentioned in the four Inquest Reports prepared by the
two police officers under the supervision and direction of
the Investigating Officer Sri Sudhakar Pandey (P.W.10)
as is evident from the depositions of P.W.10-Sudhakar
Pandey and P.W.13-Sifate Haider. Further, DW-1 Nahar
has stated before the trial Court that on 11.11.1994, at
about 11:00 p.m., a demand was made from Faizabad for
Dog Squad and he reached Faizabad at 3:00 p.m. and
after that, he reached the place of occurrence with sniffer
dog Neera at about 04:00 p.m. He, thereafter, gave the
sniffer dog the smell from the spot but the dog went upto
the tube-well, took a round there and returned without
success. D.W.1 had further stated that in cases where the
accused are named in the FIR, there is no necessity to
bring the dog to trace the culprits and dog squad is
requisitioned only when the culprits have to be traced. In
these backgrounds, his submission is that the FIR of the
incident was not in existence from the time of inquest
report till the returning of sniffer dog from the place of
occurrence as P.W.2-Uma Kant Verma, in his cross-
examination, had categorically stated before the trial
Court that after the incident, all the family members had
gathered and talked to each other        in respect of the
incident and conversation took place with his brother to
the family members in respect of lodging of report
against whom person(s) and further P.W.2 has stated that
a conversation was going on in respect of lodging report
against Krishna Murari, Kashi Ram, Ram Milan and
Raghav and not against other persons. In support of his
submission, he has placed reliance upon the judgment of
the Madras High Court in the case of Micheal alias Nai
Micheal Vs. State passed in Crl. A. (MD) No. 178 of
2010 on 03.09.2010.
(II) P.W.10-Sudhakar Pandey has deposed before the trial
Court that he recorded the statements of witnesses Daljeet
Singh and Hari Om Singh at the time of panchayatnama
when they reached the place of occurrence and, whatever
he found the evidence in the statements of Daljeet Singh
and Hari Om Singh, on that basis he arrested Ram Tilak.
In addition to that, there was no other evidence against
Ram Tilak for arresting him, whereas as per the F.I.R.,
Ram Tilak was named accused, which establishes that the
FIR is ante-timed.
(III) The entire case rests on the ocular testimony of P.W.1 and
P.W.2, who are said to have witnessed the incident. Both
of them are interested witnesses. The presence of P.W.1-
Rama Kant Verma and P.W.2-Uma Kant Verma is highly
doubtful. P.W.1, in his cross-examination, had deposed
before the trial court that during the incident, no injury on
his body of any types had occurred; his brother Uma Kant
Verma did not sustain any type of injury during the
incident by the accused persons; during incident,
witnesses of the case Manik Ram, Munna Lal, Babu Lal
Harijan and his father Ramtej were also not sustained any
type of injury from the side of accused persons.
According to him, P.W.2-Uma Kant, in his examination-
in-chief, at one place, had stated that thereafter, the
accused ran for assaulting his brother Rama Kant and his
cousin Girish and assaulted them. Later on, P.W.2, in
cross-examination, had stated that his brother Rama Kant
was not assaulted. P.W.2, in cross-examination, has also
stated before the trial Court that some persons were
stayed whole night at the tubewell and some persons had
gone from there; they did not try to go to the police
station in the night with their assistance; Chaukidar
neither came there nor he was called. He also stated that
P.W.2-Uma Kant Verma had stated that though Ram Dev
stood, he did not run, whereas P.W.1 had stated that Ram
Dev also stood from cot. P.W.2 had further stated that
when his grand-father and his uncle were beaten, at that
time, he and Girish (deceased) were coming out from
tubewell and his uncle and grand-father was beaten at a
distance of 5-7 steps from tubewell and after coming out
from tubewell, they, while raising the alarm, ran towards
the field of sugarcane and not standing there. P.W.1 has
stated that accused persons while leaving Ram Naresh
and Sukai, ran towards him and he, thereafter, ran
towards the northern side. P.W.1 had later on stated that
the accused ran towards Ram Dev and Girish. In these
backgrounds, his submission is that the presence of P.W.1
and P.W.2 during the incident are doubtful and their
statements are contradictory.
IV The medical evidence does not support the prosecution
story. As per the statement of P.W.1, P.W.2 and the F.I.R.,
the incident was in the night of about 02:30 p.m. P.W.1
and P.W.2 have stated that deceased Girish after taking
dinner at about 09:15 p.m. and other deceased at 10:15
p.m., came at the tubewell. P.W.9-Dr. O.P. Khatri has
stated that half digested food was found in the stomach of
the four deceased, which could be of three to four hours.
His submission is that from the statements of P.W.1,
P.W.2 and P.W.9, it transpires that all the deceased had
eaten before 10:00 O’clock in the night and the maximum
time of three hours of the above meal is added to it, then,
the incident will be around 01:00 a.m. in the night and if
one hour survival time is excluded as stated by P.W.9,
then, the incident took place at 12:00 O’clock in the
night, which creates reasonable doubt the presence of
P.W.1 and P.W.2 at the place of occurrence during the
incident. In this regard, he has placed reliance upon the
judgments of this Court passed by a Co-ordinate Bench
of this Court in Criminal Appeal No. 431 of 1990 :
Jaikaran and another Vs. State of U.P., decided on
V. While passing the impugned judgment, the learned trial
Court has committed an error in adopting two separate
parameters, by one way acquitted two accused persons,
namely, Ram Tilak Verma and Ram Kripal Verma and
by the other way, convicted and awarded the appellants
capital sentence on the same set of facts and evidences.
In this regard he has invited our attention towards the
judgment of the Apex Court in Criminal Appeal No.
434-436 of 2020 : Jaikam Khan vs. The State of Uttar
Pradesh, decided on 15.12.2021 and has stated that the
Apex Court in the aforesaid judgment held in para-81
about choosing between two or more possibilities, and
preponderates of one over the other etc. He has also
placed reliance upon the judgment of the Apex Court in
Amar Singh Vs. The State (NCT of Delhi) : Criminal
Appeal No. 335 of 2015, decided on 12.10.2020.
VI The prosecution has failed to prove the motive of the
appellants to commit the murders of the deceased but
from the evidence of the prosecution, it is established that
the informant P.W.1 Rama Kant Verma had falsely
implicated the appellants in the instant case. The
evidences of the prosecution show that a litigation was
pending between the victims and one of the appellant,
namely, Krishna Murari and there was no enmity with the
other appellants and two acquitted persons, however,
P.W.1 and P.W.2, in their cross-examination, has admitted
the facts that there occurred some quarrel in between
Ram Milan, appellants and prosecution witnesses with
respect to the taking of water of the fields. It has also
been admitted that motor of Raghav Ram had been stolen
and in that theft case, Raghav Ram and Kashi Ram had
made complained against Uma Kant Verma P.W.2 and in
that case, police made inquiry and came to the residence
of Uma Kant Verma and had left after inquiry without
doing anything against Uma Kant Verma . According to
him, these four appellants are not related closely or
distantly to each other and there was no reason for these
persons to have united to commit the murder of four
persons in a pre-planned manner.
VII  The beneficiary of the incident appears to be the
prosecution side and not the appellants and two acquitted
persons. He argued that Sukai had three sons, namely,
(father of P.W.1-Rama Kant Verma and P.W.2-Uma Kant
Verma ) and Girish (deceased) is the son of Ram Naresh
(deceased)     Ram Dev (deceased) had three married
daughters. Therefore, the property left by Sukai and his
two deceased sons came to be vested in Ram Tej, father
of P.W.1 and P.W.2.
VIII The statement recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C. has not
been considered by the trial Court. The investigation of
the case is also tainted as weapon of assault has not been
recovered by the Investigating Officer; statement under
Section 161 Cr.P.C. of P.W.10 Sri Sudhakar Pandey and
Constable Ram Harsh Yadav, who had scribed the chik
F.I.R., has not been found in the case diary; father of
P.W.1 has not been examined as prosecution witness
while as per FIR he was eye-witness; no injury has been
found on the person of P.W.1 and P.W.2; the prosecution
has not explained the delay for sending G.D. before
Circle Officer after three days; darkness found in the
fields; no nearest villagers were examined by the
Investigating Officer nor produced before the trial Court
for his/her examination; recovery memo of bed sheets of
the cots of the deceased have not been examined by the
Investigating Officer during trial proceedings nor
produced.
IX    Lastly, it has been argued that the appellants are more than
70 years old and are languishing in jail for more than 17
years without committing any offence, hence the
impugned judgment is liable to be quashed.
(32) On behalf of the State, Shri Vimal Kumar Srivastava, learned
Government Advocate assisted by Shri Chandra Shekhar
Pandey, learned Additional Government Advocate has argued
I.    Though the deceased are the family members of P.W.1
and P.W.2 and are related to each other, their testimony
cannot be discarded merely because the relationship can
never be a factor to affect the credibility of witnesses.
His submission is that P.W.1 and P.W.2 have established
their presence at the place and time of occurrence and
their statements are trustworthy.       In support of this
contention, he has placed reliance upon Yogesh Singh
Shanekar Dubey Vs. State of Bihar : (2019) 6 SCC
501, Sudhakar alias Sudharshan Vs. State represented
by the Inspector of Police, Sri Rangam Police Station
II.  The failure of the prosecution to recover the weapon from
the accused persons/appellants is not fatal to the
prosecution case as      the statements of eye-witnesses
P.W.1 and P.W.2 have been clear and consistent while
describing the sequence of events that had taken place on
the day of the occurrence. There is no material
discrepancy or contradiction in the statements of P.W.1
and P.W.2 as they had identified the appellants, who
committed the murders of the deceased with Gandasa and
Banka, which also corroborates with the medical
evidence.   In support of this assertion, he has placed
reliance upon Ram Singh Vs. State of Rajasthan :
III. The statements of P.W.1 and P.W.2 show that appellants
committed the murder of the four deceased persons in the
night of 10.11.1994 at about 02:30 a.m. with Gandasa and
Banka and the medical evidences have also supported the
prosecution case. There is direct evidence against the
appellants for murdering of the deceased. The trial Court
has rightly discarded the plea of the appellants.      His
submission is that as the ocular testimony of P.W.1 and
P.W.2 are reliable and trustworthy, it cannot be discarded
only because of absence of motive. In this regard, he has
placed reliance upon the judgment of the Apex Court in
Bipin Kumar Mondal Vs. State of West Bengal                  :
IV.    So far as the sentence is concerned, while placing
reliance upon Machhi Singh and others Vs. State of
Punjab : (1983) SCC 470, he argued that the trial Court
has    rightly   sentenced    the  appellants    for   capital
punishment as the prosecution has fully established that
this case falls under the category of ‘rarest of rare cases’.
(33) None responds on behalf of the revisionist/informant nor
learned Counsel for the respondents no. 1 and 2/acquitted
persons in Criminal Revision No. 14 of 2000.
However, learned Government Advocate appearing on behalf of
the State has stated that no appeal against the acquittal of Ram
Kripal and Ram Tilak have been filed on behalf of the State.
His submission is that the trial Court, after appreciating the
evidence on record, has rightly acquitted Ram Kripal and Ram
Tilak as the charge against them is only of conspiracy for
committing murders, which the prosecution has not proved.
(34) We have heard Sri Umesh Pratap Singh and Sri Shitla Prasad
Tiwari,    learned    Counsel    appearing    on  behalf    of   the
convicts/appellants, Sri Vimal Kumar Srivastava, learned
Government Advocate assisted by Sri Chandra Shekhar Pandey,
learned Additional Government Advocate for the State/
respondent at length and have carefully gone through the
impugned judgment and order of conviction and sentence
passed by the learned trial Court. We have also re-appreciated
the entire evidence on record, particularly the depositions of
PW1 Rama Kant Verma and PW2 Uma Kant Verma. We have
also considered the ante-mortem injuries found on four
deceased persons.
(35) It would become manifest from the aforesaid that the learned
trial Court has based the conviction of appellants and acquittal
of Ram Tilak Verma and Ram Kripal Verma on the ocular
testimony of the informant Rama Kant Verma PW-1 and Uma
Kant Verma       PW-2, who are the family members of the
deceased.    Submission       of  learned   Counsel     for   the
convicts/appellants that the testimonies of P.W.1 and P.W.2
cannot be relied upon as they are interested and family
members of the deceased and further their presence at the place
of occurrence is doubtful.
(36) Undisputedly, both P.W.1-Rama Kant Verma and P.W.2-Uma
Kant Verma, who are eye-witnesses, are family members of the
deceased. It is settled law that merely because the witnesses are
interested and related witnesses, it cannot be a ground to
disbelieve their testimony. However, the testimony of such
witnesses has to be scrutinized with due care and caution and
upon scrutiny of the evidence of such witnesses, if the Court is
satisfied that the evidence is creditworthy, then, there is no bar
on the Court in relying on such witness. (See Dalbir Kaur Vs.
State of Punjab : (1976) 4 SCC 158, Piara Singh and others
Vs. State of Punjab : (1977) 4 SCC 452, Anil Phukan Vs.
State of Assam : (1993) 3 SCC 282, Sudhkar alias
Sudharshan Vs. State Represented by the Inspector of
(2018) 5 SCC 435, Sheo Shankar Dubey Vs. State of Bihar :
(37) In Kartik Malhar Vs. State of Bihar : (1996) 1 SCC 614, the
Apex Court has held that a close relative who is a very natural
witness cannot be regarded as an interested witness. Paras-15
and 16 of the report are reproduced as under :-
“15. As to the contention raised on behalf of the
appellant that the witness was the widow of the
deceased and was, therefore, highly interested
and her statement be discarded, we may
observe that a close relative who is a natural
witness regarded as an interested witness. The
term "interested" postulates that the witness
must have some direct interest in having the
accused somehow or the other convicted for
some animus or for some other reason. In
Dalbir Kaur and Others v. State of Punjab,
(1976) 4 SCC 158, it has been observed as
"Moreover a clause relative who is a very
natural witness cannot be regarded as an
interested, witness. The term 'interested
postulates that the person concerned must
have some direct interest in seeing that the
accused person is somehow or the other
convicted either because he had some animus
with the accused or for some other reason.
Such is not the case here,"
In Dalip Singh v. State of Punjab, AIR (1953) SC
364, it has laid down as under :
"A witness is normally to be considered
independent unless he or she springs from
sources which are likely lo be tainted and
that usually means unless the witness has
cause such as enmity against the accused, to
wish to implicate him falsely. Ordinarily, a
close relative would be the last to screen the
real culprit and falsely implicate an innocent
person. It is true, when feelings run high and
there is personal cause for enmity, that there
is tendency to drag in an innocent person
against whom a witness has a grudge along
with the guilty, but foundation must be laid
for such a criticism and the mere fact of
relationship far from being a foundation is
often a sure guarantee of truth. However, we
are not any sweeping generalisation. Each
case must be judged on its own facts. Our
observations are only made to combat what
is so often but forward in cases before us as a
general rule of prudence. There is no such
general rule. Each case must be limited to
and be governed by its own facts."
(38) Thus, it will be necessary to scrutinize the evidence of P.W.1-
Rama Kant Verma and P.W.2-Uma Kant Verma with more
care, caution and circumspection.
(39) It transpires from the depositions of P.W.1-Rama Kant Verma
that all four convicts/appellants and 2-3 unknown persons who
covered their faces came to the tubewell of the informant’s
family in the intervention night of 10/11.11.1994 at 02:30 p.m.
According to him, at that time, he was sleeping along with his
cousin brother Girish Chandra Verma inside the tube-well room
by shutting its door; his uncle Ram Naresh (father of Girish
Chandra Verma) and his grand-father Sukai were sleeping on
separate cots under the Chhappar situated in the direction of
west of tube-well; another uncle Ram Dev was sleeping under
the Chhappar situated on South side of the tube-well; and his
brother Uma Kant (P.W.2) was sleeping west side of Sariya on
the way (rasta), which is adjacent to the Chhappar where Ram
Naresh and Sukai were sleeping. According to him, on the
alarm of his grand-father Sukai and his uncle Ram Naresh
cpkvks&cpkvks (save save), he (P.W.1) and his cousin brother
awoke and opened the door of tubewell and saw that Krishna
Murari alias Murli and Kashi Ram armed with Gandasa and
Raghav Ram and Ram Milan armed with Banka were causing
hurt to Ram Naresh and Sukai and 2-3 persons who had
covered their faces by means of cloth were causing hurt to them
by means of Banka and Gandasa both. On seeing this, he and
his cousin brother Girish raised alarm. They ran to help his
grand-father Sukai and cousin Ram Naresh, whereupon all the
appellants started causing hurt to Girish and thereafter the
appellants caused hurt to Ram Dev by means of Gandasa and
Banka. After that, he ran inside the northern side of sugarcane
field whereas his brother Uma Kant Verma (P.W.2) ran into the
field, which is adjacent to Sariya and is towards north.
According to him, the electricity bulb was burning on the Neem
tree situated south-west of the tube-well. There was another
neem tree on which also electricity bulb was hanging and was
burning. He saw the occurrence in the light of the electricity
bulb and identified the four appellants. On alarm, Ram Tej,
Babu Lal Harijan and several villagers came armed with lathies
and with torches. Thereafter, all the appellants/miscreants ran
away towards south. All the four injured persons died on the
spot due to injuries. He further stated that he did not go to
lodge the FIR immediately due to fear in the night. In the
morning, he went to police station Tarun on a bicycle along
with P.W.7 Manik Ram, P.W.8 Munna Lal Verma and one
another person. While they were on their way to police station,
then, Daljeet Singh (P.W.3) of village Jaisingh Mau and Hari
Om Singh (P.W.4) of village Tikri told him that last evening at
about 09:00 a.m., on the shop of Ram Kripal Verma in Lal
Ganj Bazar, he had seen Ram Tilak Verma along with Krishna
Verma and 2-3 other person taking non-vegetarian food. He
stated that on this information, he was convinced that the
conspiracy was hatched by Ram Tilak, Ram Kripal and Krishna
Murari etc. to commit the murders. He reached the police
station at 06:30 p.m. and handed over written report (Ext. Ka.1)
to the police.
(40) According to P.W.2-Uma Kant Verma, who is brother of P.W.1-
Rama Kant Verma , at the time of the incident i.e. in the night
of 10/11.11.1994. at about 02:30 a.m., he was sleeping in front
of Sariya on the way (rasta) adjacent to the Chhappar and that
in the western side of Sariya, there is a field of sugarcane and
that his Chhappar of vkslkjk is adjacent to eastern side of his
Sariya. According to him, the way, he was sleeping, was in
between the Sariya and Chhappar in north-south and that this
way (rasta) leads up to the northern chak road. He has stated
that in the east of the Sariya, his Osara has two rooms in which
chaff/straw and grains are being kept and on that night, his
uncle Ram Naresh and grand-father Sukai were sleeping on the
separate Cots in that Osara (vkslkjk). There is tube-well east of
Osara, and in between a Rasta runs which also leads to the chak
road. He further stated that on the night of the incident, his
brother Rama Kant and his cousin Girish Chandra Verma were
sleeping inside the tube-well, whereas in the south of the
Chhappar, which also belonged to him, his grand-father Ram
Dev was sleeping. There is a neem tree in the western side of
his tubewell. On the date of the incident, an electricity bulb was
burning in a branch of the neem tree, which was connected with
tube-well. In the south direction of the Chapper, in which his
grand-father Ram Dev was sleeping, there is an open ground
and thereafter, there is his chapper. The eastern side of this
chapper, there is a neem tree. On the date of the incident, an
electricity bulb was burning in a branch of the tree, which was
also connected with the tubewell. He listened the noise of cpkvksa
cpkvks (save-save). On this noise, he woke up and saw that
appellants Krishna Murari and Kashi Ram armed with Gandasa
and Raghava Ram and Ram Milan armed with Banka were
causing hurt to his grand-father Sukai and his uncle Ram
Naresh and apart from them, there were 2-3 other persons also
who had covered their faces. They were also causing hurt to
Ram Naresh and Sukai. At that time, his brother Rama Kant
and his cousin Girish came out of the room of tubewell. They
all raised alarm. Thereafter, the accused persons ran towards his
brother Rama Kant and cousin Girish for assaulting and started
assaulting. In the western-southern side of the tubewell of
Girish, Ram Dev was sleeping and they all ran for assaulting
and started assaulting. Thereafter, he (P.W.2) and Rama Kant
(P.W.1) ran towards north in the sugar-cane field by raising
alarm and hiding in the sugarcane. On alarm and noise, his
father Tej Ram Verma, Manik Ram. Munna Lal, Lallan Prasad
Tewari, Babu Lal and other persons of his village came with
lathi and torch whereupon the accused ran towards south. On
the assault of the accused, his uncle Ram Naresh, his grand-
father Sukai, Ram Dev and cousin Girish Chandra Verma died
on the spot.
(41) Both P.W.1-Rama Kant Verma and P.W.2-Uma Kant Verma
have stated that on the date of occurrence i.e. in the intervening
night of 10.11.1994, at 02:30 a.m., Rama Kant Verma (P.W.1)
was sleeping along with cousin Girish Chandra Verma
(deceased) inside tube-well room after shutting its door; his
uncle Ram Naresh Verma          (deceased) and his grand-father
Sukai (deceased) were sleeping under Chhappar on separate
cots west of the tube-well; uncle Ram Dev (deceased) was
sleeping under the chhappar south of the tube-well; and Uma
Kant Verma (P.W.2) was sleeping west of the Sariya on the
Rasta (way), which is adjacent to the chhappar where Ram
Naresh (deceased), Sukai (deceased) were sleeping. Both these
witnesses i.e. P.W.1 and P.W.2 have further stated that
appellants Krishna Murari alias Murli and Kashi Ram were
armed with Gandasa and appellants Raghava Ram and Ram
Milan were armed with Banka. They all and 2-3 other persons
who had covered their faces by means of cloth and armed with
Banka and Gandasa were causing hurt to their uncle Ram
Naresh (deceased) and their grand-father Sukai (deceased).
They also stated that on seeing causing hurt, both Girish
(deceased) and Rama Kant (P.W.1) raised alarm and ran to help
Ram Naresh (deceased) and Sukai (deceased) and thereafter, all
the appellants were causing hurt to Girish (deceased) by means
of Gandasa and Banka and thereafter, they ran inside the sugar-
cane field. They also stated that they saw the incident in the
light of electricity bulb, hanging in the branches of two Neem
trees. They also stated that appellants and other assailants ran
away, after assaulting Ram Naresh, Sukai, Ram Dev and
(42) We have gone through the evidence of Rama Kant Verma
(P.W.1) and Uma Kant Verma (P.W.2) and find them to be
wholly truthful witnesses. Since they have furnished the same
manner of assault and while dealing with their evidence, we
have found that their version      in relation to the assault on the
deceased is in consonance with medical evidence. Further, we
find that they have explained their presence at the place of the
incident. They have stated that they were sleeping there on the
date and time of the incident.
(43) It is pertinent to mention that although P.W.1-Rama Kant Verma
and P.W.2-Uma Kant Verma were extensively cross-examined,
nothing could be extracted there from which could impair their
credibility.
(44) Earlier we have reproduced the ante-mortem injuries suffered
by the deceased Ram Dev, Ram Naresh, Sukai and Girish and
seen that Ram Dev sustained two abraded contusion on the
right side forehead, twelve incised wounds on his face, neck,
shoulder, fore-arms and one stab wound on lungs. His right
clavicle, 4 ribs (3 to 7) on right side chest were found fractured;
lung was also found cut; semi digested food was present in the
stomach; faecal matter was present in the intestines.
The deceased Ram Naresh sustained thirteen incised
wounds on head, face, neck, arms, wrist and hand. His left
cervical was found fractured; Right side ribs (3 to 6th) were
found fractured; semi-digested food was present in the
stomach; faecal matter was also found in intestines.
The deceased Sukai sustained four incised wounds on
neck and fore-head. His right clavicle and right side 2 nd to 7th
ribs were found fractured; membrances of lungs were torned;
right lung 7 cm x 4 cm were cut; semi digested food and faecal
matter was found in stomach and intestines.
The deceased Girish sustained fifteen incised wounds on the
head, hand, palm, knee, index finger. His occipital bone back
side was fractured upto 3 inches; brain matter was coming out;
semi digested food and faecal matter were found present.
(45) Dr. O.P. Khatri (P.W.9) opined that all the dececeased died due
to shock and haemorrahage as a result of ante-mortem injuries.
According to him, the ante mortem injuries suffered by the
deceased were sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to
cause death. It has also been stated before the trial Court by
P.W.9 that the deceased could have died on 11.11.1994 at 02:30
a.m.; incised wound was found on the lungs of the deceased
Ram Dev; because of injury no.9, collor bone of the deceased
Ram Dev was found fractured; injury no.9 of the deceased
Ram Dev could be attributable by Banka; injuries no. 1 and 2 of
Ram Dev could be attributable by banka or part of pool of
Gandasa; and all the ante-mortem injuries sustained by other
deceased persons could be attributable by Banka or Gandasa.
P.W.9-Dr.O.P. Khatri was extensively cross-examined but
nothing could be extracted there from which could impair
credibility of the evidence of the eye-witnesses P.W.1-Rama
Kant Verma and P.W.2-Uma Kant Verma. Both these witnesses
have consistently stated that the deceased died on the spot as a
consequence of the said injuries. Thus, we are of the considered
view that there is no material discrepancy in the medical and
ocular evidence. There is no reason to interfere with the
judgments of the trial Court on this ground.
(46) In any event, it has been consistently held by the Apex Court
that the evidentiary value of medical evidence is only
corroborative and not conclusive and, hence, in case of a
conflict between oral evidence and medical evidence, the
former is to be preferred unless the medical evidence
completely rules out the oral evidence. [See Solanki
Chimanbhai Ukabhai Vs. State of Gujarat, (1983) 2 SCC
174; Mani Ram Vs. State of Rajasthan, 1993 Supp (3) SCC
18;   State of Haryana Vs. Bhagirath, (1999) 5 SCC 96;
Dhirajbhai Gorakhbhai Nayak Vs. State of Gujarat, (2003)
5 SCC 223; Thaman Kumar Vs. State of U.T. of
Prosecutor, High Court of A.P., (2006) 11 SCC 239; State of
U.P. Vs. Dinesh, (2009) 11 SCC 566; State of U.P. Vs. Hari
Chand, (2009) 13 SCC 542; Abdul Sayeed Vs. State of M.P.,
(2010) 10 SCC 259 and Bhajan Singh @ Harbhajan Singh &
(47) In the present case, we do not find any major contradiction
either in the evidence of the witnesses or any conflict in
medical or ocular evidence that could tilt the balance in favour
of the convicts/appellants.        The minor improvements,
embellishments etc. apart from being far yield of human
faculties are insignificant and ought to be ignored since the
evidence of witnesses otherwise overwhelmingly corroborates
each other in material particulars.
(48) It has been argued by the learned Counsel for the
convicts/appellants that there was no immediate motive with
the appellants to commit the murder of the deceased.
(49) However, the Trial Court found that there was sufficient motive
with the accused persons/appellants to commit the murder of
the deceased since 1990, litigation of land is going on between
the family of the deceased and Krishna Murari. The long nursed
feeling of hatred and the simmering enmity between the family
of the deceased and the accused persons most likely manifested
itself in the outburst of anger resulting in the murder of the
deceased. We are not required to express any opinion on this
point in the light of the evidence adduced by the direct
witnesses to the incident.
(50) It is a settled legal proposition that even if the absence of
motive, as alleged, is accepted that is of no consequence and
pales into insignificance when direct evidence establishes the
crime. Therefore, if there is direct trustworthy evidence of
witnesses as to the commission of an offence, motive loses its
significance. Therefore, if the genesis of the motive of the
occurrence is not proved, the ocular testimony of the witnesses
as to the occurrence could not be discarded only on the ground
of absence of motive, if otherwise the evidence is worthy of
reliance. [See Hari Shankar Vs. State of U.P., (1996) 9 SCC
40; Bikau Pandey & Ors. Vs. State of Bihar, (2003) 12 SCC
616; State of U.P. Vs. Kishanpal & Ors., (2008) 16 SCC 73;
Abu Thakir & Ors. Vs. State of Tamil Nadu, (2010) 5 SCC
91 and Bipin Kumar Mondal Vs. State of West Bengal;
(51) The next submission of the Counsel for the appellants is that the
Investigating Officer has not recovered any weapon of assault
as alleged by the prosecution i.e. Gandasa and Banka. We feel
no need to address this issue since it had already been validly
discarded by the trial Court while convicting the appellants. In
any case, it is an established proposition of law that mere non-
recovery of weapon does not falsify the prosecution case where
there is ample unimpeachable ocular evidence. (See Lokhan
Sao Vs. State of Bihar : (2008) 16 SCC 73, Abu Thakir Vs.
State of T.N. : (2010) 5 SCC 91, and Bipin Kumar Mondal
Vs. State of West Bengal : (2010) 12 SCC 91.
(52) The next line of contention of the learned Counsel for the
appellants is that no independent witnesses were examined to
prove the prosecution case even though as per the prosecution
case itself, number of villagers came on the spot on hearing the
hue and cry.    We are not impressed by this submission in the
light of the observations made by the Apex Court in Darya
Singh Vs. State of Punjab : AIR 1968 SC 328, wherein the
Apex Court has observed as under :-
“12. It is well-known that in villages where
murders are committed as a result of
factions existing in the village or in
consequence of family feuds, independent
villagers arc generally reluctant to give
evidence because they are afraid that
giving evidence might invite the wrath of
the assailants and might expose them to
very serious risks. It is quite true that it is
the duty of a citizen to assist the
prosecution by giving evidence and helping
the administration of criminal law to bring
the offender to book, but it would be
wholly unrealistic to suggest that if the
prosecution is not able to bring
because they are afraid to give evidence,
that itself should be treated as an infirmity
in the prosecution case so as to justify the
defence contention that the evidence
actually adduced should be disbelieved on
that ground alone without examining its
merits.”
(53) Similarly, in Raghubir Singh Vs. State of U.P., (1972) 3 SCC
79, the Apex Court has held that the prosecution is not bound to
produce all the witnesses said to have seen the occurrence.
Material witnesses considered necessary by the prosecution for
unfolding the prosecution story alone need be produced without
unnecessary and redundant multiplication of witnesses. In this
connection, general reluctance of an average villager to appear
as a witness and get himself involved in cases of rival village
factions when tempers on both sides are running high, has to be
borne in mind.
(54) Further, in Appabhai and Anr. Vs. State of Gujarat, 1988
Supp (1) SCC 241, the Apex Court has observed that :
“Experience reminds us that civilized people
are generally insensitive when a crime is
committed even in their presence. They
withdraw both from the victim and the
vigilante. They keep themselves away from
the Court unless it is inevitable. They think
that crime like civil dispute is between two
individuals or parties and they should not
involve themselves. This kind of apathy of
the general public is indeed unfortunate,
but it is there everywhere whether in village
life, towns or cities. One cannot ignore this
handicap with which the investigating
agency has to discharge its duties. The
Court, therefore, instead of doubting the
prosecution case for want of independent
witness must consider the broad spectrum
of the prosecution version and then search
for the nugget of truth with due regard to
probability, if any, suggested by the
accused.”
(55) The other submission of the learned Counsel for the appellants
is that FIR number and distance of police station from the place
of occurrence, which find mention in the FIR, have not been
mentioned in the four Inquest Reports prepared by the two
police officers under the supervision and direction of the
Investigating Officer and therefore, his contention is that the
FIR was not lodged at 06:30 a.m. but it was ante-timed.
According to him, the special report was signed by the Circle
Officer only on 15.11.1994 although it is sent allegedly on
12.11.1994 and received in the office on 14.11.1994, hence
there is delay in sending the special report to the officer
concerned. We are of the view that in any event, in the light of
position of law examined above and the observation of the trial
Court that it merely shows remissness on part of the
Investigating Officer, it should not be treated as fatal to the
prosecution case, hence we are not inclined to disbelieve the
prosecution story.
(56) At this juncture, it would be relevant to mention that the Apex
Court in a catena of decisions has held that although in terms of
Section 157 Cr.P.C., the police officer concerned is required to
forward a copy of the FIR to the Magistrate empowered to take
cognizance of such offence, promptly and without undue delay,
it cannot be laid down as a rule of universal application that
whenever there is some delay in sending the FIR to the
Magistrate, the prosecution version becomes unreliable and the
trial stands vitiated. When there is positive evidence to the fact
that the FIR was recorded without unreasonable delay and
investigation started on the basis of that FIR and there is no
other infirmity brought to the notice of the Court, then in the
absence of any prejudice to the accused, it cannot be concluded
that the investigation was tainted and the prosecution story
rendered unsupportable. [See Pala Singh Vs. State of Punjab,
(1972) 2 SCC 640; Sarwan Singh Vs. State of Punjab, (1976)
4 SCC 369; Anil Rai Vs. State of Bihar, (2001) 7 SCC 318;
Munshi Prasad & Ors. Vs. State of Bihar, (2002) 1 SCC 351;
Aqeel Ahmad Vs. State of U.P., (2008) 16 SCC 372;
Dharamveer Vs. State of U.P., (2010) 4 SCC 469; Sandeep
Vs. State of U.P., (2012) 6 SCC 107].
(57) Further, the evidentiary value of the inquest report prepared
under Section 174 of Cr.P.C. has also been long settled through
a series of judicial pronouncements of the Apex Court. It is
well-established that inquest report is not a substantive piece of
evidence and can only be looked into for testing the veracity of
the witnesses of inquest. The object of preparing such report is
merely to ascertain the apparent cause of death, namely,
whether it is suicidal, homicidal, accidental or caused by
animals or machinery etc. and stating in what manner, or by
what weapon or instrument, the injuries on the body appear to
have been inflicted. [See Pedda Narayan Vs. State of A.P.,
(1975) 4 SCC 153; Khujji Vs. State of M.P., (1991) 3 SCC
627; Kuldip Singh Vs. State of Punjab, 1992 Supp (3) SCC 1;
George and Ors. Vs. State of Kerala and Anr., (2008) 4 SCC
605; Suresh Rai Vs. State of Bihar, (2000) 4 SCC 84; Amar
Mohan Singh Vs. State of U.P., (2006) 2 SCC 450; Sambhu
Das Vs. State of Assam, (2010) 10 SCC 374].
(58) In the present case, it is not the case of the convicts/appellants
that they have been prejudiced by the alleged delay in dispatch
of the FIR to the nearest Magistrate competent to take
cognizance of such offence. Moreover, in our opinion, the non-
recording of certain relevant entries in the inquest report do not
constitute a material defect so grave to throw out the
prosecution story and the otherwise reliable testimonies of
prosecution     witnesses      that   have    mostly     remained
uncontroverted.
(59) The learned Counsel for the convicts/appellants has then tried
to create a dent in the prosecution story by pointing out
inconsistencies between ocular evidence and the medical
evidence. However, we are not persuaded with this submission
since the trial Court has categorically ruled that the medical
evidence was consistent with the ocular evidence and we can
safely say that to that extent, it corroborated the direct evidence
proffered by the eye-witnesses.
(60) At the cost of repetition, it would be relevant to mention that
there is no material discrepancy in the medical and ocular
evidence. There is no reason to interfere with the judgments of
the trial Court on this ground.
(61) For the reasons above, the evidence of P.W.1-Rama Kant Verma
and P.W.2-Uma Kant Verma             inspire confidence and their
evidence squarely establishes the involvement of appellants
Krishna Murari, Raghav Ram, Kashi Ram and Ram Milan in
the incident. Therefore, we do not have any reservations in our
minds that the learned trial Court acted correctly in convicting
Krishna Murari, Raghav Ram, Kashi Ram and Ram Milan for
the offence punishable under Section 302 read with Section 149
I.P.C. and Section 148 I.P.C.
(62) So far as Criminal Revision No. 14 of 2000, which has been
filed by the informant Rama Kant Verma (P.W.1) against the
impugned judgment of acquittal of Ram Kripal and Ram Tilak,
is concerned, we find that P.W.1-Rama Kant Verma , in his
cross-examination, has stated before the trial Court that he did
not recognize Ram Kripal Verma and Ram Tilak Verma at the
time of the incident, meaning thereby that the P.W.1-Rama Kant
Verma did not see these two accused persons to commit the
offence of murder of the deceased.       The evidence on record
reflects that the allegations levelled by the prosecution against
these two persons are that they were conspiring to commit the
offence of murder of the deceased on the basis of presumption
that these two persons had taken non-vegetarian foods with the
convicts/appellants in the bazar. Except for this, there is no
evidence against these two persons to commit the offence of
murder of the deceased.
(63) On due consideration of the evidence on record, we are of the
view that merely taking of non-vegetarian food with the
appellants does not constitute conspiracy as the prosecution has
failed to adduce any evidence which shows that on the
conspiracy/instigation of Ram Kripal and Ram Tilak,
appellants/convicts had committed the offence of murder of the
deceased persons. Thus, the trial Court has rightly acquitted
Ram Kripal and Ram Tilak and there is no illigality or infirmity
in the impugned judgment with regard to acquitting Ram Kripal
and Ram Tilak, hence Criminal Revision No. 14 of 2000 is
liable to be dismissed.
(64) Now, while upholding the conviction of the convicts/appellants,
we proceed to consider the question of 'death sentence' awarded
to them by the trial Court under Section 302 read with Section
(65)  Capital punishment has been the subject-matter of great social
and judicial discussion and catechism. From whatever point of
view it is examined, one indisputable statement of law follows
that it is neither possible nor prudent to state any universal form
which apply to all the cases of criminology where capital
punishment has been prescribed. Thus, the Court must examine
each case on its facts, in the light of enunciated principles and
before opting for the death penalty, the circumstances of the
offender are also required to be taken into consideration along
with the circumstances of the crime for the reason that life
imprisonment is the rule and death sentence is an exception.
(66) Before going into the legality and propriety of question of
sentence imposed upon the convicts/appellants, it is profitable
to look at the various decisions of the Apex Court in the matter.
The decision in Bachan Singh v. State of Punjab reported in
AIR 1980 SC 898 pronounced by the Constitutional Bench of
the Hon'ble Apex Court stands first among the class making a
detailed discussion after the amendment of Cr.P.C. in 1974. In
this case, the Apex Court has held that provision of death
penalty was an alternative punishment for murder and is not
violative of Article 19 of the Constitution of India. Relevant
paragraphs of the said judgment are relevant and the same are
reproduced herein below:-
"132. To sum up, the question whether or not
death penalty serves any penological purpose
is a difficult, complex and intractable issue. It
has evoked strong, divergent views. For the
purpose of testing the constitutionality of the
impugned provision as to death penalty in
Section 302 of the Penal Code on the ground
of reasonableness in the light of Articles 19
and 21 of the Constitution, it is not necessary
for us to express any categorical opinion, one
way or the other, as to which of these two
antithetical views, held by the Abolitionists and
Retentionists, is correct. It is sufficient to say
that the very fact that persons of reason,
learning and light are rationally and deeply
divided in their opinion on this issue, is a
ground among others, for rejecting the
petitioners argument that retention of death
penalty in the impugned provision, is totally
devoid      of    reason     and    purpose.     If,
notwithstanding the view of the Abolitionists
to the contrary, a very large segment of
people, the world over, including sociologists,
legislators, jurists, judges and administrators
still firmly believe in the worth and necessity of
capital punishment for the protection of
society, if in the perspective of prevailing crime
conditions in India, contemporary public
opinion channelized through the people's
representatives in Parliament, has repeatedly
in the last three decades, rejected all attempts,
including the one made recently, to abolish or
specifically restrict the area of death penalty, if
death penalty is still a recognised legal
sanction for murder or some types of murder
in most of the civilised countries in the world, if
the framers of the Indian Constitution were
fully aware -- as we shall presently show they
were -- of the existence of death penalty as
punishment for murder, under the Indian Penal
Code, if the 35th Report and subsequent
reports of the Law Commission suggesting
retention of death penalty, and recommending
revision of the Criminal Procedure Code and
the insertion of the new Sections 235 (2) and
354 (3) in that Code providing for presentence
hearing and sentencing procedure on
conviction for murder and other capital
offences were before the Parliament and
presumably considered by it when in 1972-
1973 it took up revision of the Code of 1898
and replaced it by the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, it is not possible to hold that
the provision of death penalty as an alternative
punishment for murder, in Section 302 of the
Penal Code is unreasonable and not in the
public interest. We would, therefore, conclude
that the impugned provision in Section 302,
violates neither the letter nor the ethos of
200. Drawing upon the penal statutes of the
States in U.S.A. framed after Furman v,
Georgia, in general, and Clauses 2(a), (b), (c),
and (d) of the Indian Penal Code (Amendment)
Bill passed in 1978 by the Rajya Sabha, in
particular, Dr. Chitale has suggested these
"aggravating circumstances":
Aggravating circumstances : A Court may,
however, in the following cases impose the
penalty of death in its discretion:
(a) if the murder has been committed after
previous planning and involves extreme
(b) if the      murder     involves  exceptional
(c) if the murder is of a member of any of the
armed forces of the Union or of a member of
any police force or of any public servant and
(i) while such member or public servant was on
(ii) in consequence of anything done or
attempted to be done by such member or
public servant in the lawful discharge of his
duty as such member or public servant
whether at the time of murder he was such
member or public servant, as the case may be,
or had ceased to be such member or public
(d) if the murder is of a person who had acted
in the lawful discharge of his duty under
Section 43 of the CrPC, 1973, or who had
rendered assistance to a Magistrate or a police
officer demanding his aid or requiring his
assistance under Section 37 and Section 129 of
the said Code.
201. Stated broadly, there can be no objection
to the acceptance of these indicators but as we
have indicated already, we would prefer not to
fetter judicial discretion by attempting to make
an exhaustive enumeration one way or the
204. Dr. Chitaley        has   suggested    these
mitigating factors:
"Mitigating circumstances":- In the exercise of
its discretion in the above cases, the Court shall
take into account the following circumstances:
(1) That the offence was committed under the
influence of extreme mental or emotional
(2) The age of the accused. It the accused is
young or old, he shall not be sentenced to
(3) The probability that the accused would not
commit criminal acts of violence as would
constitute a continuing threat to society.
(4) The probability that the accused can be
reformed and rehabilitated. The State shall by
evidence prove that the accused does not
satisfy the conditions 3 and 4 above.
(4) The probability that the accused can be
reformed and rehabilitated. The State shall by
evidence prove that the accused does not
satisfy the conditions 3 and 4 above.
(5) That in the facts and circumstances of the
case the accused believed that he was morally
justified in committing the offence.
(6) That the accused acted under the duress or
domination of another person.
(7) That the condition of the accused showed
that he was mentally defective and that the
said defect unpaired his capacity to appreciate
the criminality of his conduct.
207. We will do no more than to say that these
are undoubtedly relevant circumstances and
must be given great weight in the
209. There are numerous other circumstances
justifying the passing of the lighter sentence;
as there are countervailing circumstances of
aggravation. "We cannot obviously feed into a
judicial computer all such situations since they
are astrological imponderables in an imperfect
and undulating society." Nonetheless, it cannot
be over-emphasised that the scope and
concept of mitigating factors in the area of
death penalty must receive a liberal and
expansive construction by the courts in accord
with the sentencing policy writ large in Section
354 (3). Judges should never be bloodthirsty.
Hanging of murderers has never been too
good for them. Facts and figures albeit
incomplete, furnished by the Union of India,
show that in the past Courts have inflicted the
extreme penalty with extreme infrequency - a
fact which attests to the caution and
compassion which they have always brought to
bear on the exercise of their sentencing
discretion in so grave a matter. It is, therefore,
imperative to voice the concern that courts,
aided by the broad illustrative guidelines
indicated by us, will discharge the onerous
function with evermore scrupulous care and
humane concern, directed along the high-road
of legislative policy outlined in Section 354 (3),
viz., that for persons convicted of murder, life
imprisonment is the rule and death sentence
an exception. A real and abiding concern for
the dignity of human life postulates resistance
to taking a life through law's instrumentality.
That ought not to be done save in the rarest of
rare cases when the alternative option is
unquestionably foreclosed."
(67) In Machhi Singh v. State of Punjab reported in (1983) 3 SCC
470, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has made an attempt to cull
out certain aggravating and mitigating circumstances and it has
been held that it was only in ‘rarest of rare’ cases, when the
collective conscience of the community is so shocked that it
will expect the holders of the judicial power centre to inflict
death penalty irrespective of their personal opinion as regards
desirability or otherwise of retaining death penalty. In this
judgment the Hon’ble Supreme Court has summarized the
instances on which death sentence may be imposed, which
"38. xxxxxxxxxxx
(i) The extreme penalty of death need not be
inflicted except in gravest cases of extreme
(ii) Before opting for the death penalty the
circumstances of the 'offender' also require to
be taken into consideration along with the
circumstances of the 'crime'.
(iii) Life Imprisonment is the rule and death
sentence is an exception. In other words death
sentence must be imposed only when life
imprisonment appears to be an altogether
inadequate punishment having regard to the
relevant circumstances of the crime, and
provided, and only provided, the option to
impose sentence of imprisonment for life
cannot be conscientiously exercised having
regard to the nature and circumstances of the
crime and all the relevant circumstances;
(iv) A balance-sheet of aggravating and
mitigating circumstances has to be drawn up
and in doing so the mitigating circumstances has
to be accorded full weightage and a just balance
has to be struck between the aggravating and
the mitigating circumstances before the option
is exercised."
39. In order to apply these guidelines inter alia
the following questions may be asked and
(a) Is there something uncommon about the
crime which renders sentence of imprisonment
for life inadequate and calls for a death
(b) Are the circumstances of the crime such that
there is no alternative but to impose death
sentence even after according maximum
weightage to the mitigating circumstances
which speak in favour of the offender?
40. If upon taking an overall global view of all
the circumstances in the light of the aforesaid
proposition and taking into account the answers
to the questions posed herein above, the
circumstances of the case are such that death
sentence is warranted, the court would proceed
to do so."
(68) The issue again came up before Hon'ble Apex Court in
Ramnaresh & others v. State of Chhattisgarh reported in
(2012) 4 SCC 257, wherein the           Hon’ble Supreme Court
reiterated 13 aggravating and 7 mitigating circumstances as laid
down in the case of Bachan Singh (supra) required to be taken
into consideration while applying the doctrine of "rarest of
rare" case. Relevant para of the same reads thus:-
"76. The law enunciated by this Court in its
recent judgements, as already noticed, adds
and elaborates the principles that were stated
in the case of Bachan Singh (supra) and
thereafter, in the case of Machhi Singh (supra).
The aforesaid judgments, primarily dissect
these     principles    into   two    different
compartments - one being the "aggravating
circumstances" while the other being the
"mitigating circumstances". The Court would
consider the cumulative effect of both these
aspects and normally, it may not be very
appropriate for the Court to decide the most
significant aspect of sentencing policy with
reference to one of the classes under any of
the following heads while completely ignoring
other classes under other heads. To balance
the two is the primary duty of the Court. It will
be appropriate for the Court to come to a final
conclusion upon balancing the exercise that
would help to administer the criminal justice
system better and provide an effective and
meaningful reasoning by the Court as
contemplated under Section 354 (3) of Cr.P.C.
(1) The offences relating to the commission of
heinous crimes like murder, rape, armed
dacoity, kidnapping etc. by the accused with a
prior record of conviction for capital felony or
offences committed by the person having a
substantial history of serious assaults and
criminal convictions.
(2) The offence was committed while the
offender was engaged in the commission of
another serious offence.
(3) The offence was committed with the
intention to create a fear psychosis in the
public at large and was committed in a public
place by a weapon or device which clearly
could be hazardous to the life of more than
one person.
(4) The offence of murder was committed for
ransom or like offences to receive money or
monetary benefits.
(6) The offence was committed outrageously
for want only while involving inhumane
treatment and torture to the victim.
(7) The offence was committed by a person
while in lawful custody.
(8) The murder or the offence was committed
to prevent a person lawfully carrying out his
duty like arrest or custody in a place of lawful
confinement of himself or another. For
instance, murder is of a person who had acted
in lawful discharge of his duty under Section 43
(9) When the crime is enormous in proportion
like making an attempt of murder of the entire
family or members of a particular community.
(10) When the victim is innocent, helpless or a
person relies upon the trust of relationship and
social norms, like a child, helpless woman, a
daughter or a niece staying with a father/uncle
and is inflicted with the crime by such a trusted
(11) When murder is committed for a motive
which evidences total depravity and meanness.
(12) When there is a cold blooded murder
without provocation.
(13) The crime is committed so brutally that it
pricks or shocks not only the judicial
conscience but even the conscience of the
(1) The manner and circumstances in and under
which the offence was committed, for
example, extreme mental or emotional
disturbance or extreme provocation in
contradistinction to all these situations in
normal course.
(2) The age of the accused is a relevant
consideration but not a determinative factor
by itself.
(3) The chances of the accused of not indulging
in commission of the crime again and the
probability of the accused being reformed and
(4) The condition of the accused shows that he
was mentally defective and the defect
impaired his capacity to appreciate the
circumstances of his criminal conduct.
(5) The circumstances which, in normal course
of life, would render such a behavior possible
and could have the effect of giving rise to
mental imbalance in that given situation like
persistent harassment or, in fact, leading to
such a peak of human behavior that, in the
facts and circumstances of the case, the
accused believed that he was morally justified
in committing the offence.
(6) Where the Court upon proper appreciation
of evidence is of the view that the crime was
not committed in a pre-ordained manner and
that the death resulted in the course of
commission of another crime and that there
was a possibility of it being construed as
consequences to the commission of the
primary crime.
(7) Where it is absolutely unsafe to rely upon
the testimony of a sole eye-witness though
prosecution has brought home the guilt of the
(69) In the matter of Dharam Deo Yadav vs. State of UP reported
in (2014) 5 SCC 509, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has held
“"36. We may now consider whether the
case falls under the category of rarest of
the rare case so as to award death sentence
for which, as already held, in Shankar
Kisanrao Khade v. State of Maharashtra
(2013) 5 SCC 546 this Court laid down three
tests, namely, Crime Test, Criminal Test and
RR Test. So far as the present case is
Criminal Test have been satisfied as against
the accused. Learned counsel appearing for
the accused, however, submitted that he
had no previous criminal records and that
apart from the circumstantial evidence,
there is no eye-witness in the above case,
and hence, the manner in which the crime
was committed is not in evidence.
Consequently, it was pointed out that it
would not be possible for this Court to
come to the conclusion that the crime was
committed in a barbaric manner and, hence
the instant case would not fall under the
category of rarest of rare. We find some
force in that contention.
Taking in consideration all aspects of the
matter, we are of the view that, due to lack
of any evidence with regard to the manner
in which the crime was committed, the case
will not fall under the category of rarest of
rare case.
Consequently, we are inclined to commute
the death sentence to life and award 20
years of rigorous imprisonment, over and
above the period already undergone by the
accused, without any remission, which, in
our view, would meet the ends of justice."
(70) In Kalu Khan v. State of Rajasthan reported in (2015) 16
SCC 492, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that:-
"30. In Mahesh Dhanaji Shinde v. State of
Maharashtra, the conviction of the
appellant-accused was upheld keeping in
view that the circumstantial evidence
pointed only in the direction of their guilt
given that the modus operandi of the
crime, homicidal death, identity of 9 of 10
victims, last seen theory and other
incriminating circumstances were proved.
However, the Court has thought it fit to
commute the sentence of death to
imprisonment for life considering the age,
socio-economic       conditions,   custodial
behaviour of the appellant-accused persons
and that the case was entirely based on
circumstantial evidence. This Court has
placed reliance on the observations in Sunil
Dutt Sharma v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi)
as follows: (Mahesh Dhanaji case, SCC p.
"35. In a recent pronouncement in Sunil
Dutt Sharma v. State (Govt. of NCT of
Delhi), it has been observed by this Court
that the principles of sentencing in our
country are fairly well settled -- the
difficulty is not in identifying such
principles but lies in the application
thereof. Such application, we may
respectfully add, is a matter of judicial
expertise and experience where judicial
wisdom must search for an answer to the
vexed question -- Whether the option of
life sentence is unquestionably foreclosed?
The unbiased and trained judicial mind free
from all prejudices and notions is the only
asset which would guide the Judge to
(71) In the light of the above proposition of law, we are required to
scrutinize the case in hand minutely to find out whether the
case falls under the category of "rarest of the rare case",
whether imposition of death penalty, which is an exception,
would be the only appropriate and meaningful sentence and
whether imprisonment for life, which is the rule, would not be
adequate and would not meet the ends of justice.
(72) While awarding the death sentence to the appellants, the trial
Court has drawn a conclusion that the appellants had committed
the offence of murder of the deceased with pre-determined
mind and pre-planned manner, hence the same comes in the
category of 'rarest of rare cases'.
(73) From a perusal of the above, it is clear that the special reasons
assigned by the trial Court for awarding extreme penalty of
death are that the murder was pre-meditated and pre-planned
one, therefore, imposition of lesser sentence than that of death
sentence, would not be adequate and appropriate. In these
circumstances, the trial Court held that the balance-sheet of the
aggravating and mitigating circumstances was heavily weighed
against the appellants making it the rarest of rare cases and
consequently awarded the death sentence.
(74) But, having gone through the facts and circumstances of this
case, we find that no evidence on record to establish that the
convicts/ appellants committed pre-planned and pre-meditated
murder of the deceased. At least, no such evidence has been led
by the prosecution to establish this fact. It comes out that
convicts/appellants were causing injuries to the deceased and
when they were doing so, even the witnesses also reached
there, but that itself is not sufficient to hold that it is a pre-
meditated or pre-planned murder.
(75) It is true that the manner in which crime has been committed by
the appellants by Gandasa and Banka blows, is brutal, cruel and
gruesome, but there is absolutely no evidence to suggest as to
what could be the reason for the appellants to commit the said
offence. This could be because of frustration, mental stress or
emotional       disorder  which    would    be   the    mitigating
circumstances to be taken note of.
(76) It is relevant to mention here that both the eye-witnesses P.W.1
and P.W.2 have stated that at the time of the incident, appellants
Krishna Murari alias Murli and Kashi Ram were armed with
Gandasa, whereas appellants Raghav Ram and Ram Milan were
armed with Banka and apart from them, 2-3 other persons who
had covered their faces by means of cloth were also having
Banka and Gandasa.        As per the prosecution story, all the
persons above were causing hurt to the deceased with Banka
and Gandasa, on account of which, four deceased persons died
on the spot. As per the opinion of P.W.9 Dr. O.P. Khatri, ante-
mortem injuries sustained the deceased could be attributable by
Banka and Gandasa. But both Rama Kant Verma PW-1 and
Uma Kant Verma PW-2 have not been able to specify who
amongst appellants and 2-3 unknown persons who covered
their faces with the cloth, were responsible for the fatal injuries
suffered by the four deceased. P.W.1 and P.W.2 have failed to
narrate the specific role of assault of weapon by the appellants
upon the deceased persons. Moreso, the appellants did not have
criminal history.
(77)  After considering the above facts and circumstances of the
case,, we are of the view that the instant case does not fall in
the category of 'rarest of rare cases', warranting capital
punishment. Hence, the death sentence awarded to the convicts/
appellants under Section 302 read with Section 149 of IPC is
liable to be converted into life imprisonment.
(78) In the result :-
(A)   Capital Sentence No. 01 of 2000 :-
While affirming the conviction and sentence of the
appellants for the offence punishable under Section 148
I.P.C. and the conviction of the appellants for the offence
punishable under Section 302 read with Section 149 IPC,
we set aside the 'sentence of death' awarded to the
convicts by the trial Court by means of impugned
judgment dated 21.12.1999 and direct that for the murder
committed by the convicts Krishna Murari alias Murli,
Raghav Ram Verma, Kashi Ram Verma and Ram
Milan Verma, they are sentenced to life imprisonment
instead of death sentence.
Appellants Krishna Murari alias Murli, Raghav Ram
Verma, Kashi Ram Verma and Ram Milan Verma are
in jail and shall serve out their sentence.
Subject to this alteration in the sentence, Capital
Sentence No.1 of 2000 is dismissed.
The appeal is partly allowed. Although we maintain the
conviction and sentence of appellants Krishna Murari
alias Murli, Raghav Ram Verma , Kashi Ram Verma
and Ram Milan Verma for the offence punishable under
Section 148 I.P.C. and their conviction for the offence
punishable under Section 302 read with Section 149
I.P.C but we set aside their sentence of death on the latter
count and instead sentence them to imprisonment for life.
Appellants Krishna Murari alias Murli, Raghav Ram
Verma , Kashi Ram Verma and Ram Milan Verma
are in jail and shall serve out their sentence.
(C)  Criminal Appeal No. 25 of 2000:
The appeal is partly allowed. Although we maintain the
conviction and sentence of appellant Raghav Ram
Verma for the offence punishable under Section 148
I.P.C. and his conviction for the offence punishable
under Section 302/149 I.P.C but we set-aside his
sentence of death on the latter count and instead sentence
him to imprisonment for life.
Appellant Raghav Ram Verma is in jail and shall serve
out his sentence.
The appeal is partly allowed. Although we maintain the
conviction and sentence of appellant Krishna Murari
Verma alias Murli for the offence punishable under
Section 148 I.P.C. and his conviction for the offence
punishable under Section 302 read with Section 149
I.P.C but we set aside his sentence of death on the latter
count and instead sentence him to imprisonment for life.
Appellant Krishna Murari Verma alias Murli is in jail
and shall serve out his sentence.
The appeal is partly allowed. Although we maintain the
conviction and sentence of appellant Kashi Ram Verma
for the offence punishable under Section 148 I.P.C. and
his conviction for the offence punishable under Section
302/149 I.P.C but we set aside his sentence of death on
the latter count and instead sentence him to imprisonment
for life.
Appellant Kashi Ram Verma is in jail and shall serve
out his sentence.
The appeal is partly allowed. Although we maintain the
conviction and sentence of appellant Ram Milan Verma
for the offence punishable under Section 148 I.P.C. and
his conviction for the offence punishable under Section
302 read with Section 149 I.P.C but we set aside his
sentence of death on the latter count and instead sentence
him to imprisonment for life.
Appellant Ram Milan Verma is in jail and shall serve
out his sentence.
The instant criminal revision preferred by Rama Kant
Verma (informant) is dismissed.
(79) Let a copy of this judgment and the original record be
transmitted to the trial court concerned forthwith for necessary
information and compliance.