1.    The petitioner is aggrieved of and has called in question order dated
16.09.2021 and order dated 17th June, 2022, both passed by the Additional
Commissioner (Commissioner Agrarian Reforms), Anantnag in an
application for condonation of delay and appeal captioned Gh. Rasool Shah
v. Mushtaq Ahmad Pandit respectively. Vide impugned order dated 16 th
September, 2021, Commissioner, Agrarian Reforms, Anantnag has
condoned the delay for filing the appeal against the order of Assistant
Commissioner Revenue (Collector Agrarian Reforms), Anantnag dated 16 th
July, 2005. By a subsequent order passed on 30 th June, 2022, the
Commissioner, Agrarian Reforms had allowed the appeal and set aside
order dated 16th July, 2005 passed by the Collector Agrarian Reforms,
2.     Briefly put, the facts leading to the filing of this writ petition are in
On 29th June, 2005, the petitioner filed a suit for declaration with
consequential relief of injunction before the Collector, Agrarian Reforms,
Anantnag. In the suit, the petitioner sought a declaration to the effect that he
was owner of the land measuring 2 kanal 11 marlas comprising Khasra
No.339 situated at village Uranhall [“the subject land”] belonging to
respondent No.3 by way of adverse possession. The case set up by the
petitioner in the suit was that he was put in possession of the subject land in
pursuance of a sale agreement drawn in his favour by respondent No.3
against a sale consideration of Rs.16,76,000/-. The petitioner paid a sum of
Rs.5,01,100/- to respondent No.3 at the time of execution of the sale
agreement. The petitioner also claimed that later the sale deed was not
executed by respondent No.3. On the presentation of the suit, the Collector
Agrarian Reforms summoned respondent No.3, who instead of contesting
the suit entered into an amicable settlement with the petitioner. A
compromise deed in writing entered into between the petitioner and
respondent No.3, too, was submitted and as a result whereof, the Collector
Agrarian Reforms declared the petitioner as owner of the subject land vide
order dated 16th July, 2005.
While the petitioner and respondent No.3 had buried the hatchet in
terms of the compromise deed, the Collector Agrarian Reforms acting suo
moto summoned the petitioner and respondent No.3 and reversed his earlier
order dated 16th July, 2005 by passing a fresh order dated 01st September,
2005. The earlier order was recalled on the ground that the compromise was
entered into between the petitioner and respondent No.3 was sham and
attempted to defeat the provisions of Agrarian Reforms Act as also to
effectuate transfer of immovable property in disguise of sale deed. Order
dated 1st September, 2005 passed by the Collector Agrarian Reforms,
Anantnag was challenged by the petitioner before the Financial
Commissioner Revenue (with Powers of Commissioner, Agrarian Reforms),
Srinagar in an appeal. The Financial Commissioner Revenue vide its order
dated 20th May, 2009 accepted the appeal and set aside the order of
Respondent No.3, feeling aggrieved by the order of the
Srinagar filed revision before the Jammu & Kashmir Special Tribunal. The
revision petition was dismissed and the order of the Financial
Commissioner/Commissioner, Agrarian Reforms was upheld by the
Tribunal vide its order dated 28th June, 2013. It seems that while the revision
petition was pending before the Jammu & Kashmir Special Tribunal,
respondent No.3 filed an appeal against order dated 16 th July, 2005 before
Anantnag. The appeal was belated and was, thus, accompanied by an
application for condonation of delay of more than four years. Vide order
dated 16th September, 2021, the Additional Deputy Commissioner,
Anantnag condoned the delay and took up the appeal for consideration on
merits. The appeal, too, was considered and disposed by the Additional
Deputy Commissioner (Commissioner, Agrarian Reforms) Anantnag vide
impugned order dated 17th June, 2022. Both the orders i.e. one passed on
application for condonation of delay and another on the appeal on merits are
subject matter of challenge in this petition.
3.     The impugned order passed by respondent No.1 condoning the delay
of more than four years in filing the appeal is assailed primarily on the
ground that respondent No.1 has committed grave error in condoning the
inordinate delay of more than four years without being satisfied about the
sufficient cause, which prevented respondent No.3 to file appeal within
time. The order is, thus, assailed being an outcome of non-application of
4.     The order passed in appeal is challenged by the petitioner primarily
on the ground that no appeal was maintainable against the order passed on
the basis of a compromise entered into between the parties. It is contended
that respondent No.3, who had voluntarily executed a compromise deed
acknowledging the petitioner to be absolute owner in possession of the
subject land, could not have been permitted to resile from his solemn
affirmation made before the Collector, Agrarian Reforms, Anantnag.
Respondent No.1 without going into this important aspect of the matter
accepted the appeal of respondent No.3 on the ground that the compromise
entered into between the petitioner and respondent No.3 was only a device
to defeat the provisions of the Agrarian Reforms Act and to pass on the
property without execution of proper sale deed and payment of stamp duty.
5.     Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that respondent No.3, who
was party to this alleged machination and manipulation could not have been
permitted to take benefit of his own wrong. The appeal at the instance of
respondent No.3 was, thus, not maintainable but unfortunately, respondent
No.1 did not appreciate this vital aspect of the matter and accepted the
appeal as if it was exercising suo moto powers of appeal or revision, which
the statute i.e. the Jammu & Kashmir Agrarian Reforms Act does not confer
on any authority.
6.     Per contra, learned counsel appearing for respondent No.3 submits
that respondent No.1 has rightly condoned the delay of four years, in that,
respondent No.3 was bona fide litigating in different forums and, thus, lost
four years in the process. He invited reference of this Court to suo moto
order of the Collector, Agrarian Reforms, Anantnag recalling its earlier
order, which, thereafter became subject matter of challenge before the
Commissioner, Agrarian Reforms (Financial Commissioner), Srinagar and
7.     Mr.Shuja-ul-Haq, learned counsel for respondent No.3, submits that
respondent No.3, realizing that his remedy would lie in challenging the
order dated 06.07.2005 and litigation before Jammu & Kashmir Special
Tribunal was only an exercise in futility, decided to challenge the basic
order dated 16th July, 2005 before the appellate forum i.e. respondent No.1.
He contests order dated 16.07.2005 by submitting that the compromise
entered into between the petitioner and respondent No.3 was unlawful and
the order obtained from the Court of Collector, Agrarian Reforms, Anantnag
was a result of fraud played by the parties upon the Court. He submits that
that the order/decree passed in favour of the petitioner declaring him to be
the owner in possession of the subject land was in disguise of sale and not
only it was in violation of the provisions of the Agrarian Reforms Act and it
had the effect of evading huge amount of stamp duty.
8.     Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material
on record, it is necessary to first notice few salient features of the Jammu
and Kashmir Agrarian Reforms Act, 1976 [„the Act‟]. The Act enacted by
the erstwhile Jammu and Kashmir Legislature was a progressive legislation
aimed at providing for transfer of land to tillers and for better utilization
thereof in the State of Jammu and Kashmir. The Act was brought into force
w.e.f. First of June, 1978. In terms of Section 4 of the Act, all rights, title
and interest in land of any person not cultivating it personally in Kharif
1971 shall be extinguished and deemed to be vested in the State with effect
from 1st of May, 1973. The Section is given overriding effect over any law
for the time being in force. That apart, under the Act, nobody, either owner
or the tenant, is entitled to hold in personal cultivation land in excess of 182
kanals (sealing area) on the first day of September, 1971 and the rights, title
and interest of such individual in the excess land shall be deemed to have
been vested in the State on the first day of May, 1973. Section 7 provides
for resumption of land by ex-landlord for bonafide personal cultivation.
Section 8 of the Act, however, provides vesting of ownership rights in land
vested in State under Section 4 of the Act in the tenant who is found to be in
personal cultivation thereof in Kharif 1971. Section 13 of the Act places
restriction on utilization of land after the commencement of the Act. It
provides that no person shall hold land otherwise than for personal
cultivation or for residential purposes up to 2 kanals per family or for
horticulture purposes subject to the provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir
Prohibition on Conversion of Land and Alienation of Orchards Act, 1975.
There is further provision for retaining some land for Industrial or
Commercial purposes with the previous permission of the Revenue Minister
or any officer nominated by him in this behalf. There is complete
prohibition under Section 13 (2) for creation or continuation of tenancy after
First day of May, 1973. Sub Section (3) of Section 13 clearly lays down that
if a person who is possessed of land fails to utilize it in accordance with or
utilizes in contravention of provisions of Sub Section (1) of Section 13 or
lets land to a tenant in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (2), the
rights, title or interest in land of such person, after an enquiry to be
conducted as per the Agrarian Reforms Rules, 1977 [„the Rules‟] shall vest
in the State. Section 17 of the Act imposes prohibition on transfer of
Agrarian land.
9.     With a view to implementing the provisions of the Act, Section 18
provides for appointment of following five classes of officers by the
Government with the following hierarchy:-
The general superintendence and control on those officers is vested in
10.   Subject to the control of the Government, the Commissioner Agrarian
Reforms     has  the    overall   control   over    the   Collectors,    Assistant
Commissioners, Tehsildars and Nain Tehsildars. Similarly, subject to the
control of the Commissioner, the Assistant Commissioner, the Tehsildar and
the Naib Tehsildars shall be subordinate to and under the control of the
Collector and so on and so forth. Section 19 of the Act deals with the
powers of the Revenue Officers. Apart from the general functions to be
discharged and powers to be exercised by these officers, as are specified by
or under the Act, there are certain applications, suits and proceedings which
are required to be disposed of by a Collector. Sub Section (3) enumerates
such applications, suits and proceedings. Sub Section (3) is relevant for
determination of controversy in this petition and is, therefore, reproduced
“(3) The following applications, suits and proceedings
shall be disposed of by a Collector:-
(b)    proceedings under sub-section (2) of section 68-A
of the Jammu and Kashmir Tenancy Act, Samvat
(e)    all other cases of dispute including those where the
party in possession pleads adverse possession
11.    Clause (e) of sub-section 3 reproduced above clearly provides that the
Collector Agrarian Reforms is competent to entertain even a dispute where
the party in possession pleads adverse possession against the recorded
owner/intermediary. Section 25 bars the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to
entertain a suit in respect of any question or to determine any matter arising
under the Act and the Rules framed thereunder. The Section makes it
explicit that no order of any officer or authority passed under the Act or
Rules framed there under shall be called in question in any civil court.
Section 25, for facility of reference is set out below:-
“ 25. Bar of jurisdiction of Civil Court:
12.    Section 21 deals with appeals and revisions and provides that final
order of Collector or Revenue Officer of a class lower than that of a
Collector is appealable before the Commissioner Agrarian Reforms at the
instance of the person aggrieved. Initially when the Act was enacted, the
Jammu and Kashmir Special Tribunal exercising powers of Revenue
Minister was empowered to hear revision against the final order passed by
the Revenue Officers provided it would find that a question of law of public
interest was involved in the case. This provision is now deleted by the
Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization Act, 2019 read with the Jammu and
Kashmir (Adoption of State Laws) Fifth Order, 2020. The Act has been
retained with certain modifications and adoptions.
13.    When the controversy raised in this petition is viewed in the light of
salient provisions of the Act noticed hereinabove, it is seen that the
respondent No.3 had entered into an agreement with the petitioner for sale
of the subject land (admittedly land as defined under Section 2(a) of the
Act) against a sale consideration of Rs. 16,76,000/-, out of which the
petitioner had paid a sum of Rs. 5,01,100/- at the time of execution of the
sale agreement. This happened on 17-06-2004 when the agreement to sell
was executed between the petitioner and the respondent No.3. It transpires
that the petitioner was also put possession of the subject land. It is, however,
not discernable from the pleadings of the parties or record on file as to
whether the balance payment was made or not but the fact remains that the
petitioner and respondent No.3, in collusion with each other, decided to get
a consent decree from the Collector Agrarian Reforms, Anantnag.
Accordingly, a suit was presented by the petitioner on 29-06-2005 for a
decree of declaration, declaring the petitioner owner in possession of the
subject land by adverse possession. The respondent No.3, against whom the
suit was filed by the petitioner, chose not to contest it and instead consented
for passing of a decree of declaration as prayed for by the petitioner. The
Collector Agrarian Reforms, Anantnag, without even realizing that as per
own showing of the petitioner he was put into possession in June, 2004 that
too pursuant to an agreement to sell executed between the parties, obliged
the petitioner and respondent No.3 and passed the decree prayer for. The
petitioner and the respondent No.3 succeeded in evading the payment of the
stamp duty and getting the document of conveyance registered under the
14.    True it is that the Collector Agrarian Reforms, Anantnag, without
having been vested with the powers of review, suo moto acted on realizing
the mistake and reviewed the order/decree of declaration of ownership
passed in favour of the petitioner. Obviously, this order of the Collector
Agrarian Reforms, Anantnag passed in exercise of review jurisdiction was
set aside by the Commissioner Agrarian Reforms on appeal, relying upon
sub-section (3) of Section 21 of the Act. It may be pertinent to note that sub-
section (3) of Section 21 clearly provides that no application for review shall
lie against any order passed under the Act and the Rules framed thereunder,
except for correction of clerical or arithmetical mistakes in orders or errors
arising therein due to accidental slip or omission. The respondent No.3, who
had later resiled from the consent he had given before the Collector, filed a
revision petition which at that point of time was maintainable before the
Jammu and Kashmir Special Tribunal exercising the powers of the Revenue
Minister. While the revision petition was pending, which was ultimately
dismissed, the respondent No.3 filed an appeal against the consent decree
obtained by the petitioner before the Commissioner Agrarian Reforms. The
appeal was delayed by almost four years. On furnishing of sufficient cause
for delay by the respondent No.3, which, as claimed, had occurred due to
the suo moto review by the Collector Agrarian Reforms, Anantnag and
filing of appeal and revision before the Commissioner Agrarian Reforms
and the Special Tribunal respectively, the Commissioner Agrarian Reforms
condoned the delay vide impugned order dated 16-09-2021. The
Commissioner Agrarian Reforms took up the appeal for consideration and
after hearing both the sides, accepted the same vide impugned order dated
30-06-2022. The impugned order passed by the Collector dated 16-07-2005
was set aside. The petitioner has called in question both these orders on the
grounds which have been taken note of in the earlier part of this order.
15.    In the given facts and circumstances of the case and regard being had
to the rival stand of the parties, an important question has cropped up for
determination i.e. „whether the Commissioner Agrarian Reforms, the
appellate authority under Section 21 of the Act, is competent in law to set
aside an order passed by the Collector Agrarian Reforms with the consent of
the parties, and whether a person who has consented for passing a decree
against him, can be said to be a person aggrieved for maintaining such
16.    The concomitant question that would also require determination by
this Court is; „whether the Commissioner Agrarian Reforms, the appellate
authority, has the power and jurisdiction to declare an order passed by the
Collector Agrarian Reforms null and void if the same is found to have been
obtained by the parties in collusion and by plying fraud with the Collector‟.
17.    In the instant case, indisputably, the suit which was filed by the
petitioner against respondent No.3 before the Collector Agrarian Reforms,
Anantnag, was a collusive suit. Not only the possession of the petitioner
over the subject land was permissive having been obtained in pursuance of
agreement to sell but the same was only a year old. To claim a decree of
declaration of ownership by adverse possession, a person claiming
ownership by adverse possession must plead and demonstrate by proof that
he has been in continuous and uninterrupted possession of the property for
over 12 years and that his possession is open and hostile to the actual owner.
That apart, from the sequence of events narrated above, it should have been
more than clear to the Collector Agrarian Reforms that the suit was a device
to transfer the Agrarian land otherwise than by executing a proper sale deed
and in contravention of the provisions of the Act.
18.    I have noticed the salient provisions of the Act and the object for
which it was enacted. There is clear prohibition on transfer of Agrarian land.
It can only be possessed by a person for personal cultivation or for other
permissible purposes like to limited extent for residential, horticulture,
Industrial or Commercial purposes subject to permission of the competent
authority. Without going much in details, suffice it to say that the subject
property could not have been validly sold by the respondent No.3 to the
petitioner in view of the prohibition contained under the Act. Assuming that
the transfer of the subject land was permissible under the provisions of the
Act, yet it could not have been done without executing a sale deed in
writing, paying the proper stamp duty and getting it registered before the
registering authority.
19.    Obviously and there is not an iota of doubt that the order of the
Collector Agrarian Reforms, Anantnag dated 16-07-2005 passed in the suit
of the petitioner for ownership by adverse possession, was obtained by
collusion between the petitioner and the respondent No.3. Collusion in
judicial proceedings is a secret arrangement between two persons that the
one should institute a suit against the other in order to obtain a decision of a
judicial tribunal for some sinister purpose        (Wharton’s Law Lexicon, 14th
Edn.). It is an action between two parties that are not true adversaries and
have no true controversy between them. The two parties are nominal
adversaries merely for the goal of obtaining an answer to a legal question or
favourable precedential view. The collusion connotes an agreement between
two or more person to defraud a person of his/her rights or to obtain
something that is prohibited by law. To understand the nature of a collusive
decree/order better, it is necessary to survey the case law and the precedents
on the subject.
20.    Way back in the year 1956 a three Judge Bench of Hon‟ble the
Supreme Court in Nagubai Ammal and others v. B. Shama Rao and ors,
AIR 1956 SC 593, in para 13 have very convincingly brought out the
distinction between the proceeding which is collusive and the one which is
fraudulent. Para 13 reads thus:-
“13. Now, there is a fundamental distinction between a proceeding
which is collusive and one which is fraudulent. "Collusion in
judicial proceedings is a secret arrangement between two persons
that the one should institute a suit against the other in order to
obtain the decision of a judicial tribunal for some sinister
purpose". (Wharton's Law Lexicon, 14th Edition, page 212). In
such a proceeding, the claim put forward is fictitious, the contest
over it is unreal, and the decree passed therein is a mere mask
having the similitude of a judicial determination and worn by the
parties with the object of confounding third parties. But when a
proceeding is alleged to be fraudulent, -what is meant is that the
claim made therein is untrue, but that the claimant has managed to
obtain the verdict of the court in his favour and against his
opponent by practising fraud on the court. Such a proceeding is
started with a view to injure the opponent, and there can be no
question of its having been initiated as the result of an
understanding between the parties. While in collusive proceedings
the combat is a mere sham, in a fraudulent suit it is real and
earnest. The allegations in the petition of Abdul Huq set out above
show that the suit itself was not attacked as collusive, but that the
execution proceedings were impeached as fraudulent. It should be
mentioned that on this petition the District Judge passed an order
on 30-6-1932 directing the Official Receiver to take the necessary
steps and report. But nothing came out of this.”
21.    In Rupchand Gupta v. Raghuvanshi (Private) Ltd. and anr, AIR
1964 SC 1889, Hon‟ble the Supreme Court in para 9 explained the
definition of collusion in the following manner:-
“ 9. One of the simplest definitions of collusion was given by Mr.
Justice Bucknill in Scott v. Scott. "Collusion may be defined", said
the learned Judge, "as an improper act done or an improper
refraining from doing an act, for a dishonest purpose".
Substantially the same idea is expressed in the definition given by
Whatron's Law Lexicon, 14th Edition, p. 212. viz.. "Collusion in
judicial proceedings is a secret arrangement between two persons
that the one should institute a suit against the other in order to
obtain the decision of a judicial tribunal for some sinister
purpose". This definition of collusion was approved by the Court
in Nagubai Ammal & ors., v. B. Shamma Rao.”
22.    Later in Ramchandra Ganpat Shinde and anr v. State of
Maharashtra and ors, (1993) 4 SCC 216, Hon‟ble the Supreme Court
once again had the occasion to deal with the question of collusion in judicial
proceedings. Placing reliance upon Nagubai Ammal and Rupchand Gupta
(supra), Hon‟ble the Supreme Court in para 9 held thus:-
“ 9. In Nagubai Animal and Ors. v. B. Shamma Rao and Ors.
(1956) SCR 451 at 463, this Court held that collusion in judicial
proceedings is a secret arrangement between two person that the
one should institute a suit against the other in order to obtain the
decision of a judicial tribunal for some sinister purpose. In such a
proceedings, the claim put forward is fictitious, the contest over it
is unreal, and the decree passed therein is a mere mask having the
similitude of a judicial determination and worn by the parties with
the object of confounding third parties. This was reiterated
in Roop Chand Gupta v. Raghuvanshi Pvt. Ltd. and Anr. (1964) 7
SCR 761 at 763, in which this Court held that the collusion is an
improper act done by an improper refraining from doing an act, for
a dishonest purpose. In these two cases this Court set aside the
collusive decree obtained by the parties. Collusion, thus, is a
foundation to put forward a format of judicial process and a
pretext of contest which in effect is unreal and a force and the
decree or order obtained on its basis is a mere mask having
similitude of judicial determination with the object of confounding
third parties. The offending order is vitiated by collusion and
formed foundation for election to the committee of the society.
23.  Following observations made by Hon‟ble the Supreme Court in para
11 of the judgment in Ramachandra Ganpat Shinde (supra) are equally
relevant and are therefore reproduced hereunder:-
“11. …………. Undoubtedly, the order passed by the High Court
under Article 226 is a judicial order exercising its constituent
power but when its process is abused and an order of minutes
obtained by consent hedged with collusion and fraud on the Court
and obviously, though not pleaded, on general body of the
members of the society, when the facts were brought to the notice
of the High Court, it is the High Court alone or on appeal this
Court which is to correct such and order.”
To the similar effect are the observations made in para 13 of the
judgment, which is also set out below:-
“ 13. Respect for law is one of the cardinal principles for an
effective operation of the constitution, law and the popular
Government. The faith of the people is the source and succour to
invigorate justice intertwined with the efficacy of law. The
principle of justice is ingrained in our conscience and though ours
is a nascent democracy which has now taken deep roots in our
ethos of adjudication - be it judicial, quasi-judicial or
administrative as hallmark, the faith of the people in the efficacy
of judicial process would be disillusioned, if the parties are
permitted to abuse its process and allowed to go scot free. It is but
the primary duty and highest responsibility of the court to correct
such orders at the earliest and restore the confidence of the litigant
public, in the purity of fountain of justice; remove stains on the
efficacy of judicial adjudication and respect for rule of law, lest
people would lose faith in the courts and take recourse to extra-
constitutional remedies which is a death-knell to the rule of law.”
24.   The position as expounded in the aforesaid judgments was reiterated
by Hon‟ble the Supreme Court in Gram Panchayat of Village Naulakha v.
Ujagar Singh and ors, (2000) 7 SCC 543. Paragraph Nos. 4 to 8 are
relevant and are reproduced thus:-
“ 4. On this point, we have heard the learned counsel for the
respondents who contended that the principle laid down by the
Full Bench in Jagar Ram's case is correct and that the earlier
judgment in the present case is binding on the basis of the
principle of res judicata. The panchayat cannot therefore raise a
plea of collusion in the latter proceeding unless it has first filed a
suit and obtained a declaration or unless it took steps to have the
earlier decree set aside.
5. We may state that the view taken by the Full Bench of the
Punjab & Haryana High Court in Jagar Ram's case is not correct
and in fact, it runs contrary to the provisions of section 44 of the
Indian Evidence Act. That section provides that: Any party to a
suit or proceeding may show that any judgment, order or decree
which is relevant under sections 40, 41, 42 and which has been
delivered by a Court not competent to deliver it or was obtained by
fraud or collusion.
(Section 40 refers to the relevances of previous judgments which
are pleaded as a bar to a second suit or trial and obviously
concerns section 11 CPC).
6. It appears from commentary in Sarkar's Evidence Act (13th Ed.,
reprint, at p. 509) on Section 44 that it is the view of the
Allahabad, Calcutta, Patna, Bombay High Courts that before such
a contention is raised in the latter suit or proceeding, it is not
necessary to file an independent suit. The passage from Sarkar's
Evidence which refers to various decisions reads as follows:
"Under Section 44 a party can, in a collateral proceeding in
which fraud may be set up as a defence, show that a decree
or order obtained by the opposite party against him was
passed by a court without jurisdiction or was obtained by
fraud or collusion and // is not necessary to bring an
independent suit for setting it aside, Bansi v. Dhapo,; Rajib
Panda v. Lakhan Sendh Mahapatra; Parbati v. Gajraj
Singh, Prayag Kumari Debi v. Siva Prosad Singh, Hare
Krishna Sen v. Umesh Chandra Dutt, Aswini Kumar
Jamiraddin v. Khadejanessa Bibi, Bhagwandas Narandas v.
D. D. Patel & Co., Bishunath Tewari v. Mirchi and
Thus, in order to contend in a latter suit or proceeding that an
earlier judgment was contained by collusion, it is not necessary to
file an independent suit as stated in Jagar Ram's case for a
declaration as to its collusive nature or for setting it aside, as a
condition precedent. In our opinion, the above cases cited in
Sarkar's Commentary are correctly decided. We do not agree with
the decision of the Full Bench of the Punjab & Haryana High Curt
in Jagar Ram's case. The Full Bench has not referred to Section
44 of the Evidence Act not to any other precedents of other Courts
or to any basic legal principle.
7. The law in England also appears to be the same, that no
independent suit is necessary. In Spencer-Bower and Turner on
Res Judicata (2nd Ed., 1969) it is stated (para 369) that there are
exceptions to the principle of res judicata. If the party setting up
res judicata as an estoppel has alleged all the elements of an
estoppel (i.e ingredients of res judicata), it is still open to the latter
(the opposite party) to defeat the estoppel by setting up and
establishing certain affirmative answers. Of these there are four
main classes-fraud, cross-estoppel, contract and public policy. The
author clearly says that no active proceedings for 'rescission' of the
earlier judgment are necessary. They state (para 370) as follows:
"The avoidance of a judicial act on the ground of fraud or
collusion is effected not only by active proceedings for
rescission........but also by setting up the fraud as a defence
to an action on the decision, or as an answer to any case
which, whether by way of estoppel or otherwise, depends
for its success on the decision being treated as
Thus, the law is well settled that no independent suit as a condition
precedent is necessary.
8. Collusion, say Spencer-Bower and Turner (para 378), is
essentially play- acting by two or more persons for one common
purpose-a concerted performance of a fabula disguised as a
judicium-an unreal and fictitious pretence of a contest by
confederates whose game is the same. As stated by Lord Selborne
there is no judge; but a person invested with the ensigns of
a judicial office, is misemployed in listening to a fictitious
cause proposed to him, there is no party litigating.......no
real interest brought into question and to use the words of a
very sensible civilian on this point, fabula non judicium,
hoc est; in scena, non in foro, res agitur.
That, in our view, is the true meaning of the word 'collusion' as
applied to a judicial proceeding.”
25.    From the above discussion and having regard to the law enunciated
by Hon‟ble the Supreme Court on the point, there is not even an iota of
doubt that the suit filed by the petitioner against respondent No.3, which
culminated into passing of a sort of consent decree by the Collector
Agrarian Reforms on 16-07-2005, was collusive in nature filed with an aim
of accomplishing a sinister purpose, that is, obtaining an order in
contravention of the provisions of the Act. The intention of the parties in
filing the suit was obvious and the sole purpose was to transfer the agrarian
land from respondent No.3 to the petitioner without executing a proper sale
deed, without paying the stamp duty and without getting it registered as also
to defeat the provisions of the Act. In the instant case the claim that was put
forth by the petitioner was fictitious and the contest that was made by
respondent No.3 was unreal. The petitioner and respondent No.3 succeeded
in getting a decree passed, which was a mere mask having the similitude of
judicial determination and worn by the parties to defeat the provisions of the
Act. The petitioner and respondent No.3, by entering into a secret and
unholy alliance, played a fraud on the court and obtained a decree which
was not only a result of collusion between the two but was in contravention
of the provisions of the Act. To repeat, what was said by Hon‟ble the
Supreme Court in K. D. Sharma v. Steel Authority of India Limited,
(2008) 12 SCC 481, “fraud avoids all judicial acts, ecclesiastical or
temporal" proclaimed Chief Justice Edward Coke of England before about
three centuries. The judgment/decree obtained by fraud has to be treated as a
nullity by every Court, tribunal or judicial/ quasi judicial authority. As is
held in A. V. Papayya Sastry v. Govt. of A.P, (2007) 4 SCC 221, a
judgment, decree or order obtained by playing fraud on the Court, tribunal
or authority is nullity and non est in the eye of law. Such a judgment, decree
or order, by the first court or by the final court, has to be treated as nullity
by every court, superior or inferior. It can be challenged in any Court at any
time in appeal, revision, writ or even in collateral proceedings.”
26.    Viewed the instant case in the context of legal position enunciated by
Hon‟ble the Supreme Court, I am of the considered opinion that the order of
the Collector Agrarian Reforms, Anantnag dated 16-07-2005 was as a result
out of collusion between the petitioner and the respondent No.3 aimed at
achieving the sinister purpose of conveying the agrarian land in
contravention of the provisions of the Act and to avoid the payment of
stamp duty and registration of document of conveyance.
27.    This brings me to the argument of learned counsel for the petitioner
that under Section 19 of the Act only a person aggrieved can file an appeal
and, therefore, the respondent No.3, who was himself a party to the
collusion or fraud, cannot be permitted to take the benefit of his own wrong
and prefer the appeal before the Commissioner Agrarian Reforms. The
petitioner has placed reliance on a Division Bench judgment of this Court in
Khati (Mst) and Ors v. Ali Mohammad Sofi and anr, 2014 (4) JKJ HC
106. The Division Bench has relied upon the Single Bench judgment of
Mst. Zaina v. Financial Commissioner and ors, SLJ 1983 J&K 1, in
which this Court has opined that the order passed on mutation by Naib
Tehsildar, being agreed order, was not amenable to challenge in revision.
While I do not find any fault with the view taken by the Division Bench and
the Single Bench in these cases, but both the aforesaid cases have been
decided on their own facts. The case of the parties before this Court in the
aforesaid judgments was not one of the orders passed in collusive
proceedings or orders obtained by practicing fraud on the authorities under
the   Agrarian      Reforms    Act.   Both   the  judgments     are,    therefore,
distinguishable and not applicable to the facts of the instant case.
28.    It is true that going by plain language of Section 19, an appeal against
the order of Collector Agrarian Reforms before the Commissioner is
maintainable at the instance of a person aggrieved and ordinarily a person
who has consented to an order cannot be said to be a person aggrieved. Had
it been an appeal against the order of Collector simplicitor, in the ordinary
course of things, the position would have been different. However, in the
instant case what was brought to the notice of the appellate authority was
the fraud and collusion of the seemingly adversaries which culminated into
passing of the order under challenge in appeal. As the legal position has
been elaborately discussed hereinabove, such order or decree obtained as a
result of collusion or fraud is nullity in the eye of law and, therefore, does
not even require a formal declaration. If the forum hearing appeal/ revision
comes to a conclusion that the order impugned before it is passed by the
forum below in a proceeding filed in collusion, such authority cannot shut
its eyes and refuse to entertain the same on the ground that the appellant
before him was also a party to such collusion and fraud. Such orders, as and
when brought to the notice of the appellate or revisional authority, are
required to be avoided without any delay.
29.    Aside, this Court while exercising its extra ordinary writ jurisdiction
vested in it under Article 226 of the Constitution, has vast powers to declare
such orders, obtained by collusion or fraud, as null and void. Assuming that
the appellate authority, i.e. Commissioner Agrarian Reforms could not have
exercised the jurisdiction to set aside the order of Collector Agrarian
Reforms, Anantnag dated 16-07-2005 at the instance of respondent No.3,
nothing prevents this Court to hold order dated 16-07-2005 passed by
Collector Agrarian Reforms, Anantnag, a nullity in the eye of law having
been obtained by the petitioner in collusion with respondent No.3 in
contravention with the provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, the
Registration Act and the Jammu and Kashmir Agrarian Reforms Act, 1976.
Such order is non est in the eye of law and must be held so.
30.    For the foregoing reasons and the legal exposition discussed above, I
find no merit in this petition and the same is, accordingly, dismissed. The
competent revenue authority shall take note of the contravention of the
provisions of the Act made by the petitioner and the respondent No.3 in
respect of the subject land and shall take appropriate action as envisaged
under the Act, which may include vesting of the subject land in the State.
31.    Before parting, I deem it appropriate to sound a note of caution to the
courts subordinate to this Court exercising civil jurisdiction, that there is
growing tendency in the litigants to file collusive suits and obtain decrees
for accomplishing sinister purposes like avoiding registration of sale deeds,
paying stamp duty and many a times getting their rights determined in
contravention of law. Many a times decrees are passed by the civil Courts,
which, on the face of it, are in contravention of law, merely, on the ground
that the party opposing the suit consents for passing such decree. It is thus
imperative to keep in mind, the legal position as adumbrated hereinabove,
while considering such requests for passing consent decrees. The civil
Courts must ensure that consent decree is not prayed for to achieve sinister
purposes or that it does not contravene any law. A collusive decree cannot
be used as a cloak for the sale deed. There could be numerous occasions
where parties in collusion with each other may approach the civil Courts for
passing the decrees in contravention of law and for achieving the unlawful
objects. It would be appropriate if Registrar General ensures the circulation
of this judgment amongst the Judges subordinate to this Court.