Cr. M.P.(M) No. 2527 of 2022
Reserved on: 04.01.2023
State of Himachal Pradesh
The Hon’ble Mr. Justice Satyen Vaidya, Judge.    of
Whether approved for reporting?1 Yes
For the petitioner:
Mr. Manoj Chauhan and Mr.
ou                      Varun   Chandel,
rt                    Advocate with Mr. Rajesh
By way of instant petition, a prayer has been
ig      h   made for grant of pre-arrest bail to petitioner in case FIR
No. 94 of 2022, dated 19.11.2022, registered at Police
H           Station, Kotkhai, District Shimla, H.P. under Sections 408
and 34 of IPC.
Whether the reporters of Local Papers may be allowed to see the judgment? Yes.
2.         The case has been registered on the basis of a
complaint received by the police from Proprietor “Stan H.P.
Enterprises” Gumma, which is a retail sale outlet for
petroleum products, alleging inter alia that his four
employees including the petitioner have misappropriated
an amount to the tune of Rs.28,57,022/-. He further
alleged that all the accused had absconded.
During investigation, the police is stated to have
taken into possession the records maintained at “Stan
H.P.Enterprises”. The investigation also discovered that
the petitioner is maintaining five different bank accounts
in his name and between February, 2022 to November,
2022, a total sum of Rs.17,57,014/- was deposited in his
account with the Punjab National Bank. Out of such
amount, a sum of Rs.3,26,372/- is stated to have been
transferred to the account of another co-accused and
Rs.2,45,645/- in the account of the complainant. The
H   balance of the amount of Rs.11,84,997/- is stated to be
withdrawn by the petitioner, from time to time and some
part of it is stated to be transferred through UPI to other
persons.
4.         The respondent-State has opposed the grant of
pre-arrest bail to the petitioner on the ground that the
petitioner is not disclosing the name of persons in whose
account he has transferred the money in addition to the
co-accused and complainant. It has also been submitted
that petitioner has been avoiding the questions in this
behalf and has also been providing evasive answers.
On the other hand, it has been submitted on
behalf of the petitioner that the petitioner is innocent. The
transactions in his bank account were being made at the
instance and with the consent of the complainant as also
the Manager of the establishment named Surender Singh
Pathania, who was looking after the accounts. It has
further been contended on behalf of the petitioner that
during investigation, he has fully associated himself and
has provided entire detail of accounts to the police. The
petitioner is stated to be permanent resident of Village
Shimla, H.P. He has also undertaken to abide by all the
terms and conditions as may be imposed while disposing
of this application.
6.        The    case   was    registered    on      19.11.2022.
Petitioner was admitted to interim bail on 23.11.2022.
More than a month has elapsed thereafter. Petitioner has
joined the investigation as and when required. The
Investigating Agency already had sufficient time at its
disposal to complete the investigation atleast substantially
especially keeping in view the facts of the case.
It is alleged that petitioner instead of crediting
the amount received from retail sale in the account of
Petrol Station, had been directly crediting to his account.
The allegations against petitioner are subject to proof.
Mere fact that huge transaction has been found in the
bank account of petitioner does not necessarily lead to the
conclusion of his guilt. As per the investigation report, a
sum of Rs.2,45,645/- stands transferred from the account
of the petitioner to the account of “Stan H.P. Enterprises”.
From this fact, it can be inferred, atleast prima-facie, that
H   the bank account of “Stan H.P. Enterprises” was receiving
payments from the account of petitioner. How and why
there was no re-conciliation of the account of the Petrol
Station, has not been explained. Had the petitioner
intended to misappropriate the amount by depositing the
same to his account, he would not have remitted any
amount to the account of the Petrol Station.
8.        The observations as above, have been made
only to prima-facie assess the seriousness and gravity of
allegations against petitioner.
The respondent has not been able to justify the
reasons for seeking custodial interrogation of petitioner. It
is submitted that the petitioner is not disclosing the names
and identity of persons in whose account the money has
been transferred from his account. The grounds so raised
on behalf of the respondents does not appear to be
justified for the reason that the bank transactions can be
ascertained by the police from documentary evidence. As
regards the allegation of money withdrawn by the
petitioner from his account and the non-disclosure of
identity of persons to whom it has been disbursed, those
H   facts may not be so relevant for proving all the allegations
levelled against petitioner. The investigation in a criminal
case cannot be used as a recovery proceeding.
10.      The importance of personal liberty as a
constitutional mandate has been underlined by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in Siddharth vs. State of Uttar
Pradesh and another (2022) 1 SCC 676, as under:
“10. We may note that personal liberty is an
important aspect of our constitutional mandate. The
occasion to arrest an accused during investigation
arises             custodial    investigation        becomes
necessary or it is a heinous crime or where there is a
possibility of influencing the witnesses or accused
may abscond. Merely because an arrest can be made
because it is lawful does not mandate that arrest
must be made. A distinction must be made between
the existence of the power to arrest and the
justification for exercise of it. If arrest is made routine,
it can cause incalculable harm to the reputation and
C   self-esteem of a person. If the Investigating Officer has
no reason to believe that the accused will abscond or
disobey summons and has, in fact, throughout
ig  h         cooperated with the investigation we fail to appreciate
why there should be a compulsion on the officer to
arrest the accused.”
H   11.      In Nathu Singh vs. State of Uttar Pradesh
and others (2021) 6 SCC 64, the Hon’ble Supreme Court
has observed as under:
“19. At first blush, while this submission appears to
be attractive, we are of the opinion that such an
analysis of the provision is incomplete. It is no longer
res integra that any interpretation of the provisions
of Section 438, Cr.P.C. has to take into consideration
the fact that the grant or rejection of an application
under Section 438, Cr.P.C. has a direct bearing on the
fundamental
in Article 21 of the Constitution, as an effective
medium to protect the life and liberty of an individual.
The provision therefore needs to be read liberally, and
considering its beneficial nature, the Courts must not
read in limitations or restrictions that the legislature
have not explicitly provided for. Any ambiguity in the
language must be resolved in favour of the applicant
seeking relief. In this context, this Court, in the
Constitution Bench decision of this Court in Gurbaksh
Singh Sibbia v. State of Punjab, (1980) 2 SCC 565,
which was recently upheld and followed by this Court
C  in Sushila Aggarwal vs. State (NCT of Delhi) (2020) 5
SCC 1 at SCC p. 56, para 14, held as follows:
(Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia case, SCC p. 586, para 26)
ig  h             “26. We find a great deal of substance in
Mr Tarkunde's submission that since denial of
bail amounts to deprivation of personal liberty,
the court should lean against the imposition of
unnecessary restrictions on the scope of Section
H                 438, especially when no such restrictions have
been imposed by the legislature in the terms of
that section. Section 438 is a procedural
provision which is concerned with the personal
liberty of the individual, who is entitled to the
benefit of the presumption of innocence since
he is not, on the date of his application for
anticipatory bail, convicted of the offence in
respect of which he seeks bail. An overgenerous
infusion of constraints and conditions which are
not to be found in Section 438 can make its
provisions constitutionally vulnerable since the
right to personal freedom cannot be made to
depend on compliance with unreasonable
restrictions. The beneficent provision contained
in Section 438 must be saved, not jettisoned.”
emphasis supplied)
24. However, such discretionary power cannot be
exercised in an untrammeled manner. The Court must
take into account the statutory scheme under Section
438, Cr.P.C.,   particularly,    the    proviso      to Section
438(1), Cr.P.C., and balance the concerns of the
investigating agency, complainant and the society at
large with the concerns/interest of the applicant.
Therefore, such an order must necessarily be
narrowly tailored to protect the interests of the
applicant while taking into consideration the concerns
of the investigating authority. Such an order must be
a reasoned one.”
Keeping in view the facts of the case and also
aforesaid exposition, I am of the considered view that no
case for custodial interrogation of petitioner is made out.
The tool of custodial interrogation cannot be used to
extract confession. Such interrogation is permissible
where the Investigating Agency is without any means to
H   extract the facts. As noticed above, in the instant case the
bank transactions can easily be ascertained through
documentary evidence.
13.        The petitioner is permanent resident of Village
Shimla, H.P. and there is no apprehension of his fleeing
petitioner that he potentially can tamper with the
from the course of justice. It is also not alleged against
prosecution evidence. The State has also not come up with
a plea that the arrest of other co-accused is not possible
without interrogating the petitioner in custody.
Keeping in view the facts of the case, the
petition is allowed and the petitioner is ordered to be
released on bail, in case of his arrest, in FIR No. No. 94 of
2022, dated 19.11.2022, registered at Police Station,
Kotkhai, District Shimla, H.P. under Sections 408 and 34
of IPC, on his furnishing personal bond in the sum of
Rs.50,000/- with one surety in the like amount to the
satisfaction of Investigation Officer. This order is, however,
subject to following conditions: -
H              (i)    That the petitioner shall make himself available
for the purpose of investigation, an and when
required.
(ii)   That the petitioner shall not tamper with the
prosecution evidence nor hamper the investigation
of the case in any manner whatsoever.
(iii)   That   the    petitioner   shall     not     make      any
inducement, threat or promise to any person
acquainted with the facts of the case so as to
dissuade him/her from disclosing such facts to the
Court or the Police Officer; and
That the petitioner shall not leave India without
prior permission of this Court till completion of
investigation and thereafter of the trial court.
Any observation made hereinabove shall not be
taken as an expression of opinion on the merits of the
case and the trial Court shall decide the matter
uninfluenced by any observation made hereinabove.
Petition stands disposed of.