Heard Mr. Uday Narain Singh, learned counsel for the
applicant, learned A.G.A. for the State, Mr. Om Prakash,
learned counsel for opposite party no.2.
This application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed by
applicant for quashing the cognizance order dated 03.08.2022
passed by Judicial Magistrate as well as charge sheet dated
24.7.2022 as well as entire proceedings of Criminal Case
No.13440 of 2022 arising out of Case Crime No.217 of 2022,
under Section 67 of Information Technology (Amendment) Act,
Police Station Nawabad, District Jhansi pending in the court of
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jhansi. Further prayer has been made
to stay the further proceeding of above mentioned criminal
In short, the facts in brief are that the impugned FIR has been
lodged by the informant on 31.5.2022 against the applicant and
unknown persons alleging that 1 to 2 months ago, some
unknown persons with different mobile numbers and I.Ds.,
obtained photo of the informant from social media and while
tempering with the photo as well as while using abusive words,
viral the same on internet for which the informant has also
given an application before cybre thana.
Submission of learned counsel for the applicant is that the
applicant has been falsely implicated in the present case just to
pressurize and harass the applicant, in fact, no such incident has
taken place. The real fact is that the son of opposite party no.2,
namely, Ankit Nagpal and applicant were doing training in the
year 2021 at HDFC Bank at Bangalore and during the training
period, the son of opposite party no.2 proposed to the applicant
and when the applicant denied for the same, the opposite party
no.2 tried to harass and obstructed in her marriage. It is further
alleged that after completing the training, the victim returned
back to her home but the son of opposite party no.2
continuously calling the applicant and also send vulgar message
with social media platform, thereafter, the applicant lodged the
FIR on 11.02.2022 bearing Case Crime No.64 of 2022, under
Sections 354-ka, 354 gha, 506 IPC against the son of opposite
party no.2 in which after instigation charge sheet has been
submitted against the son of opposite party no.2 on 28.3.2022.
Further submission is that the present FIR is a counterblast to
the FIR lodged by the applicant against the son of opposite
party no.2. After investigation, the investigating officer has
submitted charge sheet against the applicant under Section 67 of
Information Technology (Amendment) Act in illegal and
arbitrary manner and the learned Magistrate took cognizance on
a printed proforma vide its order dated 03.03.2022 and
summoned the applicant to face trial. Further submission is that
in catena of judgments of this Court has held that the
summoning order on printed proforma without application of
judicial mind could not be passed. No ingredient of Section 67
of I.T. Act are existing under the facts and circumstances case,
therefore, no offence is made out against the applicant but the
court below has utterly failed to consider as no prima facie case
is made out against the applicant. He also pointed out certain
documents in support of his contention.
Per contra, supporting the impugned cognizance order, learned
AGA as well as learned counsel for opposite party no.2
vehemently opposed the contention raised by learned counsel
for the applicant and have submitted that during investigation,
the investigating officer found that some person including the
applicant, who is also a lady, is involved in the aforesaid illegal
activities, therefore, submitted charge sheet against the
applicant after recording statement under section 161 Cr.P.C. of
the witnesses. These witnesses have clearly alleged in their
statements that applicant as well as other accused persons are
involved in the offence in question. They have further stated
that since the offence is below 7 years, the police has no right to
arrest the applicant in compliance of Sections 41 and Section
41-A of the Code of Criminal Procedure. However, it is prayed
that the application of the applicant may be dismissed, as the
applicant has committed a serious crime.
I have considered the rival submissions advanced by learned
counsel for the parties and perused the material available on
For appreciation of the arguments of the learned counsel for the
applicant, Section 67 of the Act is reproduced as under:-
"67. Punishment for publishing or transmitting obscene material in
Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published in the electronic
form, any material which is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or
if its effect is such as to tend to deprave and corrupt persons who ae likely,
having regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter
contained or embodied in it, shall be punished on first conviction with
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two
three years and with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees and in the
event of a second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to five years and also with fine
which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
67-A. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material
containing sexually explicit act, etc.in electronic form:
Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted
inthe electronic form any material which contains sexually explicit act or
conduct shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to five years and also with fine
which may extend to ten lakh rupees.
Exception: This section and section 67 does not extend to any book,
pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting, representation or figure in
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public
good on the ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing,
painting, representation or figure is in the interest of science, literature, art,
or learning or other objects of general concern; or
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide for religious purposes.
67-B Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material depicting
children in sexually explicit act, etc. in electronic form.
(a) Publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted material
in any electronic form which depicts children engaged in sexually explicit
(b) creates text or digital images, collects, seeks, browses, downloads,
advertises, promotes, exchanges or distributes material in any electronic
form depicting children in obscene or indecent or sexually explicit manner
(c) cultivates, entices or induces children to on line relationship with one
or more children for and on sexually explicit act or in a manner that may
offend a reasonable adult on the computer resource or
(d) facilitates abusing children on line or
(e) records in any electronic form own abuse or that of others pertaining to
sexually explicit act with children, shall be punished on first conviction
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
five years and with a fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and in the
event of second of subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to seven years and also with fine
which may extend to ten lakh rupees;
Provided that the provisions of section 67, section 67A and this section
does not extend to any book , pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting,
representation or figure inj electronic form-
(i) The publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the
public good on the ground that such book, pamphlet, paper writing,
drawing, painting, representation or figure is in the interest of science,
literature, art or learning or other objects of general concern; or
(ii) which is kept or used for bonafide heritage or religious purposes
Explanation: For the purposes of this section, "children" means a person
who has not completed the age of 18 years.
67-C Preservation and Retention of Information by intermediaries:
(1) Intermediary shall preserve and retain such information as may be
specified for such duration and in such manner and format as the Central
Government may prescribe.
(2) Any intermediary who intentionally or knowingly contravenes the
provisions of sub section (1) shall be punished with an imprisonment for a
term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine."
Perusal of above quoted section 67 of Information Technology
Act, it is very unfortunate that under the above mentioned Act,
the accused shall only be punished on first conviction with
imprisonment of either description for a term, which may
extended to two to three years with fine and in the event of
second or subsequent conviction which imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to five years also with
fine, which may extend to 10 lakh rupees.
Having examined the matter in its entirety, here it would be
apposite to mention that this Court is of the view that it is
beyond the shadow of doubt that social media is a global
platform for exchange of thoughts, opinions and ideas. The
internet and social media has become an important tool through
which individuals can exercise their right to freedom of
expression but the right to freedom of expression comes with its
own set of special responsibilities and duties. It does not confer
upon the citizens the right to speak without responsibility nor
does it grant unfettered licence for every possible use of
As per statement of witnesses, namely, Shyam Sunder Nagpal,
husband of opposite party no.1, Suneel Kathuriya, brother of
opposite party no.2 and also independent witness, namely,
Govind Srivastava, there is clear cut allegation against the
applicant. They have fully supported the prosecution story. It is
an admitted fact that the both parties i.e. applicant and son of
opposite party no.2 known to each other and both have worked
in the same office during training at Bangalore.
Upon perusal of F.I.R. and the allegations made therein as well
as material against the applicant, as per prosecution case, the
cognizable offence against the applicant is made out. Perusal of
charge sheet submitted against the applicant shows that after
investigation, the investigating officer has submitted charge
sheet after collecting cogent and reliable evidence against the
applicant and thereafter the learned Magistrate has rightly
summoned the applicant to face trial.
Having considered the submissions made on behalf of the
parties and perused the order impugned as well as material
brought on record and also considering the above mentioned
provisions of section 67 Information Technology Act, it is
clearly established that the offence under Section 67 I.T. Act is
attracted in the present case, therefore, I am of the view that no
ground for quashing the proceedings of aforesaid case is made
out which may call for any interference by this Court in
exercise of its inherent power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. as the
same do not suffer from any illegality or infirmity.
The application lacks merit and is, accordingly, dismissed.