Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 1395 of 2022
Counsel for Applicant :- Sundeep Shukla
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Heard Mr Sundeep Shukla, learned counsel for the
applicant and Shri Virendra Kumar Maurya, learned
Additional Government Advocate assisted by Shri Prashant
Kumar Singh, learned Brief Holder, representing the State
of Uttar Pradesh and perused the record of the case.
By means of this application under Section 482 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure (herein after referred to as
“Cr.P.C.”),  the    applicant   has  invoked    the      inherent
jurisdiction of this Court for quashing the impugned charge
sheet No. 263 of 2015 dated 09.07.2017, under Sections
354, 452, 323, 504, 506 IPC, cognizance and summoning
order dated 17.7.2017 passed by the learned Judicial
Magistrate-III, Meerut, order dated 25.10.2017 whereby
the learned Magistrate issued bailable warrant as well as
further proceedings of case No. 646 of 2014, pending in
the court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate-V, Meerut.
Before considering the merits of the case, it would
not be out of place to mention it here that in the instant
case, the charge sheet was submitted            way back on
09.07.2015,      cognizance     was   taken    thereon          and
summoning order was passed on 17.07.2015, which were
challenged by the applicant before this Court by filing the
instant application on 12.1.2022, i.e. after about six and a
half years. When, learned counsel for the applicant was
confronted with the aforesaid delay in challenging the
charge sheet, cognizance and summoning order, he
submitted that the applicant was not aware about the
initiation of the proceedings against him.
On a query by the Court that learned Magistrate in
the order dated 25.10.2017 has specifically mentioned that
“on the case being taken up, accused did not turn up,
summon has already been served upon him, issue bailable
warrant against him”, learned counsel for the applicant has
belied the order of the learned Magistrate by saying that
aforesaid order has been passed by the learned Magistrate
on the basis of conjecture and surmises. Averments to this
effect has also been made by the learned counsel for the
applicant in paragraphs 40, 41 and 42 to the affidavit filed
in support of this application.
Such types of averments made by the applicant to
explain the delay in filing this application are highly
Now I proceed to consider the merit of the case.
The facts that formed the bedrock of this application
in nutshell are that an application under Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C. was moved by the victim on 01.09.2014 before the
Judicial Magistrate-III, Meerut with the allegations that
accused-Pankaj, who is the resident of the same village
used to stalk her with bad intention and was in search of
making sexual relations with the applicant-victim for the
last one year. On 01.7.2014, the accused, with an intention
to outrage her modesty, caught hold of her, but the matter
was resolved by the police by putting pressure on the
family of the victim. On 27.8.2014, when the victim was
sleeping in her room, at about 11.00 PM, accused barged
into her room, swooped her and tried to commit rape upon
her forcibly. On the shrieks of the victim, her mother wake
up and apprehended the accused, but by using force,
abusing and assaulting her mother, he managed to escape
by extending threat that if the victim does not make sexual
relation with him, he will attack her with acid. The incident
was witnessed in the light of inverter.      The application
further mentions that she has given information to the
police on 28.8.2014 and also sent a letter to the Senior
Superintendent of Police, Meerut on 30.8.2014, but since,
no    action was taken by the police, she has filed the
application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. supported by her
The aforesaid application was allowed by the Judicial
Magistrate-III, Meerut vide order dated 26.9.2014 and
SHO concerned was directed to lodge an FIR and
investigate the matter.
In pursuance of the order of the Magistrate dated
26.9.2014, the FIR was lodged on 28.9.2014 at case crime
No. 646 of 2014, under Sections 354, 376, 511, 504, 506,
323, 452 IPC, police station Kharkhauda, sub-district Sadar,
After lodging of the FIR, the law set into motion and
investigation was carried out by the investigating officer
and on culmination of investigation, the investigating
officer submitted charge sheet against the applicant, on
which cognizance was taken and accused-applicant was
summoned, which is the subject matter of challenge in this
The main substratum of argument of learned counsel
for the applicant is that the first information report was
lodged on the basis of application and order passed under
Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. for the incident which took place on
27.08.2014 by one Koshika impersonating herself as Neha
on the basis of false, frivolous and cooked up story,
whereas Neha has left for her heavenly abode on
13.05.2008. In support of his submission, learned counsel
for the applicant has relied upon an undated death
certificate issued by the New Delhi Municipal Council to
show that Km. Neha died on 13.5.2008               at All India
Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi. Learned counsel
for the applicant further submits that statements recorded
under sections 161 and 164 Cr.P.C. are false and
Learned counsel for the applicant lastly submitted
that the applicant has been falsely implicated in this case
and no offence whatsoever is made out against the
applicant. Under the facts and circumstances of the case,
impugned charge-sheet, cognizance order, summoning
order and further proceedings initiated against                   the
applicant are liable to be quashed by this Court.
Per contra, learned Additional Government Advocate
representing the State submits that on 04.2.2022 when
this case was taken up for the first time, on the submission
advanced by the learned counsel for the applicant that the
victim, who has lodged the application under Section
156(3)    Cr.P.C. on     01.9.2014,  has   already       died      on
13.5.2008, State was directed to obtain instructions. On
the basis of instructions, learned AGA submits that the
death certificate produced by the learned counsel for the
applicant is found fake and manipulated. Further, the
applicant has never produced the said death certificate
before the investigating officer during investigation to
verify the truth or otherwise of the said certificate whereas
the statement of the applicant was recorded by the
investigating    officer  on   09.7.2015.  To     buttress         his
submission, learned Additional Government Advocate has
produced before this Court death certificate of Km. Neha,
issued by the Registrar, Birth and Death, Nagar Nigam,
Meerut showing her death at Ring Road, Lohiya Nagar,
Meerut on 24.9.2015. He has also produced a copy of
paper cutting dated       25.9.2015 of Amar Ujala, Meerut
Edition in which it was mentioned that Km. Neha died in
road accident. Both the documents, produced by the
learned Additional Government are kept on record and
marked as “A”.
Learned Additional Government Advocate further
submits that statement of the victim under section 161
Cr.P.C. was recorded on 07.10.2014 and supplementary
statement under section 161 Cr.P.C. on 09.7.2015, whereas
her statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. was recorded in
the case diary on 10.10.2014. In her statements, both
under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and 164 Cr.P.C., the victim has
fully supported the prosecution case by giving vivid
description of the occurrence.
Learned      Additional   Government   Advocate          also
submits that the allegations made in the FIR as well as
material against the applicant, as per prosecution case, the
cognizable offence against the applicant is made out. The
criminal proceedings against the applicant cannot said to
be abuse of the process of the Court. Hence this
application is liable to be rejected.
Guidelines with regard to the exercise of jurisdiction
by the Court under section 482 Cr.P.C. have been laid down
by Apex Court from time to time.
In State of Haryana Vs. Bhajan Lal, 1992 (51)
SCC 335, Apex Court laid down certain broad tests to
exercise the inherent power or extraordinary power of the
High court. On the cost of repetition it is not necessary to
reiterate the guidelines. Suffice it to state that they are
only illustrative. The High Court should sparingly and only
in exceptional cases, in other words, in rarest of rare
cases, and not merely because it would be appealable to
the learned Judge, be inclined to exercise the power to
quash the FIR/Charge sheet/complaint.
1995 (7) JT 299, the Apex Court reiterated the above
view and held that when the complaint or charge sheet
filed disclosed prima facie evidence, the court would not
weigh at that stage and fine out whether offence could be
made out.
In State of Himachal Pradesh Vs. Pirthi Chand
and another, 1996 (2) SCC 37, Supreme Court held thus:
“It is thus settled law that the exercise of inherent
power of the High Court is an exceptional one.
Great care should be taken by the High Court
before embarking to scrutinise the FIR/charge-
sheet/ complaint. In deciding whether the case is
rarest of rare cases to scuttle the prosecution in its
inception, it first has to get into the grip of the
matter whether the allegations constitute the
offence. It must be remembered that FIR is only
an initiation to move the machinery and to
investigate into cognizable offence. After the
investigation is conducted and the charge-sheet is
laid the prosecution produces the statements of
the witnesses recorded under section 161 of the
Code in support of the charge- sheet. At that stage
it is not the function of the Court to weigh the pros
and cons of the prosecution case or to consider
necessity of strict compliance of the provisions
which are considered mandatory and its effect of
non-compliance. It would be done after the trial is
concluded. The Court has to prima facie consider
from the averments in the charge-sheet and the
statements of witness on the record in support
thereof whether Court could take cognizance of the
offence, on that evidence and proceed further with
the trial. If it reaches a conclusion that no
cognizable offence is made out no further act could
be done except to quash the charge-sheet. But
only in exceptional cases, i.e., in rarest of rare
cases of mala fide initiation of the proceedings to
wreak private vengeance process of criminal is
availed of in laying a complaint or FIR itself does
not disclose at all any cognizable offence - the
Court may embark upon the consideration thereof
and exercise the power.
In State of Bihar Vs. Rajendra Agrawalla, 1996
SCALE (1) 394, the Apex Court observed as under:
“It has been held by this Court in several cases
that the inherent power of the court under Section
482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure should be
very sparingly and cautiously used only when the
court comes to the conclusion that there would be
manifest injustice or there would be abuse of the
process of the court, if such power is not
exercised. So far as the order of cognizance by a
Magistrate is concerned, the inherent power can be
exercised when the allegations in the First
Information Report or the complaint together with
the other materials collected during investigation
taken at their face value, do not constitute the
offence alleged. At that stage it is not open for the
court either to shift the evidence or appreciate the
evidence and come to the conclusion that no prima
facie case is made out.”
These guidelines were reiterated by the Apex Court
in Central Bureau of Investigation Vs. Duncans Agra
Vs. State NCT of Delhi, 1999 (3) SCC 259 and Zandu
Haque and another (2005) 1 SCC 122.
In M/s Medchl Chemicals and Pharma P limited
Vs. M/s Biological E. Limited and others, JT 2000 (2)
SC 426, Apex Court held thus:
“ Exercise of jurisdiction under the inherent
power as envisaged in Section 482 of the code to
have the complaint or the charge sheet quashed is
an exception rather a rule and the case for
quashing at the initial stage must have to be
treated as rarest of rare so as not to scuttle the
prosecution.    With     the    lodgment       of     First
Information Report the ball is set to roll and
thenceforth the law takes its own course and the
investigation ensues in accordance with the
provisions of law. The jurisdiction as such is rather
limited and restricted and its undue expansion is
neither practicable nor warranted.”
In Md. Allauddin Khan Vs. State of Bihar, 2019
(6) SCC 107, the Magistrate took cognizance of the offence
under Section 323, 379 read with Section 34 of the Indian
Penal Code by holding that a prima facie case was made
out against the respondents         therein on the basis of
allegations made in the complaint. Patna High Court set
aside the order of Magistrate on appreciation of the
evidence. The Apex Court, while setting aside the order of
the Patna High Court, held thus:
“in our view, the High Court had no jurisdiction
to appreciate the evidence of the proceedings under
Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973
(for short “Cr.P.C”) because whether are are
contradictions    or/and     inconsistencies      in       the
statements of the witnesses is essentially an issue
relating to appreciation of evidence and the same
can be gone into by the Judicial Magistrate during
trial when the entire evidence is adduced by the
parties. That stage is yet to come in this case.”
In State of Madhya Pradesh Vs. Yogendra
Singh Jadon and another, (2020) 12 SCC 588, after the
registration of FIR, a charge sheet under Section 420, 406,
409, 120-B IPC and 13(1)(d) and 13(2) of the Prevention
of Corruption Act was filed. The Special Judge passed an
order framing charges against Yogendra Singh Jadon and
others. That order was challenged before the High Court
by way of filing criminal revision. The High Court found
that the offences under Sections 420 and 120-B IPC were
not made out. The Apex Court while setting aside the
order of the High Court held that the High Court                has
examined the entire issue as to whether the offence under
Sections 420 and 120-B is made out or not at pre trial
stage. The power under Section 482 of the code of
Criminal Procedure cannot be exercised where the
allegations are required to be proved in court of law.
The Apex Court in Rajeev Kourav Vs. Baisahab
and others, (2020)3 SCC 317, the High Court of Madhya
Pradesh quashed the criminal proceedings on the basis of
assessment of statements of the witnesses recorded under
Section 161 Cr.P.C. The Apex Court set aside the order of
the High Court by holding that statements of the witnesses
recorded    under   Section    161  Cr.P.C.   being        wholly
inadmissible in evidence cannot be taken into consideration
by the Court, while adjudicating a petition filed under
Section 482 of the Code.
In Kaptan Singh Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and
others, AIR 2021 SC 3931, the charge sheet was
submitted by the investigating officer after recording the
statement of the witnesses, statement of the complainant
and collecting the evidence from the place of incident and
taking statement of the independent witnesses and even
statement of the accused persons. The cognizance of the
offence was also taken by the learned Magistrate. The
High Court has quashed the criminal proceedings for the
offences under Sections 147, 148, 149, 406, 329 and 386
IPC initiated against the applicant.
The Apex Court while quashing the order of the
Allahabad High Court, held that the High Court is not
required to go into the merits of the allegations and /or to
enter into the merits of the as if the High Court is
exercising the appellate jurisdiction and /or conducting the
trial. High Court has exceeded its jurisdiction in quashing
the criminal proceedings in exercise of poowers under
Section 482 Cr.P.C. The High Court has failed to appreciate
and consider the fact that there are very serious triable
issue/allegations which are required to be gone into and
considered at the time of trial. The High Court has lost
sight of crucial aspects which have emerged during the
course of the investigation.
In State of Odisha Vs. Pratima Mohanty etc. ,
2021 SCC Online SC 1222, Apex Court, while quashing the
order of Odisha High Court, held thus:
“It is trite that the power of quashing should be
exercised sparingly and with circumspection and in
rate cases. As per settled proposition of law while
examining an FIR/complaint quashing of which is
sought, the court cannot embark upon any enquiry
as to the reliability or genuineness of allegations
made     in    the   FIR/complaint.   Quashing          of     a
complaint/FIR should be an exception rather than an
ordinary rule. Normally the criminal proceedings
should not be quashed in exercise of powers under
Section    482    Cr.P.C.  when   after    a     thorough
investigation the charge sheet has been filed. At the
stage of discharge and/or considering the application
under Section 482 Cr.P.C. the courts are not required
to go into the merits of the allegations and/or
evidence in details as if conducting the mini trial. As
held by this Court the powers under Section 482
Cr.P.C. is very wide, but conferment of wide power
requires the court to be more cautious. It casts an
onerous and more diligent duty on the Court.”
In view of the aforesaid pronouncements of the Apex
Court, I have examined the matter in its totality and I find
that the case of the applicant does not fall within the
categories of rarest of rare cases. This Court is of the view
that the appreciation of evidence is a function of the trial
court and this Court in exercise of power under Section
482 Cr.P.C. cannot assume such jurisdiction and put to an
end to the process of trial provided under the law.
It is well settled by the Apex Court in the
aforementioned judgments that the power under Section
482 Cr.P.C. at pre-trial stage should not be used in a
routine manner, but it has to be used sparingly, only in
such an appropriate cases, where it manifestly appears
that there is a legal bar against the institution or
continuance     of  the    criminal proceedings      or      where
allegations made in first information report or charge-sheet
and the materials relied in support of thereof, taking on
their face value and accepting in their entirety do not
disclose the commission of any offence against the
This Court is further of the view that the grounds
taken in the application reveal that many of them relate to
disputed question of fact, which cannot be adjudicated by
this Court     at the pre-trial stage, which can be more
appropriately gone into by the trial court at the appropriate
stage. The applicant has an alternative statutory remedy of
moving discharge application at the appropriate stage.
The taking of cognizance of the offence is an area
exclusively within the domain of a Magistrate. At this stage, the
magistrate has to be satisfied whether there is sufficient ground
for proceeding and not whether there is sufficient ground for
conviction. At that stage the court below is not required to
go into the merit and demerit of the case. Genuineness or
otherwise of the allegations cannot be even determined at
the stage of summoning the accused.
Having considered the facts, circumstances and
nature of allegations against the applicant in the instant
case, I am of the considered view that a prima facie
cognizable offence is made out against the applicant. The
impugned criminal proceeding under the facts of this case
cannot said to be an abuse of the process of the Court.
In view of what has been indicated herein above, I
am of the view that there is no good ground to invoke
inherent power under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure by this Court.
Accordingly, the relief as sought by the applicant by
means of the instant application is hereby refused.
This application under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure is accordingly rejected.
The trial court is directed to proceed against the
applicant in accordance with law.
Office is directed to transmit a copy of this order to
the learned Trial Court with a week.
Location: High Court of Judicature at