2.      By this petition preferred under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India the petitioner has prayed for a direction to the respondent to
consider her candidature for the post of Office Assistant (Multi
purpose) and to issue appointment order in her favour in light of offer
letter dated 03.03.2021 for selection to the said post.
3.      As per the petitioner, Institute of Banking Personnel Selection
(IBPS) issued advertisement for recruitment of officers and Office
Assistant (Multi purpose) in Regional Rural Banks including the
respondent Bank. Petitioner duly registered herself and submitted the
online form on 13.07.2020 for the post of Office Assistant (Multi
purpose) under OBC category. On account of typographical mistake,
the petitioner mentioned her date of birth as 02.11.1991 instead of
04.11.1991. Petitioner then appeared in the written examination and
Digitally signed by NEERAJ
successfully cleared the same and offer letter dated 03.03.2021 was
issued by the respondent Bank in her favour. The petitioner was called
to report at head office of the respondent Bank on 18.03.2021 for
documents verification.
4.     As directed, the petitioner appeared before the head office of
the respondent Bank on 18.03.2021 and furnished her original
documents. However, the respondent Bank rejected the candidature
and selection of the petitioner on the ground that she had filled
incorrect date of birth in her application form. The petitioner
preferred a representation before the respondent Bank seeking
permission to make necessary correction in her date of birth in the
application form, but no decision upon the same was taken hence she
has approached this Court.
5.     Reply has been filed by the respondent submitting that when
the petitioner was called for document verification, her actual date of
birth did not match with the date of birth given by her in the
application form, hence, her candidature and selection was rejected.
6.     Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner
has not gained by filling an incorrect date of her birth in her
application form. Taking both the dates into account the petitioner
would still be eligible for recruitment. The incorrect date mentioned
in the application form by her was only a typographical mistake. The
petitioner has been duly selected on merits and offer letter has been
issued in her favour. The mistake on her part was inadvertent and
trivial and ought to have been condoned by the respondent and
appointment order ought to have been issued in her favour.
7.     Learned counsel for the respondent submits that as the date of
birth as mentioned by the petitioner in her application form was
Digitally signed by NEERAJ
incorrect, the same having been discovered at the time of inspection
of her original documents, her candidature has rightly been rejected.
8.     I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused
the record. The question for determination in this petition is whether
candidature of the petitioner ought to have been cancelled on ground
of typographical error in her date of birth in her online application
after she had cleared the written test and after interview offer letter
had been issued in her favour.
9.     A candidate applying for a Government job should fill up the
application form carefully. The candidate cannot claim any vested
right of rectification of errors in application. When material
discrepancy is noticed in the application form, the candidature may be
cancelled even after the application has been processed and candidate
has been allowed to participate in the selection process. But when a
candidate has participated in the selection process and has cleared all
the stages successfully, candidature should not be cancelled without
careful scrutiny of the gravity of the lapse. The same cannot be done
for minor omissions or errors.
10.    The difference between the actual date of birth of the petitioner
and the date filled by her in the application form was only of two
days. The petitioner has not derived any benefit whatsoever on
account of the said difference. The case of petitioner is not that she
has not at all been shortlisted or has not been allowed to participate in
the selection process. She has been so allowed and has emerged
successful in every stage. Respondent has not looked into the trivial
nature of lapse on part of the petitioner. It is not a case of concealment
of any criminal prosecution by the petitioner or suppression of a like
nature. It is also not a case of any deliberate misrepresentation on her
Digitally signed by NEERAJ
part. The information wrongly given by the petitioner was not a very
material information.
11.    It is not the case of respondent itself that the petitioner has
derived any advantage by entering the wrong date of birth in the
application. There was no intentional misrepresentation on part of the
petitioner as she had submitted her school Certificate. There is a
difference between a mere inadvertent error and misrepresentation or
suppression. Cancellation of candidature of petitioner on the ground
of typographical error in her application form is hence arbitrary and
grossly disproportionate to the gravity of her lapse.
12.    The Delhi High Court has also in similar circumstances, in
W.P. (C) No.11642/2016, Ajay Kumar Mishra V/s. Union of India
& Others decided on 23.12.2016 held as under :-
“15. As observed above, it is not the case of the
respondents that the petitioner derived any advantage by
entering the wrong date of birth in his online application.
There is a difference between a mere inadvertent error and
misrepresentation or suppression. There could be no
intentional misrepresentation as the school certificate was
submitted. The penalisation of cancellation of the
candidature on the ground of a typographical error is
arbitrary, unreasonable harsh and disproportionate to its
gravity of the lapse. ”
13.    As a result the petition is allowed. The respondent is directed to
consider the candidature of petitioner for the post of Office Assistant
(Multi purpose) and to issue appointment order in her favour in light
of offer letter dated 03.03.2021.