This petition is filed to quash the suo moto criminal complaint
registered by the Inspector of Police, NIB-CID Police Station, Chennai in
Crime No.79 of 2017 on 17.10.2017.
2.      According to the complaint, based on the prior
information, the Inspector of Police along with Police Constable Mr.Babu
and Head Constable Mr.Senthil Kumar went to the Grand Plaza Resort and
on identification of the accused by the informant, on 17.10.2017 at about
11.30 a.m., the petitioner herein was arrested and polythene white colour
bag carried by him was seized in the presence of Constable Mr.Babu and
Head Constable Mr.Senthil Kumar. The petitioner was informed about his
right under Section 50 of the Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act, 1985 and the bag he carried was tested. He was examined and found
that he has ganja leaves and flower buds. On weighing, it was found 0.650
grams.       After drawing two samples each 25 grams, the remaining
contraband was duly packed and sealed. Thereafter, the case was registered
under Section 8(c) r/w 20(b) (ii)(A) of the Narcotics Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 and the accused was arrested and
released on bail by the police at the police station itself.
3.      Alleging that it is a false case foisted against him, the
petitioner filed Crl.O.P.No.27369 of 2018 to quash the First Information
Report. When the matter was came up for hearing, Mr.M.Mohamed Riyaz,
then Additional Public Prosecutor, on instructions, has submitted that the
respondent police has already completed the investigation and filed the final
Report on 06.12.2017 before the Judicial Magistrate No.II, Ponneri and the
said final report is yet to be taken on file and numbered. Recording the
same, this Court directed the respondent police to get the final report
numbered, within two weeks, from the date of receipt of the copy of that
order and liberty was given to the petitioner to challenge the final report, if
so advised. In the said circumstances, since till date final report was not
filed, the petitioner has approached this Court by way of filing this petition
under Section 482 of Cr.P.C in Crl.O.P.No.4980 of 2019, which is under
consideration before this Court.
4.      The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted
that, inspite of the direction by this Court vide order dated 26.11.2018 to get
the final report numbered, within two weeks, till date, the final report has
not seen the light of the day and not numbered.             The offence being
punishable to the extent of 1 year and failure to file the final report, within a
period of one year, hit by law of limitation as prescribed under Section 468
of the Criminal Procedure Code. Further, the learned counsel also
contended that the seized contraband has also not been seen the light of the
day, which clearly indicate that, Mrs.Vijayalakshmi, the then Inspector of
Police attached to NIB CID, with malicious intention, has registered this
complaint falsely implicated in a grave offence of Trafficking the Narcotic
Drugs and thereby prevented the petitioner herein, who was pursuing his
Engineering Course at Venkateswara Engineering College.
5.     Considering the gravity of allegation made by the
petitioner herein, this Court directed the Government Advocate (Crl.Side) to
find out the current status of the complaint registered against this petitioner
and also to produce CD file. Accordingly, the learned Government
Advocate (Crl.Side) produced CD file and submitted that the Investigating
Officer, who has registered the case has been transferred and final report
filed by her not yet taken on file and not pursued.
6.     From the record, it is also seen that the samples were sent
to the Court with a requisition letter to forward the samples for laboratory
test. Though the Magistrate ordered to forward the samples to the lab test,
the same was not sent for lab test. Also, the remaining contraband was not
produced before the Court under Form 95.
7.      In view of the fact that more than 1 year has lapsed after
registering the complaint and the maximum punishment for possession of
0.650 grams of ganja is up to one year, the complaint suffers limitation
prescribed under Section 468 of the Criminal Procedure Code. The present
incumbent state, she has sought the legal opinion in the matter to proceed
further.     This Court on perusing the CD file finds nothing well in the
manner in which the case has been registered and dealt by the then
8.      As far as the relief sought for by the petitioner, this Court
has no hesitation to allow the same for the reason that the contraband
alleged to have been seized by the petitioner has not been tested for its
content, inspite of lapse of 5 years. Inspite of the direction by this Court to
get the final Report numbered, the then Investigating Officer has not taken
any interest to get the final report numbered. This attitude of the
Investigating Officer who has registered the case, clearly indicates that the
case is not registered based on true facts. It is for the Senior Official to look
into this case and take appropriate action for registering the complaint and
not proceeding further in accordance with law. Since the Investigating
Officer, who has registered this case, has been transferred and not in the
office, this Court is not inclined to pass any order against the respondent
police. However, record that the case against the petitioner registered in
Crime No.79 of 2017 is a clear case of abuse of power and malicious
prosecution launched by the then Investigating Officer with the help her
subordinates namely, Mr.Babu and Mr.Senthil Kumar.
9.    In the result, this Criminal Original Petition is allowed
and the First Information Report in Crime No.79 of 2017 on the file of the
respondent Police, (NIB-CID) Chennai is quashed.
Speaking order/non speaking order
1.The The Inspector of Police, NIB-CID Police Station,Chennai.