The present petition is filed under Section 482 of
"To set aside the order dated 19.12.2016
passed by the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, Sirsi
Sub-Division, Sirsi in No.MAG/2/ViVa/01/2016-
17(Annexure-B) and order dated 30.01.2019
passed by the court of the 1 s t Additional
District  and   Sessions    Judge,  UK   Karwar,
sitting at Sirsi in Crl.RP NO.5072 of 2016
2.    The brief facts of the case are as under :-
The petitioners have established a poultry farm in
the agricultural land belonging to them bearing survey
Nos.4/1 and 4/2 of Bandal Village, Sirsi Taluk. A notice
came to be issued by the Tahasildar directing the
petitioners to close the poultry farm on the ground that
the poultry farm is creating nuisance to the general
public and also directed to show cause as to why the
preliminary order could not be made absolute. The said
notice bearing No.MAG/II/ViVa/I/2016-17 was issued on
Thereafterwards, the petitioners appeared before
the Assistant Commissioner, Sirsi Sub-Division and filed
their objections to the show cause notice.           W ithout
recording the evidence of the parties, the 1 s t respondent,
who is the Sub-Divisional Magistrate, passed an order on
19.12.2016 to the effect that the preliminary order passed
in the case is made absolute.
Again   the  said  order   was   challenged    by   the
petitioners herein before the 1 s t Additional District and
Sessions Judge, UK Karwar, sitting at Sirsi, in Crl.RP
No.5072/2016     and  the  learned   District Judge,     after
hearing the parties, dismissed the Revision Petition,
which is under challenge before this Court.
3. In the petition the following grounds have been
i.   That the Sub-Divisional Magistrate failed to apply his mind
while passing impugned order as per Annexure B without
recording evidence of the. parties. When Section 133 of the
Criminal Procedure Code is invoked, judicial) discretion is
mandatory. But in the case on hand, admittedly the
Petitioners are engaged in agricultural work i. e. poultry
farming in their agricultural lands, learned magistrate failed
to record evidence and also failed to look into the root of
the case, as whether the alleged complaint comes under
Section 133 to 138 of the Criminal Procedure Code or not
and hence the order is against the principles of law.
ii.   That the provisions of Section 133 of the Criminal
Procedure Code provide a speedy and summary remedy in
case of a urgent situation where there is at imminent
danger to public interest or public health. In all other cases,
the parties should be referred to the remedy under the
ordinary law of land. The idea is that if immediate steps are
not taken, irreparable injury will be done. Extraordinary
powers are meant to be exercised under extra-ordinary
circumstances. But in this case, without any valid reasons
and without verifying the alleged reports as to whether the
authorities had complied with the procedure laid down by
the respective laws before preparing such reports,
Respondent - 1 has proceeded under Section 133 of the
Criminal Procedure Code. Admittedly, the poultry-farm in
question situate over private. lands in Sy. Nos. 4/1 & 4/2 of
Bandal, surrounded by forest on three sides and by paddy
fields on one side. Moreover, the impugned order is passed
nearly 3 years ago by Respondent - 1 and it thus become
apparent that the facts nowhere attract immediate threat or
any right to exercise discretionary power for removal of
existing poultry-farm which is hygienic condition, as per the
report dated 02/02/2019. Hence, the impugned orders as
per Annexures- B & E are liable to be set aside.
iii. That immediately after passing ex-parte order dated
29/11/2016 under Section 133(2) of the Criminal Procedure
Code, Respondent - 1 issued notice to the Petitioners. The
Petitioners   duly   appeared    with   their   Advocate    on
05/12/2016. Without giving reasonable time, the matter
listed again on 07/12/2016, and on that day the Petitioners
filed their Statement of Objections and requested for
leading evidence on their behalf. But the matter listed on
14/12/2016 for hearing, and on 19/12/2016 the impugned
order (Annexure - B) was passed directing removal of
poultry-farm on or before 26/12/2016. Such procedure is in
violation of the principles of natural justice, and it clearly.
shows that the Sub-Divisional Magistrate without recording
any evidence or conducting an enquiry has passed the final
order against the spirit of the provisions of Sections 133 &
138 of the Criminal Procedure Code. It is pertinent to note
that the Sub-Divisional Magistrate passed the preliminary
order as per Section 133 and issued notice to the
Petitioners as contemplated under Section 134 of the
Criminal Procedure Code. Thereafter, the Petitioners
appeared and filed their explanation. Section 138 of Code
prescribes the procedure to be followed after appearance
of the person in pursuance of the show-cause notice. It
mandates that the Magistrate shall take evidence in the
matter as in a summons case and thereafter, if he is
satisfied with the order made originally is reasonable, he
shall confirm the same or if he thinks to modify he can
modify the orders earlier passed by him. If the Magistrate is
not so satisfied, no further proceedings shall be taken in
the case. Thus, sub-section (1) of Section 138 of the
Criminal Procedure Code casts an obligation on the
Magistrate to take evidence as in a summons case. The
Courts of law have repeatedly observed that it is the duty of
the Magistrate as and when dealing with a case under
Section 133 of the Criminal Procedure Code should take
evidence and satisfy himself. Even in cases the person
concerned does not pursue his objections, the complainant
should lead evidence on his side and should not leave the
Magistrate to base his order only on materials placed
before him when the preliminary order was passed. Neither
the reports of the Tahsildar nor any other document
produced while passing an order under Section 133 can
substitute the recording of evidence under Section 138 of
the Criminal Procedure Code. In the present case, no
evidence is recorded and the Sub-Divisional Magistrate has
made the preliminaryTorder absolute without any evidence,
and without understanding the aforesaid provisions the
Sessions Court has mechanically confirmed the same.
Therefore, the impugned orders (Annexures - B & E) are
liable to be set aside.
iv. That since 2000, the Petitioners are running their poultry-
farm over their own lands. Admittedly, in the jurisdiction of
Bandal Panchayat, there are nearly 24 to 25 poultry-farms.
At this juncture, some persons who are inimicallu disposed
of have moved an application by misusing the provisions of
Section 133 of the Criminal Procedure Code with the
allegations of entire activities of Petitioners are illegal and
which effects the health of the neighbouring residents.
Even before the Sessions Court, certain applications were
moved to prejudice the mind of the Court. It clearly shows
that some persons trying to harm Petitioners' poultry-farm
under the guise of removal of public nuisance that may
cause injury later. But the provisions of Section 133 of the
Criminal Procedure Code apply only when there are
compelling immediate circumstances existing and not to
potential nuisance i e. to what may become nuisance in the
future. Such orders cannot be passed on imagination of
nuisance. Hence, the impugned orders are untenable in the
eye of law. Respondent 1 and the Sessions Court have
failed to examine the facts of case against the provisions of
law on public nuisance amounting to abuse of process of
law. Hence, the impugned orders are liable to be set aside.
v. That the settled position of law is that if any sufficient
material is found to proceed with the matter, Respondent 1
has to conduct spot-enquiry and collect / record evidence
on such aspect and also ensure cross-examination of
deponents, and then proceed ahead with the case on
merits under Section 138 of the Criminal Procedure Code.
Without following the prescribed procedure. Respondent 1
has simply passed the mandatory order for removal of
poultry-farm. Since he has failed to adhere to the
provisions mandated under Chapter X of the Criminal
Procedure Code, the impugned orders are liable to be set
aside.
vi.  That Respondent - 1 has failed to consider the matter
under the provisions of Sections 133 & 138 of the Criminal
Procedure Code while passing impugned order, as
'nuisance is an inconvenience which materially interferes
with the ordinary physical comfort of human existence. It is
not capable of precise definition. To bring in application of
Section 133 of the Code, there must be imminent danger to
the property and consequential nuisance to the public. The
nuisance is the concomitant act resulting in danger to the
life or property due to likely collapse. The object and
purpose behind Section 133 of the Code is essentially to
prevent public nuisance and involves a sense of urgency in
the sense that if the Magistrate fails to take recourse
immediately. irreparable damage would be done to the
public. It applies to a condition of the nuisance at the time
when the order is passed and it is not intended to apply to
future likelihood or what may happen at some later point of
time. Hence, the order under Section 138 of the Criminal
Procedure Code which confirmed by the Sessions Court is
liable to be set aside.
vii. That the Respondents herein and the Sessions Court failed
to understand that no license is required to run a poultry-
farm under any law. The provisions of Section 2 of the
Karnataka Land Reforms Act, 1961 clearly state that
poultry-farming is part of agriculture. Section 2(1) of the
(A) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,
(b) the raising of crops, grass or garden produce;
(f) grazing.
Poultry-farming is an agricultural activity. One doesn't need
a license to engage in agricultural activities. Such being the
legal position, no license is required to carry on poultry-
farming. Hence, there is no question of the Gram
Panchayat issuing or cancelling any license to carry on
agricultural activities, The provisions of the Karnataka Land
Reforms Act, 1961 or Karnataka Gram Swaraj and
Panchayat Raj Act, 1993 do not contemplate issue of a
license for carrying on agriculture or agricultural activities.
Hence, the impugned orders based on erroneous findings
are liable to be set aside.
viii. Petitioners are agriculturists carrying on agricultural activity
over agricultural lands. They are not into any illegal trade or
occupation. Apart from valuable agricultural land, the
Petitioners have invested substantial time, money and
energy over the past several years. They have raised big
loans also and they are already under tremendous
pressure to repay the same. Poultry-farming is                a
continuous process and if there is any interruption, the
livestock will be put to peril. Poultry-farming is Petitioners'
source of livelihood and they are neither qualified nor in a
position to take up any other vocation at this stage of life.
Article 19 of the Constitution of India guarantees their
fundamental right to practice any profession or to carry on
any occupation. Such lawful occupation cannot be taken
away from them in this manner. The rights that are further
guaranteed under Articles 14 & 21 of the Constitution are to
be ensured to be made available to the Petitioners also.
Poultry-farming provides health and revenue to the nation.
Poultry-farming is the main source of rural employment.
The State is required to promote and improve agriculture
and poultry farming. Having regard to the innumerable
benefits that accrue to the villagers, agriculturists and other
citizens, it is the duty of the State to support. and
encourage poultry-farming.
ix. That immediately after their appearance, Petitioners filed
Statement of Objections before Respondent - 1 and took a
specific contention that there is no immediate threat or
injury to the public at large from the poultry-farm
agricultural activities as they already doing this work
scientifically since from establishment as all round cleaning
is undertaken every single day in the poultry-farm.
Disinfectants, insecticides & pesticides are regularly used
to prevent any kind of infection and human intervention is
kept at bare minimum levels. The birds too are regularly
administered with vaccinations & medication. Petitioners
have put in a lot of effort, energy & money to maintain
healthy 'bio security at the poultry-farm. Such being the
position, there is no question of the poultry-farm causing
any problem to anybody. There is absolutely no damage or
injury caused by the poultry-farm either to mankind or
ecology or environment. Poultry-farmers themselves are
quite concerned about cleanliness & hygiene as the birds in
the poultry-farm are quite sensitive. They cannot afford to
compromise on cleanliness. The poultry farms, for this
reason, are maintained well. There is no other discharge
that arises from the poultry-farm for anybody to object. If at
all there is an odour, it cannot be termed as harmful or
injurious or nuisance. As already stated, the poultry-farm is
far away from the village. There can be no mosquito
menace due to poultry-farming. Mosquitoes breed in
stagnant water and other surroundings like paddy fields.
There is no scope for the mosquitoes to breed in a poultry-
farm. However, every villager, every farmer is responsible
to maintain cleanliness & hygiene and not just poultry-
farmers. The State authorities are required to ensure that
every villager maintains hygiene. If the villagers pollute
their surroundings by not maintaining proper cleanliness or
hygiene, the atmosphere gets vitiated and everybody will
be affected. Respondent 1 and the Sessions Court have
failed to consider such objections and render findings
leading to miscarriage of justice.
x. That the Respondents failed to consider that in so far as
disposal of bird droppings is concerned, the Petitioners
remove the same periodically from the farm and sell to
farmers as manure. The bird-droppings are willingly
purchased and used by farmers as manure. Such manure
is considered to be highly beneficial and it is very much in
demand by the farmers. It may be noted that Petitioners
spread a layer of paddy husk on the floor inside the cages.
Such a step ensures elimination of moisture, smell, etc.
and helps the farm to be dry & clean all the time. Even
otherwise, after due verification, if the Respondents come
to the conclusion that the Petitioners' farm is going wrong,
they have to hear the owner/ occupier and prescribe
remedial measures first. Upon notice to such an erring
poultry-farm, an opportunity should be given for correction.
Only in case of failure to take corrective steps, penal action
can    be    contemplated.     The     Respondents     cannot
straightaway order closure of a poultry-farm. On the basis
of unverified allegations, the Respondents cannot take
action against the Petitioners. One should understand that
poultry-farming, which is part of agriculture, is also very
much essential for the existence of mankind and for the
community / society. Poultry products are high in protein
and they are the most complete food available in nature. It
is an irony that though most of us consume poultry
products, no one wants a poultry-farm. Having regard to
the lifetime of the birds that are being reared by the
Petitioners, the Respondents ought not to have ordered
removal. Admittedly, there are thousands of birds in the
poultry farm at present and any coercive action by the
Respondents in closing the poultry-farm at this stage would
result in mass destruction of said the birds.
xi.     That this Hon'ble High Court may be pleased to permit the
Petitioners to raise any new grounds at the time of hearing.
4.  Reiterating         the     above     grounds,      learned
counsel for the petitioners contended that the action of
the respondents is totally illegal and when the poultry
farm has been established in the private land, there is no
authority for the respondents to initiate action under the
provisions of Sections 133, 137 and 138 of the Cr.P.C
and therefore, the order passed by the respondents is
without any legal authority and thus sought for allowing
the petition.
5.    Per      contra,     learned      HCGP       vehemently
contended that the fact of establishing the poultry farm
though in a private land, the respondents have got
authority to initiate action under the provisions of Section
133 of Cr.P.C., if it is causing nuisance to the general
publish at large and therefore sought for dismissal of the
He further contended that the said aspect of the
matter has been rightly considered by the authorities and
the learned District Judge while considering the revision
petition and sought for dismissal of the petition.
6.    Perused the material on record meticulously In
the light of the rival contentions of the parties.
7.    It is an admitted fact that the poultry farm is
established in a private land belonging to the petitioners.
To fortify the said contention, learned counsel for the
petitioners drew the attention of this Court to the record
of rights. As could be seen from the record of rights, the
land in which the poultry farm is situated belongs to the
petitioners and it is an agricultural land.        The term
‘agriculture’ in its wide connotation encompasses itself
into it the activities allied to the agricultural operations.
It cannot be disputed that the poultr y farming is part of
the agricultural operations.
8.    Further, as could be seen from the material on
record, the poultry farm is situated about 3 kms away
from the place where the residences of the general public
are situated.   W hat exactly is the type of nuisance that
has been caused to the general public at large by
establishing such a poultry farm in the private land
owned by the petitioners is not forthcoming on record.
No material is forthcoming on record placed by the
respondents,     wherein    the       general     public  being
complained about the nuisance.
9.   In this regard this Court places its reliance on
the decision of this Court in the case of Balakrishna Rao
Vs. State of Mysore and Others reported in 1973 (1)
M ysore Law Journal page 362.           In the said decision, it
has been categorically held that the evidence has to be
recorded by the Magistrate.        It is further observed that,
though the spot inspection was conducted in the said
case, the evidence was not taken by the Magistrate and
therefore, the decision taken by the Magistrate did not
satisfy the requisite conditions to pass the order under
the provisions of Section 137 Cr.P.C.           In the case on
hand also, the Executive Magistrate failed to record
evidence and satisfy about the alleged nuisance.
10.   Under such circumstances, the action taken by
the authorities without even recording the evidence of the
parties, has resulted in miscarriage of justice and also
abuse of process of law.
11.   The power under Sections 133, 138 and 139
Cr.P.C.   has   to  be  exercised       by affording   sufficient
opportunities to the parties and to record evidence and to
arrive at a legal finding that the action of the petitioners
has resulted in nuisance to the general public at large.
No     such    material    is      forthcoming     on    record.
Unfortunately, these aspects of the matter are not taken
note   of  by  the   respondents       and   also  not  properly
appreciated by the learned District while dismissing the
revision petition of the petitioners.
12.   Under the above circumstances, this Court is
of  the   considered   opinion      that  the   impugned   order
passed by the respondents and the order of dismissal
passed by the District Judge needs to be set aside.
The petition is allowed.
The order dated 19.12.2016 passed by the Sub-
Divisional  Magistrate,     Sirsi   Sub-Division,   Sirsi in
No.MAG/II/ViVa/I/2016-17,       which   was   confirmed   in
Crl.RP No.5072/2016 by the I Addl. District and Sessions
Judge, UK Kar war, sitting at Sirsi, is hereby set aside.