1.    The District Magistrate, Pulwama, on being satisfied, on the basis of
the letter dated 30th October 2021 and the material produced along-
with it in the form of dossier by the Senior Superintendent of Police,
Awantipora, ordered for the preventive detention of the petitioner-
appellant Murtaza Rashid under Section 8 of the J&K Public Safety
Act 1978 (hereinafter referred to as „the Act‟) to prevent him from
acting in a manner prejudicial to the security of the State.
2.    The aforesaid detention order was executed on 31st October 2021 and
the petitioner-appellant was taken into preventive custody. The
detention order was confirmed on 29th November 2021. The
petitioner-appellant was supplied with the detention order, detention
notice and the grounds of detention and it is said that the contents of
the order of detention and the grounds of detention were duly read
over and explained to him in the language he understands.
3.    The petitioner-appellant invoked the writ jurisdiction of the court to
challenge the aforesaid detention order and to set him free on various
grounds.
4.    The writ petition filed by the petitioner-appellant challenging the
detention order was considered by the learned Single Judge in the light
of the pleadings exchanged between the parties and was dismissed
vide judgment and order dated 12th May 2022.
5.   The learned Single Judge on the basis of the pleadings and the
arguments advanced by the respective parties considered as many as
five points on which the detention order was challenged including the
grounds that the detention order is vague; it suffers from non-
application of mind as the grounds of detention are nothing but
repetition of the police dossier; the detaining authority failed to supply
the entire material which formed the basis of his detention; and the
petitioner-appellant being an illiterate person was unable to
understand the contents of the detention order, the copy of the same
was not supplied to him in the language known to him and that no
affidavit was filed to substantiate that the grounds of detention were
read over and explained to the petitioner-appellant.
6.   All the above arguments were repelled by the learned Single Judge
while dismissing the petition.
7.   The above judgment and order of the learned Single Judge dated 12 th
May 2022 dismissing the writ petition of the petitioner-appellant is
being assailed by him by filing this appeal under Clause 12 of the
8.   We have heard Mr. G. N. Shaheen, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner-appellant and Mr Asif Maqbool, learned Dy. AG appearing
for the respondents.
9.   Mr. G. N. Shaheen, learned counsel in assailing the judgment and
order of the writ court argued that full and complete material which
formed the basis of passing the impugned detention order was never
supplied to the petitioner-appellant and thus he was deprived of the
opportunity to file an effective representation as envisaged under
Section 13 of the Act and Article 22 of the Constitution of India.
Secondly, the grounds on which the detention order has been passed
are vague and on such vague allegations, it was not possible for the
petitioner-appellant to submit a proper representation. Lastly, the
petitioner-appellant is an illiterate person who knows only kashmiri
language and, as such, serving a copy of the notice of detention, order
of detention and the grounds of detention which were in English upon
the petitioner-appellant were of no consequence. The petitioner-
appellant was deprived of his right to file an appropriate
representation.
10.  Mr Asif Maqbool, learned Dy. AG in defence of the impugned
judgment and order submitted that the learned Single Judge has
recorded a specific finding on each and every point argued on behalf
of the petitioner-appellant. There is no perversity in those findings.
The judgment is sound and suffers from no error or illegality. The
petitioner-appellant was supplied with the copy of the notice of
detention, detention order and the grounds of detention. The Sub-
Inspector (SI) while serving the above documents upon the petitioner-
appellant has read out the contents of the detention order and the
grounds of detention and even explained the same to the petitioner-
appellant in the language he knows and understands. The petitioner-
appellant was also specifically informed that he has a right to make
representation to the detaining authority or the Government against his
detention but he never chose to avail it. The grounds of detention are
clear enough and explains the reasons for his detention. The
petitioner-appellant is not an illiterate person. He has studied upto 7 th
Class and he knows English which is evident from the fact that he
signs in English. Therefore, it was not necessary to provide him with
the translated copy of the above documents.
11.  The first ground that was urged before the writ court and has also been
reiterated hereinbefore us is that the grounds of detention are vague
which rendered it difficult for the petitioner-appellant to file an
effective representation.
12.  This argument has been considered and dealt with in extenso by the
writ court and considering the decision of the Supreme Court in the
case of Mohammad Yousuf Rather vs. State of JK & Ors.
reported in (1979) 4 SCC 370 as cited on behalf of the petitioner-
appellant held that in the instant case, the grounds are very specific
and there is no vagueness so as to deny the petitioner-appellant an
opportunity of making a representation.
13.  The grounds of detention in unequivocal terms states that the
petitioner-appellant who is aged about 27 years and is ordinarily
resident of village Samboora has studied upto Class 7th and that he is
affiliated with The Resistance Front (TRF), an organization with the
aim and object to secede the Union Territory of JK from the Union
Territory of India so as to annex it with Pakistan. The petitioner-
LPA No. 85/2022                                                 Page 3 of 12
appellant is in contact with various terrorists under whose influence
and ideology he is carrying out subversive activities prejudicial to the
security of the State. The TRF with which he is connected is an off-
shoot of the terror outfit Lashkar-i-Toiba (LeT) and is responsible for
recent killing of civilians in District Srinagar and other parts of the
valley. The TRF as per the inputs received is acting on the dictates of
the pakistani intelligence ISI. The petitioner-appellant in connivance
with the terrorists is providing logistic support including transporting
of arms for terrorists from one place to another through
unconventional and safe passages. The petitioner-appellant has been
identified after hard coordinated efforts of the various agencies which
revealed his linkage with terrorist outlets. Therefore, it is imperative to
detain him to prevent unleashing of terror in the valley and to enable
the law enforcing agencies to bring back normalcy for the common
good. The petitioner-appellant is not being deterred by the laws of the
country and is likely to indulge in anti-national and anti-social
activities. Therefore, to prevent him from indulging in such activities
which are prejudicial to the security of the State, it is necessary to
detain him under the Act.
14.  A plain reading of the aforesaid grounds of detention would establish
that the allegations made against the petitioner-appellant are very
specific and there is no vagueness. It may be worth noting that nothing
more as revealed in the grounds of detention could have been spelt out
as it would have been counter-productive to the maintenance of
security of the State and normalcy in the valley. The situation in the
valley does not permit disclosure of any further confidential or
sensitive information which if goes in the hands of the separatist
group would certainly be a great threat to the nation. The vagueness of
the grounds of detention have to be considered in the fact situation
prevailing in the area specially Kashmir which has been greatly
affected by militancy in the past. In view of the aforesaid facts and
circumstances, we are of a firm opinion that the detention order cannot
said to be faulty on the ground of vagueness.
15.  Mr. G. N. Shaheen, learned counsel has placed reliance upon
Jahangir Khan Fazal Khan Pathan vs. Police Commissioner,
LPA No. 85/2022                                                  Page 4 of 12
Ahmedabad & Anr. (1989)AIR (SC) 1812 wherein it has been held
that if the grounds of detention are vague, the order of detention would
be illegal and bad. There is no second opinion on the above
proposition of law, but the vagueness of the ground has to be adjudged
on the facts and circumstances of each case. In the said case, the
detenu was charged with threatening with Rampuri knife but without
disclosing any particulars as to the place or when and to whom such
threats were extended. It was in the above background that the
detention order was found to be faulty on the ground of vagueness.
16.  The other authority in connection with the above point cited by Mr. G.
N. Shaheen, is the case of Mohammad Yousuf Rather vs. State of
JK & Ors. (1979) AIR (SC) 1925. The aforesaid was the case from
J&K under Section 8 of the Act. In the said case, the allegations were
that thedetenu started campaign in villages asking the inhabitants not
to sell their paddy crop to the Government and to manhandle the
Government officials. Since the ground failed to mention the names of
the villages where the detenu made such a campaign, the grounds of
detention were held to be vague. One of the allegations against the
detenu was that he was found leading unruly mobs in different
villages and instigating them to set fire to the houses of the workers of
Jamiat-i-Islami. Again since the names of the villages where he was
indulging in such activity was not disclosed the ground was held to be
vague.
17.  The aforesaid judgment has been elaborately dealt with by the learned
Single Judge who has opined that compared with the grounds of
detention in that case, the case of the petitioner-appellant is quite
different and it cannot be said that the grounds are so vague that he
could not have filed any proper representation to the Government or
the detaining authority.
18.  There is no flaw in the reasoning given by the learned Single Judge
and since in our opinion the grounds of detention are not vague rather
very specific, the detention cannot be quashed on the vagueness of the
grounds.
19.  This apart, the petitioner-appellant never made any slightest effort to
submit even a simple representation contending that he is submitting it
LPA No. 85/2022                                                 Page 5 of 12
but with a caveat that it may not be effective as the grounds of
detention were vague. The very fact that the petitioner-appellant
accepted the grounds of detention and raised no protest by filing any
representation alleging it to be vague, it gives a legitimate impression
that he was fully satisfied by the grounds of detention and deliberately
choose not to file any representation for some other reason.
20.  This takes us to the second point of argument of Mr. G. N. Shaheen,
that as petitioner-appellant is an illiterate person, he ought to have
been supplied with the copy of the documents in the language
understood by him and that in the absence of any affidavit of the
officer that the detention order and the grounds of detention were read
over and explained to him, it would mean that the petitioner-appellant
was denied opportunity of filing an effective representation.
21.  Let us first examine if the petitioner-appellant is illiterate or not.
22.  The petitioner-appellant claims himself to be an illiterate person, but
the grounds of detention clearly states that he had studied upto Class
7th and then dropped out. This aspect of the matter was never denied
by the petitioner-appellant, not even through the pleadings in the writ
petition, meaning thereby that he accepts that he had studied upto
Class 7th and is able to read and write. He had even signed the receipt
of the documents in English which also indicates that he can write in
23.  UNESCO defines a literate person as „one who with understanding
can both read and write a short simple statement on his/her everyday
life.
24.  The National Literacy Mission defines literacy as acquiring the skills
of reading, writing an arithmetic and the ability to apply them on one‟s
day to day life.
25.  Black‟s Law Dictionary 4th edition (Revised) gives the meaning of
„literate‟ as one who is able to read and write a language. The
petitioner-appellant who has studied upto class 7th and signs in English
is certainly a person who can read and write at least a simple sentence
and is therefore „literate‟.
26.  Law Lexicon describes „literate‟ as a person who is able to read and
write having knowledge of letters of a language. On the anvil of the
above definition also the petitioner-appellant who is able to sign in
English and has studied upto class 7th is surely a person who has
knowledge of English letters.
27.  In the background of this above definition of literacy and the fact that
petitioner-appellant has studied upto Class 7th and is able to write and
sign in English, the petitioner-appellant in the given facts and
circumstances, is not a completely illiterate person. He is in a position
to understand things and put his signatures in English.
28.  A Division Bench of the Calcutta High Court in Steel Authority of
India vs. BalBahadur Sharma 1997 SCC Online Calcutta 536
while dealing with the issue of a person possessing a qualification of
7th Class pass held that the plea of illiteracy is undoubtedly untrue.
The application form shows that he had signed it in Hindi and the
affidavit in support of the writ petition is in English and yet he
claimed himself to be an illiterate which was not accepted.
29.  In the instant case, there is no denial to the fact that the petitioner-
appellant is Class 7thpass and he had signed the receipt of the
document in English. Therefore, in the absence of any material to
show that the petitioner-appellant is unable to understand and even
read and write a small statement, we are of the opinion that he cannot
be held to be a completely illiterate person.
30.  Coming to the other aspect of the matter that he ought to have been
supplied with the documents in the language understood by him i.e.,
Kashmiri, it may be noted that the SI while serving the documents
upon him has read out the contents thereof and have explained the
same to him the language understood by him. There is no denial to the
above factual aspect. The petitioner-appellant only contends that the
affidavit of the SI ought to have been filed to prove that he has read
out and explained the documents to him. The submissions may be
attractive but has no force. The requirement of the affidavit is
imperative only where there is no documentary proof of serving the
documents upon the detenu/petitioner-appellant. It would not be
necessary where the SI himself has served the documents and read out
LPA No. 85/2022                                                Page 7 of 12
and explained the contents thereof to him with further instructions that
he has a right to file a representation against it before the
authority/State    Government         and     the detenu/petitioner-appellant
accepts it by putting his signatures.
31.  A perusal of the impugned order reveals that the allegations of the
petitioner-appellant was that the grounds of detention were in English
which language he was unable to understand. The respondents in the
objections stated that the grounds were explained to him in the
language known to him. The Police Inspector had personally
explained the detenu the order of detention and the grounds of
detention on which the same was based.
32.  The writ court on the basis of the above pleadings and taking into
consideration the case of Smt. Raziya Umar Bakshi vs. Union of
India & Ors. (1980) Supp. SCC 195 held that the obligation to
supply a copy of the translated version of the grounds of detention
arises only in a case where the detenue claims that he does not know
the language in which the order of detention or the grounds of
detention are passed but that would not be necessary where the
detention order and the grounds of detention were read over and
explained to the detenue in the language which he fully understood.
The execution report prepared by SI contains the signature of the
petitioner-appellant in English meaning thereby that he accepts the
contents of the report to the effect that the detention order and the
grounds of detention has been read over and explained to him by the
SI in the language known to him.
33.  The writ court in dealing with the issue whether in every case, the
officer executing the order of detention must also file an affidavit to
substantiate the fact that not only the orders and the documents were
supplied but were also read over and explained to the detenue in the
language he understood, observed as under:-
“16.   Insofar as the filing of the affidavit of the executing officer
is concerned, in my opinion, it is not necessary in every
case that such an affidavit be filed as on a reading of the
judgment in Umar Bakshi‟s case, particularly in para 5, it
can be seen that even if there is some sort of a certificate on
record to show that the grounds had been explained to the
LPA No. 85/2022                                                         Page 8 of 12
detenu in the language which he understood, it would be a
sufficient compliance. In the present case, there is on record
a certificate of the Executing Officer, SI Sameer Ahmed,
which clearly reflects that not only was the relevant
material supplied to the petitioner but also the contents
were read over to the petitioner in the language which he
understood.”
34.  In Fazal Husain and Arshad Ahmad vs. the State of Jammu and
Kashmir, 1969 (2) SCC 356, the Apex Court observed as under:-
“9………..The learned counsel for the petitioner contends that
the Deputy Superintendent Central Jail, who is alleged to have
served the order of detention on the petitioner, should have
filed the affidavit. The State has annexed to the affidavit a
copy of the Government Detention Order and below the
detention order the following endorsement exists:
"The notice of this order has been served upon Shri
Fazal Hussain s/o Ayub Khan detenu by reading over
the same to him.
In view of this endorsement' the order of detention we do not
consider that it was necessary that the Deputy
Superintendent, Central Jail, should have filed an affidavit to
the effect that he had served the order of detention on the
detenu Fazal Hussain.”
35.  In view of the aforesaid findings and the case law, we are of the
opinion that the writ court committed no error in holding that the
affidavit of the SI that he has not only served the documents upon the
petitioner-appellant but has also read over and explained to him the
same in the language he understood, was not at all necessary and the
absence of such an affidavit would not vitiate the detention order.
36.  Mr. G. N. Shaheen, learned counsel in connection with the above
argument had submitted that oral explanation of the detention order
and the grounds of detention are not sufficient and that the petitioner-
appellant ought to have been supplied with the translated copies of the
same in the language known to him i.e., Kashmiri which was not
done.
37.  In the above context, he has placed reliance upon Full Bench decision
of the Supreme Court of India in the case of Hadibandhu Das vs.
District Magistrate and Anr. AIR 1969 SC 43.
38.  In the aforesaid case, the grounds of detention order were typed in
English language and were running into 14 pages. It is thus held oral
LPA No. 85/2022                                                          Page 9 of 12
explanation of such order/grounds was not sufficient unless they are
supplied in the language understood by the detenue. In the instant
case, the grounds of detention though typed in English were very short
hardly in two pages and they were supplied to the petitioner-appellant.
Therefore, it cannot be said that he was not supplied with the copy of
the detention order and the grounds of detention or that the same was
not explained to him in the language known to him in as much as we
have previously discussed and held that the same were duly read over
and explained to him.
39.  It may worth noting that the petitioner-appellant has studied upto
Class 7th and is not an illiterate person, rather he is able to write and
sign in English from which an inference can easily be drawn that he
knows simple English language. This apart, it is only his contention
that he knows and understands kashmiri only, but there is no material
whatsoever which can justify and establish that he is a kashmiri
knowing person only and does not understands English. Therefore,
supply of the detention order and the grounds of detention to him in
kashmiri language does not appear to be imperative under the above
fact situation.
40.  The other decision relied upon by Mr. G. N. Shaheen, learned counsel
is that of Shri Lallubhai Jogibhai Patel vs. Union of India & Ors
AIR 1981 SC 728. In the said case, it was held that though the Police
Inspector has filed an affidavit stating that he had fully explained the
grounds of detention in Gujarati to the detenu, but that is not sufficient
compliance of the mandate of Article 22 (5) of the Constitution. The
use of the word „communicated‟ means that the detention order and
the grounds of detention must be handed over and left with the
detenue in the language which he understands, otherwise, it would
defeat the whole purpose of communicating the grounds to the
detenue to enable him to file an effective representation. It was also
observed that simply verbal explanation of the grounds of detention to
the detenue leaving nothing in writing with him in the language
understood by him infringes upon his constitutional right guaranteed
by Article 22(5) of the Constitution. The above case law in the first
side appears to be in favour of the petitioner-appellant, but on closer
scrutiny, we find that in the said case, it was an admitted position that
LPA No. 85/2022                                                 Page 10 of 12
the detenu knew only Gujarati. It is in the said context that this court
held that mere explanation of the grounds of detention in Gujarati
without leaving a copy of the same with him in the language known to
him vitiates the detention order. This is not the situation in the case
before us where the petitioner-appellant is an English knowing person
with no material on record to establish that he only knows and
understands Kashmiri. He has been read over and explained the
detention order and the grounds of detention in the language
understood by him and the copies of the said documents were handed
over to him in English which he is capable to read and write. Thus, the
aforesaid decision also does not come to the rescue of the petitioner-
appellant.
41.  Now we come to the last submission of Mr. G. N. Shaheen, learned
counsel that the petitioner-appellant was not supplied with the
complete material, such as, the Dossier which has been relied upon by
the District Magistrate in passing the impugned detention order and,
as such, vitiates the same.
42.  It is an admitted position as is revealed from the plain reading of the
detention order that the detaining authority has passed the same on the
basis of the dossier supplied by the Senior Superintendent of Police.
The copy of the said dossier was never supplied to the petitioner-
appellant. Thus, it is contended that he was denied proper opportunity
to file an effective and a purposeful representation.
43.  In Ichhu Devi Choraria vs. Union of India & Ors. 1980 (4) SCC
531, the Supreme Court has taken a view that documents, statements
and other material referred to or relied upon in the grounds of
detention by the detaining authority in arriving at its subjective
satisfaction to detain a person, get incoprated and become part of the
detention by reference. Therefore, the right of the detenue to receive
copies of the detention order and the grounds of detention necessarily
includes the documents, statements and other materials from which
the detention order flows, because unless all those material are
supplied he would not be in a position to make a meaningful
representation.
44.  In Thahira Haris vs. Government of Karnatake & Ors. 2009 11
SCC 438 while considering the scope of Article 22(5) of the
LPA No. 85/2022                                                Page 11 of 12
Constitution, the Supreme Court held that non supply of relevant
documents, statement and other materials relied upon in the grounds
of detention would vitiate the detention order which necessarily has to
be quashed in such circumstances.
45.   In view of the aforesaid discussion and the facts and circumstances of
this case, we are of the opinion that the petitioner-appellant is not an
illiterate person; he is an English knowing person and that in the
absence of any material to prove that he knows only kashmiri, he
cannot be said to be a person having knowledge of kashmiri only; he
was read over and explained the detention order and the grounds of
detention in the language known to him; he was duly communicated
with both the above documents in English, the language known to
him; the affidavit of the police official serving and explaining the
documents to him is not mandatory in each and every case especially
where there is endorsement to the above effect; and that it was not
imperative to supply translated copies of the documents to him.
Nonetheless as the entire dossier which forms the basis of the
detention order was not provided to him, he was denied his
constitutional right to make a meaningful and a purposeful
representation vitiating the order of detention.
46.   Accordingly, the appeal is allowed and the judgment and order of the
writ court dated 12th May 2022 is set-aside. The impugned order No.
60/DMP/PSA/21 dated 30th October 2021 passed by respondent No. 2
is quashed.
47.   The personal liberty of the petitioner-appellant is directed to be
restored if not wanted in any other case.