1.  The appellant has preferred the present appeal to assail the order dated
14.08.2019 in HMA Case No. 5861276/2016, whereby the learned
Single Judge, Family Court has decided the application preferred by the
appellant under Section 24 of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
2.  The Family Court has granted maintenance at the rate of Rs. 30,000/-
per month to the appellant-wife and Rs. 15,000/- per month each in
respect of the two minor children, aged 8 years and 12 years.
3.  The objective of granting interim or permanent maintenance to a
spouse is to ensure that they are not reduced to financial constraints,
due to the failure of their marriage. There can be no strait jacket
formula for deciding the amount of maintenance to be awarded – many
factors need to be taken into account. The maintenance amount
awarded must be realistic and reasonable.
4.  A perusal of the impugned order shows that there is hardly any
discussion undertaken by the Presiding Judge while passing the
impugned order, he has only recorded the submissions of the parties
and in paragraph 8 observed as follows:
“8. Keeping in view the submissions and the facts of the
case that the divorce petition filed by the petitioner is
pending. Petitioner is working in Dubai and earning more
than 20,000 Dirhams per month which on conversion comes
to around Rs. 4,00,000/- in Indian currency. Besides that
respondent has two minor children who are dependent upon
respondent. Since 18.04.2018 onwards she is not working.
Keeping in view, all these facts and that it is the duty and
responsibility of the petitioner to support the respondent and
the children. It is directed that petitioner shall pay Rs.
30,000/- to the respondent per month and Rs. 15,000/- per
month to each of the children. Support amount to the
respondent shall be payable to the respondent from
18.04.2018 onwards. So far as the amount payable to
children are concerned that shall be payable from the date of
application i.e. 21.10.2013 till the disposal of the present
petition. Application u/s 24 of HMA stands disposed off.”
5. We are also conscious of the fact that a certain amount of guess
work is required to grant maintenance as none of the parties
disclose their true and correct income in their income affidavits, but
we cannot forget or ignore the purpose of “Adjudication” by a
Court of competent jurisdiction. An order, judgment or decree is to:
(a) see and appreciate the pleadings of the parties;
(b) see and appreciate the supporting documents;
(c) analyse the material before the Court;
(d) apply the principles of law and the precedents and thereafter give
a reasoned and speaking order which effectively adjudicates the
pending disputes.
6.  The purpose of an “Adjudication” is that the parties get to know the
material, the reasoning and the thought process which has weighed
with the Court while passing the order. After an order is passed, it
should be clear as to what were the facts of the case, what was
controversy that arose in the matter and ultimately the reasoning due to
which the court came to its conclusion and decision.
7.  In G.Saraswathi & Anr v. Rathinammal & Ors (2018) 3 SCC 340 it
“10. Time and again, this court has emphasised on the courts the
need to pass reasoned order in every case which must contain the
narration of the bare facts of the case of the parties to the lis, the
issues arising in the case, the submissions urged by the parties,
the legal principles applicable to the issues involved and the
reasons in support of the findings on all the issues arising in the
case and urged by the learned counsel for the parties in support of
its conclusion. It is really unfortunate that the Division Bench
failed to keep in mind this principle while disposing off the appeal
and passed a cryptic and unreasonable order. Such order, in our
view, has undoubtedly caused prejudice to the parties because it
deprived them to know the reasons as to why one party has won
8.  The impugned judgment dated 14.08.2019 fails to meet the test of
“Adjudication” as enumerated by us above and the need of a reasoned
order.
9.  We, therefore, remand back the matter to the Family Court for re-
hearing the matter and for passing a detailed and reasoned order on the
same.
10. Both parties are entitled to file further documentary evidence on which
they wish to place reliance, along with their respective additional
affidavits which may be filed within three weeks from today.
11. In the meantime, the respondent shall not only continue to pay
maintenance as fixed by the Family Court but shall also pay the entire
school fee of the children.
12. The appellant shall file before the Family Court the details of the
school fee already paid in respect of the children and also the current
fee payable in respect of the children.
13. As soon as the said particulars are filed before the Family Court, the
respondent shall, within two weeks thereof, clear the arrears and also
start paying current fee.
14. Counsel for the appellant states that there arrears of Rs. 17,00,000/-
payable by the respondent in terms of the impugned order towards
maintenance. This is disputed by the respondent who is present and
states that the entire amount has been paid. This aspect shall also be
considered and decided by the Family Court.
15. We request the Family Court to expedite the hearing of the application
under Section 24 as well as the consideration of the aspect whether
there are any arrears pending or not.     The hearing in the divorce
proceeding shall also be expedited.
16. The appeal stands disposed of in the aforesaid terms.