Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 16961 of 2022
Counsel for Applicant :- Nanhe Lal Tripathi
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
1. The judgement is being structured in the following
conceptual framework to facilitate the discussion:
II   Submissions of learned counsels
C. Instances and Consequences of denial of
D. NLSA Scheme for Legal aid
1. Shri Nanhe Lal Tripathi, learned counsel assisted by Shri
Satish Kumar Mishra, learned counsel for the applicant
predicates his submissions on merits by contending that the
applicant's inability to access legal aid raises legal and
constitutional issues which directly affect the right of bail and
the personal liberty of the applicant. Members of the Bar also
submit that this problem is faced by many prisoners. The issue
regarding the scope and right of legal aid to prisoners arises in
the circumstances of this case, but also transcends the facts of
this case.
2. While discharging judicial functions in bail determination
this Court is not denuded of its status as a constitutional court.
The court is under a constitutional obligation to address various
legal and constitutional issues which impact the grant of bail if
they arise in the facts of a case. Forgotten humanity in jails has
been brought in full glare of the judicial process. In these facts
and circumstances the court cannot abdicate its constitutional
role, and turn a blind eye to their suffering.
II. Submissions of learned counsels
3. Shri Nanhe Lal Tripathi, learned counsel assisted by Shri
Satish Kumar Mishra, learned counsel for the applicant makes
the following submissions:
A. The applicant belongs to a economically deprived class of
citizenry, who was abandoned by his near and dear ones after
his imprisonment. He has no effective pairokar to conduct his
B. The applicant did not have access to legal aid to file his bail
applications in a timely manner before the trial court as well as
C. Denial of legal aid delayed recourse to the legal remedy of
bail, and caused unjustified incarceration.
D. Right of the applicant to legal aid is a fundamental right and
is also a statutory right vested in him by the Legal Services
4. Learned members of the Bar also made submissions on the
issue of legal aid and pointed out various other instances where
under trials in cases of heinous crimes could not approach the
courts for consideration of bail applications in a timely manner
due to lack of legal aid. Shri Rishi Chaddha, learned A.G.A. and
Shri Paritosh Kumar Malviya, learned A.G.A. have assisted the
Court on behalf of the State.
Learned counsels at the Bar have called attention to the
statutory provisions of the Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987,
rulings of constitutional courts and the jail manual, which will
be discussed in the narrative.
“Prison and the authorities conspire to rob each man of his
5. Stephen William Hawking in his book “The Grand Design”
relates an incident where keeping fish in bowls was banned in
1  Nelson Mandela in Long Walk to Freedom
Italy. The sponsor of the measure demonstrated that fish in
spherical bowls develop a distorted vision with passage of time.
Prison conditions which are not under constitutional watch will
degrade human life and distort human vision.
6. India's long freedom struggle seared the experience of
oppressive prison regimes and steeled the resolve to improve
prison conditions.
7. Constitutional courts have fortified certain inviolable
fundamental rights of prisoners. The discussion will profit by
referencing some authorities. While examining conditions of
jailed prisoners, the Supreme Court in Sunil Batra v. Delhi
Administration and Ors.2, acknowledged the restricted
fundamental rights of prisoners but found in no uncertain terms
that “Part III of the Constitution does not part company with the
prisoner at the gates, and judicial oversight protects the
prisoners' shrunken fundamental rights, if flouted, frowned
upon or frozen by the prison authority.” Further“...The
operation of Article 14, 19 and 21 may be pared down for a
prisoner but not puffed out altogether.” Finally the following
proposition was entrenched in the body of case laws relating to
fundamental rights of prisoners.“56...So the law is that for a
prisoner all fundamental rights are an enforceable reality,
though restricted by the fact of imprisonment.”
8. Hussainara Khatoon and others (I) v. Home Secretary,
State of Bihar3 recognized the right of speedy trial of a
prisoner flowing from Article 21 of the Constitution of India “to
be implicit in the broad sweep” of Article 21 of the
Constitution. Other facets of fundamental rights of prisoners
have been propounded in Mohammad Giasuddin vs. State of
Andhra Pradesh4, Sunil Batra (II) v. Delhi Administration5,
Sheela Barse v. State of Maharashtra6, Nilabati Behera
(Smt) alias Lalita Behera (Through the Supreme Court
Legal Aid Committee) v. State of Orissa and Ors7, and
Shabnam v. Union of India and others8.
9. This Court in Gobardhan Singh and another v. State of
U.P.9 noted the abject conditions of a large number of forgotten
“nameless” prisoners and set forth:
“This is not just an isolated case. We realize that there are a large number
of such cases of forgotten "nameless" prisoners who have become "ticket
numbers" and are languishing in jails for prolonged periods of time, as
under trials (UTs) or as convicted prisoners whose appeals are pending
almost interminably before Higher Courts, who may or may not have
filed bail applications and who have become very old, or are ailing from
an incurable disease, or who may even have become immobile or have
lost any capacity to commit a further crime. The complainant (if any) has
lost any interest in prosecuting them or in keeping them in jail any
longer. Usually the families of such accused have been destroyed, or
reduced to such abject poverty, as happens when a family member
contracts a serious disease, that they cannot pay counsel's fee or incur the
recurring unavoidable expenditures in Court offices to get applications
and affidavits prepared or the matters listed, and the bail or case disposed
of. The relatively luckier children and dependents may perhaps have
been provided with a roof over their heads by a grudging relative, or they
may have been placed in a State or private run children's home. Others
may simply have been abandoned to the street. The daughters in the
family may not have been married off, and may be getting exploited by
some social deviant in the family or outside. Keeping such prisoners in
jail any further, in the already overcrowded jails, serves no useful
purpose and is an unnecessary burden on the State and the tax payer.”
10.    The concerns expressed in Gobardhan Singh (supra)
were followed up by commensurate action in Bachchey Lal v.
State of U.P.10 by issuing various directions for ameliorating the
conditions of prisoners and upholding their rights.
11. Constitutional courts have consistently protected the dignity
and rights of prisoners in jails.
12. The right of bail is acknowledged as a statutory right, but is
also seen in the perspective of constitutional liberties by good
authorities in point. Various facts of the right to seek bail were
examined by this Court in Junaid Vs. State of U.P.11 and Ajeet
Chaudhary Vs. State of U.P. and another12
13. The aforesaid authorities establish the undeniable linkage
between right of bail and fundamental right to personal liberty.
Every prisoner has a fundamental right to file an application for
bail before the competent court as per law and without delay.
14. Liberty was assured to all citizens in the constitutional text,
but justice is dear to many citizens in the real world. Inalienable
constitutional rights are severed by compelling socio economic
realities. Poverty, social exclusion and lack of legal aid impede
the course of justice. Article 39A of the Constitution of India
removes the barriers in redeeming the preamble promise of
securing justice for all citizens. Article 39A of the Constitution
of India underscores the importance of providing legal aid to
serve equal justice to all citizens and states so:
The State shall secure that the operation of the legal system promotes
justice, on a basis of equal opportunity, and shall, in particular, provide
free legal aid, by suitable legislation or schemes or in any other way, to
ensure that opportunities for securing justice are not denied to any citizen
by reason of economic or other disabilities.”
15. Free legal aid is today enshrined as a statutory right in the
Legal Services Authorities Act. Free legal aid was earlier
exalted as a fundamental right by constitutional law. Holdings
of constitutional courts form the backdrop of the Legal Services
Authorities Act. Allahabad High Court had pioneered the
concept of legal aid as intrinsic to a fair trial in the fabled
dissent of Hon'ble Syed Mahmood J in Queen-Empress v.
Pohpi and others13. Denial of legal aid causes violation of fair,
reasonable and just procedure, unjustified incarceration, and
curtailment of liberty. Articles 14 and 21 of the Constitution of
India are engaged in these circumstances.
16. In this regard reference can be made profitably to the
following holdings in Hussainara Khatoon and others (IV) v.
Home         Secretary,    State    of    Bihar,     Patna14made        after
referencing Article 39A of the Constitution of India:
“7.....This Article also emphasises that free legal service is an inalienable
element of 'reasonable, fair and just' procedure for without it a person
suffering from economic or other disabilities would be deprived of the
opportunity for securing justice. The right to free legal services is,
therefore, clearly an essential ingredient of 'reasonable, fair and just,
procedure for a person accused of an offence and it must be held implicit
in the guarantee of Article 21. This is a constitutional right of every
accused person who is unable to engage a lawyer and secure legal
services on account of reasons such as poverty, indigence or
incommunicado situation and the State is under a mandate to provide a
lawyer to an accused person if the circumstances of the case and
the needs of justice so required, provided of course the accused person
does not object to the provision of such lawyer.”
17. The need to rescue the credibility of the legal system and
restore the faith of the common man in the justice system was
emphasized in following terms:
“9. We may also take this opportunity of impressing upon the
Government of India as also the State Governments, the urgent necessity
of introducing a dynamic and comprehensive legal service programme
with a view to reaching justice to the common man. Today,
unfortunately, in our country the poor are priced out of the judicial
system with the result that they are losing faith in the capacity of our
legal system to bring about changes in their life conditions and to deliver
justice to them. The poor in their contract with the legal system have
always been on the wrong side of the law. They have always come across
"law for the poor" rather than "law of the poor". The law is regarded by
them as something mysterious and forbidding-always taking something
away from them and not as a positive and constructive social device for
changing the socio economic order and improving their life conditions
by conferring rights and benefits on them. The result is that the legal
system has lost its credibility for the weaker sections of the community.
It is, therefore, necessary that we should inject equal justice into legality
and that can be done only by dynamic and activist scheme of legal
services. ….We would strongly recommend to the Government of India
and the State Governments that it is high time that a comprehensive legal
service programme is introduced in the country. That is not only a
mandate of equal justice implicit in Article 14 and right to life and liberty
conferred by Article 21, but also the compulsion of the constitutional
directive embodied in Article 39A.”
18. The courts too have a duty to ensure that prisoners
appearing in criminal proceedings have access to legal aid.
Courts cannot remain mute spectators when legal aid is denied
to prisoners in legal proceedings before them.
19. The trial courts stand at a vantage point in these matters and
are best circumstanced to understand the need of legal aid of the
prisoners appearing before them.
20. The Supreme Court in Khatri and others (II) v. State of
Bihar15 and others recognized pervasive legal illiteracy in the
country and cast an obligation on trial judges to bring about the
fruition of the rights of prisoners to free legal aid in the
“But even this right to free legal services would be illusory for an
indigent accused unless the magistrate or the Sessions Judge before
whom he is produced informs him of such right. It is common
knowledge that about 70 per cent of the people in the rural areas are
illiterate and even more than that percentage of people are not aware of
the rights conferred upon them by law. There is so much lack of legal
awareness that it has always been recognised as one of the principal
items of the programme of the legal aid movement in this country to
promote legal literacy. It would make a mockery of legal aid if it were to
be left to a poor ignorant and illiterate accused to ask for free legal
services. Legal aid would become merely a paper promise and it would
fail of its purpose. The magistrate or the sessions judge before whom the
accused appears must be held to be under an obligation to inform the
accused that if he is unable to engage the services of a lawyer on account
of poverty or indigence, he is entitled to obtain free legal services at the
cost of the State. Unfortunately, the judicial magistrates failed to
discharge this obligation in the case of the blinded prisoners and they
merely stated that no legal representation was asked for by the blinded
prisoners and hence none was provided. We would, therefore, direct the
magistrates and Session Judges in the country to inform every accused
who appears before them and who is not represented by a lawyer on
account of his poverty or indigence that he is entitled to free legal
services at the cost of the State. Unless he is not willing to take
advantage of the free legal services provided by the State, he must be
provided legal representation at the cost of the State.”
Prophetic words which fell on institutions with short
21. The aforesaid propositions are entrenched in the body of
judicial precedents as is evident from readings of Madhav
Hayawadanrao Hoskot v. State of Maharashtra16 and Suk
das v. Union Territory of Arunachal Pradesh 17 and State of
Andhra Pradesh v. Challa Ramkrishna Reddy18.
22. The right to free legal aid, responsibility of the trial courts
and the Government is stated in Section 304 of the Code of
“304. Legal aid to accused at State expense in certain cases.-
(1) Where, in a trial before the Court of Session, the accused is not
represented by a pleader, and where it appears to the Court that the
accused has not sufficient means to engage a pleader, the Court shall
assign a pleader for his defence at the expense of the State.
(2) The High Court may, with the previous approval of the State
Government, make rules providing for-
(a) the mode of selecting pleaders for defence under sub- section (1);
(b) the facilities to be allowed to such pleaders by the Courts;
(c) the fees payable to such pleaders by the Government, and generally,
for carrying out the purposes of sub- section (1).
(3) The State Government may, by notification, direct that, as from such
date as may be specified in the notification, the provisions of sub-
sections (1) and (2) shall apply in relation to any class of trials before
other Courts in the State as they apply in relation to trials before Courts
V. Legal Aid: B. Statutory Scheme of LSA Act,
23. The need for a specific statute and independent statutory
authorities to provide “free legal and competent legal services
(to the weaker sections of the society) to ensure that the
opportunities of securing justice are not denied to any citizens
by any reason of economic and other disabilities”, was
acknowledged by the legislature when it enacted the Legal
Services Authorities Act, 1987 (hereinafter referred to as the
24. The Act is a welfare legislation. Settled canons of statutory
interpretation will guide the court in construing the provisions
of the Act. Cases in point settle the proposition that welfare
legislations are liable to be interpreted liberally to ensure that
beneficent measures contemplated by the legislature reach
eligible persons.
25. The proposition will be reinforced by authorities.
K.H.Nazar v. Mathew K.Jacob and others19 held that:
“Provisions of a beneficial legislation have to be construed with a
purpose-oriented approach. The Act should receive a liberal construction
to promote its objects.6 Also, literal construction of the provisions of a
beneficial legislation has to be avoided. It is the Court’s duty to discern
the intention of the legislature in making the law. Once such an intention
is ascertained, the statute should receive a purposeful or functional
[Also see: Union of India v. Prabhakaran Vijaya Kumar and
others20, and Allahabad Bank and another v. All India
26. Relevant provisions of the Act are discussed in the
paragraphs that follow. Section 2 of the Act is the definition
clause. Section 2 (aaa), section 2(c) and section 2(g) of the Act
define “court”, “legal service” and “scheme” respectively.
27. Section 2(aaa) is extracted below:
“Section 2 (aaa). “court” means a civil, criminal or revenue court and
includes any tribunal or any other authority constituted under any law for
the time being in force, to exercise judicial or quasi-judicial functions.”
28. The definition of the word “court” is exhaustive. The vast
reach of the provision envisages all proceedings pending before
various courts and legally constituted tribunals and authorities
where a lis can be instituted, and rights of citizens will be
engaged and adjudicated as per law. Trial courts, revising courts
and appellate courts alike come within the purview of the
“Section 2(c). legal service” includes the rendering of any service in the
conduct of any case or other legal proceeding before any court or other
authority or tribunal and the giving of advice on any legal matter.”
30. The provision contains an inclusive definition of “legal
service” and recognizes various collateral services which are
integral to providing fruitful legal aid in the conduct of legal
proceedings or giving legal advice. The wide ambit of the
provision ensures that legal aid is not curbed by a constricted
understanding, and legal services are rendered effectively.
31. The construction of the words “means” and “includes” used
in the definition clauses in section 2(aaa) and section 2(c) is
assisted by this iteration in Bharat Coop. Bank (Mumbai)
Ltd. v. Coop. Bank Employees Union22 by holding thus:
“When in the definition clause given in any statute the word "means" is
used, what follows is intended to speak exhaustively. The use of the word
“means” indicates that the “definition is hard and fast definition, and no
other meaning can be assigned to the same. On the other hand, when the
word "includes" is used in the definition, the legislature does not intend
to restrict the definition. It makes the definition enumerative and not
exhaustive. That is to say, the term defined will retain its ordinary
meaning but its scope would be extended to bring within its matter,
which in its ordinary meaning may or may not comprise.”
32. Section 2(g) of the Act reads as under:-
“Section 2(g). scheme” means any scheme framed by the Central
Authority, a State Authority or a District Authority for the purpose of
giving effect to any of the provisions of this Act.”
33. The provision imparts statutory flavour to the schemes
framed        by various authorities under the Act. This creates
enforceable rights in favour of the recipient and enhances
efficacy of the schemes for legal aid.
34. Section 3 and Section 3A constitute National Legal Services
Authority and the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee
23 NLSA appended to endnote as Appendix I to the judgment
35. Section 6 constitutes the State Legal Services Authority.
Section 8A and Section 9 constitute High Court Legal Services
Committee         and     District         Legal         Services          Authority
36. Section 7 of the Act which defines the functions of the State
Authority has a direct bearing on the controversy and is being
“Section 7. Functions of the State Authority-(1) It shall be the duty of the
State Authority to give effect to the policy and directions of the Central
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the functions referred to in sub-
section (1), the State Authority shall perform all or any of the following
functions, namely,-
(a) give legal service to persons who satisfy the criteria laid down under
(b) conduct Lok Adalats, including Lok Adalats for High Court cases;
(c) undertake preventive and strategic legal aid programmes; and
(d) perform such other functions as the State Authority may, in
consultation with the Central Authority, fix by regulations.”
37. Among other functions the statute unequivocally enjoins
upon the State Authority to give legal aid to persons who satisfy
the criteria laid down under this Act, and to undertake
“preventive and strategic legal aid programmes”. The power to
undertake legal aid programmes by creating various schemes
and procedures is guided in broad and conceptual terms, and not
by a minutely detailed framework.
38. The meaning of “strategic” in Oxford dictionary is “forming
24 SLSA, HCLSC and DLSA appended to endnote as Appendix II to the judgment
part of a long-term plan or aim to achieve a specific purpose.”
The meaning of “preventive” is                               “designed to prevent
something from occurring.” The words “strategic” and
“preventive” in Section 7 are of wide import which envisage the
State Legal Services Authority to independently and proactively
create schemes to provide legal aid and prevent miscarriage of
39. Entitlement to legal services is provided for in Chapter IV.
Section 12 of the Act25iii contains the criteria for giving legal
services. Section 12(e) of the Act is germane to the controversy
and is extracted below:-
“Section 12 (e) a person under circumstances of underserved want such
as being a victim of a mass disaster, ethnic violence, caste atrocity, flood,
drought, earthquake or industrial disaster.”
40. The eligibility criteria for giving legal services under
Section 12(e) is broad based.
The breadth of the provision manifests the legislative
intent to reach out to the last person at the bottom of the social
heap. The section contemplates to give legal aid to persons who
suffer from deprivation and exclusion caused by circumstances
of want which are not of their making.
Under the provision persons facing circumstances of
“undeserved want” become entitled for legal services. The
phrase “undeserved want” is generic in nature. The word “such
as” precedes the examples of “undeserved want” described in
the section. The instances of “undeserved want” depicted in the
25 Section 12 appended to endnote as Appendix III to the judgment
provision are illustrative and not exhaustive, and are in the
nature of externalities i.e. adverse circumstances over which a
person has no control and which prevent recourse to justice.
The phrase “undeserved want” in the statute is not a fixed
concept but an evolutionary exercise. The State Legal Services
Authority is mandated to enquire whether the circumstances of
a person being considered for legal aid fall within the sweep of
“undeserved want”.
41. The entitlement to legal services of persons who satisfy any
of the criteria laid down in Section 12 of the Act is vested by
virtue of Section 13 of the Act.
“Section 13. Entitlement to legal services.-(1) Persons who satisfy or
any of the criteria specified in section 12 shall be entitled to receive legal
services provided that the concerned Authority is satisfied that such
person has a prima-facie case to prosecute or to defend.
(2) An affidavit made by a person as to his income may be regarded as
sufficient for making him eligible to the entitlement of legal services
under this Act unless the concerned Authority has reason to disbelieve
such affidavit.”
42. A conjoint reading of various provisions detailed above
establishes that for grant of aid the legislature has made no
distinction between persons who are imprisoned for heinous
offences or non heinous crimes. Further, eligible persons are
entitled to legal services at any stage of proceedings (whether
pre trial, trial or appeal or revisional) which he or she is
prosecuting or defending. (Ref: Rajoo alias Ramakant Vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh26).
43. Under the scheme of the Act the Legal Services Authorities
also have to suo moto initiate the process of identifying classes
of persons who face circumstances of “undeserved want”,
educate them on their right to legal aid, frame schemes,
determine the nature of legal services required in the case, and
give them requisite legal services.
44. The statute envisages that the arms of law are long enough
to reach injustice. The constitution ensures that the arms of
courts are strong enough to serve justice.
45. In light of the scheme of the Act thus discussed, I hold that
persons who cannot file bail applications before the competent
court due to these reasons.
(b) have been abandoned by friends and family after their
(c) do not have any pairokar,
(d) have not been educated of their right to move a bail
application without delay; are victims within the scope of
“undeserved want”.
46. Such class of persons are entitled to legal services, the
nature of which has to be decided by the statutory authorities.
47. Similarly there are persons who fail to file bail applications
before the trial court in a timely manner after their detention, or
do not expeditiously approach the High Court for bail after the
rejection of their bail applications by the trial court. The said
cases prima facie fall within the ambit of “undeserved want”,
subject to enquiry by the State Legal Services Authority or the
V. Legal Aid: C. Instances and Consequences of
48. The applicant was in jail since 06.12.2017. He was able to
file a bail application before the trial court in 2019 i.e. after a
delay of more than one year. The bail application was rejected
on 04.06.2019 by the trial court. He could approach this Court
for bail only in the year 2022 i.e. three years after the trial court
refused him bail.
49. The applicant was delayed in taking recourse to legal
remedies and securing justice because of financial penury, lack
of legal awareness, absence of pairokar and denial of legal aid.
50. This case is not a one off. While sitting in bail jurisdiction, I
noticed a number of cases where bail applications were filed
after inordinate delays because the prisoners did not have access
to legal aid. The other category of cases was where bail
applications could be filed but lay unattended in the cold
storage of the Registry. In the latter cases lack of funds and
absence of pairokars led to ineffective prosecution causing
indefinite delays in hearing.
And so the prisoners wait resigned to their fate.
51. Some like cases which were pointed out by the members of
[I. Rajnish v. State of U.P. in Criminal Misc. Bail Application
No.20805 of 2022, II. Chhotey vs. State of U.P. in Criminal
Misc. Bail Application No.5328 of 2018, III. Mahesh Chandra
Shukla v. State of U.P. in Criminal Misc. Bail Application
No.17940 of 2022, IV. Vikas Dwivedi v. State of U.P. in
Criminal Misc. Bail Application No.22375 of 2020 and V.
Ramu Vs. State of U.P. in Criminal Misc. Bail Application
52. In Rajnish (supra) the applicant was in jail since
26.04.2011. The first bail application was filed by the applicant
before the trial court 11 years after his imprisonment. The trial
had not concluded when the applicant was enlarged on bail by
this Court on 06.08.2022. While granting bail the Court was
constrained to hold:
“This is the first bail application which has been moved by the applicant
before this Court. The applicant belongs to the bottom heap of humanity
and unfortunately forgotten class of citizens. He did not have the
resources to engage a counsel nor was he given to access to legal aid for
these long years. Constitutional promise of securing justice has been
denied to him.
However, it is for all instruments of governance, the trial courts, the
police authorities, the legal services authorities to introspect and bring
about necessary systemic corrections with the conviction that such a state
of affairs will not be repeated. Never again. The District Legal Services
Authority in the State of Uttar Pradesh shall draw up a list of prisoners
who are incarcerated for long period and examine whether they have not
been able to move bail applications due to penury and lack of access to
legal aid. Corrective measures should accordingly be taken. Legal aid
workshop should be conducted in every jail in the State of Uttar Pradesh
to ensure that such grievances are promptly redressed.”
(emphasis supplied)
53. In Ramu (supra) the applicant was in jail since 14.02.2008.
The first bail application was rejected by this Court on
15.11.2008. The applicant was able to file the second bail
application before the High Court in 2019 i.e. more than 11
years after the rejection of first bail application by this Court.
Thereafter, further three years delay occurred in hearing of the
bail due to applicant's inability to file listing application and
effectively prosecute them. The trial had not concluded when
the bail was granted by this Court on 16.07.2022.
54. In Chhotey (supra) the applicant was in jail since
22.02.2014. The first bail application of the applicant was
rejected by this Court on 19.08.2014. The second bail of the
applicant was filed more than three years after the rejection of
first bail application by this Court. Further four years delay
happened as the applicant lacked resources to file listing
applications and prosecute them effectively.
55. It is noteworthy that in Chhotey (supra) the trial
proceedings came to a halt in the year 2012 when the records of
the trial court were transmitted to this Court. During eight years
of imprisonment of the applicant the trial was at a stand-still.
While granting bail to the applicant on 16.03.2022 in Chhotey
(supra) this Court made these observations :
“The comments of the trial judge indicate that the records of the case
were transmitted to this Court in compliance of the orders passed on
12.09.2012. In the comments sent by trial judge it is further stated that in
the absence of the records the Sessions Trial No. 956 of 2013 (State Vs
Chhotey) cannot proceed. Without availability of original documents
including the case diary the applicant could not be charged by the trial
court. As per the comments of the trial court various communications
were sent by the trial court on 28.03.2014, 27.09.2014, 14.01.2020,
15.01.2021, 04.08.2021 to the High Court. However the records have not
yet been transmitted to the trial court. From the aforesaid submissions as
well as the records available before this Court it appears that the
applicant has been in detention since 22.02.2014 but has not been
charged by the trial court till date. The trial against the applicant is yet to
Denial of legal aid was highlighted in the aforesaid order.
56. In Vikas Dwivedi (supra) the applicant was in jail since
05.03.2013. The applicant was able to file the bail application
before the trial court more than four and half years after his
imprisonment. He could file the first bail application before this
Court more than six months after the rejection of his bail by the
trial court. The first bail application of the applicant was
rejected by this Court on 17.05.2018. The second bail of the
applicant was filed more than two years after the rejection of
first bail application by this Court. Thereafter, further two years
of delay was occasioned due to lack of resources to file listing
applications and prosecute the same effectively. When the
applicant was granted bail by this Court on 17.02.2022 the trial
had not concluded.
57. In Mahesh Chandra Shukla (supra) the applicant was in
jail since 12.07.2009. The fourth bail was filed nine years after
the rejection of the third bail. Trial had not concluded when bail
was granted by this Court on 29.08.2022.
58. Many of the aforesaid bail applications were delayed second
or subsequent bail applications before this Court.
The grounds for second or subsequent bail applications
can be promptly advised to prisoners only when they have
regular and unimpeded access to legal aid.
59. The failure of justice in the said cases was occasioned by
poverty,     social  exclusion,     legal   illiteracy, impersonal
administration and denial of legal aid.
Exactions of poverty are more severe than punishments in
law. For them the glorious dawn of the 75th year of
independence has lost the sheen of freedom's ideals and the
substance of the republic's promise.
60. Injustice is the birthmark of a slave nation. Justice is the
birthright of a free people and our constitution says they shall
have it.
The resolve of the “people of India” to secure justice for
all citizens was embedded in the Constitution of India.
61.    All stakeholder institutions have to pause and reflect. The
judiciary too have to turn the searchlights inwards. The courts
have the power to judge, but cannot escape the judgement of the
nation's collective conscience. Independence of judiciary is
strengthened by honest introspection and self correction.
62. The Bar of the Allahabad High Court spoke for prisoners
who had lost their voice, and worked tirelessly without thought
of remuneration or expectation of reward. The learned counsels
uphold the highest traditions of the profession, and shine light
on the hallowed heritage of this Court.
63. Shri Ajay Kumar Pathak, learned counsel, Shri Saurabh
Yadav, learned counsel, Shri Anil Kumar Srivastava, learned
counsel, Ms.Ushma Mishra, learned counsel and Shri Ashish
Kumar Singh, learned counsel and Shri Rishi Chaddha, learned
A.G.A. and Shri Paritosh Kumar Malviya, learned A.G.A. in the
aforesaid cases respectively deserve fullest appreciation. In
such matters, Shri N.I. Jafri, learned Senior Counsel assisted by
Ms. Nasira Adil, learned counsel, Ms. Gunjan Jadhwani,
learned counsel, Shri Omar Zamin, learned counsel and Shri
Rajrshi       Gupta, learned    counsel   have   unconditionally
volunteered to take up the causes. The learned counsels have
always assisted the Court competently. They researched
painstakingly and argued with ability.
64. The plight of prisoners who suffer long incarcerations due
to interminable delays in the criminal justice system was
noticed by the Supreme Court. In 'Re-inhuman conditions in
1382 jails' (Writ Petition (Civil) No.406 of 2013)27 various
directions were issued by the Supreme Court on 24.04.2015 to
the National Legal Services Authority (NLSA), and the
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) to set up Under Trial Review
Committees (UTRCs) in every district. Functioning of the
UTRCs improved consequent to directions of the Supreme
Court issued on various dates.
65. The campaign for release of prisoners gained force
momentum after a scheme was initiated by the National Legal
Services Authority to commemorate the 75th year of
independence. The programme is being implemented with full
vigour in the State of Uttar Pradesh by the State Legal Services
Authority in conjunction with the District Legal Services
The cases like that of the applicant and in issue before this
Court are not covered by the said scheme.
66. In summation legal aid is a catalyst to redeem the preamble
promise of justice and remains a bulwark for protection of
fundamental rights.
67. The rights to file a bail without delay, and access to legal aid
of an eligible prisoner are intertwined. They cannot be
separated. The right of moving a bail application becomes
illusory and personal liberty remains a distant dream, if the right
to legal aid of an entitled prisoner is not effectuated.
68. Fresh breeze of fundamental rights shall blow through the
stone walls that a prison make. Iron bars of jails cannot hold
back the glad tidings of equal justice.
69. Anonymity of a prisoner imposed by isolation cannot
suppress the identity of a citizen created by the Constitution.
Fundamental rights of prisoners paired with statutory duties of
the State Legal Services Authority cast an obligation on the
SLSA to devise a scheme (I) to identify prisoners who are
undertrial for various crimes including heinous offences and
have not applied for bail before the trial court in a timely
manner after their imprisonment, (II) to identify prisoners who
are facing trials for various crimes including heinous offences
but have failed to file bail applications before the High Court in
an expeditious time frame after rejection of their bail
application by the trial court, (III) to identify prisoners who are
facing trials in various offences including heinous crimes but
are unable to file subsequent bails before the High Court after
rejection of earlier bail application by this Court, (IV) to
identify prisoners who are unable to effectively prosecute their
pending bail applications in various offences including heinous
crimes causing delays in hearing, (V) to ascertain whether
inability of the said prisoners to expeditiously file or effectively
prosecute bail application is caused by factors comprehended
under Section 12 read with Section 13 of the Act, (VI) to
approach prisoners who qualify for legal aid, educate them on
their rights of filing bail applications without delay, and
determine the nature of legal aid needed by them, (VII) to
provide legal aid and facilitate filing of bail applications of such
prisoners in a timely manner before the competent courts, (VIII)
to facilitate counsels in getting necessary instructions, relevant
documents, office support for filing the bail applications. (IX)
to facilitate effective prosecution of bail applications by the
counsels who should take out measures for listing of bails and
hearing of matters.
70. This exercise of identification of prisoners, determination of
their eligibility for legal aid and giving legal aid should be an
established procedure in jails which should be undertaken on a
continuous basis and without any break by the District Legal
71. The jail authorities too have responsibilities in this regard.
The duties of jail officials to prevent “undue long detention of
prisoners are stated in Regulation 439(a) of the U.P. Jail
Manual.                                     [Ref: the U.P. Jail Manual28 iv]
72. The jail authorities as well as concerned State authorities are
directed to cooperate with the State Legal Services Authority
and the District Legal Services Authority and ensure effective
implementation of the schemes framed by the                            State Legal
73. This scheme will have the added benefit as delayed trials or
pending appeals will come to the notice of the High Court for
appropriate directions as per law.
74. Following suggestions for effective implementation for the
said scheme may be considered :
28 U.P. Jail Manual appended to endnote as Appendix IV to the judgment
A. To create a comprehensive programme with SOPs for legal
aid to prisoners accused of various crimes including heinous
offences who have not filed bail applications before the High
Court within a period of one year after rejection of bail by the
trial court. The said period of one year is only suggestive. The
said period has to be determined by the State Legal Services
B. To create a comprehensive programme with SOPs for giving
legal aid to prisoners accused of committing various crimes
including heinous offences who have not been able to move bail
applications    before   the    trial court  six   months     after
imprisonment. The said period of six months is only suggestive.
The said period has to be determined by the State Legal
C. The State Legal Services Authority may suggest to the High
Court to decide an appropriate procedure for filing of bail
applications on behalf of the undertrial prisoners, and
particularly those who do not have any pairokars.
D. Legal aid counsels may be given appropriate directions to
take measures for listing and early hearing of bail applications.
E. Filing of subsequent bail applications in case the first bail
application is rejected by the High Court.
F. The jail authorities and District Legal Services Authority
shall maintain the list of all prisoners which shall contain these
details. Date of imprisonment, date of filing of bail application
before the competent court, date of grant/rejection of bail
application by the trial court, the date of grant/rejection of bail
application by the High Court, date of conviction and latest
status of pending bail applications. Efforts should be made to
make updated ordersheets of courts, likely dates of listing
available online in jails.
G. Regular intimation of the status of the case to the prisoners.
Take regular feedback from prisoners including those who have
been given legal aid.
75. By means of this first bail application the applicant has
prayed to be enlarged on bail in Case Crime No. 880 of 2017 at
Police Station Neodiya, District Jaunpur under Section 302 IPC.
The applicant is in jail since 06.12.2017.
76. The bail application of the applicant was rejected by learned
Additional District & Sessions Judge, Jaunpur on 04.06.2019.
77. Sri Nanhe Lal Tripathi, learned counsel assisted by Sri
Satish Kumar Mishra, learned counsel for the applicant contend
that the applicant has been falsely implicated in the instant case.
The applicant was not named in the FIR. There is no direct
evidence against the applicant and he had no motive to commit
the murder. At best it is a case of circumstantial evidence. The
recovered items were planted on the applicant by the police
authorities only to burnish their professional credentials. There
is no independent witness to the recovery. The recovered items
cannot be connected with the offence. The applicant was not
last seen in the company of the deceased at a time proximate to
the death of the latter. The time of death opined in the post
mortem report contradicts the prosecution case. The chain of
incriminating circumstances against the applicant is neither
complete nor reliable. The applicant has explained part of his
criminal history. The learned counsel reiterates the ground of
denial of legal aid causing prolonged imprisonment.
78. Learned AGA points out two more criminal cases registered
against the applicant while he was in jail.
Rejoining the issue, learned counsel for the applicant submits
that the aforesaid cases could not be disclosed as the applicant
does not have any effective parokar to take details of the case.
However on the basis of instructions from the applicant and
from the record of learned AGA, learned counsel for the
applicant submits that the applicant was falsely implicated in
the aforesaid cases when he raised his voice against the
excesses of jail authorities and demanded legal aid.
79. Shri Rishi Chaddha, learned A.G.A for the State could not
satisfactorily dispute the aforesaid submissions from the record.
80. The applicant was granted interim bail on 18.08.2022 by
81. Let the applicant- Anil Gaur @ Sonu @ Sonu Tomar be
released on bail in the aforesaid case crime number on
furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the court below. The following
conditions be imposed in the interest of justice:-
(i) The applicant will not tamper with the evidence
during the trial.
(ii) The applicant will not influence any witness.
(iii) The applicant will appear before the trial court on the
date fixed, unless personal presence is exempted.
(iv) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly make
inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted
with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from
disclosing such facts to the Court to any police officer or
tamper with the evidence.
“[3. Constitution of the National Legal Services Authority.—(1) The
Central Government shall constitute a body to be called the National
Legal Services Authority to exercise the powers and perform the
functions conferred on, or assigned to, the Central Authority under this
(2) The Central Authority shall consist of—
(a) the Chief Justice of India who shall be the Patron-in-Chief;
(b) a serving or retired Judge of the Supreme Court to be nominated by
the President, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India, who shall
be the Executive Chairman; and
(c) such number of other members, possessing such experience and
qualifications, as may be prescribed by the Central Government, to be
nominated by that Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of
(3) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Chief Justice
of India, appoint a person to be the Member-Secretary of the Central
Authority, possessing such experience and qualifications as may be
prescribed by that Government, to exercise such powers and perform
such duties under the Executive Chairman of the Central Authority as
may be prescribed by that Government or as may be assigned to him by
the Executive Chairman of that Authority.
(4) The terms of office and other conditions relating thereto, of members
and the Member-Secretary of the Central Authority shall be such as may
be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Chief
Justice of India.
(5) The Central Authority may appoint such number of officers and other
employees as may be prescribed by the Central Government, in
consultation with the Chief Justice of India, for the efficient discharge of
its functions under this Act.
(6) The officers and other employees of the Central Authority shall be
entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be subject to such other
conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Chief Justice of India.
(7) The administrative expenses of the Central Authority, including the
salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the Member-Secretary,
officers and other employees of the Central Authority, shall be defrayed
out of the Consolidated Fund of India.
(8) All orders and decisions of the Central Authority shall be
authenticated by the Member-Secretary or any other officer of the
Central Authority duly authorised by the Executive Chairman of that
(9) No act or proceeding of the Central Authority shall be invalid merely
on the ground of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the
constitution of, the Central Authority.”
Central Authority shall constitute a committee to be called the Supreme
Court Legal Services Committee for the purpose of exercising such
powers and performing such functions as may be determined by
regulations made by the Central Authority.
(2) The Committee shall consist of –
(a) a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court who shall be the Chairman; and
(b) such number of other members possessing such experience and
qualifications as may be prescribed by the Central Government, to be
nominated by the Chief Justice of India.
(3) The Chief Justice of India shall appoint a person to be the Secretary
to the Committee, possessing such experience and qualifications as may
be prescribed by the Central Government.
(4) The terms of office and other conditions relating thereto, of the
members and Secretary of the Committee shall be such as may be
determined by regulations made by the Central Authority.
(5) The Committee may appoint such number of officers and other
employees as may be prescribed by the Central Government, in
consultation with the Chief Justice of India, for the efficient discharge of
its functions.
(6) The officers and other employees of the Committee shall be entitled
to such salary and allowances and shall be subject to such other
conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Central Government in
consultation with the Chief Justice of India.”
“Section 6.Constitution of State Legal Services Authority.- (1) Every
State Government shall constitute a body to be called the Legal Services
Authority for the State to exercise the powers and perform the functions
conferred on, or assigned to, a State Authority under this Act. State Legal
(2) A State Authority shall consist of-
(a) the Chief Justice of the High Court who shall be the Patron-in-Chief;
(b) a serving or retired Judge of the High Court to be nominated by the
Governor, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court, who
shall be the Executive Chairman; and
(c) such number of other members, possessing such experience and
qualifications as may be prescribed by the State Government, to be
nominated by that Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of
(3) The State Government shall, in consultation with the Chief Justice of
the High Court, appoint a person belonging to the State Higher Judicial
Service, not lower in rank than that of a District Judge, as the Member
Secretary of the State Authority, to exercise such powers and perform
such duties under the Executive Chairman of the State Authority as may
be prescribed by that Government or as may be assigned to him by the
Executive Chairman of that Authority:
Provided that a person functioning as Secretary of a State Legal Aid and
Advice Board immediately before the date of constitution of the State
Authority may be appointed as Member-Secretary of that Authority, even
if he is not qualified to be appointed as such under this sub-section, for a
period not exceeding five years.
(4) The terms of office and other conditions relating thereby, of members
and the Member-Secretary of the State Authority shall be such as may be
prescribed by the State Government in consultation with the Chief
Justice of the High Court.
(5) The State Authority may appoint such number of officers and other
employees as may be prescribed by the State Government in consultation
with the Chief Justice of the High Court, for the efficient discharge of its
functions under this Act.
(6) The officers and other employees of the State Authority shall be
entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be subject to such other
conditions of service as may be prescribed by the State Government in
consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court.
(7) The administrative expenses of the State Authority, including the
salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the Member-Secretary or
any other officer of the State Authority shall be defrayed out of the
consolidated fund of the State.
(8) All orders and decisions of the State Authority shall be authenticated
by the Member Secretary or any other officer of the State Authority duly
authorized by the Executive Chairman of the State Authority.
(9) No act or proceeding of a State Authority shall be invalid merely on
the ground of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the
constitution of, the State Authority.”
shall constitute a committee to be called the High Court Legal Services
Committee for every High Court, for the purpose of exercising such
powers and performing such functions as may be determined by
regulations made by the State Authority.
(a) a sitting Judge of the High Court who shall be the Chairman; and
(b) such number of other members possessing such experience and
qualifications as may be determined by regulations made by the State
to be nominated by the Chief Justice of the High Court.
(3) The Chief Justice of the High Court shall appoint a Secretary to the
Committee possessing such experience and qualifications as may be
prescribed by the State Government.
(4) The terms of office and other conditions relating thereto, of the
members and Secretary of the Committee shall be such as may be
determined by regulations made by the State Authority.
(5) The Committee may appoint such number of officers and other
employees as may be prescribed by the State Government in consultation
with the Chief Justice of the High Court for the efficient discharge of its
(6) The officers and other employees of the Committee shall be entitled
to such salary and allowances and shall be subject to such other
conditions of service as may be prescribed by the State Government in
consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court.”
Government shall, in consultation with Chief Justice of the High Court,
constitute a body to be called the District Legal Services Authority for
every District in the State to exercise the powers and perform the
functions conferred on, or assigned to, the District Authority under this
(2) A District Authority shall consist of-
(a) the district Judge who shall be its Chairman; and
(b) such number of other members, possessing such experience and
qualifications, as may be prescribed by the State Government, to be
nominated by that Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of
(3) The State Authority shall, in consultation with the Chairman of the
District Authority, appoint a person belonging to the State Judicial
Service not lower in rank than that of a Subordinate Judge or Civil Judge
posted at the seat of the District Judiciary as Secretary of the District
Authority to exercise such powers and perform such duties under the
Chairman of that Committee as may be assigned to him by such
(4) The terms of office and other conditions relating thereto, of members
and Secretary of the District Authority shall be such as may be
determined by regulations made by the State Authority in consultation
with the Chief Justice of the High Court.
(5) The District Authority may appoint such number of officers and other
employees as may be prescribed by the State Government in consultation
with the Chief Justice of the High Court for the efficient discharge of its
(6) The officers and other employees of the District Authority shall be
entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be subject to such other
conditions of service as may be prescribed by the State Government in
consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court.
(7) The administrative expenses of every District Authority, including the
salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the Secretary, officers and
other employees of the District Authority shall be defrayed out of the
Consolidated Fund of the State.
(8) All orders and decisions of the District Authority shall be
authenticated by the Secretary or by any other officer of the District
Authority duly authorized by the Chairman of that Authority.
(9) No act or proceeding of a District Authority shall be invalid merely
on the ground of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the
constitution of, the District Authority.”
12. Criteria for giving legal services.—Every person who has to file or
defend a case shall be entitled to legal services under this Act if that
(a) a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe;
(b) a victim of trafficking in human beings or beggar as referred to in
Article 23 of the Constitution;
(c) a women or a child; 1[(d) a person with disability as defined in clause
(i) of section 2 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities,
Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of 1996);] 1[(d)
a person with disability as defined in clause (i) of section 2 of the
Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and
Full Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of 1996);]"
(e) a person under circumstances of undeserved want such as being a
victim of a mass disaster, ethnic violence, caste atrocity, flood, drought,
earthquake or industrial disaster; or
(g) in custody, including custody in a protective home within the
meaning of clause (g) of section 2 of the Immoral Traffic (Prevention)
Act, 1956 (104 of 1956) or in a juvenile home within the meaning of
clause (j) of section 2 of the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 (53 of 1986) or in
a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home within the meaning of
clause (g) of section 2 of the Mental Health Act, 1987 (14 of 1987); or
2[(h) in receipt of annual income less than rupees nine thousand or such
other higher amount as may be prescribed by the State Government, if
the case is before a court other than the Supreme Court, and less than
rupees twelve thousand or such other higher amount as may be
prescribed by the Central Government, if the case is before the Supreme
Court.] 2[(h) in receipt of annual income less than rupees nine thousand
or such other higher amount as may be prescribed by the State
Government, if the case is before a court other than the Supreme Court,
and less than rupees twelve thousand or such other higher amount as may
be prescribed by the Central Government, if the case is before the
(h) in receipt of annual income less than rupees nine thousand or such
other higher amount as may be prescribed by the State Government, if
the case is before a court other than the Supreme Court, and less than
rupees twelve thousand or such other higher amount as may be
prescribed by the Central Government, if the case is before the Supreme
“439(a) Whenever an undertrial prisoner is detailed in jail for an undue
long period the Superintendent shall address the District Magistrate or
the Sessions Judge, as the case may be, with a view to the speedy
disposal of his case or the exercise by him of the power of releasing the
prisoner on bail.”