Case :- PUBLIC INTEREST LITIGATION (PIL) No. - 17 of 2022
Counsel for Petitioner :- Rama Kant Dixit,Asok Pande,Shraddha Tripathi
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
In the pre-lunch session today, after hearing the parties’
counsel we had passed the following order:
“Heard Sri Ashok Pandey and Ms. Shraddha
Tripathi, learned counsel for the petitioner and Sri
O.P. Srivastava, learned Senior Counsel, assisted by
Sri Kaushalendra Yadav and Ms. Anupriya
Srivastava for the Election Commission of India
and Sri Abhinav N. Trivedi, learned counsel for the
State through virtual mode.
For the reasons to be recorded, we decline to
entertain the writ petition at the instance of the
petitioners and the same is accordingly dismissed.”
We now proceed to record the reasons as under:
The present writ petition has questioned the legality of
election schedule notified by the Election Commission of India
on 8.1.2022 insofar as it relates to the holding of general
elections of U.P. State Assembly. The notification is annexed
as Annexure-1 to the writ petition.
Sri O.P. Srivastava, learned Senior Counsel assisted by
Sri Kaushalendra Yadav and Ms Anupriya Srivastava, learned
counsel for the Election Commission of India and Sri Abhinav
N. Trivedi, learned counsel for the State, have argued that the
present     writ    petition   filed   by   the   petitioners    is    not
maintainable; firstly for the reason that the petitioners in
paragraph-3 of the writ petition are espousing a personal
interest which they claim to have in the ongoing process of
election and; secondly Article 329 of the Constitution of India
bars the justiciability of any such cause relating to the
election of a house of State Legislature under writ jurisdiction.
Sri Ashok Pandey, assisted by Ms Shraddha Tripathi,
learned counsel for the petitioner in reply to the preliminary
objections raised by the learned counsel for opposite parties,
is unable to justify as to how a person who is espousing his
personal cause can maintain a writ petition in public interest.
He,    however,      laid   emphasis      that   a   person     having   an
interwoven      cause     inclusive   of    personal     interest    in the
important matters cannot be prevented to approach this Court
in public interest for adjudication on questions of public
importance, no matter his own interest constitutes a part
Public Interest Litigation in our humble opinion must
remain away from any personal interest and to this extent the
objection raised by learned counsel for opposite parties has
More relevant is the objection that is raised on the
touchstone of Article 329 of the Constitution of India which
for ready reference is reproduced hereunder:
“329. Bar to interference by courts in electoral
matters:- Notwithstanding anything in this Constitution -
(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of
constituencies or the allotment of seats to such
constituencies, made or purporting to be made under
Article 327 or Article 328, shall not be called in question in
(b) No election to either House of Parliament or to the
House or either House of the Legislature of a State shall be
called in question except by an election petition presented
to such authority and in such manner as may be provided
for by or under any law made by the appropriate
The rider operating upon the exercise of jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in relation to
the matters of election to a State Legislative Assembly has
invited the attention of this Court ever since the case of
Ponnuswami (N.P.                 Ponnuswami v. Returning officer, Namakkal
Constituency and others                    reported in   1952 AIR 64). In a catena
of judgements rendered by the apex court, it has succinctly
been held that justiciability of a cause relating to election
pertaining to State Legislative Assembly is permissible only
through an election petition.
In the present case, it is not in dispute that a
notification under Section 15 of the Representation of the
People Act, 1951 has already come to be issued on 8.1.2022
and it is equally not in dispute that the prayer made in the
writ petition affects the election process which has already
commenced with the issuance of impugned notification.
Public Interest Litigation is not an exception to Article
329 of the Constitution of India, thus, the objection raised on
behalf of the opposite parties deserves to be sustained and we
also do not find any fruitful purpose to be served in
embarking upon merit of the case once the very cause
agitated in the writ petition is not justiciable.
Besides the above, we are unable to estimate the
magnitude of affected parties as a result of relief sought in the
present writ petition which undoubtedly suffers from non-
joinder of the necessary parties.
For the reasons recorded above, the writ petition has
thus been dismissed.
Digitally signed by NARENDRA     Digitally signed by ATTAU RAHMAN