1.   The respondents issued a recruitment notification dated
18.01.2020 inviting applications for recruitment to the post of
Stenographer Grade-III (Hindi and English) in the Districts Courts
and the District Legal Services Authorities. Reservations were
provided for Divorcee category women in this recruitment process.
The last date of submission of online application forms was
2.   The petitioner claims that she was married to one Shri
Vikash on 06.07.2018. However, the matrimonial relationship fell
(2 of 5)            [CW-1004/2022]
out and thus, a customary divorce took place in the Society
Panchayat on 17.09.2018 and an agreement was executed on the
very same day for terminating the relations between the spouses.
An application under Section 13B of the Hindu Marriage Act was
filed on 12.07.2019 but could not be posted for second motion
because of some dispute. The decree of divorce was passed on
13.08.2020. The delay occurred on account of COVID pandemic
and the lockdown imposed pursuant thereto. As the application
under Section 13B of the Hindu Marriage Act had already been
filed long before submitting the application form in the recruitment
process, the petitioner applied in the category of Divorcee Female.
The result of the recruitment in question was declared on
30.06.2021. The petitioner was called for interview and document
verification and was declared successful in the category of
Divorcee Female. However, the previous result was cancelled and
fresh result was declared because of some litigation, etc.       The
petitioner was again declared successful in the Divorcee Female
category in the revised result and was called for interview and
document verification vide Notice dated 07.12.2021. The final
result was declared on 15.12.2021 wherein, a note was appended
that the petitioner did not have the decree of divorce on the last
date of submission of online application form i.e. 28.02.2020 and
thus, she was not being considering in Divorcee Female category.
Thereupon, The petitioner has approached this Court by way of
this writ petition for assailing the notice dated 15.12.2021
whereby, the candidature of the petitioner has been rejected on
the ground that she did not possess the decree of divorce on the
last date of submission of online application form.
(3 of 5)             [CW-1004/2022]
3.    Shri   Rakesh   Arora,   learned     counsel  representing   the
petitioner, vehemently and fervently urged that the respondents
were    totally  unjustified  in   turning    down   the   petitioner’s
candidature in the Divorcee Female category because she was
already having a customary divorce agreement. As the application
for divorce by mutual consent under Section 13B of the Hindu
Marriage Act had also been filed well before issuance of the
recruitment notification but could not be decided because of the
prevailing COVID pandemic and hence, the petitioner ought to
have been given appointment in the Divorcee Female category as
per her merit. He submitted that there was no requirement in the
recruitment notification that for applying in the Divorcee category,
the aspirant must be holding the divorce decree. As the
application had been preferred under Section 13B of the Hindu
Marriage Act, grant of decree of divorce was a foregone
consequence thereof. As a matter of fact, the divorce decree was
granted on 13.08.2020 i.e. well before declaration of the result
and thus, the impugned notice should be struck down and the
respondents be directed to offer appointment to the petitioner as
per her merit and performance against the seats reserved for
Divorcee Female category.
4.    We    have   given   our   thoughtful    consideration   to  the
submissions advanced by the petitioner’s counsel and, have gone
through the material placed on record.
5.    The recruitment notification in question, in no uncertain
terms, stipulated that the reservation was being offered to
“Divorcee Female” category. For a person, applying in the said
(4 of 5)             [CW-1004/2022]
category, the status of being divorced was imperative. There is
nothing in law which can permit a candidate to apply in the said
category in the expectancy that a decree would be granted.
6.     Be that as it may. Since the petitioner was not a ‘Divorced
Female’ as on the last date of submission of application forms, she
was not entitled to apply in the said category and as a
consequence,     the    respondents    were    absolutely  justified   in
rejecting the petitioner’s candidature in the category of Divorcee
Female. Law in this regard is well settled by Hon’ble the Supreme
Court in the case of Ashok Kumar Sonkar vs. Union of India,
reported in (2007)3 SCC 956 wherein, the Hon’ble Court was
considering the aspect of the candidate not holding the requisite
academic qualification by the last date of submission of the
application forms. It was held that if the Rules and the recruitment
notification   are   silent, the   last    date  for  considering    the
qualification would be the last date of submission of the
application forms. In the present scenario, admittedly, the
petitioner was not a Divorcee on the last date of submission of the
application forms and thus, she was not entitled to apply in such
category. As a matter of fact, she made a mis-statement of being
divorced while applying against the seats reserved for Divorcee
Female     aspirants.   Hence,   the   respondents    were   absolutely
justified in rejecting the petitioner’s candidature by the impugned
notice dated 15.12.2021 which is perfectly in accordance with law.
7.     In support of his contentions, Shri Rakesh Arora has placed
reliance on the Single Bench Judgment in the case of Reetu
Kalasua Vs. State of Rajasthan & Ors. reported in 2014 (3)
(5 of 5)          [CW-1004/2022]
WLC (Raj.) 137. It may be mentioned here that the Judgment of
Reetu Kalasua (supra), which in turn was rendered on the ratio of
a Division Bench Judgment in the case of State of Rajasthan &
Ors. vs. Ms. Jamna Rajpurohit reported in 2013(4) CDR 2275
(Raj.) were both considered by a Division Bench in the case of
State of Rajasthan vs. Jagdish Prasad (D.B. Civil Special
Apeal (Writ) No.611/2016) decided on 09.09.2016 and the
Hon’ble Division Bench has declared the Judgment rendered in the
case of Ms. Jamna Rajpurohit (supra) to be per incuriam.
Manifestly thus, the judgment in the case of Reetu Kalasua
(supra) relied upon by Shri Arora does not lay down the correct
preposition of law and hence is of no help whatsoever to the
8.    As a consequence, the writ petition fails and is hereby
dismissed as being devoid of merit.