1.    The petitioner is before this Court seeking for the
following reliefs:
a.    Issue a writ in the nature of mandamus or any
other writ or directions directing the Respondents
to grant/sanction compensation of Rs.25,00,000/-
(Rupees Twenty Five Lakhs only), for the loss of
reputation,      illegal    detention   and    illegal
handcuffing of the petitioner, even prior to the
Petitioner been proved guilty in a exclusively
bailable offence under the provision of Negotiable
b.    Issue a writ in the nature of mandamus or any
other writ or directions directing the Respondents,
to ensure that the laws, rules, regulations,
circulars, notifications etc., that have been issued
by the Central Government Agencies & the State
Government Agencies & the directions of the
Hon’ble Apex Court & this Hon’ble Court are
abided, prior to arresting the petitioner or calling
the petitioner to the Police Station on the pretext
of enquiry etc.
c.    Pass such other order or orders as the Hon’ble
Court may deem fit in the facts and circumstances
of the case.
2. The petitioner claims to be a law student studying in
Shikshan Parasrak Mandal’s Law College, at Raibag.
Certain disputes arose between the petitioner and
one Babu Annappa @ Annu Gurav in respect of a
mortgage deed executed in respect of agricultural
lands belonging to the petitioner. Pursuant thereto,
five criminal cases were filed against the petitioner
for  offences   under    Section   138  of  Negotiable
Instruments Act, 1881 on account of dishonour of
cheques issued in pursuance of the said mortgage.
As regards the said dishonor of cheques, Babu
Annappa    filed   five   criminal  proceedings   viz.,
C.C.Nos.531 to 535/2019 before II Additional Civil
Judge and JMFC., Chikodi at Chikodi.
3. The petitioner was arrested in C.C.No.533/2019 in
furtherance of non-bailable warrant issued by the II
Additional Civil Judge and JMFC., Chikodi vide order
dated 10.04.2019 by the Respondent No.3-Police
Sub-Inspector, Ankali Police Station between 1.00
WP No. 115362 of 2019
p.m. to 1.30 p.m., in the Market Place at Ankali,
when the petitioner is stated to have been returning
from his College after writing his internal exams.
4.  The   petitioner  claims   that  the   petitioner was
handcuffed and paraded with handcuffs in Ankali
Town and later on was taken in a K.S.R.T.C Bus in
handcuffs from Ankali Police Station to Chikodi Police
Station, without producing the petitioner before the
Court. The petitioner claims that the said incident
has been video recorded and a compact disc in
relation thereto has been produced by the petitioner.
The petitioner moved a bail application in the said
proceedings. However, the same was rejected and
the petitioner was remanded to Judicial custody.
Subsequently, the petitioner was convicted by the II
Additional Civil Judge and JMFC., Chikodi in all five
criminal cases, as regards which, appeals were filed
by the petitioner in Criminal Appeal Nos.362 to
366/2019 challenging the said order of conviction,
WP No. 115362 of 2019
wherein the 7th Additional District and Sessions
Court, Belagavi had stayed the order of conviction
and sentence vide order dated 19.10.2019.
5. The    petitioner   claims    that  despite   the    stay,
respondent No.3 officials were illegally arresting and
detaining    the   petitioner,   more   particularly,   on
05.11.2019, the petitioner is alleged to have been
detained and taken to the Ankali Police Station
stating that an execution warrant has been issued
against the petitioner. But later on, he was released
when the advocate of the petitioner approached the
Ankali Police Station. The petitioner further claims
that   the   petitioner   was   once   again   called   by
respondent No.3 officials to attend the Ankali Police
Station on 08.11.2019 and further that the police
attached to respondent No.3 have been visiting the
house of the petitioner in civil dress and have
threatened him. It is on the basis of the above, the
petitioner claims that his family life has been ruined
WP No. 115362 of 2019
so also his reputation. The petitioner’s fundamental
rights have been violated by the respondents abusing
their official position and it is in that background that
the petitioner is before this court seeking for the
aforesaid reliefs.
6. Sri.Santosh Pujari, learned counsel for the petitioner
submitted that:
6.1. The respondent No.3 and police attached to the
Ankali    Police    Station    have   been    acting
arbitrarily and illegally with ulterior motives;
6.2. That     the   offences   being   bailable  and   the
petitioner’s counsel having filed an exemption
application, non-bailable warrant ought not to
have been issued against the petitioner;
6.3. At the time of arrest of the petitioner, the
petitioner ought not to have been handcuffed
nor was he required to be paraded in Ankali
WP No. 115362 of 2019
Town and taken in KSRTC bus from Ankali
Police Station to Chikodi Police Station;
6.4. The punishment for the offences of dishonor of
cheques, even if convicted, is a maximum of
two years. Thus, the petitioner ought not to
have been handcuffed;
6.5. There is absolutely no reason for the petitioner
to be paraded in Ankali Town which has caused
serious harm and injury to the reputation of the
6.6. That the manner in which the respondent No.3
and its officials have acted is nothing less than
police raj.
6.7. That the concerned police have given a go-bye
to the directions issued in numerous decisions
of the Hon’ble Apex Court and this Court.
6.8. That the manner in which they have acted has
affected the personal liberty of the petitioner.
WP No. 115362 of 2019
He refers to and relies upon the following
6.8.1. State     of    Maharashtra          &    Ors     vs.
Ravikant S.Patil reported in (1991) 2
SCC 373 more particularly Paras 4 and 5
which read as under:-
4. Having gone through the entire record we are
unable to disagree with some of the findings of
the High Court regarding the handcuffing and we
do not propose to interfere with the order
directing the payment of compensation. But we
think that Shri Prakash Chavan, Inspector of
Police, appellant 2 herein, cannot be made
personally liable. He has acted only as an official
and even assuming that he has exceeded his
limits and thus erred in taking the undertrial
prisoner handcuffed, still we do not think that he
can be made personally liable. In Rudul Sah v.
State of Bihar [(1983) 4 SCC 141 : 1983 SCC (Cri)
798] , this Court directed the State to pay
compensation to the person illegally detained. The
High Court also having noted this decision
observed that the court can order payment of
compensation either by the State or persons
acting on behalf of the State. Having so observed,
the High Court, however, held Shri Prakash
Chavan, Inspector of Police personally liable and
directed him to pay the compensation. We are of
the view that in the instant case also a similar
order as one passed in Rudul Sah case [(1983) 4
SCC 141 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 798] , will meet the
ends of justice. Then the High Court has also
directed that an entry should be made in his
service record to the effect that he was guilty of
violation of fundamental right of an undertrial
prisoner. So far this direction is concerned, it is
submitted that such an adverse entry cannot
straightway be made without giving the Inspector
of Police, appellant 2 herein, an opportunity of
WP No. 115362 of 2019
being heard. We find considerable force in this
submission and accordingly we modify the order of
the High Court as follows.
5. The compensation of Rs 10,000 as awarded by
the High Court, shall be paid by the State of
Maharashtra. The concerned authorities may, if
they think it necessary, hold an enquiry and then
decide whether any further action has to be taken
against Shri Prakash Chavan, Inspector of Police.
Subject to the above directions, this appeal is
disposed of.
Contempt           Petition)       reported         in
(1996) 4 SCC 152 more particularly
Paras 11, 18, 19 and 22 which read as
11. The justification for handcuffing that has been
offered about the undertrial prisoners trying to
escape from custody does not stand scrutiny
because the accused were social activists who were
agitating for the protection of the rights of the
tribals and at the time of arguments on the bail
application of the accused persons, bail was not
opposed by the prosecution on the ground of
seriousness of the charges against them or the
likelihood of their absconding. It is not disputed
that no orders were obtained from the Magistrate
concerned with regard to handcuffing of the
prisoners before taking them to court from jail and
to the jail from the court. The handcuffing of the
members of the Sangath who were undertrial
prisoners, was, therefore, not justified and was in
clear disregard of the law laid down by this Court in
the decisions referred to above. The question that
arises is whether the said actions of the
contemners in handcuffing the prisoners constitute
contempt of this Court. We will first take up the
case of the five police personnel who are
Contemners 1 to 5.
18. The handcuffing of the undertrial prisoners
cannot, however, be justified even under the
provisions of Regulation 465 of the M.P. Police
Regulations inasmuch as the said regulation
requires an express authorisation from the
Magistrate/Jail Officer for the purpose of taking him
to court from jail and from jail to court. Admittedly,
no such authorisation was obtained in this case. As
regards the role and responsibility of Contemners 1
to 5 in these actions involving handcuffing of
undertrial prisoners, it may be stated that
Contemners 3 to 5 were directly involved in the
said incidents of handcuffing because the
handcuffing was done under their directions or in
their presence. Contemners 1 and 2, even though
not directly involved in the said incidents since they
were not present, must be held responsible for
having not taken adequate steps to prevent such
actions and even after the said actions came to
their knowledge, they condoned the same by not
taking stern action against persons found
responsible for this illegality. We, therefore, record
our disapproval of the conduct of all the five
Contemners 1 to 5 in this regard and direct that a
note regarding the disapproval of their conduct by
this Court be placed in the personal files of all of
19. We are also constrained to say that though
nearly 15 years have elapsed since this Court gave
its decision in Prem Shankar Shukla [(1980) 3 SCC
526 : 1980 SCC (Cri) 815 : (1980) 3 SCR 855] no
steps have been taken by the authorities concerned
in the State of Madhya Pradesh to amend the M.P.
Police Regulations so as to bring them in accord
with the law laid down by this Court in that case.
Nor has any circular been issued laying down the
guidelines in the matter of handcuffing of prisoners
in the light of the decision of this Court in Prem
to the Government of Madhya Pradesh is,
therefore, directed to ensure that suitable steps are
taken to amend the M.P. Police Regulations in the
light of the law laid down by this Court in Prem
(Cri) 815 : (1980) 3 SCR 855] and proper
guidelines are issued for the guidance of the police
personnel in this regard. The Law Department and
the Police Department of the Government of
WP No. 115362 of 2019
Madhya Pradesh shall take steps to ensure that the
law laid down by this Court in the matter of
protection of human rights of citizens as against
actions by the police is brought to the notice of all
Superintendents of Police in the Districts soon after
the decision is given, by issuing necessary circulars
in that regard and the responsibility is placed on
the Superintendent of Police to ensure compliance
with the said circulars by the subordinate police
personnel under his charge.
22. We have carefully considered the two affidavits
of the contemner as well as the affidavits of Shri
Betulla Khan and Shri Girdhari Lal Vani, Advocates.
We would assume that on 8-2-1993 the contemner
did not make the statement about the judgments
of this Court having no application there and the
police having the right to transport the accused as
they want, with or without handcuffs. But the
contemner, being a judicial officer, is expected to
be aware of law laid down by this Court in Prem
Shankar Shukla v. Delhi Admn. [(1980) 3 SCC 526
: 1980 SCC (Cri) 815 : (1980) 3 SCR 855] and
Sunil Gupta v. State of M.P. [(1990) 3 SCC 119 :
1990 SCC (Cri) 440] Prem Shankar Shukla v. Delhi
(1980) 3 SCR 855] was decided in 1980, nearly 13
years earlier. In his affidavits also he does not say
that he was not aware of the said decisions. Apart
from that, there were provisions in Regulation 465
of the M.P. Police Regulations prescribing the
conditions in which undertrial prisoners could be
handcuffed and they contain the requirement
regarding authorisation for the same by the
Magistrate. It appears that the contemner was
completely insensitive about the serious violations
of the human rights of the undertrial prisoners in
the matter of their handcuffing inasmuch as when
the prisoners were produced before him in court in
handcuffs, he did not think it necessary to take any
action for the removal of handcuffs or against the
escort party for bringing them to the court in
handcuffs and taking them away in handcuffs
without his authorisation. This is a serious lapse on
the part of the contemner in the discharge of his
duties as a judicial officer who is expected to
ensure that the basic human rights of the citizens
are not violated. Keeping in view that the
contemner is a young judicial officer, we refrain
from imposing punishment on him. We, however,
WP No. 115362 of 2019
record our strong disapproval of his conduct and
direct that a note of this disapproval by this Court
shall be kept in the personal file of the contemner.
We also feel that judicial officers should be made
aware from time to time of the law laid down by
this Court and the High Court, more especially in
connection with protection of basic human rights of
the people and, for that purpose, short refresher
courses may be conducted at regular intervals so
that judicial officers are made aware about the
developments in the law in the field.
6.8.3. Rini Johar & Another vs. State of
Madhya Pradesh & Ors reported in
(2016) 11 SCC 703 more particularly
Paras 16 and 27 which read as under:
16. In Joginder Kumar v. State of U.P. [Joginder
Kumar v. State of U.P., (1994) 4 SCC 260 : 1994
SCC (Cri) 1172] while considering the misuse of
police power of arrest, it has been opined: (SCC p.
“20. … No arrest can be made because it is
lawful for the police officer to do so. The existence
of the power to arrest is one thing. The justification
for the exercise of it is quite another. … no arrest
should be made without a reasonable satisfaction
reached after some investigation as to the
genuineness and bona fides of a complaint and a
reasonable belief both as to the person's complicity
and even so as to the need to effect arrest.
Denying a person of his liberty is a serious matter.”
27. In the case at hand, there has been violation of
Article 21 and the petitioners were compelled to
face humiliation. They have been treated with an
attitude of insensibility. Not only there are violation
of guidelines issued in D.K. Basu [D.K. Basu v.
State of W.B., (1997) 1 SCC 416 : 1997 SCC (Cri)
92], there are also flagrant violation of mandate of
law enshrined under Section 41 and Section 41-A
Cr.PC.    The       investigating   officers   in    no
WP No. 115362 of 2019
circumstances can flout the law with brazen
proclivity. In such a situation, the public law
remedy which has been postulated in Nilabati
Behera [Nilabati Behera v. State of Orissa, (1993)
2 SCC 746 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 527] , Sube Singh v.
State of Haryana [Sube Singh v. State of Haryana,
Hardeep Singh v. State of M.P. [Hardeep Singh v.
State of M.P., (2012) 1 SCC 748 : (2012) 1 SCC
(Cri) 684] , comes into play. The constitutional
courts taking note of suffering and humiliation are
entitled to grant compensation. That has been
regarded as a redeeming feature. In the case at
hand, taking into consideration the totality of facts
and circumstances, we think it appropriate to grant
a sum of Rs 5,00,000 (Rupees five lakhs only)
towards compensation to each of the petitioners to
be paid by the State of M.P. within three months
hence. It will be open to the State to proceed
against the erring officials, if so advised.
6.8.4. Anita Thakur & Ors vs. Government J
& K and Ors. Reported in (2016) 15
SCC 525, more particularly Paras 13, 18
and 19 which read as under:
13. It is perceivable that the State in its initial
affidavit had stated that the Director General of
Police         by        its         order     dated
8-7-2015 had appointed Inspector General of
Police, CID to enquire into the allegations as
regards the violation of the provisions enshrined
under Sections 41-A to 41-C CrPC. It needs to be
stated here that in pursuance of the order passed
by the Director General, an enquiry has been
conducted by the Inspector General of Police
Administration, CID, Bhopal. It has been styled as
“preliminary enquiry”. The said report dated 19-8-
2015 has been brought on record. The inquiring
authority has recorded the statement of Ms Ishrat
Praveen Khan. The part of her statement reads as
WP No. 115362 of 2019
“… When I received the order, I requested DSP
Shri Deepak Thakur that I was not in the District
Police Force. I do not have any knowledge about
IPC/CrPC/Police Regulation/Police Act and Evidence
Act, IT Act as I have not obtained any training in
Police Training School, nor do I have any
knowledge in this regard, nor do I have any
knowledge to fill up the seizure memo and arrest
memo. Even after the request, DSP Shri Deepak
Thakur asked in strict word that I must follow the
order. The duty certificate was granted to me on
26-11-2012, on which Report No. 567 time 16.30
was registered, in which there are clear directions.
In compliance with this order, we reached Kondwa
Police Station in Pune, Maharashtra on 27-11-2012
with my team and 2 constables and 1 woman
constable were sent to assist us from there. The
persons of Police Station Kondwa came to know
reaching Lulla Nagar that the said area does not
fall under their police station area so the police of
Kondwa phoning Banwari Police Station got to
bring the force for help Banwari Police Station. I
had given the written application in PS Banwari.
The entire team reached the house of Rini Johar
and 1 laptop of Dell company and 1 data card of
Reliance company were seized. Rini Johar called
her mother Gulshan Johar from the Court
furnishing information to her about her custody.
Thereafter, Shri Rini Johar had called up the
Inspector General of Police, State Cyber Police Shri
Anil Kumar Gupta. I and my team had taken Miss
Rini Johar and Smt Gulshan in our custody. I and
Constable Miss Hemlata Jharbare conducted robe
search of Miss Rini Johar and Smt Gulshan Johar.
Nothing was found on their body.”
18. In D.K. Basu v. State of W.B. [D.K. Basu v.
State of W.B., (1997) 1 SCC 416 : 1997 SCC (Cri)
92] , after referring to the authorities in Joginder
Kumar [Joginder Kumar v. State of U.P., (1994) 4
v. State of Orissa [Nilabati Behera v. State of
and State of M.P. v. Shyamsunder Trivedi [State of
M.P. v. Shyamsunder Trivedi, (1995) 4 SCC 262 :
1995 SCC (Cri) 715] the Court laid down certain
guidelines to be followed in cases of arrest and
detention till legal provisions are made in that
behalf as preventive measures. The said guidelines
read as follows: (D.K. Basu case [D.K. Basu v.
WP No. 115362 of 2019
State of W.B., (1997) 1 SCC 416 : 1997 SCC (Cri)
92] , SCC pp. 435-36, para 35)
“(1) The police personnel carrying out the arrest
and handling the interrogation of the arrestee
should     bear     accurate,   visible   and    clear
identification    and    name     tags   with    their
designations. The particulars of all such police
personnel who handle interrogation of the arrestee
must be recorded in a register.
(2) That the police officer carrying out the arrest of
the arrestee shall prepare a memo of arrest at the
time of arrest and such memo shall be attested by
at least one witness, who may either be a member
of the family of the arrestee or a respectable
person of the locality from where the arrest is
made. It shall also be countersigned by the
arrestee and shall contain the time and date of
(3) A person who has been arrested or detained
and is being held in custody in a police station or
interrogation centre or other lock-up, shall be
entitled to have one friend or relative or other
person known to him or having interest in his
welfare being informed, as soon as practicable,
that he has been arrested and is being detained at
the particular place, unless the attesting witness of
the memo of arrest is himself such a friend or a
relative of the arrestee.
(4) The time, place of arrest and venue of custody
of an arrestee must be notified by the police where
the next friend or relative of the arrestee lives
outside the district or town through the Legal Aid
Organisation in the District and the police station of
the area concerned telegraphically within a period
of 8 to 12 hours after the arrest.
(5) The person arrested must be made aware of
this right to have someone informed of his arrest
or detention as soon as he is put under arrest or is
(6) An entry must be made in the diary at the
place of detention regarding the arrest of the
person which shall also disclose the name of the
next friend of the person who has been informed of
WP No. 115362 of 2019
the arrest and the names and particulars of the
police officials in whose custody the arrestee is.
(7) The arrestee should, where he so requests, be
also examined at the time of his arrest and major
and minor injuries, if any, present on his/her body,
must be recorded at that time. The “Inspection
Memo” must be signed both by the arrestee and
the police officer effecting the arrest and its copy
provided to the arrestee.
(8) The arrestee should be subjected to medical
examination by a trained doctor every 48 hours
during his detention in custody by a doctor on the
panel of approved doctors appointed by Director,
Health Services of the State or Union Territory
concerned. Director, Health Services should
prepare such a panel for all tehsils and districts as
(9) Copies of all the documents including the
memo of arrest, referred to above, should be sent
to the Illaqa Magistrate for his record.
(10) The arrestee may be permitted to meet his
lawyer during interrogation, though not throughout
the interrogation.
(11) A police control room should be provided at all
district and State headquarters, where information
regarding the arrest and the place of custody of the
arrestee shall be communicated by the officer
causing the arrest, within 12 hours of effecting the
arrest and at the police control room it should be
displayed on a conspicuous noticeboard.”
19. Mr. Fernandes, learned Amicus Curiae, in a
tabular chart has pointed that none of the
requirements had been complied with. Various
reasons have been ascribed for the same. On a
scrutiny of the enquiry report and the factual
assertions made, it is limpid that some of the
guidelines have been violated. It is strenuously
urged by Mr Fernandes that Section 66-A(b) of the
Information Technology Act, 2000 provides
maximum sentence of three years and Section 420
CrPC stipulates sentence of seven years and,
therefore, it was absolutely imperative on the part
of the arresting authority to comply with the
WP No. 115362 of 2019
procedure postulated in Section 41-A of the Code
of Criminal Procedure. The Court in Arnesh Kumar
v. State of Bihar [Arnesh Kumar v. State of Bihar,
while dwelling upon the concept of arrest, was
compelled to observe thus: (SCC p. 277, para 5)
“5. Arrest brings humiliation, curtails freedom
and casts scars forever. Lawmakers know it so also
the police. There is a battle between the lawmakers
and the police and it seems that the police has not
learnt its lesson: the lesson implicit and embodied
in CrPC. It has not come out of its colonial image
despite six decades of Independence, it is largely
considered as a tool of harassment, oppression and
surely not considered a friend of public. The need
for caution in exercising the drastic power of arrest
has been emphasised time and again by the courts
but has not yielded desired result. Power to arrest
greatly contributes to its arrogance so also the
failure of the Magistracy to check it. Not only this,
the power of arrest is one of the lucrative sources
of police corruption. The attitude to arrest first and
then proceed with the rest is despicable. It has
become a handy tool to the police officers who lack
sensitivity or act with oblique motive.”
6.8.5. Mehmood Nayyar Azam vs. State of
Chhattisgarh           &     Ors     reported         in
(2012) 8 SCC 1, more particularly Paras
42, 44, 45, 46, 47 and 48 which read as
42. Presently, we shall advert to the aspect of
grant of compensation. The learned counsel for the
State, as has been indicated earlier, has submitted
with immense vehemence that the appellant should
sue for defamation. Our analysis would clearly
show that the appellant was tortured while he was
in custody. When there is contravention of human
rights, the inherent concern as envisaged in Article
WP No. 115362 of 2019
21 springs to life and enables the citizen to seek
relief by taking recourse to public law remedy.
44. Dr A.S. Anand, J. (as His Lordship then was),
in his concurring opinion, expressed that: (Nilabati
SCC pp. 768-69, para 34)
“34. … The relief of monetary compensation,
as exemplary damages, in proceedings under
Article 32 by the Supreme Court or under Article
226 by the High Courts, for established
infringement of the indefeasible right guaranteed
under Article 21 of the Constitution is a remedy
available in public law and is based on the strict
liability for contravention of the guaranteed basic
and indefeasible rights of the citizen. The purpose
of public law is not only to civilize public power but
also to assure the citizen that they live under a
legal system which aims to protect their interests
and preserve their rights. Therefore, when the
court moulds the relief by granting ‘compensation’
in proceedings under Articles 32 or 226 of the
Constitution seeking enforcement or protection of
fundamental rights, it does so under the public law
by way of penalising the wrongdoer and fixing the
liability for the public wrong on the State which has
failed in its public duty to protect the fundamental
rights of the citizen. The payment of compensation
in such cases is not to be understood, as it is
generally understood in a civil action for damages
under the private law but in the broader sense of
providing relief by an order of making ‘monetary
amends’ under the public law for the wrong done
due to breach of public duty, of not protecting the
fundamental         rights  of   the    citizen.   The
compensation is in the nature of ‘exemplary
damages’ awarded against the wrongdoer for the
breach of its public law duty and is independent of
the rights available to the aggrieved party to claim
compensation under the private law in an action
based on tort, through a suit instituted in a court of
competent jurisdiction or/and prosecute the
offender under the penal law.”
45. In Sube Singh v. State of Haryana [(2006) 3
1117] a three-Judge Bench of the Apex Court, after
referring to its earlier decisions, has opined as
follows: (SCC pp. 198-99, para 38)
WP No. 115362 of 2019
“38. It is thus now well settled that the award
of compensation against the State is an
appropriate and effective remedy for redress of an
established infringement of a fundamental right
under Article 21, by a public servant. The quantum
of compensation will, however, depend upon the
facts and circumstances of each case. Award of
such compensation (by way of public law remedy)
will not come in the way of the aggrieved person
claiming additional compensation in a civil court, in
the enforcement of the private law remedy in tort,
nor come in the way of the criminal court ordering
compensation under Section 357 of the Code of
46. At this stage, we may fruitfully refer to the
decision in Hardeep Singh v. State of M.P. [(2012)
1 SCC 748 : (2012) 1 SCC (Cri) 684] The appellant
therein was engaged in running a coaching centre
where students were given tuition to prepare for
entrance test for different professional courses. On
certain allegation, he was arrested and taken to
police station where he was handcuffed by the
police without there being any valid reason. A
number of daily newspapers published the
appellant's photographs and on seeing his
photograph in handcuffs, the appellant's elder
sister was so shocked that she expired. After a long
and delayed trial, the appellant, Hardeep Singh,
filed a writ petition before the High Court of
Madhya Pradesh at Jabalpur that the prosecution
purposefully caused delay in conclusion of the trial
causing harm to his dignity and reputation. The
learned Single Judge, who dealt with the matter,
did not find any ground to grant compensation. On
an appeal being preferred, the Division Bench
observed that an expeditious trial ending in
acquittal could have restored the appellant's
personal dignity but the State instead of taking
prompt steps to examine the prosecution witnesses
delayed the trial for five long years. The Division
Bench further held that there was no warrant for
putting the handcuffs on the appellant which
adversely affected his dignity. Be it noted, the
Division Bench granted compensation of Rs 70,000.
47. This Court, while dealing with the facet of
compensation, held thus: (Hardeep Singh case
pp. 752-53, para 17)
“17. Coming, however, to the issue of
compensation, we find that in the light of the
findings arrived at by the Division Bench, the
compensation of Rs 70,000 was too small and did
not do justice to the sufferings and humiliation
undergone by the appellant. In the facts and
circumstances of the case, we feel that a sum of Rs
2,00,000 (Rupees two lakhs) would be an adequate
compensation for the appellant and would meet the
ends of justice. We, accordingly, direct the State of
Madhya Pradesh to pay to the appellant the sum of
Rs 2,00,000 (Rupees two lakhs) as compensation.
In case the sum of Rs 70,000 as awarded by the
High Court, has already been paid to the appellant,
the State would naturally pay only the balance
amount of Rs 1,30,000 (Rupees one lakh thirty
Thus,    suffering   and   humiliation    were
highlighted and the amount of compensation was
48 [Ed.: Para 48 corrected vide Official
Corrigendum No. F.3/Ed.B.J./47/2012 dated
13-8-2012.] . On a reflection of the facts of the
case, it is luculent that the appellant had
undergone mental torture at the hands of
insensible police officials. He might have agitated
to ameliorate the cause of the poor and the
downtrodden, but, the social humiliation that has
been meted out to him is quite capable of
destroying the heart of his philosophy. It has been
said that philosophy has the power to sustain a
man's courage. But courage is based on self-
respect and when self-respect is dented, it is
difficult even for a very strong-minded person to
maintain that courage. The initial invincible mind
paves the path of corrosion. As is perceptible, the
mindset of the protectors of law appears to cause
torment and insult and tyrannise the man who is
helpless in custody. There can be no trace of doubt
that he is bound to develop stress disorder and
anxiety which destroy the brightness and strength
of the will power. It has been said that anxiety and
stress are slow poisons. When torment is added, it
creates commotion in the mind and the slow
poisons get activated. The inhuman treatment can
be well visualised when the appellant came out
from custody and witnessed his photograph being
circulated with the self-condemning words written
WP No. 115362 of 2019
on it. This withers away the very essence of life as
enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution.
Regard being had to the various aspects which we
have analysed and taking note of the totality of
facts and circumstances, we are disposed to think
that a sum of Rs 5 lakhs (Rupees five lakhs only)
should be granted towards compensation to the
appellant and, accordingly, we so direct. The said
amount shall be paid by the respondent State
within a period of six weeks and be realised from
the erring officers in equal proportions from their
salary as thought appropriate by the competent
authority of the State.
6.8.6. Jaswinder Singh and Others vs. State
of Karnataka reported in (2002) ILR
(KAR) 2213, more particularly Pars 14,
15, 16 and 18 which read as under:-
14. The close reading of the ratio laid down by the
Supreme Court in several cases indicate the
following inviolable guidelines:
(1) Handcuffing of the undertrial prisoner is not a
rule but an exception.
(2) The accused in the custody of the escort staff
who is under judicial custody is deemed to be
under such custody and authorisation of the Court
and therefore, transit of the prisoners from Jail to
Court and back should necessarily be by the order
of the Magistrate or Sessions Court. Without such
orders handcuffing by the escort officials is
impermissible.
(3) Handcuffing of    the prisoner in transit to jail to
Court and back         should be dependent upon
justifiable reasons  like his antecedents, his violent
behavior likelihood  of attempt of escape or rescue.
15. Mere fact that the alleged offence is heinous in
nature     shall    not   warrant    justification    of
handcuffing.
16. As laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court,
violent, disorderly behavior and antecedents of the
prisoner are the relevant factors, apart from the
post arrest incidents of violent and disorderly
behaviour; the antecedents, the violent conduct,
behavior or scheming actions of the accused while
committing the offence and the motive for the
crime, shall also be a requisite considerations for
justification or otherwise for handcuffing, which the
Magistrate or Sessions Court may take into
consideration while passing the orders on
handcuffing of the Undertrial Prisoners.
18. After due consideration of the ratio as culled
out above from the various decisions of the Apex
Court, coming to the case on hand, the conduct of
the escort staff in handcuffing the accused during
their transit from prison to Court and back cannot
be said to be without a judicial order. May be
during the committal stage before a Magistrate, no
such orders is passed. But however, the Sessions
Court by its earlier order dated 7.11.2000
permitted handcuffing of the accused for a limited
extent and for limited period during the transit. On
the second application of the accused the Sessions
Court rejected their request by order dated
28.1.2002 on the ground that there has been
already an earlier order on this issue and that there
are no changed circumstances to review or
reconsider the request. The present grievance
petition is not in the nature of revision or criminal
petition       invoking     inherent      jurisdiction.
Nevertheless, keeping in view the ends of justice,
this broader issue was also taken up for
consideration while hearing the petition and after
carefully going through the earlier order of the
Sessions Court, where in detail the Court has
passed a considered order on 7.11.2000. Almost an
year thereafter request is-sought to be made in the
course of the argument for a direction against the
prosecution not to handcuff the accused during
their transit from prison to Court and back. Since
there is already a concluded order and at a belated
stage, the request made does not appear to be a
tenable, besides, by giving stringent direction,
substantial progress has been made in recording of
the evidence and presently directions are issued for
conclusion of the trial by the end of March 2002.
WP No. 115362 of 2019
6.9. On the basis of the above, he submits that
there is no order permitting handcuffing of the
petitioner.   Therefore,   handcuffing   of   the
petitioner and parading him is violative of
Article 21 of the Constitution of India as also
violative of the principles and directions issued
in the aforesaid decisions and as such, the
petitioner is required to be compensated as
against illegal acts of the respondents by
awarding compensation of Rs.25 lakhs.
7. Despite several opportunities having been granted to
the respondents to file their Statement of Objections,
no objections have been filed by the respondents.
Sri.Praveen Uppar, learned HCGP would however
7.1. The petitioner had not appeared before the II
Additional Civil Judge and JMFC., Chikodi due to
which the said Court had issued non-bailable
warrant. The petitioner had abused the process
WP No. 115362 of 2019
of the Court and not even appeared before the
said Court.
7.2. The petitioner claiming to be a law student was
violating the applicable law even though the
criminal proceedings were pending against him
and it is for this reason that the petitioner was
arrested in furtherance of the execution of a
non-bailable warrant and since the petitioner
was to be taken from Ankali to Chikodi he was
handcuffed, more so since the mode of travel
was through public transport.
7.3. He further submits that the petitioner was not
paraded in Ankali town, he was taken from the
place of his arrest to the bus stand from where
the petitioner was transported to Chikodi Police
Station. The mere walking from the place of
arrest to the bus stand cannot be said to be
parading    of   the     petitioner  and   in   that
background, he submits that the decisions
WP No. 115362 of 2019
relied upon by the petitioner are not applicable
to the present case.
7.4. The police have acted in a proper and required
manner and therefore, the above Writ Petition
is required to be dismissed.
8.  On the basis of the above submissions, the points
that would arise for consideration/determination are:
1.    Whether the accused who is arrested can
be handcuffed?              If so, under what
circumstances?
2.    If there is any violation by the Arresting
Officer, would accused be eligible for
compensation?
3.    On what basis, is the compensation
required to be determined and paid?
9.  I answer the above questions as under: -
10. Answer to Point No.1: Whether the accused
who is arrested can be handcuffed?                  If so,
under what circumstances?
10.1. Section 46 of the Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973    (for  short,     ‘Cr.P.C.’) deals  with  the
WP No. 115362 of 2019
manner of making an arrest and the same
reads as under:-
46. Arrest how made. (1) In making an arrest the
police officer or other person making the same shall
actually touch or confine the body of the person to be
arrested, unless there be a submission to the custody by
word or action.
[Provided that where a woman is to be arrested, unless
the circumstances indicate to the contrary, here
submission to custody on an oral intimation of arrest
shall be presumed and, unless the circumstances
otherwise require or uncles the police officer is a female,
the police officer shall not touch the person of the
woman for making her arrest].
(2) If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to
arrest him, or attempts to evade the arrest, such police
officer or other person may use all means necessary to
effect the arrest.
(3) Nothing in this section gives a right to cause the
death of a person who is not accused of an offence
punishable with death or with imprisonment for life.
[(4) Save in exceptional circumstances, no woman shall
be arrested after sunset and before sunrise, and where
such exceptional circumstances exist, the woman police
officer shall, by making a written report, obtain the prior
permission of the Judicial Magistrate of the first class
within whose local jurisdiction the offence is committed
or the arrest is to be made].
10.2. A perusal of the above provision would indicate
that a person can be arrested by touching or
confining the body of the person to be arrested,
unless, there is a submission to the custody by
WP No. 115362 of 2019
word or action.        It is only when there is a
resistance to the arrest or evasion of arrest that
the Police Officer may use all means necessary
to effect the arrest.
10.3. Section 49 of Cr.P.C. reads as under:-
49. No unnecessary restraint. The person arrested
shall not be subjected to more restraint than is
necessary to prevent his escape.
10.4. A reading of the above provision would indicate
that a person arrested shall not be subjected to
more restraint than is necessary to prevent his
escape. Therefore, it is the requirement of law
that the restraint has to be reasonable and only
to the extent that the person does not escape
from custody.
10.5. Section 220 of the Indian Penal Code (for short,
‘IPC’) reads as under:-
220. Commitment for trial or confinement by
person having authority who knows that he is
acting contrary to law.—Whoever, being in any office
which gives him legal authority to commit persons for
trial or to confinement, or to keep persons in
WP No. 115362 of 2019
confinement, corruptly or maliciously commits any
person for trial or to confinement, or keeps any person
in confinement, in the exercise of that authority knowing
that in so doing he is acting contrary to law, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, or with fine, or
with both.
10.6. A reading of the above provision would indicate
that if a person who has legal authority to
confine a person, confines such a person
contrary to law, he shall be punishable with
imprisonment, which may extend to seven
years or with fine or with both.
10.7. Sections 831, 832, 833, 834 and 835 of the
Karnataka Police Manual reads as under:-
831: The use of handcuffs not only causes
humiliation to the prisoner but also destroys his self-
respect and is contrary to the modern notions in the
treatment of offenders. Prisoners should not
normally be handcuffed, unless he is violent or
disorderly or circumstances necessitate such
handcuffing. No person arrested by a police Officer
or remanded to custody by a Magistrate on a charge
of having committed a bailable offence, shall be
handcuffed unless for some special reasons it is
believed that he is likely to escape. The following
instructions are issued in this behalf:—
(1) A prisoner should not normally be handcuffed unless
he is violent or disorderly, or circumstances
necessitate such handcuffing.
WP No. 115362 of 2019
(2) Fetters should not be imposed on any prisoners
admitted in a hospital except with the approval of the
Medical Officer and in no case prisoners who are aged
and bed-ridden in hospital should be handcuffed or
fettered.
(3) In no case handcuffs or getters should be imposed on
women prisoners, juvenile prisoners or civil prisoners.
(4) No person arrested by a Police Officer or remanded to
custody by a Magistrate, on a charge of having
committed a bailable offence shall be handcuffed
unless for some special reasons it is believed that he
is likely to escape.
(5) When an accused is in Court during the trial he
must be held to be in the custody of the Court. If
the accused is so dangerous that it is necessary
to handcuff him, a representation should be
made to the Court and the Court will issue
proper instructions in the matter. Accused
persons while in Courts during trial should not be
handcuffed except with the permission of Court.
6) Under trial prisoners while being escorted to and from
Courts, shall not be handcuffed and chained unless
there is a reasonable expectation either from the
heinous nature of the crimes with which they are
charged or for their character or behavior that such
persons will use violence or will attempt to escape or
that an attempt will be made to rescue them. The
same principle will be applied to convicts proceeding
in public places in police custody. The decision as to
whether handcuffs and chains should be used or not
will ordinarily lie with the Station House Officer or in
his absence, with the officer next below him in
seniority. As far as possible, the police escort shall in
each case be sufficiently strong to prevent such
persons from escaping or giving undue trouble.
(7)   Whenever accused, but convicted persons are
handcuffed, the facts and the reasons for it shall be
stated in the Station House Diary.
(8) Whenever it is considered necessary to handcuff
accused, but unconvicted prisoners confined in a sub-
jail when taken out in the precincts of the sub jail for
food or exercise, the order of the Superintendent of
WP No. 115362 of 2019
the sub-jail should be obtained in the prescribed
register kept for the purpose by the Officer-in-charge
of every sub-jail guard.
(9)    In regard to refractory, violent or dangerous
prisoners, the Officer-in-charge of the sub-jail guard
or the senior Police Officer present may impose
handcuffs in cases where the orders of the
Superintendent of the sub-jail cannot be obtained in
time to avoid risk, provided the facts shall be reported
to the Superintendent at once.
Method of using Handcuffs and Chains
832: In securing a prisoner under escort, the
primary issue is that the policeman in charge should
be alert. He there be negligence in this respect, no
amount or method of tying or handcuffing will
prevent a prisoners escape.
833: If it be necessary to use handcuffs, the key-holes of
the handcuffs should be kept uppermost, as in this
position it is not easy to penthem by striking on some
hard substance. Care should also be taken that the
handcuffs are not too large; otherwise, prisoner can slip
his hand through them.
834: When there is only one prisoner, there is the simple
device of attaching the handcuffs to the prisoner's right
hand and to a Constable's left. Both the prisoner and the
Constable can walk in comfort but the prisoner cannot
escape.
835: It is sometimes advisable to handcuff a prisoner with
his arms behind his back. The prisoner can walk quite
comfortably but cannot run fast; and at the same time, he
cannot strike the handcuffs on some hard substance to
break them open. When travelling by train, a prisoner who
is handcuffed behind cannot easily escape as he finds it
difficult to fall out and then pick himself up again.
10.8. The said provisions provide for instructions for
using       handcuffs.          A    perusal     of   the    said
provisions would indicate that the prisoner
WP No. 115362 of 2019
should not be normally handcuffed, unless he is
violent    or    disorderly   or    circumstances
necessitate such handcuffing.    In the event of
an accused is handcuffed, the facts and reasons
for it is required to be recorded in the Station
10.9. The Hon’ble Apex Court in PREM SHANKAR
reported in (1980) 3 SCC 526 made it is
constitutional mandate that no prisoner shall be
handcuffed or fettered routinely or merely for
the convenience of the custodian or escort. This
was declared to be law by eminent libertarian,
Justice V.R.Krishna Iyer in the said judgment.
The Hon’ble Apex Court went on to hold that
the     only   circumstance     which    validates
incapacitation by irons is for preventing the
escape of the arrestee or the convict.     Where
an arrestee or a convict can be prevented from
WP No. 115362 of 2019
escape by increasing the security, the Hon’ble
Apex Court held that such an increase is to be a
norm    rather  than     handcuffing.    Even   the
offence   for  which     the  arrestee   has   been
charged would not be a ground for handcuffing
the arrestee, however grave the offence may
be, if the arrestee were not looking at escape
and/or were not given to violent behavior
putting the life and liberty of others at risk,
such a person could not be handcuffed. The
Hon’ble   Apex   Court     mandated    that  if  an
arrestee were required to be handcuffed, the
reasons for such handcuffing has to be recorded
in writing and when the arrestee was produced
before the Court, the Hon’ble Apex Court made
it a duty of the Court to enquire with the said
arrestee as to whether he had been handcuffed
or not.     If handcuffed, the Court shall go
through the reasons recorded and thereafter
WP No. 115362 of 2019
approve the reasons or reject the same. If the
Court were to reject the same, the Court would
have to put on notice the Arresting Officer and
others that arrestee should not henceforth be
handcuffed.
10.10. With the advent of virtual conferencing and
with   the    advent       of    video   conferencing
equipment being installed at the jail as also in
the   Court   Hall,   the     travel  of  under    trial
prisoners has now been restricted and as such,
under trial prisoners could be produced by
using     modern         technology      of     virtual
conferencing which does away with handcuffing
or restraints on the under trial prisoners.
10.11. This would however not apply to the arrest of a
person   and/or     the    first  production   of   the
accused before the committal Court. Since the
law   mandates      that     when    an   arrestee    is
produced for the very first time, it has to be so
WP No. 115362 of 2019
done    physically.     As regards  this  aspect,
Legislators or the Law Commission would have
to consider in what manner an accused is to be
produced before the Court for the first time and
what are the safeguards which are required to
be taken into consideration and imposed at that
point of time.
10.12. In the present case, we are concerned with the
arrest of a person and handcuffing of a person
at that particular point of time.    Even though
the facts in Prem Shankar Shukla’s case are
different from the present case in as much as
that case dealt with a convict being transported
from Jail to the Court and being produced
before the Court, the principles as stated
therein by the Hon’ble Apex Court would apply
to the present case. Similar is the situation as
regards the decision of the Hon’ble Apex Court
in the case of STATE OF MAHARASHTRA VS.
WP No. 115362 of 2019
RAVIKANT S.PATIL [(1991) 2 SCC 373] and
M.P.DWIVEDI        &     ORS   where  under   trial
prisoners    were   being   produced  before   the
CHHATTISGARH & ORS [(2012) 8 SCC 1] is
a case where an arrestee had been remanded
to the judicial custody, but instead of taking the
under trial prisoner to the jail, he was taken to
the police station where he was harassed and
ill-treated and photographs with placards were
taken and circulated among the general public.
Hence, that was a case which related to the
humiliation of the undertrial prisoner while in
judicial/police custody.
deals    with  a  case    where   the police  had
manhandled the petitioners in a brutal and
WP No. 115362 of 2019
barbaric manner.        However, they were not
arrested nor handcuffed.
703] is a case relating to illegal arrest and late
production of the arrestee before the Court
after 17 days as also related to undignified
treatment and humiliation faced by the arrestee
during the said period.
10.16. A perusal of the above decisions indicates that
none of the cases relied upon by Sri.Santosh
Pujari, learned counsel for the petitioner are
relating to the handcuffing of an accused. Few
of them are relating to under trial prisoners and
the others are relating to the humiliation by the
Police Officer after arrest and/or while in jail.
Thus, none of the said decisions would ex facie
apply to the present case.
10.17. The Hon’ble Bombay High Court in ANTONIO
reported in 2008(6) AIR BOM R 585 case
has observed that the arrestee was handcuffed
while effecting the recovery of pickaxe. Though
the same was refuted by the Police Officer, the
Bombay High Court came to a conclusion that
merely because the allegation is of theft of a
pickaxe, it was not necessary to arrest him,
particularly when the accused had himself
reported in the Police Station. The Bombay High
Court cautioned the police officers through the
State Government that such an arrest should
not be made at the drop of the hat.              The
Hon’ble    Bombay       High   Court    taking   into
consideration that there was an admission on
the   part  of  the     Police  Officer   about   the
handcuffing of the arrestee being of the opinion
WP No. 115362 of 2019
that such handcuffing was not required and
directed   the  State       Government      to   make
payment of compensation of Rs.10,000/-.
10.18. The Hon’ble Bombay High Court in SHRI
ORS       in     Criminal         Writ       Petition
No.4435/2012 considered the case where the
petitioner had been arrested and paraded in
public while being handcuffed.         In that case,
the petitioner while being taken from the Police
Station   to  the    Public    Health   Centre    was
handcuffed with a rope attached to the police
vehicle and was made to walk down the
distance from the police station to the Public
Health    Centre.          The   petitioner    therein
contended that the conduct of the police was
inhumane,    cruel    and     degrading    and   thus,
absolutely   there       is   no   justification   for
handcuffing and parading him as there was
WP No. 115362 of 2019
never any threat of escaping from the custody.
The Hon’ble Bombay High Court taking into
consideration    that     there  is  no  dispute  as
regards the handcuffing and/or the petitioner
being tied to the rope has only considered the
aspect of whether the same was justified or
not.    In the affidavit filed by the concerned
officer, it was stated that handcuffing was done
so as to prevent the arrestee from escaping the
police custody since he has started abusing the
police present at the police station. Hence,
Respondent No.2/police apprehending that the
petitioner might turn violent and escape from
the police custody or might cause injury to
himself and as such, the handcuffs were used
while taking him to the Public Health Centre
and these facts have been recorded in the
arrest   memo.         The   Arresting  Officer  had
however stated that there was no parade as
WP No. 115362 of 2019
such but the arrestee was walked from the
police station to the Public Health Centre. The
Bombay High Court was of the opinion that the
said justification did not answer the parameters
of law, since the handcuffing has to be done in
extreme circumstances and/or in exceptional
cases, for which, there has to be tangible
evidence,       documentary          or    otherwise
establishing the possibility of an escape which
would constitute a valid ground for handcuffing.
The Bombay High Court relied upon Prem
Shankar Shukla’s case supra, which related to
an undertrial prisoner being handcuffed for
production in a court from the police station.
The Bombay High Court referred to and relied
upon Paragraph 44 of the judgment of the
Hon’ble Apex Court in D.K.Basu’s case, which
reads as under:-
44. The claim in public law for compensation for
unconstitutional deprivation of fundamental right to
WP No. 115362 of 2019
life and liberty, the protection of which is
guaranteed under the Constitution, is a claim based
on strict liability and is in addition to the claim
available in private law for damages for tortious acts
of the public servants. Public law proceedings serve
a different purpose than the private law
proceedings. Award of compensation for established
infringement of the indefeasible rights guaranteed
under Article 21 of the Constitution is a remedy
available in public law since the purpose of public
law is not only to civilise public power but also to
assure the citizens that they live under a legal
system wherein their rights and interests shall be
protected and preserved. Grant of compensation in
proceedings under Article 32 or Article 226 of the
Constitution of India for the established violation of
the fundamental rights guaranteed under Article 21,
is an exercise of the courts under the public law
jurisdiction for penalising the wrongdoer and fixing
the liability for the public wrong on the State which
failed in the discharge of its public duty to protect
the fundamental rights of the citizen.
10.19. By relying on the same, the Hon’ble Bombay
High Court was of the opinion that there was a
strict liability principle which had to be applied
for    the     unnecessary       handcuffing     of   the
petitioner and awarded a sum of Rs.1,00,000/-
as compensation.
10.20. From the decisions, which have been referred
to by the counsels, it is seen that whether the
under-trial      prisoners    or   an  accused      being
WP No. 115362 of 2019
arrested, handcuffing should be by way of last
resort and such handcuffing should mainly be
only for the reason of whether there is a
possibility of the accused and/or under trial
prisoner escaping custody, causing harm to
himself or causing harm to others. The nature
of offences and the punishment prescribed for
the said offence are not relevant for the matter
of handcuffing.
10.21. Whenever a person is to be handcuffed, then it
shall be the duty of the Arresting Officer to
record the reasons for such handcuffing in the
case dairy which reasons ought to substantiate
the possibility of escape which needs to be
corroborated      with    suitable     evidence,
documentary or otherwise of the possibility of
such escape and/or the possibility of causing
harm to himself or others.    It is only if these
three conditions are fulfilled that an accused
WP No. 115362 of 2019
can be arrested.     Though of course there may
be certain other situations where handcuffing
could be justified whether the same is justified
or not would be determined by the Judge
before whom the said person is produced.        As
held by the Apex Court in Prem Shankar
Shukla’s case, there is a duty which is imposed
upon the said Court to make an enquiry from
the arrestee as to whether he had been
handcuffed and if the answer of the arrestee is
in the affirmative, to ascertain from the case
dairy the reasons for such handcuffing. If there
are no such reasons mentioned in the case
dairy to take action against the concerned
police  officer   and    if   there  are  reasons
mentioned to ascertain the veracity of the said
reasons    to    justify    the   requirement   of
handcuffing of the said arrestee. If the reasons
given are justifiable then, no action needs to be
WP No. 115362 of 2019
taken but if the reasons given are not justified,
then suitable action needs to be taken against
the police officers.
10.22. Hence, I answer Point No.1 by holding that
an accused who is arrested can normally
not be handcuffed.           It is only under
extreme circumstances that handcuffing of
an accused can be resorted to. When such
handcuffing is made, the Arresting Officer
is  required     to   record  the  reasons    for
handcuffing, which would have to sustain
the scrutiny of the Court.        Whenever an
accused is produced before the Court of
law, it would be required of the Court to
enquire     if    the    accused    had    been
handcuffed or not and if handcuffed, to
ascertain the reasons recorded by the
Arresting Officer on the justifiability on the
same. The reason of lack of personnel to
WP No. 115362 of 2019
secure   the   accused        has   already    been
negated by the Hon’ble Apex Court.                If
there   are   such       lack   of  personnel    as
submitted by the learned HCGP, it would
but be required for the State to fill up all
the vacant posts and even if that were not
to be sufficient, to recruit more persons so
that the duty involved above is discharged
in a proper and effective manner without
violating the rights of the person arrested.
11. Answer to point No.2: If there is any violation
by the Arresting Officer, would accused be
eligible for compensation?
11.1. The decisions relating to compensation for
police   excess     have       been    referred   to
hereinabove.   Though they may not relate to
handcuffing of an accused at the time of his
arrest but the principles would nevertheless
equally   apply.        In   D.K.Basu’s     case  at
Paragraph 44, the Hon’ble Apex Court has
WP No. 115362 of 2019
succinctly laid down the principles of law, which
has been reproduced hereinabove.
11.2. The aspect of liberty of a person whether he be
an   accused/a      convict    or  otherwise      is  of
paramount importance. Right to life and liberty
is a fundamental right under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India, which reads as under:-
21. Protection of life and personal liberty: No
person shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty
except according to procedure established by law.
11.3. In the event of any law restricting the right to
liberty, the same would have to stand the test
of the Constitution.       Section 46 of the Cr.P.C.
has afore detailed deals with how arrests have
to be made and Section 49 of Cr.P.C deals with
no unnecessary restraint of a person more than
what is required to prevent his escape. The
relevant provisions of the Karnataka Police
Manual in this regard have also been referred
to hereinabove.
11.4. The     Hon’ble  Apex    Court    in   the  case   of
REPORTED IN (1993) 2 SCC 746 has also dealt
with the aspect of public law relating to public
functionaries    when    the   public   functionaries
were to violate any fundamental right, more so
the right of personal liberty under Article 21 of
the Constitution of India. The Apex Court after
going through most of the decisions on the said
point, came to a conclusion that a claim in
public law for compensation for contravention
of human rights and fundamental freedoms, the
protection    of  which    is  guaranteed     in the
Constitution, is an acknowledged remedy for
enforcement and protection of such rights and
that such a claim would be based on strict
liability made by resorting to a constitutional
remedy, provided for the enforcement of a
fundamental right.        The relevant paragraph
WP No. 115362 of 2019
being para 17 is reproduced hereunder for easy
17. It follows that ‘a claim in public law for compensation’
for contravention of human rights and fundamental
freedoms, the protection of which is guaranteed in the
Constitution, is an acknowledged remedy for enforcement
and protection of such rights, and such a claim based on
strict liability made by resorting to a constitutional
remedy provided for the enforcement of a fundamental
right is ‘distinct from, and in addition to, the remedy in
private law for damages for the tort’ resulting from the
contravention of the fundamental right. The defence of
sovereign immunity being inapplicable, and alien to the
concept of guarantee of fundamental rights, there can be
no question of such a defence being available in the
constitutional remedy. It is this principle which justifies
award of monetary compensation for contravention of
fundamental rights guaranteed by the Constitution, when
that is the only practicable mode of redress available for
the contravention made by the State or its servants in
the purported exercise of their powers, and enforcement
of the fundamental right is claimed by resort to the
remedy in public law under the Constitution by recourse
to Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution. This is what
was indicated in Rudul Sah [(1983) 4 SCC 141 : 1983
SCC (Cri) 798 : (1983) 3 SCR 508] and is the basis of the
subsequent decisions in which compensation was
awarded under Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution,
for contravention of fundamental rights.
11.5. The Hon’ble Apex Court went on to further hold
at Para 20 as under:-
20. We respectfully concur with the view that the court is
not helpless and the wide powers given to this Court by
Article 32, which itself is a fundamental right, imposes a
constitutional obligation on this Court to forge such new
tools, which may be necessary for doing complete justice
and enforcing the fundamental rights guaranteed in the
Constitution, which enable the award of monetary
compensation in appropriate cases, where that is the only
mode of redress available. The power available to this
WP No. 115362 of 2019
Court under Article 142 is also an enabling provision in
this behalf. The contrary view would not merely render the
court powerless and the constitutional guarantee a
mirage, but may, in certain situations, be an incentive to
extinguish life, if for the extreme contravention the court
is powerless to grant any relief against the State, except
by punishment of the wrongdoer for the resulting offence,
and recovery of damages under private law, by the
ordinary process. If the guarantee that deprivation of life
and personal liberty cannot be made except in accordance
with law, is to be real, the enforcement of the right in case
of every contravention must also be possible in the
constitutional scheme, the mode of redress being that
which is appropriate in the facts of each case. This remedy
in public law has to be more readily available when
invoked by the have-nots, who are not possessed of the
wherewithal for enforcement of their rights in private law,
even though its exercise is to be tempered by judicial
restraint to avoid circumvention of private law remedies,
where more appropriate.
11.6. The majority judgment was delivered by Justice
J.S.Verma (as he then was) and the concurring
judgment        was      rendered      by   Justice     Justice
A.S.Anand (as he then was), in the concurring
judgment at Paras 34 and 35 it is held as
34. The public law proceedings serve a different purpose
than the private law proceedings. The relief of monetary
compensation, as exemplary damages, in proceedings
under Article 32 by this Court or under Article 226 by the
High Courts, for established infringement of the
indefeasible right guaranteed under Article 21 of the
Constitution is a remedy available in public law and is
based on the strict liability for contravention of the
guaranteed basic and indefeasible rights of the citizen.
The purpose of public law is not only to civilize public
power but also to assure the citizen that they live under a
legal system which aims to protect their interests and
WP No. 115362 of 2019
preserve their rights. Therefore, when the court moulds
the relief by granting “compensation” in proceedings
under Article 32 or 226 of the Constitution seeking
enforcement or protection of fundamental rights, it does
so under the public law by way of penalising the
wrongdoer and fixing the liability for the public wrong on
the State which has failed in its public duty to protect the
fundamental rights of the citizen. The payment of
compensation in such cases is not to be understood, as it
is generally understood in a civil action for damages
under the private law but in the broader sense of
providing relief by an order of making ‘monetary amends’
under the public law for the wrong done due to breach of
public duty, of not protecting the fundamental rights of
the citizen. The compensation is in the nature of
‘exemplary damages’ awarded against the wrongdoer for
the breach of its public law duty and is independent of
the rights available to the aggrieved party to claim
compensation under the private law in an action based on
tort, through a suit instituted in a court of competent
jurisdiction or/and prosecute the offender under the
penal law.
35. This Court and the High Courts, being the protectors
of the civil liberties of the citizen, have not only the
power and jurisdiction but also an obligation to grant
relief in exercise of its jurisdiction under Articles 32 and
226 of the Constitution to the victim or the heir of the
victim whose fundamental rights under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India are established to have been
flagrantly infringed by calling upon the State to repair the
damage done by its officers to the fundamental rights of
the citizen, notwithstanding the right of the citizen to the
remedy by way of a civil suit or criminal proceedings. The
State, of course has the right to be indemnified by and
take such action as may be available to it against the
wrongdoer in accordance with law — through appropriate
proceedings. Of course, relief in exercise of the power
under Article 32 or 226 would be granted only once it is
established that there has been an infringement of the
fundamental rights of the citizen and no other form of
appropriate redressal by the court in the facts and
circumstances of the case, is possible. The decisions of
this Court in the line of cases starting with Rudul Sah v.
State of Bihar [(1983) 4 SCC 141 : 1983 SCC (Cri) 798 :
(1983) 3 SCR 508] granted monetary relief to the victims
for deprivation of their fundamental rights in proceedings
through petitions filed under Article 32 or 226 of the
Constitution of India, notwithstanding the rights available
under the civil law to the aggrieved party where the
WP No. 115362 of 2019
courts found that grant of such relief was warranted. It is
a sound policy to punish the wrongdoer and it is in that
spirit that the courts have moulded the relief by granting
compensation to the victims in exercise of their writ
jurisdiction. In doing so the courts take into account not
only the interest of the applicant and the respondent but
also the interests of the public as a whole with a view to
ensure that public bodies or officials do not act unlawfully
and do perform their public duties properly particularly
where the fundamental right of a citizen under Article 21
is concerned. Law is in the process of development and
the process necessitates developing separate public law
procedures as also public law principles. It may be
necessary to identify the situations to which separate
proceedings and principles apply and the courts have to
act firmly but with certain amount of circumspection and
self-restraint, lest proceedings under Article 32 or 226
are misused as a disguised substitute for civil action in
private law. Some of those situations have been
identified by this Court in the cases referred to by Brother
11.7. In view of the above, I am of the considered
opinion that the respondent-State would have
to make payment of compensation to try and
make good the loss caused to the petitioner.
11.8. The measure of damage would have to be on
the basis of any evidence and documents
produced by the petitioner.               Hence, I answer
Point No.2 by holding that if there is a violation
by the Arresting officer in putting handcuffs on
WP No. 115362 of 2019
the petitioner, the petitioner would be eligible
for compensation.
12. Answer to Point No.3: On what basis, is the
compensation required to be determined and
12.1. Compensation which is required to be paid as
aforesaid being a Public Law Remedy, there
cannot be a straitjacket formula which could
determine the amount of compensation that
has to be paid.         Be that as it may.     The
compensation which is required to be paid is by
applying the principles of strict liability. While
awarding compensation, the Court would have
to take into consideration the loss/damage that
might have been caused to the person who has
been handcuffed to recompensate him/her for
such damage.       Apart there from, the Court
would also have to consider the imposition of
compensation as a deterrent to the Police
Officers who do not discharge their duties in a
WP No. 115362 of 2019
proper manner and/or violate the applicable
law.    The imposition of compensation should
also be such that the concerned Police Officers
should follow the applicable law in both letter
and spirit and are put on notice that non-
following of the applicable law could result in
they being liable to make payment of monetary
compensation to the arrestee.      Though the
State could be required to make payment of
compensation, the compensation being paid on
account of an officer of the State like a Police
Officer not following the applicable law, the
State would be at liberty to recover the same
from the concerned defaulter/defaulters.
13.  Answer to Point No.4: What Order:
13.1. It is in the above background that this Court
would have to ascertain if the petitioner has
been handcuffed and if handcuffed, whether the
WP No. 115362 of 2019
same has been justified or not.        As observed
above, there is no objections filed by the State
nor any affidavit filed by the Arresting Officer as
regards the allegations made by the petitioner.
Thus, there is no defence as such which has
been put forth by the respondents in the
present matter.
13.2. The petitioner has produced a compact disc
stated  to   be    a     recording of  the   arrest,
handcuffing and the parading of the petitioner.
13.3. A perusal of the said compact disc indicates
that the petitioner and one police officer are
standing and waiting for the bus at the bus
stop.  During the said time, the petitioner has
been permitted to speak on his mobile phone
and another person probably a friend or relative
of the petitioner has videographed the same
and also provided water to the petitioner. The
WP No. 115362 of 2019
petitioner is seen with the handcuff on his left
hand which he had put in his left trouser
pocket. The said video does not in any manner
establish the parading of the petitioner and/or
the petitioner being handcuffed in the public
presence so as to cause any injury as such to
the reputation of the petitioner.
13.4. The video also depicts that the petitioner as a
regular normal person waiting at a bus stop. In
view of the above, there are no circumstances
which are in existence to award punitive or
exemplary    compensation      to  the   petitioner.
However, there being procedural irregularity,
inasmuch as no document has been produced
to establish as to why the petitioner was
handcuffed, this Court is only left to assume
things which is not permissible either in favour
of   the   petitioner    or  in   favour   of    the
respondents.     As afore observed, it was but
WP No. 115362 of 2019
required for the concerned police officer to
record the reasons in writing in the case dairy
as to why the petitioner was required to be
handcuffed.
13.5. In the present case, there being no justification
which has been provided by the respondents for
handcuffing the petitioner since neither any
objections are filed nor is any affidavit filed by
the Arresting Officer.
13.6. It is clear that from and on behalf of the State
there is no defence to the allegations made
against the Arresting Officer. The compact disc
which has been produced has also been dealt
with hereinabove.
13.7. Apart from the petitioner stating that the
petitioner is a student of Law and that his
reputation has got affected adversely by him
being handcuffed, there is no other statement
made or evidence produced by the petitioner to
WP No. 115362 of 2019
establish the   nature  and kind   of  damage
caused.
13.8. The petitioner has claimed a sum of Rs.25
lakhs as a compensation, I am of the
considered opinion that the said amount
cannot     be       awarded    taking     into
consideration that the petitioner was a
student and that the arrest was made in
furtherance of non bailable warrant which
had been issued; the arrest being proper;
the only question being handcuffing of the
petitioner not being required, I deem it fit
to   award    a    sum   of Rs.2    lakhs   as
compensation to the petitioner payable by
the State within a period of six weeks from
the date of receipt of a copy of this order
with liberty to the state to recover the
same from the delinquent officers.
WP No. 115362 of 2019
13.9. Hence, I pass the following:
i.   The Writ Petition is allowed.
ii.  The respondent No.1-State is directed to
pay a sum of Rs.2 lakhs as compensation
to the petitioner within a period of six
weeks from the date of receipt of copy of
this order.
iii. No person whether he be an accused,
under trial prisoner or convict shall be
handcuffed unless the reason for the same
is recorded in the case dairy and/or the
relevant record as to why such a person is
required to be handcuffed.
iv.  If any accused is produced before a Court
after arrest, it shall be the duty of the said
Court to among other things enquire as to
whether     the     said  person   had    been
WP No. 115362 of 2019
handcuffed or not. If the person were to
respond in the affirmative, the Court
would have to ascertain the reasons for
such handcuffing and to decide on the
validity or otherwise of such handcuffing.
v.  If an under trial prisoner is produced
before the Court, it shall be the duty of
the Court to enquire as to whether he was
handcuffed or not and then if the person
were to respond in the affirmative, the
Court would have to ascertain the reasons
for such handcuffing and to decide on the
validity or otherwise of such handcuffing.
vi. The trial Court shall endeavor as far as
possible to the avoid physical appearance
of the under trial prisoner and permit the
under trial prisoner to appear through
video conferencing.    Only in the event of
the Court being of the opinion that the
WP No. 115362 of 2019
physical   presence    of  the  accused   is
required in Court, then the Court could
direct for such physical presence by a
reasoned order.
vii.  As far as possible, permission to handcuff
an under-trial prisoner would have to be
taken prior to the production of the under
trial prisoner before the Court and obtain
an order for handcuffing from the said
Court. If no such permission is applied for
and    under   trial prisoner  were  to  be
handcuffed, the concerned police officer
would be taking a risk of such handcuffing
being declared illegal and action being
taken against them.
viii. The contention of the learned HCGP that
the handcuffing of the petitioner was
resorted to since there were not enough
police personnel to safeguard and prevent
WP No. 115362 of 2019
the escape if any is no excuse at all. It is
for the State to equip all police stations
with    adequate     and   necessary     police
personnel required for the purpose of
discharge of the duties and obligations of
the State.
ix. The learned HCGP pointed out that there
are several vacancies. If that be so, it is
for the State to fill up those vacancies at
the earliest. The learned HCGP is directed
to bring to the notice of the Director-
General    of    Police  and    the   Principal
Secretary Home Department           about the
above observations so as to prepare a
plan and complete the recruitment in a
time bound manner.
x.  The Director General of Police shall also
endeavor to make available body cameras
to all the police officers entitled to arrest a
WP No. 115362 of 2019
person, so that the manner of arrest is
recorded by such body cameras.            The
camera    shall    also   be  equipped   with
microphone to record the conversations
that take place at that particular point of
time.  The video recording as also audio
recording shall be retained atleast for a
period of one year from the date of
recording.       A     Standard     Operating
Procedure     shall   be   prepared  by   the
Director General of Police in this regard
and suitable training to be provided to
such officers.
xi. Though the above petition is disposed, re-
list on 7th November 2022 to report
Compliance with the above directions.