This is a classic case of highhandedness at the hands of
Assistant Passport Officer in raising objections for re-issuance of the
passport by a single parent facing a matrimonial discord directing
them to approach the court and obtain the court order. The
aforementioned fact is recorded in Ext.P6 communication dated
20.1.2022 which reads as under :
“Single parent case. Pl. process with change of name
docs and hold for F's consent in D or court order. (Child's
custody not mentioned in divorce order.”
2.       Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the
petitioner is already divorced and is a single parent and Ext.P2 copy
of the divorce had already been supplied.                  But despite that the
aforementioned noting was put by the Passport Officer.                      There is
already a form Annexure 'C' Ext.P5 enclosed with the passport form
which         had already been filled by the petitioner giving an
undertaking that the entire responsibility would be of her as there is
already an order of divorce.            But despite that the objections have
been raised.
3.       It is submitted on behalf of the ASGI that during the
pendency of the writ petition, respondents have processed the
application of the petitioner on 22.2.2022 and the passport shall be
reissued in the name of the minor child namely, Smt.Sumayya,
4.       This Court has come across similar litigation day in and
day out whereby the petitioners/applicants for re-issuance of
passport particularly          either of the parent who is facing the
matrimonial discord or there is already a separation, are compelled
to approach this Court for appropriate order, despite filling the form
Annexure ‘C’.         The officers at the helm of affairs  exercising the
powers for issuing the passport are supposed to deal with the
application in a pragmatic and reasonable manner, but should not
reject the application in the manner and mode as extracted above.
Knowing fully well that this Court would have expressed concern
with regard to the spate of litigation and may come down heavily on
the action of the respondents, in anticipation of that processed the
application of the petitioner, but for redressal of the grievance, is
impelled to shell out litigation expenses.
5.       In view of the statement made on behalf of the Passport
Officer that the application has been processed and passport shall
be issued, this Court is sanguine of the fact that the passport shall
be issued within a period of one week from today. But, it would be
subject to the cost of the litigation of Rs.25,000/- to be paid by
respondent No.3 from his own salary.
6.     This order is also directed to be circulated to all the passport
officers who have been raising such type of objections compelling
the affected parties to approach this Court for no rhyme and
reasons.        Copy of the order is directed to be handed over to the
ASGI for circulation to all the passport officers.
Writ Petition is disposed of as above.