1.      Rule. Rule made returnable forthwith. With consent of
both the sides, the petition is taken up for fnal hearing.
(903) wp 7278.2022.doc
2.      Order dated 15 December 2021 passed by the District
Judge,      Solapur    rejecting      Petitioner’s   application        for
appointment of Court Commissioner for measurement of lands
during pendency of Appeal is the subject matter of challenge in
the present Petition.
3.      Petitioner / plaintiff instituted a Regular Civil Suit No.62
of 2010 for permanent injunction as well as for recovery of
possession of encroached portion of land. During pendency of
the Suit, Petitioner/plaintiff fled an application under the
provisions of Order 26 Rule 9 of Civil Procedure Code, 1908
(“Code”)      for  appointment       of   Court    Commissioner         for
measurement of lands and fiing of boundaries. The Trial
Court was pleased to allow the application vide its order dated
1 August 2011 and Taluka Inspector of Land Record (“TILR”)
came to be appointed as the Court Commissioner for
conducting joint measurement of lands bearing Gat Nos.
137/3/A, 137/3/B, 137/2/B/1 and 122 and to indicate the
boundaries of lands in possession of the respective parties.
TILR conducted measurement of lands and fled his report
along with a copy of map. He was eiamined as a witness in the
Trial Court. The report of the TILR was prima facie in favour of
(903) wp 7278.2022.doc
Plaintiff / Petitioner. However, during the course of arguments
in the Suit, the validity of report of the TILR was questioned
raising various technical objections and also about the manner
in which the measurements were conducted. The Trial Court
therefore proceeded to dismiss the Suit vide its judgment and
order dated 24 July 2018. Plaintiff / Petitioner has preferred a
Regular Civil Appeal No.189 of 2018 before the Court of
District Court, Solapur. In this Appeal, Plaintiff / Petitioner
fled an application for appointment of Court Commissioner for
re-measurement of lands on the premise that the earlier
measurements conducted were defective. The District Judge
has proceeded to reject the application by the impugned
judgment and order dated 15 December 2021.
4.      Appearing for Petitioner, Mr. Dilip Bodake the learned
counsel would submit that even though report of TILR
appointed as Court Commissioner vide order of the Trial Court
supports the case of Petitioner/plaintiff, the report has been
discarded by the Trial Court on account of objection raised by
Defendants / Respondents about the manner in which the
measurements were conducted. He apprehends that even the
District Court is likely to ignore the measurements report for
(903) wp 7278.2022.doc
the very same reason. He would submit that in such a
situation, it would be necessary to re-measure the lands so as
to present the clear picture of the site before the Trial Court.
5.      Petition is resisted by Mr. Samir Kumbhkoni, the learned
counsel       for   Respondents.      He    would   question          the
maintainability of the application fled by Petitioner / Plaintiff
before the Appellate Court for re-measurement of lands. He
would submit that the application was not fled as per the
provisions of Order 41 Rule 27 of the Code. He would question
the     correctness    of  submission    of  Petitioner     that      the
measurement report of TILR has been altogether ignored by
the Trial Court and would submit that the same is actually
taken into consideration while dismissing the Suit fled by the
Plaintiff/Petitioner. He would further submit that allowing the
application of Petitioner/Plaintiff would amount to res judicata
as the issue with regard to measurement of lands stands
concluded between the parties and cannot now be permitted to
reopened. In support of his contention, he relies upon the
judgment of the Apei Court in Satyadhyan Ghosal and Ors
Versus Smt. Deorjin Debi and anr 1.
6.      Rival contentions of the parties now fall for my
7.      Petitioner / Plaintiff has fled a Suit seeking inter alia
recovery of possession of encroached portion of land. Thus,
there is allegation about encroachment over the Suit property
by     Defendants.   Plaintiff   /   Petitioner’s application        for
appointment of Court Commissioner under the provisions of
Order 26 Rule 9 of the Code came to be allowed by the Trial
Court vide its order dated 1 August 2011. The very fact that
the application for appointment of Court Commissioner was
allowed, raises a presumption that the court needed actual
picture of the property at site and eitent of possession of lands
by the rival parties. The TILR, after carrying out the
measurements, submitted his report along with a map before
the Court and the same was proved by eiamination of TILR as
witness. However, when the Suit was argued before the Trial
Court, Defendants raised serious objections to the report of
TILR. It was contended by Defendants that the measurement
was defective as notice of measurement were not issued to the
neighbouring owners. It was also contended that it was
(903) wp 7278.2022.doc
incumbent on the part of TILR to measure the entire Gat
number which apparently was not done. It is on the basis of
these contention, Defendants urged before the Trial Court not
to take into consideration the measurement report of TILR.
The submission made on behalf of Defendants apparently
found favour of the Trial Court, which proceeded to discard the
measurement report of TILR.                In this regard, the following
fndings are recorded by the Trial Court in its judgment while
dismissing the Suit;
12. Be it as may be, the measurement of the suit land along
with the other lands is carried out by the surveyor and
accordingly he has fled the record of measurement. As mentioned
above, he has duly proved those documents including the
measurement map. It is one of the objection raised by the Ld.
Advocate for defendants Shri. S. K. Deshpande that, the
measurement is not carried out by following due procedure of law.
Perusal of the cross eiamination of PW-2 Dhondiram, it seems
that he has admitted that, he has not issued the notices to the
adjacent landholders of land block no.122 and 137. He has also
admitted that he has not issued the notices prior to measurement
to the all landholders of land block no.137. In fact, it is to be noted
that the measurement of the suit land and the lands of defendants
was directed by this court vide order below Eih.5. Therefore, it
was incumbent duty on the part of surveyor to issue the notices to
all the adjacent land holders of suit land as well as the lands of
defendants being the joint measurement. But it appears that, it is
not done. Needless to mention here that, unless such notices are
issued; the dispute of the encroachment can not be ended. It is
well settled that, the land of which measurement is being carried
out, the persons who are having adjacent lands should be heard or
should be given opportunity of being heard while carrying out the
measurement. In the failure to do the same, it will cause heavy
injustice to such persons. At the same time such measurement
can not be considered to be carried out by following due procedure.
13. The another objection raised by the Ld. Advocate by
defendants is that, the encroachment over the suit land can not be
determined unless there is measurement of the entire land block
no.137 and fiation of boundaries of the divided block numbers
(903) wp 7278.2022.doc
therein. Admittedly, the suit land and the land of defendant nos.1
to 3 are the part and parcel of original land block no.137. Certifed
copies of 7 i 12 eitracts at Eihs.8 to 11 show that, though specifc
block number is given to those lands. Admittedly, there is no
measurement of those block numbers after its division. PW-2
Dhondoram has admitted during his cross eiamination that, he
has carried out the measurement on the basis of map of block
no.137. He has carried out the said measurement without Falni
Map, Tipan and Gunakar Book. He has also admitted that, the
measurement of the divided block numbers out of block no.137 is
not carried out up till today and no such boundaries are fied as
per the division of the block numbers. He has also admitted that,
no such map of divided block numbers showing boundaries of
those sub-blocks is available in their offce. He has specifcally
further admitted that, unless the boundary of divided block
numbers is fied, encroachment can not be determined. He has
further admitted that, such boundaries are not fied in respect of
land block no.137 after its division. All these admissions clearly
go to show that, even if he has carried out the joint measurement
of suit land and the lands of defendant nos.1 to 3, it can not be
accepted for the simple reason that, such measurement can not be
accepted for want of the map of measurement after division of
land block no.137. In fact the plaintiff ought to have frstly applied
for the fiation of boundaries of the divided block number out of
block no.137.
14.    The surveyor i.e. PW-2 Dhondiram has got proved the
measurement map at Eih.78. He has not given any eiplanation
as to how he determined the location of the suit land. In fact at the
cost of repetition it be noted that, there is no fiation of boundaries
by the Government upon division of land block no.137. The
question naturally would arise as to how the surveyor decided the
length and width of the suit land. What was the base for doing so.
Unless there is map in the offce of land record or unless there is
agreed map between the parties, such measurement or fiation of
location cannot be accepted. Pertinent to note that admittedly the
plaintiff has not added all the land holders out of block no.137.
Therefore, it such measurement is accepted which has fied the
location of suit land including length and width, it will result in
injustice to those persons who are having the land in block no.137
and who are not added in the present suit. The principle of audi-
alteram will not be followed.
15.    Perusal of the measurement map at Eih.78, it is clear
that the surveyor has shown that, the land admeasuring 8 R is in
the possession of the owner of land block no.137 which is in-fact
owned by the owner of land block no.137/2/B/1. This is vague
description. Why because admittedly no such land block no.137 is
in eiistence as it is divided into such block numbers. Therefore,
for this reason also the credibility of said measurement becomes
suspicious.
16.    It is one of the objection on the part of defendants
that, road passes through the suit land. The map at Eih.78 shown
(903) wp 7278.2022.doc
that, no such road has been shown in the same. During his cross
eiamination, he has admitted that such road passes through the
suit land. However, he has admitted that, the area being used for
the said road is not mentioned in the said map. He has also
admitted that the said area being used for the road is not eicluded
in the record of the said block number. He has also not enquired to
the plaintiff in that regard. This is also one of the circumstance
which will certainly create doubt about the due measurement.
8.       I therefore do not agree with the submission of Mr.
Kumbhkoni that the Trial Court has taken into consideration
the fndings recorded by the TILR in its measurement report.
The above fndings of the trial court on contrary indicate that
the report is ignored by the Trial Court questioning its
9.       In the above circumstance, after dismissal of the Suit,
Plaintiff / Petitioner has fled application for re-measurement
of land before the Appellate Court.                 Mr. Kumbhkoni would
question maintainability of such an application which falls
beyond the purview of provisions of Order 41 Rule 27 of the
Code. The provision is reproduced below;
“27. Production of additional evidence in Appellate Court – (1)
The parties to an appeal shall not be entitled to produce additional
evidence, whether oral or documentary, in the Appellate Court. But
(a) the Court from whose decree to appeal is preferred has
refused to admit evidence which ought to have been admitted, or
[(aa) the party seeking to produce additional evidence,
establishes that notwithstanding the eiercise of due diligence, such
evidence was not within his knowledge or could not, after the
eiercise of due diligence, be produced by him at the time when the
(903) wp 7278.2022.doc
(b) the Appellate Court requires any document to be produced
or any witness to be eiamined to enable it to pronounce judgment, or
for any other substantial cause,
the Appellate Court may allow such evidence or document to be
produced, or witness to be eiamined.
(2) Whenever additional evidence is allowed to be produced by
an Appellate Court, the Court shall record the reason for its
admission.”
Thus, under the provisions of Order 41 Rule 27, the Appellate
Court is empowered to permit the parties to adduce additional
evidence if considered necessary.             The Appellate Court can
even direct the eiamination of witnesses.                 True it is that
Plaintiff / Petitioner has failed to refer to the provisions of
Order 41 Rule 27 of the Code in its application for appointment
of Court Commissioner for re-measurement of land. That alone
however cannot not take the application out of ambit of
provisions of Order 41 Rule 27. In my view even though the
provision is not mentioned in the application, the application
fled by Petitioner / Plaintiff would come within the ambit of
the provisions of Order 41 Rule 27. Therefore the submission
of Mr. Kumbhkoni in this regard deserves to be rejected.
10.      The Appellate Court now faces unique situation where
the Trial Court felt it necessary to have the actual picture of
the site before it for the purpose of determining the issue as to
whether there is encroachment on land or not. After recording
a fnding to that effect, the TILR was appointed as Court
Commissioner. TILR unfortunately did not follow the proper
procedure at the time of conducting measurements. This has
led to rejection of report of TILR. The question is whether
Petitioner / Plaintiff can be made to suffer if TILR has
(903) wp 7278.2022.doc
committed mistake while carrying out the measurement of
land. The answer to this question would obviously be in the
negative. True it is that Plaintiff / Petitioner can urge before
the Appellate Court that the TILR followed all procedures at
the time of conducting measurements. However such an
eiercise would involve a risk of the appellate court not
accepting the contention of Plaintiff/Petitioner and the same
resulting in dismissal of Appeal.               The situation that eiists
before the Appellate Court is that the measurement report of
TILR has been rejected. If the Appellate Court agrees with the
fnding of the Trial Court about non acceptance of report of
TILR, it would have nothing before it to assess as to whether
there is indeed any encroachment at the site. In these
circumstances, I am of the view, it would be appropriate the
Appellate       Court      directs     re-measurement          of    land       by
appointment of Court Commissioner. Such an eiercise can be
undertaken by eiercising power of the Appellate Court vested
under the provisions of Order 41 Rule 27 of the Code.
11.      This leaves objection of res-judicata raised by Mr.
Kumbhkoni. He has placed reliance on judgment of Apei Court
in Satyadhyan Ghosal (supra) in which it has held as under;
“7. The principle of res judicata is based on the need of giving a
fnality to judicial decisions. What it says is that once a respondent is
judicata, it shall not be adjudged again. Primarily it applies as
between past litigation and future litigation. When a matter-whether
on a question of fact or on a question of law-has been decided between
two parties in one suit or proceeding and the decision is fnal, either
because no appeal was taken to a higher court or because the appeal
was dismissed, or no appeal lies, neither party will be allowed in a
future suit or proceeding between the same parties to canvass the
matter again. This principle of res judicata is embodied in relation to
(903) wp 7278.2022.doc
suits in S. 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure; but even where S. 11
does not apply, the principle of res judicata has been applied by
courts for the purpose of achieving fnality in litigation. The result of
this is that the original court as well as any higher court must in any
future litigation proceed on the basis that the previous decision was
correct.
8.    The principle of res judicata applies also as between two
stages in the same litigation to this eitent that a court, whether the
trial court or a higher court having at an earlier stage decided a
matter in one way will not allow the parties to re-agitate the matter
again at a subsequent stage of the same proceedings. Does this
however mean that because at an earlier stage of the litigation a
court has decided an interlocutory matter in one way and no appeal
has been taken therefrom or no appeal did lie, a higher court cannot
at a later stage of the same litigation consider the matter again ?”
12.     The principles enunciated by the Apei Court on the issue
of res judicata undoubtedly is based on need of giving fnality to
the judicial decisions. However, the above observations of the
Supreme Court would have no application to the facts and
circumstances of the present case. There is no fnality to the
decision of the Trial Court yet as the appeal against its
judgment is still pending before the Appellate Court. In cases
where Court Commissioner fails to present before the court
correct picture prevaliling at the site, the trial court itself is
enpowered to appoint another court commissioner and there is
no question of attracting the principle of res judicata. Mr.
Bodke has relied on judgment of this Court in Vachhalabai w/o.
Kundlik Gavane and ors. Vs. Chinkaji s/o. Malhari Jadhav &
ors. 2 wherein it is held that if there are two conficting reports
of TILR, the Court has power to direct fresh joint measurement
under the provisions of Order 26 Rule 9 of the Code. The
objection of res judicata raised by Mr. Kumbhkoni therefore
deserves to be rejected.
13.     Accordingly, the present Petition succeeds. The order
passed by the District Court dated 15th December 2021 is set
aside and appellant’s application at Eihibit 18 stands allowed
in terms of prayers made therein.
14.     Writ Petition is accordingly allowed. Rule is made