1.     Petitioner who studied at Respondent No. 1 – Bal Bhavan
International School, Dwarka [hereinafter “the School”] and was an
exemplary student, appointed as ‘Head Boy’ in 2019-20 and ‘Sports
Captain’ in 2018-19 was unsuccessful in securing admission in colleges at
Respondent No. 3 – University of Delhi [hereinafter “DU”], a failure he
attributes to improper or lack of career guidance by the School. His
accusation is that when he opted for Mass Media Studies and Physical
Education in Class XI and XII, he was not cautioned that these subjects are
not considered as “Main” subjects by DU and are instead treated as
“Elective” attracting penalty of 2.5% deduction of marks from aggregate
marks for the purpose of selection in colleges of DU. Petitioner also seeks
intervention of statutory authorities such as Respondent No. 2 – Central
Board of Secondary Education [“CBSE”] and Respondent No. 4 –
Government of NCT of Delhi [“GNCTD”], to ensure proper dispensation of
information and guidance to students at the time of subject selection in Class
XI and XII and seeks following prayers: -
“a)   Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus directing the
Respondent Nos.2 - Central Board of Secondary Education to take action
against Respondent No. l - Bal Bhavan International School, including but
not limited to the cancellation of its affiliation/ accreditation;
b)    Issue a writ, order or direction against Respondent No. I – Bal Bhavan
International School to adequately compensate Mr. Kawal and other
students for the prejudice caused to them on account of its acts /omissions.
c)    Issue a writ, order or direction against Respondent No.3 - University of
Delhi directing it to clarify its stand in respect of treatment of subjects for
the purpose of admission and to favourably consider the application of the
Petitioner in light of the facts and circumstances of the present case.”
2.      In the opinion of the Court, prayer (a) against Respondent No. 2 –
CBSE to cancel affiliation/ accreditation of the School, lacks foundation and
is untenable. Improper career counselling to some students cannot be a
ground for de-affiliation/ de-accreditation, in absence of any statutory
provision that provides for such a penalty. Similarly, prayer (b) for grant of
compensation can also not be entertained considering highly disputed facts
that have emerged from the pleadings. The School has asserted that
guidelines issued by CBSE are diligently followed and students in Class XI
are free to opt any subjects prescribed by CBSE. They explain that Petitioner
opted for the subjects voluntarily and in consultation with his parents. All of
the subjects taught/ available in the School, are recognised by CBSE and
there is no basis for the School to consider some subjects more favourable
than others. The School does not dissuade students from opting any subject.
In light of the above, there is no basis for the Court to hold that the choice
exercised by Petitioner was not voluntarily or was exercised under
persuasion. There is also no reason for the Court to hold that the School
should have disapproved or opposed the option because of its likely impact
in admission prospects to DU. Petitioner's contention is farfetched and
exhibits a very orthodox approach towards education centred around scoring
marks. The School, on the other hand, would have a different approach of
holistic development of students and would encourage them to select
subjects based on their aptitude. Scoring of marks cannot therefore, be the
sole criteria for selecting a subject. Prayer (b) is also rejected. As regards
prayer (c), Petitioner applied to DU in the year-2020 and since then,
2022”] has been introduced this year for admission to graduate applications
under Common Seat Allocation System-2022 based on CUET (UG)-2022
scores. The prayer is thus, infructuous keeping in mind the current
admission process of DU. Moreover, the Court has no reason to direct DU to
dilute its standards for admission, as fixing the eligibility criteria is a policy-
decision and lies within the exclusive domain of the University. No
foundation or legal right has been demonstrated before this Court to issue
any directions to DU qua admission procedure followed by them for intake
of students under the erstwhile admission regime. At this juncture, it must
also be noted that Petitioner has been able to secure admission in some other
college and he is continuing his education there.
3.      In light of the fore-going, the Court does not find merit in the present
petition.
4.      Before parting, it must be emphasised that career guidance to students
in Class XI and XII is crucial. It is indeed essential that students are
counselled in this decision-making process. Respondent authorities, who
supervise education imparted to students, must step-in to ensure that there is
appropriate system of counselling in schools, career guidance programmes/
career fairs, to assist students. If students are made aware of admission
policies of different universities, it could only help them in making an
informed decision regarding their subject choices. Mr. Unmukt Gera,
counsel for GNCTD, states that such systems must be in place, although he
is unable to readily cite the same. Accordingly, the present petition is
disposed of with a direction to GNCTD/ DoE to examine this issue in
consultation with experts in the field and in case, any lacunae is required to
be filled-in, they may do so by issuing appropriate directions to schools.
5.      Disposed of.
(Corrected and released on: 29th November, 2022)