Kranti L.C. i/b Kaustubh Gidh and Dipika Shani for the Petitioner.
Mrs. A. S. Purav, AGP for the Respondent-State.
1.               It is disheartening situation for us when we the fortunates
are eagerly awaiting as the festive season is approaching and the festival
of lights would spread joy and happiness in the society throughout the
State or the whole nation, here are the few petitioners who are the
members of the marginalised section in general and tribals in particular
who have approached this Court on a grievance that they are deprived of
the basic requirement of human life, i.e., food, only on account that the
State machinery is not technically equipped to give them the benefits
flowing from the scheme formulated and floated by the Union of India
and to be implemented and executed by the respective States. The
reason, as we have stated, for deprival of distribution of foodgrain to
these petitioners is that their Aadhaar Card is not linked with the system
and secondly in view of the Government circular dated 13 th October 2016
wp-7174/21.
for receiving the benefits of public distribution system, it is a
prerequisite that Aadhaar card of each member of the family who is
enlisted in the ration card must have been linked in the RCMS system /
2.               The Petitioners are the residents of the tribal area of
Thane district, namely taluka Murbad. It would be necessary for us to
refer to certain facts such as that the Union of India formulated the
scheme, namely, the National Food Security Act, 2013 with a laudable
object as it is stated in the Act to provide for food and nutritional
security in human life cycle approach, by ensuring access to adequate
quantity of quality food at affordable prices to people to live a life with
dignity and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
Section 3 of the said Act deals with the provisions for food security. It
would be necessary to refer to certain provisions of this section and it
“3(1) Right to receive foodgrains at subsidised prices by persons
belonging to eligible households under Targeted Public
(1) Every person belonging to priority households, identified under
sub-section (1) of section 10, shall be entitled to receive five
kilograms of foodgrains per person per month at subsidised prices
specified in Schedule I from the State Government under the
wp-7174/21.
Provided that the households covered under Antyodaya Anna Yojana
shall, to such extent as may be specified by the Central Government
for each State in the said scheme, be entitled to thirty-five kilograms
of foodgrains per household per month at the prices specified in
Provided further that if annual allocation of foodgrains to any State
under the Act is less than the average annual off take of foodgrains
for last three years under normal Targeted Public Distribution
System, the same shall be protected at prices as may be determined
by the Central Government and the State shall be allocated
foodgrains as specified in Schedule IV.
Explanation.—For the purpose of this section, the "Antyodaya Anna"
Yojana means, the scheme by the said name launched by the Central
Government on the 25th day of December, 2000; and as modified
from time to time.
(2) The entitlements of the persons belonging to the eligible
households referred to in sub-section (1) at subsidised prices shall
extend up to seventy-five per cent. of the rural population and up to
fifty per cent. of the urban population.
(3) Subject to sub-section (1), the State Government may provide to
the persons belonging to eligible households, wheat flour in lieu of
the entitled quantity of foodgrains in accordance with such
guidelines as may be specified by the Central Government.”
3.                                                                        Now, on the basis of the said Act, the State of Maharashtra
issued Government Resolution dated 13 th October 2016 under the
caption “Furnishing of District-wise Updated Target And Action to be
taken therefor under the National Food Security Act, 2013”. The decision
wp-7174/21.
4.                    Now, these particular requirements in the GR dated 13th
October 2016 are clearly in contrast and stark opposition to the
notification issued by the Central Government dated 8 th February 2017.
This notification clearly states that for identification of the beneficiary,
Aadhaar Card is one of the criteria and the perusal of notification shows
that for identifying the beneficiary the Aadhaar card is not the sole
criteria. There is another document on which the beneficiary can rely
upon to receive the benefits of the scheme and that is “ration card”
issued by the State of Union Territory Administration, Food Department.
5.                    Clause (5) of the notification further makes it very clear
that notwithstanding anything in above paragraphs, any member of
eligible household listed in the Ration Card shall be entitled to receive
the entire quantity of entitled subsidised food grains or Cash Transfer of
Food Subsidy under NFSA, if any one member of the household in the
Ration Card fulfils the identification conditions mentioned in above
clauses, in case Aadhaar number is not yet assigned to all such members
of the household.
6.                    It would be useful for our purpose to refer to relevant and
wp-7174/21.
very important observations of the Hon’ble the Apex Court in the matter
of K. S. Puttaswamy v/s. Union of India (2019) 1 SCC 1 popularly known as
“Aadhaar Card Judgment”. The apex Court in this judgment observed
that dignity is an integral element of natural law and an inalienable
constitutional construct.    To lead a dignified life is a constitutional
assurance to an individual. Even the scheme floated under the National
Food Security Act aims at an object to provide the foodgrain to the
weaker section of the society in conformity with the object which we
have already stated and referred to.
.              It would be again useful for us to refer to the further
observations of the Hon’ble Apex Court and it reads those “the
experience of living with chronic hunger; recurring uncertainty about the
availability of food; debt bondage; low and highly underpaid work; self-
denial; and sacrifice of other survival needs, being discriminated against
are instances of the loss of dignity for the marginalised.”      The Apex
Court also observed that the beneficial schemes are not charity or doles.
The Apex Court further observed in clear and unambiguous words that
technology shall not be a rider for implementation of the scheme and
reads thus “Our quest for technology should be oblivious to the country’s
real problems; social exclusion, impoverishment and marginalisation.
The Aadhar project suffers from crucial design flaws which impact upon
wp-7174/21.
its structural probity.        Structural design in delivering welfare
entitlements must be compliant with structural due process, to be in
accord with Articles 14 and 21.”
.              Then it is further observed by the Hon’ble the Apex Court
that the deployment of technology must factor in the available of
technological resources in every part of the design of the coverage area
and the prevailing levels of literacy and awareness. Above all, the design
of the project will be compliant with structural due process only if it is
responsive to deficiencies, accountable to the beneficiaries and places
the burden of ensuring that the benefits reach the marginalised on the
State and its agencies.
7.             On the backdrop of the scheme under the Food Security
Act, its object, the judgment of the Hon’ble Apex Court if we peruse the
communication dated 17th September 2021 whereby it was informed that
the Petitioner – Ganpat, who is at serial no.1, would not be entitled to
receive foodgrains. Though Ganpat is having Aadhaar as well as ration
card, as the Aadhaar card is not linked with the portal or system.
The copy of ration card wherein the name of Petitioner No.
2 Prakash is mentioned is placed on record at page no.149 and the name
of Petitioner No.2 finds place in communication dated 11 th October 2021,
wp-7174/21.
placed on record at Exhibit-R1 page-160 at serial no.1. By communication
dated 11th October 2021, the similar ground is assigned for non
distribution of the foodgrain, i.e., Aadhaar Card not being linked with the
portal. The Petitioners have approached the authority, particularly the
Tahsildar and Executive Magistrate of Murbad through an Association ,
namely, Shramik Mukti Sanghtana raising the grievance of not receiving
the foodgrains and the President of said association informed vide the
communication dated 17th September 2021 Exhibit Q-1 page no.150 that
availing the benefits under the public distribution system, the linking of
Aadhaar with portal of each member enlisted in the ration card is a
prerequisite and then it is informed that the names of the members who
have approach to Tahsildar through the organisation, their Aadhaar cards
are not linked up in RCMS system, as such the authorities are unable to
distribute the foodgrain to them.
8.             It would not be out of place to state that there are as many
as 85 persons who have approached the Tahsildar, Murbad raising the
grievance of non receiving the foodgrains under the public distribution
system and the list of those persons is placed on record at page no.151,
duly signed by the Tahsildar, Murbad.
9.             Our attention was invited to the various representations
wp-7174/21.
submitted to the district authorities requesting them to distribute the
foodgrains under the public distribution system taking recourse to the
national food security act. We may refer to one of such representation
dated 20th August 2021, which is placed at page no. 170. It clearly states
that these are the tribal persons. They are the beneficiaries of scheme
framed by the central government and the state government and they
are expecting the regular distribution of foodgrains to them and
particularly for the festival season.
10.            Assuming the importance of issue, we requested the
learned AGP to seek instructions and make statement before us.
Learned AGP, on instructions, submitted that the reason for non
distribution of foodgrains to some persons is that their Aadhaar card is
linked to a different place than the residence of these persons. Now, the
practice being followed for linking of Aaadhar card is the ration-card
holder goes to the ration-shop and requests the shop-owner to link his
ration card or aadhaar card in the system.        Taking the case of the
Petitioners and alike, these are the tribal persons and majority of these
persons are not literate as such they rely on the action taken by the
respective ration shop owner and in such case if a mistake is committed
by shop owner, the same cannot be the reason for denial of food grains
to the ration card holder under the benevolent schemes.
wp-7174/21.
11.            At the cost of repetition, we state that the policy under the
National Food Security Act refers to the Aadhaar Card as one of the
mode for identifying the person and further the notification dated 8 th
February 2017 makes the position very clear in clause 5.
12.            It may not be out of place to mention that the same
notification dated 8th February 2017 is issued in pursuance of the
provisions of section 7 of the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and
Other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016.
13.            Though the grievance is raised by three petitioners before
this Court, it can be safely said that the persons enlisted in the list at
page no. 151 to 158 (duly signed by Tahsildar, Murbad) and the persons
enlisted in the list at page no.173 to 187 are similarly circumstanced with
the Petitioners. As we are unable to find any logic, reason or rational for
denying the benefits of distribution of foodgrains to the Petitioners and
alike persons raising certain technical ground by the Respondent
authorities, by way of interim direction we direct the Respondent nos. 1,
2 and 3 to distribute the foodgrains to the Petitioners and similarly
circumstanced persons - the tribal beneficiaries of Murbad taluka under
the public distribution scheme as well as the provisions of the National
wp-7174/21.
Food Security Act and the Pradhan Mantri Garib Kalyan Anna Yojana.
The Respondents are at liberty to verify the rationcards of the
Petitioners and the similarly circumstanced tribal persons. We further
direct Respondent Nos.1 and 2 to distribute the foodgrains to the tribal
persons before 4th November 2021 and Respondent No.3- Collector
Thane shall implement, supervise the distribution and shall assure that
the order of this Court is duly complied with within the stipulated period.
14.              All concerned to act upon an authenticated copy of this
order issued by the Registry of this Court. Learned AGP to forthwith
communicate this order to Respondent Nos. 1, 2 and 3. learned AGP may
communicate the order orally and need not wait for the authenticated
copy of the order.
15.              Stand over to 1st December 2021 for further consideration.
Learned AGP is permitted to file reply before the next date.