1.     This appeal under section 23 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 ( hereafter ‘the
C.P. Act’, for short) calls in question the order dated 21st August, 2020 passed by the
National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi, (hereafter ‘NCDRC’, for
short). By the impugned order, the NCDRC has dismissed the consumer complaint
lodged by the appellants.
2.     The multiple appellants are owners of flats in different blocks of a housing complex
at 1, Kailash Ghosh Road, Kolkata – 700008 (hereafter ‘housing complex’, for short ).
3.     Aggrieved by the failure of the respondents - the developers of the housing
complex - to provide services as promised, the jurisdiction of the NCRDC was invoked by
the appellants in 2008. They alleged that despite paying full consideration amount as per
market rate and despite execution and registration of deeds of conveyance in their favour,
the respondents had failed, inter alia, to provide the ‘Completion Certificate’, which is their
statutory obligation as per the rules of the Kolkata Municipal Corporation (hereafter ‘KMC’,
for short); and, in the absence of such a certificate, their occupation of the respective flats
has been rendered precarious. According to the appellants, the respondents also failed
to provide them common amenities and facilities viz., playground, community hall-cum-
office room, 33-feet wide concrete road, and supply of water from the KMC. It was their
further complaint that the respondents had adopted unfair trade practices by promising a
playground on a land which actually belonged to a local club as well as attracted buyers
by showing in the brochure/ advertisement a ‘beautified lake’, which never came into
existence. Also, finding that there were constructional defects, a valuer from the list of
approved valuers maintained by the Calcutta High Court had been engaged by the
appellants. The report of such valuer revealed constructional defects of the nature
delineated therein. Based on the complaint that was lodged before the NCDRC, the
appellants sought direction to the respondents to provide the completion certificate of the
project and to set right the constructional defects as pointed out by the valuer. Further,
they claimed that direction be issued for providing other facilities such as community hall,
landscape gardening, generator, multi-gymnasium, water filtration plant, and gas pipeline.
Additionally, compensation of Rs.1,80,00,000/- (Rupees one crore eighty lakh only)
together with litigation cost of Rs.50,000/- (Rupees fifty thousand only) was claimed.
4.       The complaint lodged by the appellants was contested by the respondents by filing
a written statement. Apart from objecting to the maintainability of the complaint on the
grounds that the same was time barred and that a joint complaint could not have been
lodged by 36 (thirty-six) flat owners, it was contended that the appellants have not paid
the full consideration amounts, that certain common facilities/amenities could be provided
only if all the members of the housing complex contribute for the same and that the
compensation claimed was vague and imaginary. It was also contended in the written
statement that most of the appellants had taken possession of the flats in 2006 without
raising any objection at the material time; hence, lodging of a complaint after 2 (two) years
of possession being delivered is motivated. Insofar as the issue of obtaining the
completion certificate is concerned, it was contended that the flats having already stood
transferred to the appellants by way of conveyance/sale deed(s), it was for the appellants
to apply before the KMC for obtaining such certificate. The respondents also contended
that since KMC had completed assessment of the flats of the appellants, it was not
possible for the respondents to now apply and obtain completion certificate for the flats.
5.       Considering the pleadings before it as well as upon hearing the parties, the
NCDRC returned findings that the respondents had shown a very casual approach and
were guilty of unfair trade practice as well; yet, it was observed that the appellants had
not been able to establish their claim. It also appears from the impugned order that the
NCDRC suspected that the purpose of the complaint was to pressurize the respondents
into paying some compensation and/or not insisting upon extra payment for the extra
facilities and amenities. Also, it was held that the respondents had been able to
successfully urge that the fault for not obtaining the completion certificate of the project
could not be attributed to them. In this regard, the NCDRC returned a finding that reading
of section 403 of the Kolkata Municipal Corporation Act, 1980 (hereafter ‘KMC Act’, for
short) makes it clear that it was incumbent on both the respondents as well as the
appellants to not occupy the premises in the absence of the completion certificate. As a
result thereof, a finding was further returned that both the parties had violated the law; as
such, no deficiency could be attributed to the respondents on this account. Based on
broadly these findings, the complaint of the appellants failed before the NCDRC.
6.       We have heard Mr. Sharma, learned counsel for the appellants. None appeared
before us on behalf of the respondents on the previous 2 (two) occasions the appeal was
heard and even today.
7.       We have also perused the impugned order of the NCDRC and considered the
materials on record.
8.       What has struck us first is the time taken by the NCDRC to decide the complaint
after it reserved the same for passing orders. It took the NCDRC in excess of 10 (ten)
months to dismiss the complaint. As our discussion hereafter would unfold, we are of the
clear view that the long delay in passing the order on the complaint did have its own effect
on the ultimate decision of the NCDRC.
9.       The complaint of the appellants was that the respondents have not provided
playground, community hall, beautified lake, landscape gardening, generator backup,
multi-gymnasium, etc. as mentioned in the brochure/advertisement pursuant to which
they expressed interest to purchase flats in the project and, thus, defaulted in providing
services in relation to housing construction.
10.      One entire paragraph in the order has been devoted by the NCDRC to highlight
that the project was not that huge and talk of common areas and facilities on a grand
scale was quite misplaced. An admission made by the appellants themselves in the
complaint has been referred to but we have not been able to trace any admission of the
complainants that the respondents promised not to deliver substantial common areas and
common facilities. Be that as it may, what the NCDRC omitted to bear in mind was that
the appellants were allured to purchase flats of the nature and kind together with facilities
and amenities as attractively published in the brochure/advertisement; hence, whether
the project was huge or otherwise was absolutely beside the point. It was the duty of the
NCDRC to ascertain, based on the materials on record, whether if at all and to what extent
facilities and amenities as promised were offered and/or whether there was any deficiency
of service. We have not found any categorical findings in this regard, although there are
unambiguous findings that the NCDRC disapproved the conduct of the respondents.
11.      The conduct of the respondents, the NCDRC recorded in the impugned order, was
far too casual and on the face of it, the respondents are guilty of “unfair trade practice”
within the meaning of section 2(1)(r) of the C.P. Act. After so recording, the NCDRC held
that this does little to rescue the complainants. The reason assigned therefor defies logic.
We have failed to comprehend as to what the NCDRC meant when it observed that the
appellants “ought to have known what they were purchasing”. More often than not, the
jurisdiction of the consumer fora under the C.P. Act is invoked postpurchase. If complaints
were to be spurned on the specious ground that the consumers knew what they were
purchasing, the object and purpose of the enactment would be defeated. Any deficiency
detected post-purchase opens up an avenue for the aggrieved consumer to seek relief
before the consumer fora. The reasoning of the NCDRC is, thus, indefensible. Indeed,
the appellants had purchased their respective flats on payment of consideration amounts
as per market rate and there was due execution and registration of the deeds of
conveyance preceded by agreements for sale and these instruments did indicate, inter
alia, what formed part of the common facilities/amenities; however, the matter obviously
could not have ended there. Whether the appellants had been provided what the
respondents had promised did survive for consideration, which does not get reflected in
the impugned order.
12.      NCDRC, in our opinion, might have missed to appreciate the present day realities
of life. Now-a-days, flat owners seldom purchase flats with liquid cash. Flats are
purchased on the basis of finances being advanced by banks and other financial
institutions. Once a flat is booked and the prospective flat owner enters into an agreement
for loan, instalments fall due to be paid to clear the debt irrespective of whether the flat is
ready for being delivered possession. The usual delays that are associated with
construction activities result in undue anxiety, stress, and harassment for which many a
prospective flat owner, it is common knowledge, even without the project/flat being wholly
complete is left with no other option but to take possession. Whether, upon taking
possession, a flat owner forfeits his/her right to claim such services which had been
promised but are not provided resulting in deficiency in services is a question that the
NCDRC ought to have adverted to. Once the NCDRC arrived at a finding that the
respondents were casual in their approach and had even resorted to unfair trade practice,
it was its obligation to consider the appellants’ grievance objectively and upon application
of mind and thereafter give its reasoned decision. If at all, the appellants had not forfeited
any right by registration of the sale deeds and if indeed the respondents were remiss in
providing any of the facilities/amenities as promised in the brochure/advertisement, it was
the duty of the NCDRC to set things right.
13.     That the appellants had genuine reasons to feel aggrieved was clearly documented
in the report of the valuer dated 11th July, 2008 which was even acknowledged by the
NCDRC, yet, a peculiar approach was adopted and the respondents absolved of their
obligations by an order which appears to us to be unjustified on facts and in the
14.     We have found from the impugned order that it speaks of certain facilities to be
made available by the respondents on payment of extra money. However, there is no
such clear-cut description of facilities/amenities which the respondents asserted would
be provided on payment of extra money by the appellants. NCDRC would have done well
to indicate the same with clarity.
15.     Finally, we cannot resist but comment on the perfunctory approach of the NCDRC
while dealing with the appellants’ contention that it was the duty of the respondents to
apply for and obtain the completion certificate from the KMC and that the respondents
ought to have been directed to act in accordance with law. The observation made by the
NCDRC of the respondents having successfully argued that it was not their fault, that no
completion certificate of the project could be obtained, is clearly contrary to the statutory
16.     Sub-section (2) of section 403 of the KMC Act was referred to by the NCDRC in
the impugned order. Sub-section (1) thereof, which finds no reference therein, requires
every person giving notice under section 393 or section 394 or every owner of a building
or a work to which the notice relates to send or cause to be delivered or sent to the
Municipal Commissioner a notice in writing of completion of erection of building or
execution of work within one month of such completion/erection, accompanied by a
certificate in the form specified in the rules made in this behalf as well as to give to the
Municipal Commissioner all necessary facilities for inspection of such building or work.
17.     Section 393 mandates every person, who intends to erect a building, to apply for
sanction by giving notice in writing of his intention to the Municipal Commissioner in such
form and containing such information as may be prescribed together with such documents
and plans. Similarly, section 394 also mandates every person who intends to execute any
of the works specified in clause ( b) to clause (m) of sub-section (1) of section 390 to
apply for sanction by giving notice in writing of his intention to the Municipal Commissioner
in such form and containing such information as may be prescribed.
18.     It is, therefore, evident on a conjoint reading of sections 403, 390 , and 394 of the
KMC Act that it is the obligation of the person intending to erect a building or to execute
works to apply for completion certificate in terms of the rules framed thereunder. It is no
part of the flat owner’s duty to apply for a completion certificate. When the respondents
had applied for permission/sanction to erect, the Calcutta Municipal Corporation Buildings
Rules, 1990 (hereafter ‘1990 Rules’, for short) were in force. Rule 26 of the 1990 Rules
happens to be the relevant rule. In terms of sub-rules (1) to (3) of rule 26 thereof, the
obligation as cast was required to be discharged by the respondents. Evidently, the
respondents observed the statutory provisions in the breach.
19.     Curiously enough, the NCDRC referred to sub-section (2) of section 403 of the
KMC Act only to permit the respondents to wriggle out of such obligation and arrived at a
completely erroneous finding that no deficiency in service could be attributed to the
respondents since both the respondents and the appellants had acted in violation of law.
True it is, the appellants ought not to have taken possession without the completion
certificate; however, that was not a valid ground not to direct the respondents to apply for
and obtain the completion certificate as required by law. The mere fact that the flat owners
were being assessed by the KMC affords no reason to the respondents for breaching
section 403(1) read with rule 26 of the 1990 Rules. Of course, once a completion
certificate is issued by the KMC upon conducting appropriate inspection and tests of the
building that has since been erected, it would stand to reason that the same amounts to
a certification that the building does not suffer from any violation of the building plan
sanctioned for the purpose under section 390 of the KMC Act or that its constructional
quality is not of the desired level for which it is unsafe for human habitation. We are
constrained to observe that the respondents have been let off by the NCDRC in a manner
contrary to law.
20.     For such infirmities, as noticed above, this is an appropriate case where the
complaint of the appellants ought to be remitted to the NCDRC for taking a relook into the
complaint in accordance with law. It is ordered accordingly.
21.     Since it is found that the appellants while praying for monetary compensation of
Rs.1,80,00,000.00 have failed to give detailed particulars and/or provide the basis
therefor, and undoubtedly, they have also been on the wrong side of law by taking
possession of their respective flats without the completion certificate, whatever might be
the compulsion, we are not inclined to direct the NCDRC to decide on the compensation
component. That chapter stands closed. The remand is directed only with a view to secure
adherence to the promises that the respondents had made in the brochure and/or
advertisement, as the case may be, and thereby cover up deficiency in service, if any, as
well as the mandatory statutory provisions.
22.     The appeal stands disposed of on terms as aforesaid, with no orders as to costs.
23.     Since the complaint is more than 15 (fifteen) years old, it would be desirable if the
NCDRC decides the same as early as possible and preferably within a year of service of
an authenticated copy of this order.