and 04.12.2019 passed by the learned Judge, Special Court under NDPS
Parganas (South) in NDPS Case No.36 of 2015 convicting the appellants
for commission of offence punishable under Section 22(c) read with
Section 29 of the NDPS Act and sentencing them to suffer rigorous
imprisonment for ten years and to pay a fine of Rs.1,00,000/-, in default,
to undergo rigorous imprisonment for six months more.
Crux of the prosecution case is to the effect on 07.10.2013 Sri
received information two persons from Village: Baro Nalda, Dist.: Nadia
will be coming to Sealdah station to deliver a consignment of preparation
of ‘Alprazolam’ to others. The information was reduced into writing and
submitted before the Zonal Director viz. Sri Subrata Biswas. Upon
necessary movement order being obtained, a team comprising of Sri
(PW4) and others proceeded towards Sealdah Station. They reached the
spot at 1:00 P.M. and kept surveillance. At about 01:30 P.M. the source
pointed out two suspects. The NCB team members encircled them. One
of the suspects was carrying a khaki colour backpack and the other was
accompanying him. The NCB officers disclosed their identity and
expressed their intention to search both of them. Offer was given to the
suspects who divulged their identity as the appellants that they had a
right to be searched before a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer or before a
Gazetted Officer, who is a member of the raiding party. The appellants
agreed to be searched before a Gazetted Officer, who is a member of the
raiding party. Upon search of the khaki colour backpack of appellant viz.
Ali Hossain Sk. @ Ali Hussain Seikh, a transparent polythene packet
containing some cream coloured powder was recovered. A railway ticket
from Palassey to Sealdah, cash of Rs.380/- and one black Karbon mobile
were also recovered from his possession. From the possession of the
appellant viz. Ishdan Seikh, similar train ticket, cash of Rs. 420/- and a
black Karbon mobile were also recovered. The cream coloured powder
was suspected to be a preparation of ‘Alprazolam’ and was weighed. Total
weight was found to be 232 gms. Two samples of five grams each were
taken from the suspected material. They were kept in separate envelopes
marked ‘S1’ and ‘S2’ respectively. Remaining material was kept in an
envelope marked as ‘M’. Envelopes were duly signed by the members of
the raiding party, appellants and independent witnesses. Other articles
recovered from the appellants including cash was also seized. After
search, notices were issued under Section 67 of the NDPS Act to the
appellants    and  their  statements   were    recorded.    Thereafter, the
appellants   were   arrested   and  produced    in   court.  In  course  of
investigation, samples were sent for chemical examination and report of
the chemical examiner was obtained. The said report disclosed presence
of ‘Diazepam’ and ‘Alprazolam’ in the samples. Petition of complaint was
filed against the appellants. Charge was framed under Section 22(c) read
with Section 29 of the NDPS Act. Appellants pleaded not guilty and
claimed to be tried. In course of trial, prosecution examined five
witnesses and exhibited a number of documents including chemical
examiner’s report as Exhibit-18. Defence of the appellants was one of
innocence and false implication. In conclusion of trial, learned trial
Judge by the impugned judgment and order dated 03.12.2019 and
04.12.2019 convicted and sentenced the appellants, as aforesaid.
Mr. Soumyajit Das Mahapatra, learned advocate appearing for the
appellant viz. Ali Hossain Sk. @ Ali Hussain Seikh in CRA 744 of 2019
submits search was conducted in violation of Section 50 of the NDPS
Act. Appellant viz. Ali Hossain Sk. @ Ali Hussain Seikh was not informed
of his right to be brought before a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer. On
the other hand, he was told he also had a right to be searched before a
Gazetted Officer who is a member of the raiding party. In State of
Rajasthan vs. Parmanand & Anr.1, the Apex Court held such offer is
not in consonance to Section 50 of the NDPS Act. Hence, search
conducted in violation of the mandatory requirements under Section 50
of the NDPS Act and the conviction of the appellant viz. Ali Hossain Sk.
@ Ali Hussain Seikh is liable to be set aside on such score alone.
Mr. Angshuman Chakraborty, learned advocate appearing for the
appellant viz. Ishdan Seikh in CRA 90 of 2020 while adopting the
submissions of Mr. Mahapatra further submits no recovery had been
effected from his client. Statements of the appellants recorded under
Section 67 of the NDPS Act are inadmissible in view of the law declared
in Tofan Singh vs. State of Tamil Nadu2. Mere presence of Ishdan
Seikh along with Ali Hossain Sk. @ Ali Hussain Seikh cannot give rise to
an inference that the said appellant abetted the possession of narcotic
Nobody appears for the Union of India in CRA 90 of 2020. Mr.
Sagar Saha, learned advocate appears for NCB in CRA 744 of 2019. As
both the appeals arise out of the selfsame judgment and order, he is
requested to represent NCB in the other appeal being CRA 90 of 2020.
His appointment may be regularised.
Mr. Saha submits recovery was made from a bag carried by Ali
Hossain Sk. @ Ali Hussain Seikh. No personal search was undertaken.
Appellants had voluntarily handed over their personal effects. Hence,
Section 50 of the NDPS Act does not get attracted in the facts of the case.
He further submits both the appellants were travelling together and from
the conduct of the appellant viz. Ishdan Seikh it is clear he abetted
possession of narcotic by Ali Hossain Sk. @ Ali Hussain Seikh.
Principal challenge thrown to the conviction of the appellants is
non-compliance of the statutory requirements of Section 50 of the NDPS
PW2 (Surajit Sen), PW3 (Debasish Chowdhury) and PW4 (Debasish
Bhattacharjee) are members of the raiding party. These witnesses stated
on receipt of secret information which was diarised, they had proceeded
to Sealdah Station to work out the information. Around 01.30 P.M. two
persons were identified by the source. They encircled the persons who
were the appellants. A notice was issued under Section 50 of the NDPS
Act stating the appellants had a right to be searched in presence of a
Gazetted Officer or a Magistrate or a member of the raiding party, who is
a Gazetted Officer. Notices have been exhibited as Exhibits-2 & 3. Both
the appellants expressed their desire to be searched before a Gazetted
Officer who is a member of the raiding party. The replies were exhibited
as Exhibits-4 & 5. Thereafter, appellants were searched. From the
backpack of appellant viz. Ali Hossain Sk. @ Ali Hussain Seikh, cream
coloured powder was recovered which was suspected to be a preparation
of ‘Alprazolam’. Personal search of the appellants also yielded other
articles namely, railway tickets, mobile phones and cash. Samples were
drawn from the suspected material and kept in separate envelopes.
Remaining material was kept in another envelope.
From the aforesaid evidence on record it appears during the
operation NCB officers had undertaken personal search of the appellants
although narcotic substance was recovered from a backpack carried by
Ali Hossain Sk. @ Ali Hussain Seikh. Mr. Saha referred to the cross-
examination of PW2, wherein the witness sought to wriggle out of the
position by stating they did not undertake personal search and the
personal properties were voluntarily handed over by the appellants. This
stance of PW2 is wholly inconsistent with the materials on record. All
witnesses including PW2 (during chief) admitted there was personal
search of the appellants at the time of recovery of narcotics from the
backpack and pursuant to such search, mobile phone, railway ticket and
cash were seized.
I have also examined the inventory report (Exhibit-7/1) prepared
by PW2 in connection with the aforesaid search and seizure. In the
inventory report, PW2 has unequivocally stated personal search had
been undertaken and the personal articles including cash were recovered
from the appellants.
In    view      of     the      aforesaid         evidence         on      record          including
contemporaneous documents prepared by PW2 in relation to the search
of the appellants, I am inclined to hold there was personal search of the
appellants at the time when the narcotic substance was recovered from a
bag carried by appellant viz. Ali Hossain Sk. @ Ali Hussain Seikh.
In State of Rajasthan vs. Parmanand & Anr. (supra), the Apex
Court, inter alia, held as follows :-
“15… if merely a bag carried by a person is searched without there being any
search of his person, Section 50 of the NDPS Act will have no application. But if the
bag carried by him is searched and his person is also searched, Section 50 of he
NDPS Act will have application……”
In the light of the aforesaid declaration of law, I hold Section 50
applies to the search conducted by the NCB officers in the present case.
The next question which arises is whether offer made by NCB
officers to the appellants that they have a right to be searched before a
Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer or a Gazetted Officer, who is a member
of the raiding party is in consonance with the statutory requirements of
Section 50 or not.
In State of Rajasthan vs. Parmanand & Anr. (supra), negating
the argument on behalf of the prosecution that an offer to be searched
before the nearest Magistrate or Gazetted Officer or a Gazetted Officer of
the raiding party is a valid compliance of Section 50 of the NDPS Act, the
Court held as follows : -
“19. We also notice that PW10 SI Qureshi informed the respondents that they could
be searched before the nearest Magistrate or before the nearest Gazetted Officer or
before PW5 J.S. Negi, the Superintendent, who was a part of the raiding party. It is
the prosecution case that the respondents informed the officers that they would like to
be searched before PW5, J.S. Negi by PW10 SI Qureshi. This, in our opinion, is
again a breach of Section 50(1) of the NDPS Act. The idea behind taking an accused
to the Magistrate or the nearest Gazetted Officer, if he so requires, is to give him a
chance of being searched in the presence of an independent officer. Therefore, it was
improper for PW10 SI Qureshi to tell the respondents that a third alternative was
available and that they could be searched before PW5 J.S. Negi, the Superintendent
who was part of the raiding party. PW5 J.S. Negi cannot be called an independent
officer. We are not expressing any opinion on the question whether if the respondents
had voluntarily expressed that they wanted to be searched before PW5 J.S. Negi, the
search would have been vitiated or not. But PW10 SI Qureshi could not have given a
third opinion to the respondents when Section 50(1) of the NDPS Act does not
provide for it and when such opinion would frustrate the provisions of Section 50(1) of
the NDPS Act. On this ground also, in our opinion, the search conducted by PW10 SI
Qureshi is vitiated.”
In the present case, the appellants were misled by the incorrect
offer given to them that they could be searched by a Gazetted Officer who
is a member of the raiding party. A Gazetted Officer who had proceeded
to the place of occurrence after entertaining reasonable belief that the
accused persons may be carrying narcotic substance cannot be said to
be an independent person before whom the law contemplates a search.
In this backdrop, acceptance of the offer by the appellants to be searched
before an officer who is a member of the raiding party cannot be said to
be a voluntary expression of their desire to be searched before such
officer. There is a clear misdirection in law in the offer given to the
appellants and accordingly they were misled to agree to a search before
an officer who was a member of the raiding party. By no stretch of
imagination, such acknowledgment on their part can be said to be a
voluntary relinquishment of the right enshrined under Section 50 of the
Crux of the safeguard enshrined in Section 50 of the NDPS Act is
that an accused should be made aware of his right to be brought before
a Magistrate or a Gazetted Officer prior to a personal search. Such offer
may be oral or in writing but the terms of the offer must be clear,
unequivocal and not create confusion in the mind of an accused with
regard to the lawful requirements prior to the search in any manner
In this regard it may be profitable to refer to the observations of
the Constitution Bench in Vijaysinh Chandubha Jadeja vs. State of
Gujarat3, wherein the Bench held there must be strict compliance of
Section 50 of the NDPS Act. The Bench held as follows :-
“29… We have no hesitation in holding that insofar as the obligation of the
authorised officer under sub-section (1) of Section 50 of the NDPS Act is concerned,
it is mandatory and requires strict compliance. Failure to comply with the provision
would render the recovery of the illicit article suspect and vitiate the conviction if the
same is recorded only on the basis of the recovery of the illicit article from the person
of the accused during such search. ……”
The Bench negated the concept of substantive compliance with
regard to Section 50 holding as follows :-
“31. We are of the opinion that the concept of “substantial compliance” with the
requirement of Section 50 of the NDPS Act introduced and read into the mandate of
the said section in Joseph Fernandez and Probha Shankar Dubey is neither borne
out from the language of sub-section (1) of Section 50 nor it is in consonance with the
dictum laid down in Baldev Singh case. Needless to add that the question whether or
not the procedure prescribed has been followed and the requirement of Section 50
had been met, is a matter of trial. It would neither be possible nor feasible to lay down
any absolute formula in that behalf.”
Recovery of narcotic from a bag carried by a person would attract
Section 50 of the NDPS Act if in course of such search, the body of the
suspect has also been searched. There is ample evidence on record a
body search of the appellants had also been undertaken when narcotic
was recovered from a bag carried by the appellant viz. Ali Hossain Sk. @
Ali Hussain Seikh. Failure to comply with Section 50 in course of such
search vitiates the seizure and the consequential conviction.
In view of the aforesaid discussion, I am constrained to hold
conviction and sentence of the appellants are liable to be set aside.
Both the appeals are accordingly, allowed.
Connected applications, if any, are also disposed of.
Appellants viz. Ishdan Seikh and Ali Hossain Sk. @ Ali Hussain
Seikh shall be released from custody, if not wanted in any other case,
upon execution of a bond to the satisfaction of the trial court which shall
remain in force for a period of six months in terms of Section 437A of the
Code of Criminal Procedure.
Lower court records along with a copy of this judgment be sent
down at once to the learned trial Court for necessary action.
Photostat certified copy of this order, if applied for, be given to the
parties on priority basis on compliance of all formalities.
I agree.