For Appellant(s)        :    Mr. Tripurari Sharma, through VC
For Respondent(s)       :    Mr. Ram Sharan Sharma, through VC
No.1679/2019, and another by claimants No.3496/2019,
have been filed against the judgment and award dated 1-3-
2019 passed by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal Alwar
(hereafter `the Tribunal’), therefore, are being decided by
this common judgment.
2.    On filing claim petition under Section 166 of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 (hereafter `the Act of 1988’) the Tribunal
awarded a compensation of Rs.47,99,536/- with interest in
favour of the claimants and while exonerating the Insurance
Company from liability, following the principle of “pay and
recover” it was directed that the Insurance Company first will
pay the compensation to claimants and then may recover the
same from owner and driver of the vehicle in question. The
claim petition was filed in relation to an accident occurred on
3-7-2015 when vehicle in question bearing registration
No.HR-74A-3768 was overturned and in that accident, one
Mr.Vinit Moyal died. The vehicle in question was in the
ownership of respondent Ashraf and was being driven by
respondent Mustkim. The vehicle in question was insured with
the United India Insurance Company. The Tribunal has
recorded a finding of fact that there is breach of conditions of
insurance policy as the driver was not having a valid and
effective licence and that the vehicle was not having a route
permit and fitness certificate on the date of accident;
therefore, the Insurance Company was absolved from the
liability to indemnify the insured (owner of the vehicle),
however, under the principle of “pay and recover” the
Insurance Company was directed to pay the compensation to
claimants and then to recover the same from the owner and
driver of the vehicle.
3.     In Appeal (1679/2019) filed by Insurance Company, it
has been argued that when the Tribunal itself has held that
there is breach of insurance policy then the claim petition
ought      to   have    been      dismissed            against   the  Insurance
Company as a whole and the Tribunal committed an error of
law     in   directing    the     Insurance            Company     to  pay    the
compensation amount to claimants and then to recover from
the owner of the vehicle. Counsel for the Insurance Company
has raised three points (i) the driver of vehicle was not
having a valid and effective licence on the date of accident,
(ii) vehicle in question was not having a route permit and
fitness certificate on the date of accident, and (iii) the
Tribunal has assessed the quantum of compensation on
higher side and prayed that impugned judgment be modified
4.    Appeal (3496/2019) has been preferred by claimants for
enhancement of compensation. Counsel for claimants has
submitted that the Tribunal has not committed any illegality
or jurisdictional error in applying the principle of “pay and
recover”. Since it is clear from the record that the vehicle in
question was insured with the Insurance Company, therefore,
even if any breach of conditions of insurance policy is found
then also considering the beneficial object of the Act of 1988,
the Tribunal is justified and well within its jurisdiction in
directing the insurer to satisfy the award, though in law it has
no liability. The right of the insurer, to recover the amount of
award from the owner and driver of vehicle has been
protected as well. As far as the quantum of compensation is
concerned, the same is rather lower side and deserves to be
enhanced suitably, but in any case, the Insurance Company
cannot challenge the quantum of compensation as the same
travels beyond defences available to Insurance Company
under Section 149(2) of the Act, 1988. Lastly, counsel for the
claimants has submitted that in case the appeal filed
Insurance Company is dismissed, the claimants would not
press their appeal.
5.   Heard learned counsel for both parties and perused the
material made available on record.
6.   This court is firstly examining the appeal filed by
Insurance Company. Counsel for the Insurance Company has
argued that while deciding the issue No.3, the Tribunal has
recorded a categorical finding of fact that the driver was not
having a valid and effective licence on the date of accident
i.e. 3-7-2015. A perusal of the record shows that Driver
Mustakim    was   driving       vehicle        in     question  having    DL-
41299/PK/Prof/09, which was issued on 20-11-2009 and the
same was valid for a period from 10-8-2011 to 19-11-2015.
The Tribunal has relied upon the reports Ex.NA-4 and Ex.NA-
5, wherein it was mentioned that aforesaid driving licence is
no more valid for any legal purposes as per Transport
Commissioner’s      note       dated          28-12-2017,        issued     in
continuance of its earlier note dated 1-8-2014 and as per
these orders all driving licences other than Smart Card have
been nullified and cancelled. On the basis of these reports,
the Tribunal concluded that the Driver was not having a valid
and effective licence on the date of accident. It appears from
the record that though the driving licence was issued to
Driver and was renewed for a period from 10-8-2011 to 19-
11-2015, nevertheless, the same seems to be nullified/
cancelled later on by the Transport Commissioner w.e.f. 1-8-
2014, for which a public notice was issued on 18-12-2017.
Thus on the date of accident i.e. 3-7-2015, the driving licence
was not treated in effect and operation. Counsel for claimants
submits that such conclusion of the Tribunal is perverse and
the licence of driver was valid on the date of accident.
7.    Be that as it may, it is not in dispute that on the date of
accident i.e. 3-7-2015, the vehicle was insured and the
insurance policy was in operation from 25-8-2014 to 24-8-
2015 and covers the risk of third party. On the strength of
such factual position, counsel for the claimants has further
argued that even if it is assumed that the driving licence of
the driver was cancelled but cancellation order was never
brought to the notice of the owner and it is not proved that
the owner was guilty of negligence in following the due
exercise and reasonable care in the matter of fulfilling the
conditions of insurance policy regarding use of vehicle by a
duly licenced driver. Counsel for claimants has relied upon the
principles of law laid down by the Apex Court in National
Counsel for claimants has submitted that applying the
principle of law as propounded by the Apex Court in case of
Swaran Singh’s case, in case of third party risk, the insurer
has to indemnify the compensation amount payable to third
party and the Insurance Company may recover the same
from the insured. It has been submitted that the doctrine of
“pay and recover” was considered by the Apex Court in
Swaran Singh’s case (supra), wherein the Apex Court
examined the liability of the Insurance Company in case of
breach of conditions of policy due to disqualification of driver
or invalid driving licence of the driver and held that in case of
third party risk, the insurer is to indemnify the compensation
amount to third party and the Insurance Company may
recover   the    same      from       the      insured.        The  Apex    court
considered the insurer’s contractual liability, as well as
statutory   liability   vis-a-vis        claims        of    third parties    and
guidelines were issued as to how and in what circumstances
principle of “pay and recover” may be applied. In para 110 of
the judgment in Swaran Singh (supra) the Apex Court has
elaborately    summarised          the      points,        wherein   under    the
principle of “pay and recover” the insurer is liable to
indemnify the compensation to third party and may recover
the same from the insured. According to counsel for
claimants, even if driving licence of driver is not treated as
effective and valid on the date of accident, then also the
present case falls within the scope of points (iii), (vii), (ix)
and (x) of para 110 of the judgment of Swaran Singh (supra).
8.    The ratio of law propounded in case of Swaran Singh
(supra) was followed by the Apex Court in case of National
700]. Later on the correctness of the aforesaid principle of
law was doubted by the Apex Court in case of National
785] and the issue was referred to Larger Bench. The Apex
Court pointed out that “if insurance company is not liable to
pay at all, then it cannot be compelled by the order of the
court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Article 142 of the
Constitution of India to pay compensation amount and later
on recover it from the owner of the vehicle”. The above
reference made in case of Paravathneni (supra) has been
disposed on 17-9-2013 by Three Judge Bench keeping the
question of law open to be decided in an appropriate case.
Thus, presently, the decision in case of Swaran Singh (supra)
followed in case of Laxmi Narain Dhut (supra) and other
cases holds the field. This principle of law has further been
affirmed and followed in case of Shamanna Vs. Divisional
9.    After discussion of case law as above, the legal position
emerges that till date the principle propounded in case of
Swaran Singh (supra) has not been upset in any subsequent
decision and still holds the field. Although, prima facie it
appears that the driving licence issued to Driver and renewed
for a period from 10-8-2011 to 19-11-2015, the same was
later on informed to be cancelled/ nullified vide public notice
date 28-12-2017, should not have been treated as invalid and
ineffective on the date of accident i.e. 3-7-2015, however, the
findings passed by the Tribunal in this regard have not been
put to challenge by the claimants, therefore, this court is not
inclined   to  interfere     with       such        findings. Nevertheless,
following the principle of law set forth in Swaran Singh’s case,
it is observed that the Insurance Company has miserably
failed to prove that the declaration of cancellation/ nullifying
the driving licence of the Driver was ever brought to the
knowledge of the owner of vehicle and it is not proved that
the owner was guilty of negligence in not following the due
care and caution to fulfill the conditions of the insurance
policy, therefore, the Tribunal has not committed any error of
law in following the principle of “pay and recover”. The
principle of law propounded in case of Swaran Singh (supra)
squarely apply to the present case. Accordingly, the first point
is turned down.
10. The second point raised by counsel for Insurance
Company regarding not having route permit and fitness
certificate of vehicle in question is concerned, counsel for
Insurance Company has drawn attention of this court to the
findings of issue No.3, wherein the Tribunal has observed that
vehicle in question was not having effective route permit and
fitness certificate. Counsel has submitted that vehicle in
question is a transport vehicle and the accident was occurred
on 3-7-2015 when the vehicle was plying in periphery of
village Falsa, Police Station Chopanki District Alwar. It has
been argued that the owner was duly served with notices of
claim petition as also of this appeal, but he has not appeared
and has not produced the permit of vehicle in question. This
court also finds that nothing has been brought on record by
the insured (owner of vehicle) to prove that he had a valid
permit of vehicle on 3-7-2015. The prayer is that for this
breach of policy condition, the claim petition be dismissed
11. In the Act of 1988, the term “motor vehicle”                         or
“vehicle” is defined under Section 2(28); the term “permit” in
Section 2(31), and “transport vehicle” is defined in Section
2(47) of the Act of 1988. Section 66 of the Act of 1988
stipulates the necessity of “permit”. Sub-section (1) thereof
provides that no owner of a motor vehicle shall use or permit
the use of vehicle as a transport vehicle in any public place,
whether or not, such vehicle is actually carrying passengers
or goods save in accordance with conditions of a permit
granted or countersigned by a Regional or State Transport
Authority or any Prescribed Authority. Various provisos have
been appended to the main provisions stipulating conditions
for use of vehicle, and carriage goods vehicle. It is apt to note
here that sub-section 3 of Section 66 of the Act of 1988
carves out actions to sub-section (1). Section 149(2)(a)(i)
relates to a vehicle not covered by a permit for hire or
reward. Section 149(2) provides statutory defences to the
insurer to contest claim petitions. Sub-section 7 of Section
147 provides that insurer to whom notice referred to sub-
section 2 or 3 has been given shall be entitled to avoid the
liability to pay any person any benefit. No such judgment and
award as is referred in sub-section 1 or no such judgment
and award as referred in sub-section 3 otherwise than in the
manner provided for in sub-section 4 or any corresponding
law can be passed. It is clear that in case the insured vehicle
does not have a valid permit, the same falls within breach of
conditions of policy as enumerated under Section 149(2) of
the Act of 1988.
12. In case at hand, nothing has been brought on record by
the insured to prove that he had a valid permit of vehicle and
the Tribunal has recorded findings in favour of the insurer
holding that in absence of a valid route permit/ permit the
insured has committed a breach of conditions of policy and as
such the insurer has been absolved to indemnify the insured.
Nevertheless, the Tribunal has considered the fact that
vehicle in question        was insured with the insurer and
insurance policy is valid for a period from 25-8-2014 to 24-8-
2015 (accident occurred on 3-7-2015). Considering the
beneficial object of the Act, the insurer was directed to satisfy
the award to claimants giving him option and liberty to
recover the amount from the insured.
13. As far as this direction issued against the Insurance
Company to first pay the compensation to claimants and then
to recover from the insured/ driver of vehicle are concerned,
the issue has examined by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in
detail in National Insurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Challa Bharathamma
14. The issue as to when Insurance Company is entitled to
be absolved from the liability to pay compensation due to
having no valid permit of vehicle in question, then whether it
can be directed to indemnify the compensation first to
claimants and then to recover from the insured. The Hon’ble
Supreme Court observed that plying vehicle without a permit
is a infraction and same is breach of conditions of insurance
policy in view of Section 66 of the Act of 1988. For such
breach, defence is available to the insurer in terms of Section
149(2) of the Act fo 1988. The Hon’ble Supreme Court while
allowing payment of compensation by Insurance Company
first and giving liberty/ right to Insurance Company to
recover the same from owner/ driver of vehicle has opined as
“The residual question is what would be the appropriate
direction. Considering the beneficial object of the Act, it
would be proper for the insurer to satisfy the award,
though in law it has no liability. In some cases the insurer
has been given the option and liberty to recover the
amount from the insured. For the purpose of recovering
the amount paid from the owner, the insurer shall not be
required to file a suit. It may initiate a proceeding before
the concerned Executing Court as if the dispute between
the insurer and the owner was the subject matter of
determination before the Tribunal and the issue is decided
against the owner and in favour of the insurer. Before
release of the amount to the claimants, owner of the
offending vehicle shall furnish security for the entire
amount which the insurer will pay to the claimants. The
offending vehicle shall be attached, as a part of the
security. If necessity arises the Executing Court shall take
assistance of the concerned Regional Transport Authority.
The Executing Court shall pass appropriate orders in
accordance with law as to the manner in which the owner
of the vehicle shall make payment to the insurer. In case
there is any default it shall be open to the Executing Court
to direct realization by disposal of the securities to be
furnished or from any other property or properties of the
owner of the vehicle i.e. the insured. In the instant case
considering the quantum involved we leave it to the
discretion of the insurer to decide whether it would take
steps for recovery of the amount from the insured.”
15. The judgment in the case of Challa Bharathamma
(supra) has been followed in case of Amrit Paul Singh Vs. Tata
16. In present case the insurance policy was in operation for
a period from 25-8-2014 to 24-8-2015 and accident occurred
on 3-7-2015. Thus the Tribunal has directed the Insurance
Company to pay the compensation to claimants who are
covered under the policy. The Tribunal has also observed in
clear terms that Insurance Company would deposit the
compensation amount payable to claimants and then would
be entitled to recover the compensation amount from the
owner and driver of vehicle in question. This court makes it
clear that as far as such recovery rights given to Insurance
Company against owner/ driver of vehicle are concerned
would be treated in context of principles of law laid down in
case of Challa Bharathamma (supra). Thus, insurer is not
required to file a separate suit, in order to certify his right to
recover the amount from owner and driver of vehicle and
may directly initiate proceedings before the Executing Court
concerned, as the dispute between the insurer and owner/
driver of vehicle was subject matter of determination before
the Tribunal and the issue has been decided against the
owner and driver in favour of the insurer. Thus on second
point also the prayer of the Insurance Company to dismiss
claim petition as a whole against the claimants due to having
no valid permit of vehicle is not acceptable and same is
turned down.
17. As far as quantum of compensation is concerned, the
Tribunal has assessed the compensation after considering
material on record and after due application of relevant rules
and law. The compensation awarded by the Tribunal is just
and proper. The Insurance Company has failed to point out
any illegality or perversity in this regard. Thus, there is no
force in third point raised by the Insurance Company.
18. The upshot of aforesaid discussion is that appeal filed by
Insurance Company fails and deserves to be dismissed.
According dismissed.
19. Since, this court has not find any merit in the appeal
filed by Insurance Company and has dismissed the same,
therefore, counsel for the claimants does not press the appeal
of claimants for enhancement of compensation. Accordingly,
the appeal filed by claimants is dismissed as not press.
20. A perusal of record reveals that Insurance Company has
deposited entire compensation amount before the Tribunal
pursuant to interim order dated 12-4-2019, out of which 50%
amount of compensation has been disbursed to claimants
according to order dated 5-8-2021 and therefore, remaining
amount so deposited be also disbursed to claimants in terms
of the award.
21. Stay application, application for vacations of stay order
and other applications, if pending, are also disposed of
accordingly. There is no order as to costs.
22. Record of the case be sent back forthwith.