2.      The employer is in appeal against an order passed by the High
Court of Judicature for Rajasthan at Jodhpur on 25.9.2019 whereby
the appeal of the Insurance Company under Section 30 of the
Employees Compensation Act, 19231 was allowed.
3.      Tej Singh, deceased was engaged by the appellant as a Helper who
died in the course of employment of the appellant on his borewell
vehicle No. RJ-06-J2725 on 11.10.2002 due to collapse of soil
surrounding the well. The petition was filed before the Employees
Commissioner2 under the Act for grant of compensation.         The
learned Commissioner passed an award dated 2.12.2005 awarding
a sum of Rs.3,27,555/- along with Rs.2,500/- as expenses for the
last rites. The legal heirs of deceased were also granted interest
@18% p.a. from the date of accident.
4.      The insurance company filed an appeal under Section 30 of the Act
before the High Court.         The High Court accepted the appeal
holding that the deceased was a Helper though the policy covered
Cleaner or Driver of the Vehicle in question.      The High Court
reduced the interest to 12% p.a. Since the insurance company has
paid the amount, liberty was granted to it to recover the sum from
the present appellant.
5.      Learned counsel for the appellant submits that there is not much
difference between the duties of a Cleaner and a Helper. It is a
nomenclature which is used interchangeably by all the employers.
Still further, reliance is placed upon insurance policy which
indemnifies the owner in respect of two drivers, one cleaner and
other employees for which extra premium has been paid by the
owner.   The premium paid by the owner was Rs.45/- i.e. Rs.15
each for two drivers and a Cleaner and Rs.75/- for other
employees.
6.      Learned counsel also refers to India Motor Tariff 17 3 issued under
the provisions of the Insurance Act, 1938.               As per such
endorsement, the insurance company has agreed to indemnify any
claim of personal injury to any paid driver or cleaner or persons
employed in loading or unloading but in any case, not exceeding
seven in number including driver and cleaner while engaged in
service of the insured. The relevant clause reads as under:
"IMT- 17 legal liability to person employed in connection
with the operation and or maintain and / or unloading of
goods carrying commercial vehicle in consideration of
payment of an additional premium it is hereby under stood
and agreed that notwithstanding anything contained herein
to the contrary the company shall indemnify the insured
against    his   legal   liability under    the   workmen's
compensation act, 1923 and subsequent amendment of
that act prior to the date of this endorsement the fatal
accident act 1855 or at common law in respect of personal
injury to any paid driver or cleaner of persons employed in
loading/ or unloading but it any case not exceeding seven in
number including driver and cleaner whilst engaged in the
service of the insured in such occupation in connection with
the goods carrying commercia! vehicle and will in addition
be responsible for ail cost and expenses incurred with its
written consent.”
7.      On the other hand, learned counsel for the Insurance Company
contended that the deceased was working as a Helper and not as
a Cleaner. He was not engaged in the loading or unloading either.
Therefore, the deceased was not covered by the Endorsement IMT
17. However, he could not point out any distinction between the
duties of Cleaner or Helper. It was contended that it was for the
employer to prove the nature of work assigned to the deceased.
8. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and find that the
High Court has accepted appeal on a make-believe argument that
Cleaner or Helper engaged by the employer are engaged in two
different duties and that a Helper is not covered by the insurance
policy.  The High Court has recorded a finding that admittedly
deceased was a Helper. In the absence of any clear demarcation
of duties of a Helper or a Cleaner and in view of the fact that
Helper and Cleaner are interchangeably used, therefore, declining
claim for the reason that deceased was engaged as a helper and
not Cleaner is wholly unjustified.     Additionally, the employer
sought indemnification of five other employees engaged in loading
or unloading activities by paying extra premium.     It was for the
insurance company to cross examine the witnesses produced by
the claimant or by the owner to prove the fact that deceased was
not engaged in loading or unloading activities. We find that the
High Court has drawn a distinction between Helper and a Cleaner
when none existed.
9.  Consequently, the order of the High Court is set aside to the extent
the Insurance Company was absolved of its responsibilities to pay
the amount of compensation so as to indemnify the employer.
However, the order regarding payment of interest @12% p.a. does
not warrant any interference.
10. The appeal is allowed. The order passed by the High Court so as
to absolve the insurance company from its liability to indemnify
the owner is set aside with no order as to cost.
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (C)   No.13522/2021
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated
25-09-2019 in SBCMA No. 117/2006 passed by the High Court of
Judicature for Rajasthan at Jodhpur)
Date : 10-01-2022 This petition was called on for hearing
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Leave granted.
The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed order.
Pending application(s), if any, also stand disposed of.
(Signed order is placed on the file)