When the matter was taken up for hearing today, the learned
Government Advocate (Criminal Side) filed the status report of the
Assistant Inspector General of Police, Law and Order, Chennai and sought
for some more time to complete the enquiry and to file a report pursuant to
the orders passed by this Court on 10.12.2021.
2. It is seen from records that insofar as Crl.O.P.No.2302 of 2021 is
concerned, there are totally 84 claims which has been furnished by way of
filing a separate application in Crl.M.P.No.13952 of 2021. All these claims
were pending before the ADJ, Hosur or before the PSJ, Hosur. Surprisingly,
all these claims were dismissed as not pressed during the year 2019. This is
not merely coincidental and it is more a knee-jerk reaction after complaints
were made to the effect that claims have been filed with false and fabricated
medical and hospital records of Cavery Hospital, Hosur. It is not clear as to
whether the concerned Judges before dismissing the 84 claims as not
pressed, even conducted any preliminary enquiry to ascertain as to why so
many claims are not pressed. It is also not known as to whether these claims
have been not pressed with the knowledge of the concerned claimants. The
84 cases have been dismissed as not pressed only based on the endorsement
made by the learned counsel who were appearing on behalf of the
3. The petition filed in Crl.M.P.No.13952 of 2021 along with all the
relevant documents was also served on the learned Government Advocate
and the learned Government Advocate was directed to instruct the Police to
conduct the enquiry and to report. The status report filed today seeks for
some more time to complete the enquiry and to file a report.
4. This Court has no difficulty in granting some more time to the
respondent-police to complete the enquiry and file a report. However, in the
meantime, a process must be undertaken to ensure that the claims were not
pressed only based on instructions from the claimants. It must also be
ensured that by withdrawing the claims, the parties/advocates do not escape
the consequences of filing false and fabricated medical/hospital records that
is said to have been obtained from Cavery Hospital, Hosur. In view of the
seriousness of the allegations made in the present case to the effect that a
total of Rs.11.70 Crores was claimed in 84 cases filed based on
fabricated/false medical/hospital records and a complaint was also made by
the Cavery Hospital, Hosur in CSR No.71 of 2019 before the Hosur Police
Station which is said to have been closed as Action dropped, and in view of
the fact that the claims came to the withdrawn as not pressed subsequently,
this Court wants to probe into this issue thoroughly and safeguard the
interest of the genuine claimants and take action against the erring parties,
officers and advocates who may be involved in this scam. For this purpose,
this Court also wants to Suo Motto implead the Secretary, Tamil Nadu State
Legal Services Authority as a party to the proceedings to help the cause of
the genuine claimants. Accordingly, the following directions are issued:-
Authority is Suo Motto added as the 5th respondent in the
Crl.O.P.No.2302 if 2021 and Mr.C.K.Chandrasekaran, learned
standing counsel is directed to take notice on behalf of the
Tamil Nadu State Legal Services Authority. The learned
counsel for the petitioner shall serve all the papers on the
(b) There shall be a direction to the respondent-police to
continue with the enquiry and a report shall be filed before this
Court before the next date of hearing. While conducting the
enquiry, the grievance that is expressed by the New India
Assurance Company Limited in Crl.O.P.No.4174 of 2021 shall
also be taken into consideration and a separate report shall be
filed with regard to those complaints made by the said
Authority is directed to co-ordinate with the District Legal
Services Authority and the claimants who have made the claims
in the 84 MCOPs shall be summoned and enquiry shall be
conducted to find out if the claims were not pressed after
getting their concurrence. While conducting the enquiry, the
Legal Services Authority shall also identify genuine claims and
report it to the concerned insurance companies. For this
purpose, the Legal Services Authority shall co-ordinate with
the learned counsel for the petitioner;
(d) The Legal Services Authority will be incurring some
expenses for summoning the various claimants and hence, this
Court deems it appropriate to direct Cholamandalam MS
General Insurance Company Limited to deposit a sum of
Rs.2,00,000/- (Rupees Two Lakhs Only) in this regard before
the Tamil Nadu State Legal Services Authority within a period
of two weeks from today. This amount shall be shared by all the
insurance companies handling Motor Insurance Policies;
(e) Wherever the State Legal Services Authority
identifies genuine claims and reports the same before the
concerned insurance companies, steps shall be taken to make an
attempt and settle the claims. The learned counsel for the
petitioner shall co-ordinate in this regard with all the concerned
insurance companies. This will save a lot of time and the
genuine claimants will also get Just compensation;
(f) The 84 cases which are annexed along with the order
is directed to be restored on file by the respective Additional
District Judges and Principal District Judge at Hosur. This
direction is issued in exercise of the powers of this Court under
Article 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India in order to
safeguard the larger interests of the claimants. In all the 84
cases, the State Legal Services Authority in co-ordination with
the District Legal Services Authority shall appoint Panel
Advocates to represent the claimants. This will ensure that in
all those cases where the parties are able to arrive at a
settlement and just compensation is fixed, an award can be
passed by recording the compromise. In all those cases where
there is a contest, the claimants will be ably assisted by the
Panel Advocates to safeguard their rights and interests. If
ultimately, it is found that fabricated/false records were filed
before the Court, it will enable the Court to initiate action in the
Authority is also directed to file a report before this Court
(f) In the additional affidavit filed in Crl.O.P.No.2302 of
2021, it is stated at paragraph Nos.5 to 7 as follows:
'4. In fact, there is a concerted conspiracy
from the moment an accident takes place. While, it is
a matter of common knowledge that there are teams
comprising brokers who handle such claims and
there are specialized practitioners, pursuing claims
for compensation, the modus operandi appears to be
skilled and well entrenched to cause serious
prejudice to all important stake holders.
5. There are several instances of even 108
Ambulances being driven to a private hospital, very
nearly hijacked, one can say, after recording
Accident Register copy in a government hospital, for
the record. This has a critical and detrimental
impact on trauma care, during the "Golden Hour" in
the treatment to victims.
6. There are several instances of delay and as
such the State of Tamil Nadu has come up with TAEI
(Tamil    Nadu    Accident   and   Emergency        Care
Initiative) with trauma care centers on the high
ways. They cater to the affected with excellent
infrastructure support in saving lives by providing
immediate and specialized trauma care.'
The special investigation team is directed to enquire the
concerned officials of TAEI and their statement shall also be
recorded and follow up action shall be taken and the same shall
also form a part of the report to be filed by the respondent-
police.
5. Post this case under the caption "For Filing Report and For Passing
Further Orders" on 04.04.2022.