I am faced with a rather strange conundrum of the High Court on its
Administrative side seeking leave to review an order passed by it on its
judicial side, particularly when the High Court is not even a party to the
proceedings leave alone an aggrieved party. Is this Court therefore
confronting a two faced JANUS?
2. To appreciate the petition now before this Court, namely, a petition
seeking leave to review the order dated 05.05.2022, it is necessary to set out
the facts in the various petitions filed seeking exemption from the payment
of Court fees which form the backdrop for the review.
3. This Court by the order which is the subject matter of review had
answered the following issues:-
"(1) Whether the provisions of Rule 24 would apply
to Appeals under Section 173 of the Motor Vehicles Act
without giving proof of the indigent circumstances.
(2) Whether the petitioners/claimants who have
obtained exemption can withdraw the amounts deposited
without paying the Court Fees."
4. This Court on considering the provisions of the Motor Vehicles
Act and its rules had passed an order stating that in order to avail the
exemption from paying Court fees in an appeal under Section 173 of the
Motor Vehicles Act, the provisions contemplated under Order XXXIII and
XLIV had to be followed and the exemption in so far the claim petitions
before the Tribunal is concerned, it would be at the discretion of the
Presiding Officer. However, taking note of the varying methods of such
discretion being exercised this Court had framed certain guidelines after
hearing the amicus curiae, the learned counsel for the claimant/appellant
and the Special Government Pleader. It is these guidelines that are now
sought to be reviewed, rather strangely by the High Court on a resolution
adopted by the Administrative Committee operating on the Administrative
side. The incongruous situation that has now been placed before this Court
is that this Court without being aggrieved over its own order is now being
directed by an Administrative Resolution to review its order. The review
application has been filed under Order 47 Rule 1 read with Section 114 of
the CPC.
5. The four grounds that have been put forward for seeking the review
briefly are as follows:-
i. The filing of the affidavit as contemplated in paragraph no.53(a) of
the order under review is beyond the scope of the Rule 24(3) of the Tamil
Nadu Motor Vehicle Accidents Claims Tribunals Rules, 1989 which are in
pari materia with Order 33 of the CPC.
ii. The attestation of the affidavit by a notary public would cause
prejudice to the claimants.
iii. Paragraph No.53 (d) and (f) have been stipulated in the rule and
adding of procedure would result in prejudice to the interest of the claimant
and caused practical difficulties for the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal.
iv. The Civil Miscellaneous Petition which was before the Court was
only filed to seek exemption from the payment of Court fee under Section
173 of the Motor Vehicles Act and the guidelines in para 53 (a) to (f) are
beyond the scope of the proceedings.
Each and every one of the above grounds are grounds, if any, which are
available to an aggrieved party. The High Court is neither a party to the
proceeding nor are they aggrieved by these guidelines.
6. Before adverting to the lis before me viz; the petition seeking
leave, it is necessary to extract certain provisions:-
Section 114 of the CPC - Subject as aforesaid, any person
considering himself aggrieved -
(a) by a decree or Order from which an appeal is
allowed by this Code, but from which no appeal has been
(b) by a decree or Order from which no appeal is
allowed by this Court, or
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of
Small Causes, may apply for a review of judgment to the
Court which passed the decree or made the Order, and the
Court may make such Order thereon as it thinks fit.
(1) Any person considering himself aggrieved-
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed,
but from which no appeal has been preferred,
(b)by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed,
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small
Causes,and who, from the discovery of new and important
matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due
diligence was not within his knowledge or could not be
produced by him at the time when the decree was passed or
order made, or on account of some mistake or error
apparent on the face of the record of for any other
sufficient reason, desires to obtain a review of the decree
passed or order made against him, may apply for a review
of judgment to the Court which passed the decree or made
the order.
(2) A party who is not appealing from a decree or
order may apply for a review of judgment notwithstanding
the pendency of an appeal by some other party except
where the ground of such appeal is common to the
applicant and the appellant, or when, being respondent, he
can present to the Appellate Court the case on which he
applies for the review.
The Claims Tribunal may, in its discretion exempt any
party from the payment of fees prescribed under sub-rule
(1): - Provided that where a claim of a party has been
exempted by the Claims Tribunal the party shall have to
pay the prescribed fees, exemption in respect of which has
been granted initially before a copy of the judgment is
obtained: Provided further that where the amount of award
is less than the amount of claim, the party shall be entitled
to refund of the proportionate fee, namely the difference
between the fee actually paid and the fee due if the claim
had been made for the amount of award.
7. Section 114 of the CPC opens with the words “any person
considering himself aggrieved”, the petitioner before this Court viz; the
High Court has not stated how it is aggrieved by the guidelines that have
been issued. These guidelines have been issued only to standardize the
manner in which a Tribunal which is exercising judicial authority, exercises
its discretion judiciously and to make it public that this exercise has not
been done capriciously.
8. This Court is unable to understand as to how these guidelines
would cause hindrance to any claimant. The claimant who has to appear in
person before the Tribunal for filing a claim petition, in addition to the
claim petition, has only to file an affidavit alongwith this petition that too,
only if they are seeking an exemption despite drawing a monthly salary. In
this regard it would be useful to refer to the judgement of the Hon’ble
Supreme Court reported in 2020 14 SCC 150 – Rakesh Malhotra Vs.
Krishna Malhotra where the Court was considering whether the grant of
permanent alimony under Section 25 of the Act can be made before the
Magistrate under Section 125 of the CrPC over and above what has been
granted by the Court when exercising power under Section 25 of the Hindu
Marriage Act. While concluding, the learned Judges at paragraph no.13 of
the said judgment had directed the husband to file an affidavit giving details
about the amounts that he has made over to the respondent/wife by way of
maintenance as awarded by the Court. The filing of an affidavit became a
guideline by virtue of the later judgment of the Supreme Court reported in
(2021) 2 SCC 324 – Rajnesh Vs. Neha and Another where the learned
Judges were considering the varying orders being passed in petitions under
Section 125 CrPC vis-à-vis the proof of income. Taking into account the
divergent demographic profile of our country and the different yardsticks
being applied by different Courts, the learned Judges observed that there
was a need for a uniform format of affidavit of disclosure of assets and
liabilities to be filed in maintenance proceedings.
9. Such an affidavit is not contemplated anywhere in the provisions of
Section 125 of the CrPC which is evident from a reading of the same which
is extracted hereinbelow:-
125. Order for maintenance of wives, children and
parents.—(1) If any person having sufficient means
neglects or refuses to maintain— (a) his wife, unable to
maintain herself, or (b) his legitimate or illegitimate minor
child, whether married or not, unable to maintain itself, or
(c) his legitimate or illegitimate child (not being a married
daughter) who has attained majority, where such child is,
by reason of any physical or mental abnormality or injury
unable to maintain itself, or (d) his father or mother,
unable to maintain himself or herself, a Magistrate of the
first class may, upon proof of such neglect or refusal, order
such person to make a monthly allowance for the
maintenance of his wife or such child, father or mother, at
such monthly rate 1 * * * as such Magistrate thinks fit and
to pay the same to such person as the Magistrate may from
time to time direct: Provided that the Magistrate may order
the father of a minor female child referred to in clause (b)
to make such allowance, until she attains her majority, if
the Magistrate is satisfied that the husband of such minor
female child, if married, is not possessed of sufficient
means: 2 [Provided further that the Magistrate may,
during the pendency of the proceeding regarding monthly
allowance for the maintenance under this sub-section,
order such person to make a monthly allowance for the
interim maintenance of his wife or such child, father or
mother, and the expenses of such proceeding which the
Magistrate considers reasonable, and to pay the same to
such person as the Magistrate may from time to time
direct: Provided also that an application for the monthly
allowance for the interim maintenance and expenses of
proceeding under the second proviso shall, as far as
possible, be disposed of within sixty days from the date of
the service of notice of the application to such person.]
10. Therefore, the guidelines passed by this Court asking a claimant
to file an affidavit is only to state that despite he being an earning member
he does not have the wherewithal to pay a Court fee. This is in the interest
of the claimant who will not be forced to prove his indigent circumstances.
This by no stretch of imagination can be called prejudicial to the interest of
the claimant. Further, the direction asking for the affidavit to be sworn
before a notary public is only to ensure its authenticity. Therefore, the need
to review these guidelines that too by the Court which is not the aggrieved
party does not arise. The stipulations in para.no.53 (d) and (f) is only a
explication of the procedure as to how Court fees have to be recovered post
the deposit by the respondent and also to ensure that the State is not
deprived of the Court fee by claimants withdrawing the money without
paying Court fees. Once again, this Court fails to understand as to why this
clause is termed to be prejudicial to a claimant. The ground that the Court
has exceeded the scope of the proceedings is to say the least an attempt by
an administrative order to circumscribe the judicial authority of this Court
exercising its jurisdiction under Clause 36 of the Letters Patent, 1865 which
36. Single Judges and Division Courts:- And we do
hereby declare that any function which is hereby directed
to be performed by the said High Court of Judicature at
Madras, in the exercise of its original or appellate
jurisdiction, may be performed by any Judge, or by any
Division Court thereof, appointed or constituted for such
purpose[in pursuance of Section 108 of the Government of
India Act, 1915] and in such Division Court is composed
of two or more Judges, and the Judges are divided in
opinion as to the decision to be given on any point, such
point shall be decided according to the opinion of the
majority of the Judges, if there shall be a majority, but if
the Judges should be equally divided,[They shall state the
point upon which they differ and the case shall then be
heard upon that point by one or more of the other Judges
and the point shall be decided according to the opinion of
the majority of the Judges who have heard the case
including those who first heard it].
11. Having dealt with the factual aspects, this Court would like to
advert to the judicial decisions which would show that the review now filed
is without any basis. The High Court of Kerala had an occasion to consider
the scope of review in the judgment reported in 1997 SCC Online Ker 422
– Mohankumar Vs. K.Natarajan and Anr. where the learned Single Judge
has observed as follows:-
“Review under Order 47 Rule 1 C.P.C. contemplates
an application for an aggrieved party against a decree or
order. The Court cannot review its own order or decree
suo-motu unless an application for review is filed by an
aggrieved party as contemplated under Section 114
C.P.C. and the court must be satisfied that the conditions
mentioned in Order 47 Rule 1 C.P.C. exists to entertain the
12. Thereafter, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the judgement reported
as Kewal Chand Mimani (D) by Lrs Vs. S.K.Sem and others in 2001 (6)
SCC 512 was deciding the correctness of an order being reviewed and
modified where the case was brought up under the head of "liberty to
mention". The learned Judges observed that liberty to mention cannot be
used as a means to achieve an advantage which is otherwise not available
under law.
“ The Circumstances under which review can be had
are provided under Order 47 of the Code of Civil
Procedure. In any event, law is well settled on this score
that the power to review is not any inherent power and it
must be conferred by law either specifically or by
necessary implication.
13. However, the authors of the Constitution has given a small
window to the Courts to correct its errors by framing Article 215 of the
Constitution of India which reads as follows:-
215. High Courts to be courts of record Every High
Court shall be a court of record and shall have all the
powers of such a court including the power to punish for
contempt of itself.
The reasons for making this provision is only to ensure that the High Court
being a Court of Record has its records intact and correct. In paragraph
no.14 of the judgement reported in (2000) 1 SCC 666 – M.M.Thomas Vs.
State of Kerala the learned Judges of the Hon'ble Supreme Court had
observed as follows;-
“ The High Court as a court of record, as envisaged
in Article 215 of the Constitutions, must have inherent
powers to correct the records. A Court of record envelops
all such powers whose acts and proceedings are to be
enrolled in a perpetual memorial and testimony. A Court of
record is undoubtedly a superior Court which is itself
competent to determine the scope of its jurisdiction. The
High Court, as a court of record, has a duty to itself to
keep all its records correctly and in accordance with law.
Hence, if any apparent error is noticed by the High Court
in respect of any orders passed by it the High Court has
not only power, but a duty to correct it.”
The right to correct its judgment is therefore restricted only within the
parameters of the above Article that too if any apparent error is noted by the
High Court in respect of orders passed by it. This right is conferred on the
High Court only when functioning in its judicial side.
14. In a judgement reported in 2021 (5) CTC 668 - Karthick Theodre
Vs. Registrar General, Madras High Court, Chennai a Single Judge of this
Court had occasion to consider the powers that were exercised by the High
Court as a Court of record under Article 215 of the Constitution of India.
The learned Judge had discussed the jurisdiction and power of the High
Court of Madras which flows from the Letters Patent of 1865. The learned
Judge had observed as follows:-
" 27. Thus, any judicial order, irrespective of the
nature of jurisdiction and the strength of the Bench, is, in
effect, the order of the High Court as one institution. The
position is made clear by Clause 36 of the Letters Patent
which runs as follows:
“36. Single Judges and Division Courts: - And we
do hereby declare that any function which is hereby
directed to be performed by the said High Court of
Judicature at Madras, in the exercise of its original or
appellate jurisdiction, may be performed by any Judge, or
by any Division Court thereof, appointed or constituted for
such purpose[in pursuance of Section 108 of the
Government of India Act, 1915] and in such Division
Court is composed of two or more Judges, and the Judges
are divided in opinion as to the decision to be given on any
point, such point shall be decided according to the opinion
of the majority of the Judges, if there shall be a majority,
but if the Judges should be equally divided,[They shall
state the point upon which they differ and the case shall
then be heard upon that point by one or more of the other
Judges and the point shall be decided according to the
opinion of the majority of the Judges who have heard the
case including those who first heard it]”
It is for this precise reason that any order, judgment
summons, precepts etc., run in the name of the High Court
as one institution. Clause 7 of the Letters Patent of 1865
“7. Writs, etc., to issue in the name of the Crown,
and under seal: - And we do hereby further grant, ordain,
and appoint that all writs, summons, precepts, rules,
orders and other mandatory process to be used, issued or
awarded by the said High Court of Judicature at Madras,
shall run and be in the name and style of Us, or of Our
Heirs, and Successors and shall be sealed with the seal of
the said High Court.”
The point here is that since the High Court is one indivisible institution, a
writ cannot lie against a judgment or order passed by it for that would
tantamount to the High Court issuing writs against itself."
15. The attention of this Court was drawn to a similar case where the
order passed by a learned Single Judge to circulate a copy of the order was
placed for the consideration of a Division Bench. The Division Bench of
this Court in the judgement in Writ Appeal No.1161 of 2020 – The High
Court of Judicature at Madras, rep. by its Registrar General High Court,
Madras Vs. A.Venkatesan and Anr. had made the following observation in
para no.11 as follows :-
“ The object with which the learned single Judge
issued the direction to the Registry to circulate the copy of
the order to all the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal in the
State of Tamil Nadu and Puducherry is to make aware of
the dictum, which will be useful to the Tribunals in dealing
with such type of cases. At the same time, if the Court feels
that it is a matter of importance where a direction is
required to be issued to the subordinate judiciary or
executive, then the matter has to be placed before the
Hon'ble Chief Justice of this Court for being placed before
the appropriate Division Bench dealing with Public
16. The aforesaid observations, in my humble opinion are per in
curium. The procedure of placing orders of the benches of this Court,
Single or Division, had emanated from an order passed by a Division Bench
of this Court in HCP.No.1306 of 2007 dated 21.09.2007 where the learned
Judges after passing a slew of directions had added a footnote that the
Section Officer had to circulate these directions to all the Subordinate
Courts immediately after obtaining the orders of the Hon’ble Chief Justice
which nod has also been given by then Hon’ble Chief Justice on
23.10.2007. Neither this Division Bench's order nor Clause 36 of the Letters
Patent was brought to the attention of the Division Bench or to the
Administrative Committee which is evident from a perusal of the order. The
Division Bench in the Writ Appeal (WA.No.1161 of 2020) supra has gone
to the extent of stating that in order to give effect to directions made by a
learned Single Judge, the matter has to be placed before a Division Bench
dealing with Public Interest Litigation, thereby opening a second line of
litigation.
17. In the judgement reported in 1993 Supp (3) Supreme Court
Cases 727 - Supreme Court Employees Welfare Association Vs. Union of
India and Another,          the Hon'ble Supreme Court was considering the
recommendation of the committee of Judges appointed by the Chief Justice
of India regarding the pay scale of Supreme Court Staff. The
recommendation of the committee had been accepted by the Chief Justice of
India and forwarded to the President of India for approval. The
recommendation was challenged by the Supreme Court Employees Welfare
Association and Supreme Court Class IV Employees Welfare Association
stating that they should be placed above a higher scale of pay than the pay
admissible for the corresponding staff working in the Delhi High Court. The
committee before it had made the recommendation had made reference to
the different interim orders passed in the Writ Petitions and stated that these
orders having been passed on the Judicial side of the Court are binding
and the Administrative side of the Court cannot ignore these orders.
Ultimately, the Bench agreed to this view of the committee that judicial
orders are binding on the administrative side and modified the interim
orders granted therein.
18. The aforesaid observation of the various judgments referred
above clearly delineates the power that the High Court exercises on its
Administrative side and on the Judicial side and make a clear distinction
between the two.
19. An administrative order passed by the High Court is subject to
Judicial scrutiny and not vice-versa. In the instant case this Court had
directed the guidelines to be circulated to all the Tribunals and therefore in
keeping with the orders passed in HCP.No.1306/2001 the Office Note has
been placed before the Chief Justice for orders for circulating the same as
the Chief Justice is the Administrative Head of the Judiciary in the State and
guidelines relating to procedure is issued under his name. In a judgment of
this         Court    reported   in    1996   SCC    Online   Mad       1132      -
T.S.Sankaranarayanan VS. High Court of Judicature at Madras a learned
Single Judge was called upon to consider whether the orders of a Division
Bench exercising jurisdiction in the Judicial side should pave way for the
decision made in the Administrative side. The learned Judge has observed
" Moreover, once a rule of procedure has been
envisaged by the High Court in its Judicial side on a
matter, the High Court in its administrative side has to
follow the same setting a good example."
20. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the judgement reported in (1995)
1 SCC 203 – High Court of M.P. Vs. Mahesh Prakash and Others was
considering an appeal filed by the High Court challenging an order passed
by the Division Bench of the High Court wherein the Division Bench had
set aside an Administrative Order of the High Court. The learned Judges
observed as follows:-
“ The order that the first respondent challenged in
the writ petition filed by him before the High Court was an
order passed by the High Court on its administrative side.
By reason of Article 226 of the Constitution it was
permissible for the appellant to move the High Court on its
Judicial side to consider the validity of the order passed by
the High Court on the administrative side and issue a writ
in that behalf. In the writ petition the first respondent was
obliged to implead the High Court for it was the order of
the High Court that was under challenge. It was, therefore,
permissible for the High Court to prefer a petition for
special leave to appeal to this Court against the order on
the writ petition passed on its judicial side.”
The learned Judges had observed that where the Administrative Order of the
High Court was set aside the High Court would then be an aggrieved party
such is not the case in the instant review.
21. Therefore, the present petition seeking leave to review which does
not come within the parameters supra, cannot be entertained as it would
amount to undermining the Judicial fibre whose touchstone is its fierce
independence and to discharge its duty without any kind of fear or favour.
By an administrative resolution an order passed by the High Court on its
Judicial Side is sought to be reviewed. Before closing, this Court would like
to refer of the judgment reported in (1995) 5 SCC 457 – C.Ravichandran
Iyer Vs. Justice A.M.Bhattacharjee and Others, wherein the learned
Judges have while answering the question "Judicial individualism -
Whether needs protection" answered as fellows:-
11. Independent judiciary is, therefore, most
essential when liberty of citizen is in danger. It then
becomes the duty of the judiciary to poise the scales of
justice unmoved by the powers (actual or perceived)
undisturbed by the clamour of the multitude. The heart of
judicial independence is judicial individualism. The
judiciary is not a disembodied abstraction. It is composed
of individual men and women who work primarily on their
own. Judicial individualism, in the language of Justice.
The learned Judges have extracted from the dissenting judgement of
Justice Douglas of the Supreme Court of United States in Stephen. S.
Chandler Vs. Judicial Council of the Tenth Circuit of the United States
[398 US 74] as follows:-
"No matter how strong an individual judge's spine,
the threat of punishment - the greatest peril to judicial
independence - would project as dark a shadow whether
cast by political strangers or by judicial colleagues. A
federal judge must be independent of every other judge...
Neither one alone nor any number banded together can act
as censor and place sanctions on him. It is vital to preserve
the opportunities for judicial individualism."
22. In the result the leave is dismissed. No costs.