1. Petitioner, through the medium of instant writ petition, seeks
quashment of the Order No.538-B of 2009 dated 28.07.2009 (for
short ‘impugned order’) issued by the Secretary J&K State Board of
School Education Srinagar (respondent No.2 herein), whereby the
petitioner was debarred from any further promotion for a period of
two years with effect from the date he becomes eligible for the next
promotion.
2. Briefly stated facts of the case are that the petitioner, who was
working as Senior Assistant in the J&K State Board of School
Education, had been served the show cause notice dated 24.04.2009
for accepting the examination application form of an ineligible
candidate for secondary school examination Session-2008 Bi-annual.
The said notice was replied by the petitioner, wherein it was
admitted that he had accepted the admission form without assessing
the previous attempts made by the said candidate. However,
respondents, after examining the reply to the show cause notice,
found the same not satisfactory and passed the impugned order,
whereby the petitioner was awarded the punishment debarring him
from further promotion for a period of two years, compelling the
petitioner to file the instant petition.
3. It would be worth to mention here that earlier this Court, vide order
dated 26.08.2009, dismissed the said petition. An appeal bearing
LPA No.188/2009 came to be filed against the said order of
dismissal dated 26.08.2009. The Division Bench after hearing the
said LPA, set aside the order dated 26.08.2009 passed by the Single
Bench, vide its order dated 16.04.2013, remanding back the matter
to the Writ Court with the request to decide the writ petition after
hearing both the parties. Accordingly, the Writ Court heard the
matter afresh and admitted the Writ Petition to hearing.
4. Thereafter, in terms of the order dated 24.06.2020, the Writ Court
while observing that the matter falls within the definition of ‘service
matters’ as contained in Section 3(q) of the Administrative
Tribunals Act, 1985 which had become applicable to the Union
Territories of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh after coming into
force of the Jammu and Kashmir Re-Organization Act, 2019 with
effect from 31.10.2019, and Section 29 of the said Act provides for
transfer of the pending cases of such nature to the Central
Administrative Tribunal, transferred the matter to the Central
Administrative Tribunal Jammu Bench. However, the learned
Tribunal sent back the matter with an observation that the Tribunal
has no jurisdiction over the Jammu and Kashmir Board of School
5. Respondents have filed their counter affidavit, wherein it is stated
that the petitioner, while posted at Branch Office Kulgam in the year
2008 allowed one Mohammad Yaseen Magray to fill the
admission/examination form of SSE (10th Class) Session-2008 Bi-
Annual at late stage and entertained it notwithstanding the fact that
the said candidate had already passed the SSE in the year 2003 under
Roll No.610509. The form of the said candidate was accepted by the
petitioner without checking the previous record. Respondents
constituted a Fact Finding Committee to probe and fix the
responsibility of the erring officer/official. The Committee held the
said candidate guilty of unfair means and also held the petitioner
responsible for the said irregularity. Respondents further stated that
the Committee, so constituted, had considered the matter and
decided to take a lenient view and only withheld the promotion of
the petitioner for two years. It is further stated that the petitioner was
given an opportunity of being heard during the course of probe, also
was served the show cause notice, to which he had replied and the
same was considered by the respondents but was found not
convincing. Respondents in their counter affidavit had stated that
none of the rights of the petitioner have been violated. The
punishment imposed on the petitioner was only for dereliction of his
official duty.
6. Heard learned counsel for the parties, perused and considered.
7. Learned counsel for the petitioner, while arguing the matter submits
that holding departmental proceeding and recording finding of guilt
against any delinquent and imposing punishment is a quasi-judicial
function and not administrative function. The authorities have to
strictly adhere to the statutory rules while imposing punishment.
8. Another ground of contention raised by learned counsel for the
petitioner is that when a departmental enquiry is conducted against a
Government employee, it cannot be treated as a casual exercise. The
enquiry proceedings also cannot be conducted with the closed mind.
The Enquiry Officer has to be unbiased. The rules of natural justice
are required to be observed to ensure that a Government employee is
treated fairly in the proceedings which may culminate in imposition
of punishment including dismissal/removal from service. In this
regard reliance was placed on the judgment rendered in the case
‘State of UP & Ors. Vs. Saroj Kumar Sinha AIR 2010 SC 3131’.
9. The next limb of the argument of the petitioner is that the delinquent
is entitled to a copy of the enquiry report for making representation
against it, if he so desires, and non-furnishing of the enquiry report
would amount to violation of natural justice. There is no question of
furnishing copy of any report to the delinquent where the
disciplinary authority is himself conducting enquiry. It is the further
contention of learned counsel for the petitioner that if a departmental
enquiry is initiated against Government employee but the same is
not completed during the period of his service, it must be completed
within six months after his retirement from service. No proceedings
can be allowed to continue against the retired Government employee
after six months of his retirement from service. It is being stated that
the petitioner has since retired from service after attaining the age of
superannuation.
10. Learned counsel further argued that a Government employee cannot
be punished on the findings of a preliminary enquiry without holding
a disciplinary enquiry after serving charge-sheet.
11. On perusal of the record, as has been produced, and the submissions
made by learned counsel for the parties, the Enquiry Committee,
which conducted the enquiry, held the petitioner responsible for
omission and commission of act, accordingly recommended to
withhold the promotion of the petitioner for a period of two years
from the date he becomes eligible for next promotion. It appears
that no subsequent enquiry was held in the matter; ultimately the
impugned order was passed against him. The enquiry which was
held in the matter was an preliminary enquiry which is always done
in the cases of such incidents to find out who was responsible for the
same.
12. The findings reached by the enquiry committee, as a result of the
preliminary enquiry, cannot be said to be findings made against the
petitioner in a departmental enquiry initiated against him for alleged
negligence of duty or violation of the statutory rules. The authorities
concerned took the view that the departmental enquiry into the
incident was enough but that clearly is not right. At the departmental
enquiry nobody is accused of negligence or dereliction of duty. It is
a kind of investigation made by the department under statutory rules.
Therefore, the petitioner is justified in challenging the validity of the
impugned order on the ground that a proper enquiry has not been
made and he has not been given a reasonable opportunity to meet the
charge against him.
13. A Committee comprising of Joint Secretary General (KD) and Dy.
Secretary Legal/Cert.(KD) delegated with the powers of Joint
Secretary was constituted vide Order No. 757-B of 2008 dated
25.10.2008 to probe the case relating to submission of admission
cum permission form of SSE (10th class) Bi-Annual 2008 (July) at
late stage through Branch office Kulgam and his subsequent
appearance in the said examination under Roll No.184538 when the
said candidate is reported to have passed this examination in the year
2003 and was the student of B.A final year at that point of time. The
committee was asked to submit the finding at the earliest and
pinpoint the responsible officials of Branch office Kulgam for
entertaining the form at late stage without any authority and without
checking the previous particulars of the said form.
14. This committee vide No. F (Estt. Commtt) B/08 dated 17.03.2009
submitted its report after conducting the enquiry and had drawn
conclusion that Mr. Ab.Ahad Yatoo, the then Section Officer Sub
Office Kulgam had exceeded the powers beyond his jurisdiction
ignoring his officer Incharge, whereas the petitioner Ab. Rehman
Dar, the then Dealing Assistant, who was to ascertain the eligibility
of the candidate as per his back reference which he didn’t do, and
that the dealing assistant was answerable as to why he had
entertained the admission/permission form without checking the
entries of the form, enrolment and marks certificate because the
marks sheet shows re-appear in two subjects only, whileas the
candidate mentioned all the subjects in which to appear in the
enrolment and admission cum permission form. The committee,
after conducting preliminary enquiry, recommended that Ab. Ahad
Yatoo, S.O be warned to be careful in future and to withhold the
promotion of the petitioner herein for the period of two years from
the date he becomes eligible for the next promotion. The committee
further recommended to forward the case to the Director School
Education Kashmir for further necessary administrative action
against the then Principal/Incharge admissions, Govt. HSS, Devsar.
15. Based on this report, show cause notice was issued to the petitioner
vide No. E(Admn-B)CU/09 dated 24.04.2009, asking him to show
cause as to why the proposed punishment be not imposed upon him
and was asked to tender his reply within 15 days from the receipt of
the notice. The petitioner in response to this notice, tendered his
explanation, stating therein that one candidate namely M.Yaseen
Magray S/O Ab. Salam Magray R/O Devsar, managed to fill up his
admission form and his duly attested admission cum permission
form through HSS Devsar, who had complete record in its
possession about the candidate like enrolment/result etc.; and that
the candidate had given the affidavit about his failure and through
production of failure marks card after duly marked by the then S.O
Ab. Ahad Yatoo, he had entertained his admission form without
assessing the attempts of the said candidate. It is the school
authorities who are on the fault where previous records are easily
available and the other particulars of the candidate were also known.
He prayed that the decision be reviewed as there was no misconduct
on his part and it may be treated as out of oversight and the proposed
heavy punishment would be injustice for him.
16. On consideration of the show cause notice, respondents vide Order
No. 538-B of 2009 dated 28.07.2009, finding the reply of the
petitioner unsatisfactory, passed the following order:-
“....that he (Mr.Ab. Rehman Dar, S.A) be debarred from
any further promotion for a period of two years, with effect
from the date he becomes eligible for the next promotion.”
The petitioner aggrieved of this order has impugned the same in this
writ petition.
17. On perusal of the record, it is crystal clear that no disciplinary
committee was constituted by the respondents to conduct regular
enquiry into the charges against the petitioner. The committee, so
constituted, had been asked to pinpoint and probe into the
irregularity committed by the officials of the Sub Office Kulgam
including the petitioner, and to fix responsibility of the Principal
HSS Devsar, S.O, and the petitioner herein. The committee had also
recommended action to be taken against the then Principal HSS
Devsar, the then S.O, who was warned to be careful in future,
whereas the petitioner was recommended to be penalized by
withholding his next promotion for a period of two years.
Respondents acted upon the afore-stated report without conducting
the disciplinary enquiry to look into the charge against the petitioner.
As per the Service Law Jurisprudence, the official having committed
misconduct during his service is to be charge-sheeted by framing
articles of charge and to lead evidence before the enquiry officer as
appointed, where the delinquent official must have a right to cross
examine the witnesses and also lead evidence in his defense.
18. Here in this case it appears that the respondents have said goodbye
to this established procedure and have hastily rushed to impose
penalty, as was recommended by the committee, which was just
holding preliminary enquiry to pinpoint and probe the role of the
different officials including the petitioner herein. It was incumbent
upon the respondents to appoint an enquiry officer, serve charge
sheet upon the petitioner as delinquent, lead evidence in support of
the charge of misconduct and allow him to bring evidence in his
defense. Respondents have thus, committed grave irregularity by not
conducting regular enquiry and imposing penalty of withholding
next promotion of the petitioner for the period of two years from the
date he becomes due for next promotion.
19. Hon’ble Supreme Court in case titled ‘Kuldeep Singh Vs.
Commissioner of Police & Ors., (1999) 2 SCC 10’, had held that
where reliance was placed by the enquiry officer on the previous
statement of the witness without supplying a copy thererof to the
delinquent and without affording an opportunity to cross-examine
the witness, and that the reasonable opportunity contemplated by
Article 311(2) of the Constitution by providing an opportunity of
being heard in accordance with the principle of natural justice, is not
the compliance thereof. To conduct departmental enquiry against a
Government servant is not a casual exercise. It cannot be conducted
with a closed mind. The enquiry officer has to be unbiased. The rules
of natural justice are required to be observed to ensure not only that
justice is done but it is manifestly seen to be done. The object of
rules of natural justice is to ensure that a government servant is
treated fairly in proceedings which may culminate in imposition of
punishment. Holding departmental proceedings and recording
finding of guilt against any delinquent and imposing punishment for
the same, is quasi-judicial function and not administrative function.
20. In this case, on the basis of record produced by the respondents, it
can be concluded that only preliminary enquiry had been conducted
and the purpose behind holding preliminary enquiry is only to take
prima facie view as to whether there can be some substance in the
allegations made against an employee, which may warrant regular
enquiry. The evidence recorded in the preliminary enquiry cannot be
used in regular departmental enquiry, as the delinquent is not
associated with it and opportunity to cross examine the persons
examined in such enquiry is not given. Using of such evidence has
been held by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case Nirmala J.Jhala
Vs. State of Gujarat & Anr., (AIR 2013 SC 1513), as violative of
the principles of natural justice. A preliminary enquiry is only a fact
finding enquiry for the satisfaction of the Authority as to whether the
allegations noticed against the employee concerned deserve any
merit and as to whether a departmental enquiry be initiated against
the employee or not. There is no requirement under any statutory
provision or otherwise which requires opportunity of participation of
delinquent employee in the preliminary enquiry.
21. Hon’ble Apex Court in the case ‘Amalendu Ghosh Vs. North
1960 SC 992’, had been pleased to hold that the government servant
cannot be punished on the findings of preliminary enquiry without
holding a disciplinary enquiry after serving a charge sheet.
22. On a close scrutiny of the case on hand having regard to the factual
as well as legal aspects of the same, this Court comes to the
conclusion that the penalty of withholding promotion of the
petitioner herein from the date he becomes due for next promotion,
is arbitrary and is not sustainable for the reason that no departmental
regular enquiry was conducted into the alleged misconduct. The
petitioner is stated to have superannuated and there is no question of
conducting any enquiry against him at this stage. The penalty
imposed on the petitioner in absence of being held guilty in regular
enquiry is the abuse of power by the respondents and this arbitrary
action on the part of the respondents cannot be upheld.
23. For the foregoing reasons and the observations made hereinabove,
the impugned order, having been passed in arbitrary manner without
conducting disciplinary enquiry into the alleged misconduct against
the petitioner, is not sustainable.
24. As a sequel to the afore-stated discussion, petition is allowed and as
a result the impugned order is quashed.