Conciliation Act, 1996. The same was filed by Umang Jatin
Gandhi against the petitioner Vijay Arvind Jariwala, who were
the two partners of the partnership firm - Blue Feathers
Infracon. In the said proceedings, the petitioner herein filed
application Exhibit 49 seeking to implead one Falguni Sandip
Naik and Sandip Balwantrai Naik persons as parties.
2.      The said application Exhibit 49 came to be dismissed by
the Commercial Court – learned 9th Additional District Judge,
Surat, Bardoli by his order dated 29.9.2021. It is this order
which is sought to be challenged by the petitioner by filing the
3.      The relevant facts are that the partnership firm in the
name and style of Blue Feathers Infracon created by deed dated
23.2.2012 which then was consisted of partners named Sandip
Balwantrai Naik, Umang Jatin Gandhi- respondents herein, Vijay
Arvindlal Jariwala and Sandip Balwantrai Naik in capacity of
partner        of  another firm    named    called    Blue        Feathers
Incorporation. In the year 2014, two partners Sandip Naik in
individual capacity and Sandip Naik in capacity of partner Blue
Feather Incorporation separated from the firm. The retirement
deed was executed on 17.7.2014. The petitioner and the
respondent herein remained two partners of the firm with profit
sharing ratio 50% each. The rest of the conditions of original
partnership deed remained unchanged.
3.1     It appears that the partnership firm- Blue Feathers
purchased land property bearing Final Plot No.136 Paiki
admeasuring 4146.25 sq.meters from one Mohammad Yakub for
consideration of Rs.2,51,27,500/-. Agreement dated 23.5.2017
and subsequently registered sale deed dated 3.6.2017 were
executed between the existing partners of the firm and the
vendor. On the land purchased by the firm as above the scheme
known as ‘Lotus’ for construction of residential flats was floated.
The construction of the scheme was earlier stopped which was
restarted by the existing partners after obtaining necessary
permission from the authorities. The existing partners- the
petitioner respondent herein- obtained loan of two crores for the
project by mortgaging the said land, it was stated.
3.2     The construction of the said project faced rough weather.
It was not completed. The existing partners made allegations
against each other about irregularities committed in the conduct
of the project. The petitioner herein alleged that the respondent-
Umang Gandhi acted fraudulently and allotted several flats/units
in the name of ‘Mann Developers’ which was a sham firm
created by him. The investors who invested their money in the
scheme registered complaints and also filed court cases.
3.3     Respondent Umang Gandhi, in view of the Arbitration
Clause in the condition No.20 of the partnership deed, filed on
2.3.2021 application seeking interim measures under Section 9
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter
referred to as the ‘Arbitration Act’). Therein he alleged that the
other partner- petitioner herein was non co-operative in the
project Lotus, that he was not giving signatures, was not
allowing the execution of signatures of agreement to sale etc.
and that construction was required to be discontinued since
November, 2020 because of the conduct of the petitioner. It was
alleged that the payment of materials on the site, the payment to
the contractor and payment to the labourers were not made and
even the time period for cash credit facility obtained from the
Bank had got over. It was stated that the prestige of the firm had
thereby suffered.
3.4     The interim prayers were sought for asking direction
against the petitioner partner to co-operate in the completion of
the project Lotus and in conducting all affairs relating thereto, in
the alternative, it was prayed to allow the applicant to take all
the steps to complete the same. Prayer was also made to permit
to operate the bank account and to execute the necessary
documents in favour of the purchasers.
3.5     It was in the above proceedings of Section 9 that the
petitioner herein filed application Exhibit 49 on 4.9.2021. In the
said application filed under Order I Rule 10 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, 1908, the petitioner prayed to join two parties as
respondents- one Falguni Sandip Naik as respondent No.2 and
Sandip Balwantrai Naik as respondent No.3. The petitioner
stated that the firm Blue Feathers gave to said Falguniben
unsecured          loan of Rs.4,26,35,000/-      by     cheque           and
Rs.2,54,00,000/- by cash. Falguniben was wife of the partner
Sandip Balwantrai Naik- the erstwhile partner who had retired
from the firm as stated above. It was stated that these amounts
were paid during the years 2011 to 2014. Out of the said total
amount given unsecured loan, Rs.19 lakhs by cheque and
Rs.1,75,10,000/- by cash were repaid to the firm by said
Falguniben, and the remainder amount was required to be
3.6     It was further stated that when the partnership firm
purchased land Final Plot No.136 paiki, by registered deed
dated 3.6.2017 on which the scheme ‘Lotus’ was started, at the
time of said transaction, Rs.1,99,00,000/- came to be readjusted
while paying the purchase price, from the total dues recoverable
by the firm from said Falguniben. The said third party however,
was yet to pay the balance amount.
3.7     It was alleged in the application Exhibit 49, that the said
Umang         Gandhi was     solely    responsible    in    derailing         the
construction project and in not making payment to the vendors
and to the financial institutions from whom the loan was availed
and had defrauded the firm. It was stated that Umang Gandhi,
during the proceedings of Section 9 issued notice dated
27.5.2021 through his advocate demanding the amount of
Rs.10,29,97,150/- from Falguni Naik. It was further stated that
Umang Jatin Gandhi in capacity of partner of Blue Feathers
Infracon filed criminal complaint under Section 138 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act, 1882 and also instituted Special
Civil Suit No.135 of 2021 against the said Falguni Naik.
3.8     On the basis of all the above facts pleaded and averred, the
petitioner invoked provisions of Order I Rule 10, CPC seeking to
join said two persons as parties in the proceedings of Section 9
of the Arbitration Act initiated by the Umang Gandhi. In was the
case that in the facts and circumstances, the said two proposed
respondents were proper and necessary parties in Section 9
proceedings. The Commercial Court dismissed the application.
4.      Learned senior advocate Mr.R.R.Marshall with learned
advocate Sandip C. Bhatt for the petitioner submitted about
creation of partnership firm and the subsequent retirement of
partner Sandip Balwantrai Naik, submitted that the Falguni Naik
who happened to the wife of the retired partner, was given large
sum of money from the firm and that part of the amount was also
adjusted in the sale consideration by the firm paid to the vendor
while the land was purchased. It was submitted that the account
was required to be settled with said proposed parties, that the
disputes had arisen between the partners in relation to the
project sought to be put up on the land purchased.
4.1     It was further submitted by the petitioner that during the
proceedings of interim measure, the original applicant Umang
Gandhi had issued notice to the said parties to refer the amount
which showed that the amount was recoverable by the firm from
the said parties. Reference was also made about filing of
criminal         complaints, the     complaint     under        Negotiable
Instruments Act and about filing of the civil suit. It was the
submission that the retiring partner continues to be liable to the
third parties in respect of his dealings with the third party while
he was a partner. It was also submitted that the liability of the
retiring partner remained continued and that he had not given
the public notice of dissolution. It was submitted that for all
these facts and reasons, the said two proposed persons were
proper and necessary parties.
4.2     On behalf of the respondent, on the other hand, learned
senior advocate Mr.Jal Unwala with learned advocate Mr.Dhaval
Vyas who appeared on caveat submitted that filing of application
Exhibit 49 was dilatory tactic, it was submitted that arbitration
was the mechanism to resolve the disputes between the parties
concerned and that the disputes were between the existing
partners, one of them filed application Section 9 for interim
measures in view of the intended arbitral proceedings between
them. It was submitted that the proposed respondent No.3
parties who were not concerned in the proceedings, it was
submitted that they were neither proper nor necessary parties in
the proceedings of Section 9 of the Arbitration Act. Learned
senior advocate relied on the decision of the Supreme Court in
the Firm Ashok Traders Vs. Gurumukh Das Saluja and
Other [(2004) SCC 155], in order to buttress his submissions.
5.      In light of the prayer of the petitioner seeking to join the
proposed respondents who were third parties in the proceedings
of Section 9 of the Arbitration Act, the question in principle
arises that whether a third party who is not party to the
arbitration agreement, could be impleaded as parties. In the
present       case    as  seen   above,      respondent    partner         in    the
proceedings of Section 9 initiated by other existing party, wants
to join Falguni Naik and Sandip Balwantrai Naik on the ground
that the partnership firm had certain dealings and transactions
with them and in that context they were required to be joined in
the proceedings of the interim measures initiated by the
respondent existing partner.
5.1     The Arbitration Act, 1996 is a special Act, designed to
provide machinery in law to facilitate the disputes between the
parties till the process of arbitration. The parties who have
entered       into   arbitration   agreement,      are   entitled        to    seek
constitution       of   arbitral  tribunal      in accordance         with       the
provisions of the Act. The provisions of Arbitration Act, 1996 are
made to apply to the parties who are bound by arbitration clause
and their relationship in the resolution of disputes between
them, in the process of arbitration is governed by the provisions
of the Act.
5.2     Section 9 of the Act enables a party to seek interim
measures before or during a arbitral proceedings, which are
intended inter alia to balance the rights between the parties who
would subject themselves to arbitral proceedings for resolution
of disputes, until such disputes are decided by arbitrator. In the
Act the term ‘party’ is defined in Section 2 (h) to mean a party to
an arbitration agreement. When the statutory provisions under
the Act are acted upon between the parties, they are the parties
with the arbitration agreement.
5.3     In relation to the aspect as to whether in the proceedings
of appointment of arbitrator under Section 11 read with Section
7 of the Act, who could be the parties that may be impleaded as
respondent , the law has found a definite exposition. Section 7
deals with the arbitration agreement which means an agreement
between the parties to submit to arbitration the disputes,
whereas Section 11 is about appointment of arbitrators. In
Sridhar and Another [(2011) 11 SCC 375] there was
tripartite housing development agreement with developer as
guarantor. Inter se dispute arose between the guarantor and the
borrower in respect of the construction agreement and in that
view arbitration clause was invoked. It was held that the lender
was not party to the arbitration agreement, could not have been
impleaded. The order of appointment of arbitrator the same
related to the lender was set aside and to the extend it related to
disputes between borrower and lender was upheld.
5.4     Similar proposition was laid down in other decisions in
141, that a person who is not party to the arbitration agreement,
if impleaded as party in the petition under Section 11 of the Act,
the court should delete such party or while accommodating
arbitrator it should make clear that arbitrator will decide only
disputes between the parties to the arbitration agreement.
5.5     It is the ‘party’ defined under Section 2(h) of the Act which
may initiate proceedings under Section 9 for interim measures.
The very basis of Section 9 proceedings is the arbitration clause
under which the arbitration proceedings could be initiated. The
interim measures could be prayed for and would operate
between the parties who would be going for or have gone, for
arbitration, namely the parties to the arbitration. By analogical
reasoning it would imply that third party has no concern with
the proceedings of Section 9 nor with the said provision
recognizes the inclusion of the third party, who may be
independently claiming the rights against the parties to the
arbitration and vice versa.
5.6     In Firm Ashok Traders (supra) in which the Supreme
Court considered the question of nature of and maintainability of
application Under Section 9 in view of the Section 69 of the
Partnership Act, 1932 when filed by partner of unregistered
firm, inter alia observed that an application under Section 9,
under the scheme of the Arbitration Act, 1996 is not a suit,
though the application may result into initiation of civil
proceedings. The Supreme Court observed that ‘the right
conferred by Section 9 cannot be said to be one arising out of
contract.        The  qualification     which  the     person         invoking
jurisdiction of the court under Section 9 must possess is of being
a ‘party’ to an arbitration agreement.’ It was further observed, ‘a
person not party to an arbitration agreement cannot enter the
court for protection under Section 9’.
5.7     The position of law that the proceedings under the
Arbitration Act which would include the proceedings under
section 9 proceedings are confined between the parties to the
arbitration agreement stand buttressed also by decision of the
Supreme Court in the context of section 11 (6) of the Act. It was
held in S. N. Prasad, Hitek Industries (Bihar) Limited vs.
Monnet Finance Limited and Others [(2011) 1 SCC 320] in
the context of section 7 and 11 of the Arbitration Act, 1996, that
a guarantor cannot be made a party to a reference to arbitration
and subjected to arbitration award, who was not party to loan
agreement contained in the arbitration clause.           In that case,
there was arbitration agreement between the lender, borrower
and one of the guarantors and it was held that it could not be
deemed or construed to be arbitration agreement in respect of
another guarantor in a party to arbitration agreement. In the
proceedings of section 11, a person who is not a party to the
agreement, has no association in eye of law.             On the same
footing, a third party cannot be a party in the proceedings under
section 9 of the Act for interim measures wherein by very nature
of the proceedings, third party cannot be said to have a legal
participatory right.
5.8     As a stranger to the arbitration agreement has no locus
standi to invoke the provisions of Section 9, since this provision
whereunder a party to the arbitration agreement may seek
interim protective measures against the another party to the
agreement, a third party who is not party to the arbitration
agreement cannot have any role to play in the proceedings to
play in to the entitlement to be impleaded. Only if the third party
is one, who is claiming through party to the arbitration
agreement, in such context of given fact situation, different
complexion may arise.
5.9     Primarily and for all purposes, the provision of Section 9 is
intended to operate between the parties to the arbitration
agreement. They are the proceedings which may be taken out
before or during arbitration proceedings. An award which may
be passed by the arbitrator would operate only between the
parties to the arbitration agreement, in as much as the disputes
between such parties would be arbitrator. Therefore if the
interim measures proceedings, a non-party to the arbitration
agreement is joined and the order regarding interim measure is
addressed to such party, it would lead to chaotic situation, as
such third party would not be amenable to the final resolutions
of the disputes. The arbitrator will have no jurisdiction to decide
in respect of or would have no domain over the rights of the
third party. A person who is not party to arbitration agreement,
remains stranger to the proceedings of Section 9 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act. For such third party no lis is
created in proceedings of Section 9. Even if the parties to the
arbitration and the third party have some inter se rights and
obligations to be enforced vis a vis each other, it would be a
separate course of action.
6.    Shoney Sanil vs. Coastal Foundations (P) Ltd. and
others (AIR 2006 Kerala 206), the writ petitioner had
challenged injunction order issued by the District Court upon an
application under section 9 of the Arbitration and Conciliation
Act, 1996, filed y the respondents.          The facts were that the
respondent Nos.1, 3 and 4 entered into agreement to build on
the land of which they were the owners. The petitioner was a
third party filed suit before the Civil Court and obtained decree
against respondent Nos. 2 to 4. In execution of which, the
property in question was brought to sell.          The writ petitioner
before the High Court purchased it and share certificate was
issued in his favour, followed by delivery of the property. The
petitioner 3rd party was just claimed possession of the property.
As disputes arose amongst the respondent Nos. 1 to 4, the first
respondent invoked section 9 of the Arbitration Act wherein
injunction restraining the writ petitioner and respondent Nos. 2
to 4 from altering the nature of the property was passed.
6.1     The question addressed was whether the writ petitioner
who was admittedly a third party to the arbitration agreement
between the respondents and who had in his favour a confirmed
court sale and certificate as well as delivery of possession, could
be dispossessed, injuncted or subject to any other court
proceedings under section 9 of the Arbitration Act. 1996. The
Madras High Court appreciated the scope of section 9 in light of
attendant provisions of the Arbitration Act observing thus,
“….the interim measures which were conceived
by the Legislature while enacting Section 9 are
those interim measures which relate to the
arbitration agreement between the parties and
being interim, they are to confine to the matters
relating to the arbitration agreement between
the parties. This intention is explicit from the
opening words of section 9, which provides for
the party to apply for interim measure under
Section 9.     Therefore, only a party to the
invoking Section 9, which consists two parts….”
6.1.1            It was observed that reading of provisions of section
9 was to show that the measures mentioned under the said
provisions can be passed in relation to the subject matter of the
dispute in arbitration and it is not the intention of the court to
interfere with or interpolate with third party rights.                  It was
stated that arbitral tribunal has its authority on the basis of the
agreement between the parties in the arbitration agreement,
and it is not the court to interfere with third party rights, as may
the courts authorize in that regard by the law of the land.
6.1.2            It was further observed that,
appointment of receiver provided under clause
(d) and the residuary provision to issue such
interim measure of protection as may appear to
be just and convenient in terms of clause (e) of
Section 9(i) and (ii) have to be read in the
backdrop of the extent of jurisdiction which can
be exercised and, this is limited to the parties
who are governed by the arbitral agreement and
not in excess thereof. On a plain reading of
the said Act, there is no room to hold that by an
interim measure under Section 9, the rights of
the third party, holding possession on the basis
of a Court sale could be interfered w ith,
inujuncted or subjected to proceedings under
Section 9 of the Act.”
6.2     It is therefore clear that what Section 9 contemplates is
issuance of interim measures by the court only at the instance of
the party to an agreement with regard to the subject matter of
arbitration agreement. The writ petitioner before the Madras
High Court was an auction purchaser in whose favour sale
certificate and also the delivery of possession, was held to be not
to be subjected to proceedings under section 9 initiated on the
basis      of     the   alleged   arbitral       agreement       between           the
6.3     In another words, what is indicated by section 9 is that
provisions for interim measures is confined and operate between
the parties to the arbitration agreement.               It is a provision for
enabling a party to the arbitration agreement to have a
protective interim measures either before or after the arbitral
proceedings. The entire basis of the section is the operation of
arbitration agreement between the parties. The concept of
interim measures enacted by the Legislature in section 9
excludes the third party- one who is not party to the arbitration
agreement. The only exception which could be carved out is in
respect of those who may be claiming through the party to the
arbitrator. Such is not the case here.
6.4     Therefore looking from the standpoint of the facts involved
also, the proposed parties cannot be said to have any inclusive
right in the proceedings of Section 9, which are the proceedings
initiated by one existing partner of the firm against the another
existing partner, in respect of the dispute between them. As
rightly noticed by the Commercial Court below, it is on the four
main grounds that the prayer for joining said Falguni Naik and
Balwantrai Naik is rested. Firstly that the retiring partner
Sandip Naik did not publish public notice regarding his
retirement from the firm, therefore he is liable to the third
parties. The second consideration urged was that the said
Falguni Naik was given unsecured loan by the firm Blue
Feathers Infracon in the year 2013 and since the amount is not
fully paid by said Falguni Naik, she is required to be joined as
party in the proceedings of interim measures under Section 9
initiated by one of the partner. The third was also that the
amount was also recoverable from said Sandip Naik by the firm
which would require his presence as party in Section 9
proceedings. The forth ground alleged was that since the Umang
Jatin Gandhi and Sandip Balwantrai Naik committed fraud and
cheating with the investors, said Sandip Naik has to be made
6.5     All the above factual aspects hardly justify the case for
joining the proposed parties. In addition that Section 9
proceedings are and have to be basically between the parties to
the arbitration, the above four grounds put forth by the
petitioner create a separate cause of action. The aggrieved party
would have a separate cause of action against another before
appropriate legal forum.
6.6     In the facts of the case the aspects to be highlighted are
that the dispute exists between the applicant respondent of
Section 9 proceedings who are the partners and party to the
arbitration agreement. Out of the two proposed parties sought to
be joined in the proceedings of Section 9, Falguni Naik was
never associated in any way with the partnership firm, whereas
Sandip Naik was a partner already retired. The dispute between
them and the partnership firm, even if viewed to be existing,
such cannot be said to be dispute within the arbitration clause
which was to operate between the parties. Such dispute could be
said to be outside the purview of the arbitration. Merely because
the partnership firm may have to recover money or have some
disputes with the proposed parties, such aspect would not made
out a case for joining them in the proceedings of Section 9 of the
Act. The Commercial Court was justified in dismissing the
7.      In view of the reasons supplied by the Commercial Court
below and for the supplemented additionally as above, the
challenge to the impugned order fails. The Special Civil
Application is dismissed. Notice is discharged. Interim orders
are vacated.