connection with the Accidental Death complaint. Further,
certain documents are produced to substantiate the fact
that even prior to marriage, the deceased was undergoing
treatment       and    was   diagnosed       for  depression.              The
deceased had complained about low mood and lack of
sleep even after marriage.                The present applicant had
supported her in continuation of the treatment which was
received from Dr. I.J. Ratnani and the Doctor had found
some partial improvement who had prescribed some
medication.           It is also submitted by learned Senior
Counsel that prior to the marriage, the deceased was
taking treatment from Dr. Vinay Kumar, a Consultant
Psychiatrist from Patna.              It is further submitted that
parents of the deceased were having knowledge of the
mental state of the deceased and there was no reason for
abettment from the side of the applicant and as a
husband, the applicant was supporting his wife in the
medical treatment.         It is submitted that the ultimate step
was taken in a state of depression. It was, therefore,
prayed that the present application may be allowed and
the applicant herein may be released on regular bail.
3. Learned         Additional   Public       Prosecutor   submitted           that
marriage span is only of seven months.                      As per the
complaint, it is submitted that there was a demand of
dowry by the applicant and the deceased was tortured for
not bringing sufficient dowry. It is further submitted that
as per the complaint, the applicant had demanded
Rs.10,00,000/- and had also alleged that not a single
rupee was provided by the deceased’s parents.                   It was,
therefore, prayed that no discretion may be exercised in
favour of the applicant.
4. Heard learned Advocates on both the sides and perused
the material on record. The documents of medical
treatment prior to the marriage are produced before this
Court.       The statement of Bank account of the deceased
has been given for perusal of the Court which reflects
that the father of the deceased had transferred an amount
of Rs.1,00,000/- into the Bank account of the deceased
and as per the statement, the same is transferred in the
Term       Deposit   with  a    maturity  date    of    08.02.2023.
Considering the mental state of the deceased and that the
trial will take its own time to conclude, this Court finds
this to be a fit case where discretion could be exercised
in favour of the applicant.
5. Hence, the present application is allowed. The applicant
is ordered to be released on regular bail in connection
with the First Information Report being Part A C.R.
No.11198035220286 of 2022 registered with Mahuva
Police      Station,  District    Bhavnagar,   on     executing           a
personal bond of Rs.15,000/- (Rupees Fifteen Thousand
only) with one surety of the like amount to the
satisfaction   of  the   trial     Court and   subject        to     the
conditions that he shall;
[a]     not take undue advantage of liberty or misuse
[b]     not act in a manner injurious to the interest of the
[c]     surrender passport, if any, to the lower court within
[d]     not leave India without prior permission of the
concerned trial court;
[e]     furnish the present address of residence to the
Investigating Officer and also to the Court at the time of
execution of the bond and shall not change the residence
without prior permission of the concerned trial court;
6. The authorities shall adhere to its own Circular relating
to COVID-19 and, thereafter, will release the applicant
only if he is not required in connection with any other
offence for the time being. If breach of any of the above
conditions is committed, the Sessions Judge concerned
will be free to issue warrant or take appropriate action in
the matter. Bail bond to be executed before the lower
Court having jurisdiction to try the case.
7. Rule is made absolute to the aforesaid extent. Direct
service is permitted. Registry to communicate this order
to    the     concerned Court/authority by    Fax      or      Email
forthwith.