We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner, the learned Additional Government Advocate for the
first and third respondents and the learned counsel appearing
for the second respondent.
2.     The petitioner who is a member of the Bar has filed this
public interest litigation inviting the attention of the Court to the
encroachments made on foot paths/ footways in a particular
location in the city.       The second prayer is for making a
particular street for one-way street and the third prayer is for
ensuring that all road signals are erected.               There are
compliance reports filed on record. In fact, as per the order
dated 18th January 2021 passed by this Court, the Member
Secretary of the District Legal Services Authority, Bengaluru,
visited the street subject matter of this petition and has
submitted a report dated 1st February 2021 along with the
photographs. We must note here that in the affidavit filed by
the petitioner on 25th March 2021, he has stated that positive
actions have been taken by the authorities. He has expressed
an apprehension that with the passage of time and after
change of present set of officers, their successors may not take
any action.
3.     A large number of photographs are placed on record of
the footways (popularly known as footpaths) which are being
used for parking of two wheelers and four wheelers. In fact,
the report submitted by the Member Secretary of the District
Legal Services Authority also shows that the footways are
being     used for parking of vehicles and particularly two
wheelers and there are other encroachments on the footways.
4.     There is an apprehension expressed by the petitioner
that with the passage of time, positive action which was taken
after appropriate directions were issued by the Court may not
be taken. There is some basis for the apprehension that after
this Court ceases to monitor the implementation, the officers of
the Bruhat Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike ('BBMP') and the
Police department will show laxity.
5.     Therefore, with the assistance of the learned counsel
appearing for the parties, we have perused the various
provisions of law dealing with the use of the footways or
footpaths. As far as the rights of the citizens in relation to
footways are concerned, there is a detailed order passed by
this Court on 31st July 2019 in W.P.No.42927/2015. In the said
order, this Court has examined the provisions of the Karnataka
Municipal Corporations Act, 1976 (for short 'the said Act of
1976') including the mandatory obligations of the Corporation
under the said Act of 1976.          After referring to the various
provisions of the said Act of 1976, in paragraph 12, this Court
held that it is the statutory obligation of the BBMP to properly
maintain    public   streets     by    carrying  out   repairs  and
improvements thereto. The definition of ‘public street’ under the
said Act of 1976 includes a ‘footway’.        Even under the Bruhat
Bengaluru Mahanagara Palike Act, 2020 (for short 'the said Act
of 2020'), the definition of 'street' includes any footway, subway
or riding path or passage over which the public have a right of
passage or access.        Even under the Karnataka Police Act,
1963, clause 20 of Section 2 defines 'street' which includes
6.    After considering the issue, this Court in paragraphs 14
to 17 of the aforesaid said order has held thus:
"14. During the last three or four decades,
the Apex Court has considerably extended the
scope of the right to life guaranteed by Article 21
of the Constitution of India. The Apex Court has
held that the right to life as guaranteed under
Article 21 of the Constitution of India includes
a right to live a meaningful and dignified life.
After all, the footways or footpaths are
provided so that the citizens can comfortably
walk from one place to another. The streets are
provided for the citizens so that they can travel
comfortably by using vehicles. If there are
potholes on the footpaths or on the streets, or if
the same are not in good condition, the life of the
citizens is exposed to danger. There are number
of cases wherein, due to bad condition of the
roads, accidents have happened resulting in either
loss of human life or causing injuries to the
citizens more so, in case of persons plying or
traveling by two-wheelers. Hence, exposing the
citizens to any danger due to bad condition of
streets will amount to violation of their rights under
Article 21. In other words, a right to have
streets including footways in a good and
reasonable condition will have to be held as an
essential part of the fundamental rights
conferred on the citizens under Article 21 of
the Constitution of India.
15. Once we hold that the right to have
roads and footways in a reasonable condition is a
part of the right guaranteed under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India, serious consequences may
follow in the event there is a breach or violation of
the said right guaranteed by the Constitution of
India, by the BBMP or any other Corporation
established under the said Act of 1976 which are
a state within the meaning of Article 12 of the
Constitution of India.
16. In the case of SUDHIR MADAN AND
OTHERS vs. MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF
DELHI AND OTHERS1, the Apex Court held that
the citizens have a fundamental right to use
the     roads,     parks      and    other     public
conveniences provided by the State. If the
streets or footways are in bad condition, the
citizens are deprived of the effective use of the
same thereby infringing their constitutional
rights. If roads are not in good condition or if
roads are not sufficiently lighted or if the same are
full of potholes, they expose the citizens to a
grave danger. As observed earlier, under Section
58 of the said Act of 1976, various obligatory
functions of the Corporation are set out. One of
the mandatory functions is of lighting of public
streets.
17. There have been instances where
bad condition of the roads including presence of
potholes has caused road accidents. As observed
earlier, road accidents cause loss of life or result
in injuries to the citizens, some of which may lead
to permanent disability. If a citizen suffers loss
due to bad condition of the road, obviously, this
would result in violation of Article 21 of the
Hence, apart from the statutory right created in favour of the
citizens under the Municipal laws due to corresponding
obligation to maintain the streets and footways in a reasonable
condition, this Court has held that a right to have streets
including footways in a good and reasonable condition will
have to be held as an essential part of the fundamental rights
conferred on the citizens under Article 21 of the Constitution of
India. Thus, it follows that if the footways or public streets are
encroached upon in any manner including by parking of
vehicles, it will amount to violation of fundamental rights
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India as held
by this Court. It is in this context that the provisions of various
laws will have to be considered. There are two aspects of the
matter. The first aspect is that apart from the fundamental right
of the citizens, there are statutory provisions dealing with
footpaths or footways and parking of vehicles. The issue of
indiscriminate parking on footways is also involved in this
petition.    The second aspect will be enforcement of the
provisions of law by setting the criminal law in motion.
7.     In exercise of the powers conferred under Section 118 of
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (for short 'the MV Act'), the Rules
of the Road Regulations, 1989 (for short 'the said Regulations
of 1989) have been framed.            Regulation 15 of the said
Regulations of 1989 deals with restrictions on parking.       Rule
"15. Parking of the vehicle.-"(1) Every
driver of a motor vehicle parking on any road
shall park in such a way that it does not cause
or is not likely to cause danger, obstruction or
undue inconvenience to other road users and
the manner of parking is indicated by any sign
board or markings on the road side, he shall
park his vehicle in such manner.
(2) A driver of a motor vehicle shall not park his
bend, top of a hill or a humpbacked
(iii) near a traffic light or pedestrian
(iv) in a main road or one carrying
(v)     opposite another parked vehicle
or as obstruction to other vehicle;
(vi) alongside another parked vehicle;
(vii) on roads or at places or roads
where there is a continuous white line
hospital entrance or blocking a traffic
sign or entrance to a premises or a fire
(ix) on the wrong side of the road;
(x)     where parking is prohibited;
8.     The power under Section 118 of the M.V. Act to make
regulations has been again exercised in the year 2017 by the
Government of India by issuing the Motor Vehicles (Driving)
Regulations, 2017 (for short 'the said Regulations of 2017').
These regulations contain more comprehensive provisions.
Regulation 3 of the said Regulations of 2017 is material which
"3. Duty towards other road users and the
general public.- No vehicle shall be driven,
stopped or parked on a road or in a public
place in such a manner as is likely to
inconvenience to, other road users."
It follows that if a vehicle is stopped or parked on a footway or
footpath, it will cause inconvenience to the users of the footway
or footpath.      Hence, such a parking is prohibited. Another
important provision in the said Regulations of 2017 is clause
(5) of Regulation 5 which reads thus:
"5. Duties of drivers and riders.-(5) The
driver shall ensure that his vehicle, while moving
or when stationery, does not cause any
hindrance or undue inconvenience to other road
users or to the occupants of any properties."
9.      Regulation 22 is material which deals with stopping and
parking. Under clause (i) of sub-regulation (1) of Regulation 22,
there is a prohibition on stopping and parking at a place where
the road is narrow or where the view is obstructed.          Sub-
regulation (2) of Regulation 22 deals with prohibition on parking
of a vehicle. Sub-regulation (2) of Regulation 22 is material
(2) A vehicle shall not be parked-
(a)   at a place where stopping a vehicle is
prohibited under sub-regulation (1);
(b)   on a main road or at a stretch of a road
where the notified maximum speed limit is fifty
(c)   on a footpath, cycle track and
(d)   before or after an intersection or a
junction up to a distance of fifty meters from the
edge of the intersection or junction;
(e)   where it would block access to
(f)   near a bus stop, at the entrance to an
educational institution or a hospital or if it is likely
to block a traffic sign or a fire hydrant;
(i)   in front of the entrance or exit of a
(j)   where there is a continuous yellow line
installed or painted on the carriageway on the
(k)   away from the edge of the footpath;
(l)   opposite another parked vehicle;
(m) if it is likely obstruct any other
vehicle or cause inconvenience to any person;
(n)    alongside another parked vehicle;
(o)    beyond the specified duration at a
place where parking is permitted for a specified
(p)    in a place where parking is permitted
for a specified category or categories of vehicles
and the vehicle does not belong to the specified
(q)    by a driver who is not differently abled
in a parking space reserved for vehicles driven by
(r)    in a manner other than that specified in
the parking bays in a designated parking lot or in
such a manner as to occupy excessive space; and
(s)    where parking is prohibited by a "No
Thus, there is a complete prohibition on parking a vehicle at a
place where the road is narrow or the view is obstructed.
There is a complete prohibition on parking a vehicle on
footpaths and cycle tracks. Clause (k) provides that a vehicle
shall not be parked away from the edge of the foot path. This
provision is obviously made to ensure that the use of adjacent
public street should continue to remain unaffected by the
parking. Clause (m) prohibits of parking of vehicles in such a
manner that other vehicles will be obstructed or inconvenience
will be caused to any person.               Thus, not only on
footpaths/footways, but there is a prohibition on parking of
vehicles in such a manner that it will obstruct the other vehicles
or cause inconvenience to any person. All this will have to be
appreciated in the light of definition of 'parking' under clause (j)
of Regulation 2 of the said Regulations of 2017 which reads
"(j) "parking" means the bringing of a vehicle to
a stationary position and causing it to wait for
any purpose other than that of immediately
taking up or setting down persons, goods or
luggage, and includes stopping for more than
10.   Regulation 39 is also material which reads thus:
39. Pedestrian crossings, footpaths and
cycle tracks.- (1)         While approaching an
uncontrolled pedestrian crossing, the driver shall
slowdown, stop and give way to pedestrians,
users of invalid carriages and wheelchairs.
(2) If traffic has come to a standstill, the driver
shall not drive the vehicle on the pedestrian
crossing if he is unlikely to be able to move
further and thereby block the pedestrian
crossing.
(3) When any road is provided with a
footpath or cycle track, no vehicle shall drive
on such footpath or track, except on the
directions of a police officer in uniform or
where       traffic   signs      permitting     such
The provisions of both the Regulations of the year 1989 and
2017 to which we have made a reference are mandatory in
11.   As could be seen from Section 177A of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988, any contravention of the Regulations made
under Section 118 is punishable with fine which shall not be
less than five hundred rupees and the maximum fine
prescribed is one thousand rupees. It reads thus:
"177A. Penalty for contravention of regulations
under section 118. - Whoever contravenes the
regulations made under section 118, shall be
punishable with fine which shall not be less than
five hundred rupees, but may extend to one
Thus, violation of the said Regulations attracts penal provision
12.   We may also make a reference to the provisions of the
Karnataka Traffic Control Act, 1960 (for short 'the said Act of
1960'). Section 8 thereof prohibits leaving a vehicle on a public
place in such a manner that it will cause danger, obstruction or
undue inconvenience to the other users.        Public place has
been defined under clause (h) of Section 2 of the said Act. It
includes a road, street, way or other place, whether a
thoroughfare or not, over which the public have a right of
access or over which they have a right to pass. Obviously,
footways will be included in the definition of public place.
Under Section 18 of the said Act of 1960, any violation of the
provisions of the said Act of 1960 or of any Rule made
thereunder is an offence for which, unfortunately, a very mild
punishment is prescribed of fine which may extend to ten
rupees or in case of successive offence, it may extend to fifty
rupees. This is a legislation of 1960. We hope and trust that
the Legislature will consider whether Section 18 needs an
amendment for providing for stringent punishments.
13.    The Karnataka Traffic Control Rules, 1979 (for short 'the
said Rules of 1979') have been framed in exercise of the
powers under Sections 14 and 16 of the said Act of 1960. Use
of footpaths is provided in Rule 6 which reads thus:
"6.     Use of foot-paths.-(1) No person
other than the person leading by foot, a bicycle,
tricycle or a perambulator shall without
reasonable cause, proceed on the carriage-way
where foot-paths either on both sides or one side
to such a carriage-way have been provided for
the exclusive use of pedestrians.
(2) No person shall, without reasonable
cause proceed on the carriage-way except on its
left side, if no foot-path for the exclusive use of
pedestrians adjoins such carriage way.
(3) No vehicle other than an invalid carriage
or a toy vehicle or a cycle ridden by a person
below ten years of age shall be used or kept on a
foot-path.
(4) No person shall cross the roads except.-
(i) at pedestrian crossing where such
(ii) where the green signal is on for
automatic          electronic     signalling
device has been           installed for the
purpose of regulating the traffic; or
(iii)      on the direction of a police
14.    Now, we come to the provisions of the MV Act. Section
117 deals with parking places and halting stations. The said
provision provides for determination of places where motor
vehicles may stand either indefinitely or for a specified period
of time. Section 122 of the MV Act is material which reads
"122. Leaving vehicle in dangerous position.- No
person in charge of a motor vehicle shall cause
or allow the vehicle or any trailer to be
abandoned or to remain at rest on any public
place in such a position or in such a condition or
in such circumstances as to cause or likely to
cause       danger,      obstruction        or    undue
inconvenience to other users of the public place
This provision is applicable when a motor vehicle is abandoned
causing inconvenience to other users of a public place which
will include footways. Under sub-section (1) of Section 127,
there is a power of vesting in the authorities to deal with
abandoned vehicles by a towing the same.
15.    Coming back to the penal provisions of the MV Act,
Section 177 provides that whoever contravenes any provisions
of the MV Act or Rules, Regulations or notification made
thereunder can be punished for the first offence, with a fine
which may extend to five hundred rupees. There is one more
penal provision which is Section 201 dealing with obstruction to
free flow of traffic.
16.    There are penal provisions under the Indian Penal Code,
1860 (for short 'IPC'). The first and foremost is under Section
188. An offence punishable under Section 188 is made out
when there is a disobedience to order duly promulgated by a
public servant. Indiscriminate parking on footways is a public
nuisance within the meaning of Section 268 of IPC. Section
283 deals with danger or obstruction to a public way or line of
17.    The upshot of the above discussion is that there is a
complete prohibition on parking of any vehicle on footways.
The restriction is found in the Regulations framed under
Section 118 of the MV Act as well as under the Rules framed
under the said Act of 1960.
18.     However, the laws relating to footways and public streets
are rarely effectively implemented. At this stage, we make a
reference to the decision of the Apex Court in the case of
AHMEDABAD MUNICIPAL CORPORATION vs. NAWAB
KHAN GULAB KHAN AND OTHERS2. In paragraph 8 of the
said decision, the Apex Court has held thus.
"8. It is for the court to decide in exercise of its
constitutional power of judicial review whether
the deprivation of life or personal liberty in a
given case is by procedure which is reasonable,
fair and just or it is otherwise. Footpath, street
or pavement are public property which are
intended to serve the convenience of the
general public. They are not laid for private
use and indeed, their use for a private
purpose frustrates the very object for which
they are carved out from portions of public
roads.      The main reason for laying out
pavements is to ensure that the pedestrians
are able to go about their daily affairs with a
reasonable measure of safety and security.
That facility, which has matured into a right
of the pedestrians, cannot be set at naught
by allowing encroachments to be made on
the pavements. The claim of the pavement-
dwellers to construct huts on the pavement or
road is a permanent obstruction to free passage
of traffic and pedestrians' safety and security.
Therefore, it would be impermissible to permit or
to make use of the pavement for private purpose.
They should allow passing and repassing by the
pedestrians. No one has a right to make use of
a public property for their private purpose without
the requisite authorisation from the competent
authority. It would, therefore, be but the duty
of the competent authority to remove
encroachments on the pavement or footpath
of the public street obstructing free flow of
traffic or passing or repassing by the
19.  In paragraph 22 of the said decision, the Apex Court has
made the following observations:
"22. Empirical study of urban and rural
population in India discloses that due to lack of
civic facilities and means of livelihood people
from rural areas constantly keep migrating to the
urban areas resulting in mushroom growth of
pavements/footpaths etc. Every Municipal
Corporation has statutory obligation to
provide free flow of traffic and pedestrians'
right to pass and re-pass freely and safely; as
Corporation/Municipality have statutory duty
to have the encroachments removed. It
would, therefore, be inexpedient to give any
direction not to remove, or to allow the
encroachments on the pavements or
footpaths which is a constant source of
unhygienic ecology, traffic hazards and risk-
prone to lives of the pedestrians. It would,
therefore, be necessary to permit the
Corporation to exercise the statutory powers
pavements/footpaths            and   to     prevent
construction thereon. As held earlier, the
Corporation should always be vigilant and
should not allow encroachments of the
pavements and foot paths. As soon as they
notice any encroachments they should
forthwith take steps to have them removed
and would not allowed them to settle down
for a long time. It is stated in their affidavit that
they are giving 21 days' notice before taking
action for ejectment of the encroachers. That
procedure, in our view, is a fair procedure and,
therefore, the right to hearing before taking
action for ejectment is not necessary in the fact-
situation. But the Commissioner should ensure
that everyone is served and if it is not possible
for reasons to be recorded in the file, through
fixture of the notice on the hutment, duly attested
by two independent panchas. This procedure
would avoid the dispute that they were not give
opportunity; further prolongation of the
encroachment and hazard to the traffic and
20.    In the decision in the case of SUDHIR MADAN AND
OTHERS vs. MUNICIPAL CORPORATION OF DELHI AND
OTHERS (supra), it is reiterated that a right to use footway or
footpath is a right of citizens. All this has to be appreciated in
the light of the fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21 of
the Constitution of India. Therefore, all the penal provisions
which we have discussed above must be scrupulously
enforced by all the concerned.
21.    The State Government will have to invite attention of the
concerned authorities to the penal provisions of the aforesaid
statutes and Regulations/Rules. The State Government must
ensure that the penal provisions are strictly enforced. Unless
the penal provisions are properly enforced, the aforesaid
provisions of law will remain only on paper.
22.    We, therefore, pass the following order:
(i) We hold that it is the duty of the respondents
to ensure that the footways and public streets are
kept free of obstructions including illegal parking
thereon. It is also their responsibility to ensure that
violations of the aforesaid provisions of law are not
taken casually and criminal law is promptly set in
(ii)  We direct the State Government and the
traffic    Police   Department      to   make    effective
implementation      of the     provisions  contained     in
Sections 117, 122, 127, 177A and 201 of the Motor
Vehicles Act, 1988 on a complaint made by a citizen
or otherwise. If any violation of the said provisions is
made, apart from taking action of removal of illegally
stopped, parked or abandoned vehicles on footways,
criminal law must be set in motion immediately;
(iii)  The    respondents    shall   ensure     strict
implementation of the provisions of the said Act of
1960 and the said Rules of 1979. As noted earlier,
the said Act of 1960 contains penal provisions for
violation.  Therefore, the relevant provisions of the
said Act of 1960 and the said Rules of 1979 shall be
scrupulously followed.
(iv) We     direct  the   respondents    to   strictly
implement the prohibitions noted above under both
the Regulations framed in exercise of the powers
under Section 118 of the M.V. Act. It is the duty of the
State     Government      and    its   agencies     and
instrumentalities to ensure that the aforesaid relevant
provisions under the M.V. Act, the said Act of 1960,
the rules framed under the said Act of 1960 as well as
the Regulations framed under Section 118 of the M.V.
Act concerning footways are strictly implemented.
They shall ensure that criminal law is promptly set in
motion against the offenders and violators;
(v) We direct the State Government as well as the
BBMP to issue directions to its officers for the
purpose of implementation of the above directions
within a period of six weeks from today;
(vi)    We  may     also    note  here    that   non-
implementation of the aforesaid provisions which we
have discussed in the body of the judgment may even
amount to violation of right to life guaranteed to the
citizens under Article 21 of the Constitution of India;
(vii) The petition is disposed of in the above
(viii) However, for reporting compliance by both
the BBMP and the State Government, the petition
shall be listed on 21st June 2021;
(ix) Compliance shall be reported by 17th June
(x) The pending interlocutory application does not
survive and is accordingly disposed of.