Learned counsel for the petitioner, Sri M.A. Siddiqui, Advocate
and learned A.G.A. for the State, Sri Balkeshwar Srivastava,
Advocate are present.
The instant writ petition is moved under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India invoking the supervisory jurisdiction of
the High Court over its subordinate court against the impugned
order dated 12.9.2006 passed by the Additional Session
Judge/Fast Track Court No.12, Sultanpur in the capacity of the
revisional court. The said revision was moved by the petitioner
against the order dated 20.4.2006 passed by IIIrd, Additional
Chief Judicial Magistrate in Criminal Case No.386 of 2006
(Mahesh Chandra Dwivedi Vs. State of U.P.).
Before going through the aforesaid two impugned orders of the
learned courts below namely the revisional court of Additional
Session Judge/F.T.C. Sultanpur as well the court of Additional
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sultanpur so as to look into the vices
crept into the impugned orders giving cause of action to file this
It would be relevant to give a brief account of the matter.
Petitioner was carrying on the business of Tent and Shamiana at
Jamo Bazar, Sultanpur in the name and style 'Sambal Tent
House'. In the intervening night of 7/8.05.2005, a theft took
place in his tent house by breaking the locks and doors of the
back side, the thieves carried away almost all the articles of
Shamiana valued of approximately sum of Rs.1,00,000/-. On
coming into the knowledge of theft on the next morning,
petitioner rushed to the police station and immediately given a
written complaint which was not registered by the local police
as First Information Report. On 19.05.2005 after a considerable
delay of 11 days the police registered the F.I.R. bearing Case
Crime No.125/2005 under Section 379 I.P.C., Police Station-
Jamo, Sultanpur. The investigation started and ultimately a final
report was submitted before the court on 20.04.2006. The final
report states that report as to the incident of theft was false and
lodged with malafide motive of claiming insurance amount,
there is no reason to proceed with the case. Learned court below
accepted the final report despite a protest petition against the
said report was there and summoned the complainant
(petitioner) under Section 182 Cr.P.C. for criminal prosecution.
It is the aforesaid order aggrieved from which the petitioner
firstly moved a criminal revision which was heard by
Additional Session Judge/F.T.C. Court No.12, Sultanpur who
rejected the same. The petitioner then came to the High Court
with petition stating illegality and irregularity in the impugned
orders passed by the court below which are given hereunder.
(i) The theft was committed by unknown thieves, therefore,
police was to investigate the matter and burdened to find out the
(ii) The report was made on morning of 8.5.2005 promptly
within reasonably possible time from the commission of
offence in the night of 7/8.05.2005 but police itself delayed in
registering the F.I.R. for 11 days on 19.05.2005. Meanwhile, no
investigation could be started for want of registration of F.I.R.
(iii) The statement of natives of the locality was not recorded.
(iv) The police submitted final report before the court without
investigating the matter seriously, simply on speculation that
the FIR of theft might have been lodged for claiming insurance
Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that now more than
15 years has already been elapsed from the date of incident and
the witnesses of the incident who were native of the locality are
not available so as to depose before the court with regard to the
Learned counsel for the petitioner further argued that the
impugned order was passed only on consideration of the case
diary submitted by the police station and the final report was
accepted on the basis of materials on case diary, however, case
diary in itself have no material except a speculation as to the
lodging of FIR for false claim of insurance.
Learned A.G.A. for the State argued that the learned counsel
always tried to linger the case and as such period of 15 years
elapsed without proceeding with the petition, therefore, petition
has become infructuous.
The argument of learned A.G.A. is not tenable as the impugned
order passed by Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sultanpur
on 20.04.2006 is consisting of order of summoning to the
complainant for prosecution with regard to false information of
theft given to the police and the court.
Both the courts below erred in acting in accordance with the
procedure on receiving the police report over a registered
criminal case. On examining the impugned order dated
20.04.2006, concluding para of the order of Additional Chief
Judicial Magistrate, Sultanpur shows a conclusion "the goods
stolen in the incident of theft are worth Rs.97,200/- including
mats, pillow and several other goods. Had the police been
sincere for prompt action the stolen goods could have been
recovered. The said sincerity and promptness undoubtedly
justifies the conclusion of the Investigating Officer."
Amazing enough the court of Magistrate on the one hand
reached at the conclusions that investigating officer was under
fault to commit delay that's why stolen goods could not be
recovered, the consequence of such conclusion could be that the
police who submitted final report as to the falsity of the First
Information Report as to the theft in the shop of the petitioner
was wrong. The protest application could have been treated as
complaint. The speculation of police that the information as to
the theft might have been lodged for the purpose of claiming
insurance amount falsely could not be given weight by the
Magistrate legally for holding the First Information Report
lodged falsely. As such proceeding for action under Section 182
Cr.P.C. vide the impugned order of Magistrate dated 20.4.2006
is not tenable in the eyes of law.
In the case of Vishnu Kumar Tiwari Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh
and Anr. reported in (2019) 8 SCC 27, it is held, "before a
Magistrate proceeds to accept a final report under S.173 and
exonerate the accused, it is incumbent upon the Magistrate to
apply his mind to the contents of protest petition and arrive at a
conclusion thereafter - While the investigating officer may rest
content by producing the final report, which, according to him,
is the culmination of his efforts, the duty of the Magistrate is
not one limited to readily accepting the final report - It is
incumbent upon Magistrate to go through the materials, and
after hearing the complainant and considering the contents of
protest petition, finally decide the future course of action to be,
whether to continue with the matter or to close the case."
The protest application of the petitioner was not only rejected
but also, without examining the truthness or falsity of the F.I.R.
on evidence, the learned court of Additional Chief Judicial
Magistrate proceeded under Section 182 Cr.P.C. for the
prosecution of complainant (petitioner) for lodging false report.
Section 182 Cr.P.C. is quoted hereunder for easy reference:-
"182. Offences committed by letters, etc.
(1) Any offence which includes cheating may, if the deception is practised
by means of letters or telecommunication messages, be inquired into or
tried by any Court within whose local jurisdiction such letters or
messages were sent or were received; and any offence of cheating and
dishonestly inducing delivery of property may be inquired into or tried by
a Court within whose local jurisdiction the property was delivered by the
person deceived or was received by the accused person.
(2) Any offence punishable under section 494 or section 495 of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860 ) may be inquired into or tried by a Court within
whose local jurisdiction the offence was committed or the offender last
resided with his or her spouse by the first marriage 1 or the wife by the
first marriage has taken up permanent residence after the commission of
If the learned court of Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate was
not in agreement with the protest application lodged by the
complainant against the report of Investigating Officer
submitted before the court, the just and proper action needed on
the part of the court was to read the protest petition as
complaint, so that the informant (petitioner) could have been
given opportunity to produce evidences and witnesses in
support of complaint made to the police with regard to the theft
in his shop. As such, the order of the Additional Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Sultanpur dated 20.4.2006 having been passed
without affording opportunity to the petitioner for leading
evidences in support of his claim. The court has not properly
examined on evidences judicially whether the report was false
with regard to the theft, as lodged in the local police station on
19.05.2005, therefore, the order is not tenable in the eyes of
On the basis of above discussions, it is held that the order dated
20.04.2006 of Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sultanpur is suffering
from illegality and the Additional Session Judge/Fast Track
Court No.12, Sultanpur was also wrong in confirming the order
of the Magistrate vide his judgment 12.09.2006.
Concluding the discussions, both the impugned orders i.e.,
order dated 12.9.2006 passed by the Additional Session
Judge/Fast Track Court No.12, Sultanpur and the order dated
20.4.2006 passed by IIIrd, Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate
in Criminal Case No.386 of 2006 (Mahesh Chandra Dwivedi
Vs. State of U.P.) are set aside and writ petition is allowed.
The order be communicated to the court concerned. Process
issued, if any, shall remain ineffective and unenforceable.