on anticipatory bail on account of offence being registered vide
C.R.No.11207024200783 of 2020 with Godhra Taluka Police
Station, Panchmahal for the offence punishable u/s. 354(A)(1),
354-D, 323, 504, 506(2) and 114 of the Indian Penal Code and
Sections 3(1)(r), 3(1)(s), 3(1) (w-1-2) and 3(2)(5A) of the
Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe (Prevention of Atrocity)
Act, 1989 (for short "the Atrocities Act"), wherein learned 5th
Additional Sessions Judge, Panchmahal at Godhra rejected
the said application on 11.01.2021.
2.    Feeling aggrieved by the said order, appellants have
preferred present criminal appeal under Section 14 of the
3.    Heard learned advocate for the appellants and learned
APP for the respondent-State and learned advocate for the
respondent no.2.
4.      It is submitted by learned advocate for the appellants
that no offence much less the offence as alleged in the FIR is
being committed by the appellants and looking to the
complaint alleged incident occurred on 19.11.2020 while the
complainant has filed present complaint on 21.11.2020 after
three days. It is further submitted that looking to the
complaint, the names of the appellants are not shown in the
FIR and the complainant has in the complaint stated that
later on, she came to know that the present appellants were
present at the Jesinghbhai’s petrol pump. It is further
submitted that no offence under the Atrocities Act is prima
facie made out against the appellants and the appellants have
not insulted or used abuse any words alleged by the
complainant and have not spoken any words against the
complainant’s caste mentioned by the complainant which will
amount to the offence punishable under the Atrocities Act. It
is further submitted that very vague and general allegations
are made in the complaint which arises doubt. It is further
submitted that the no offence as alleged has taken place and
the appellants are falsely arraigned as accused in the offence
only to settle the political dispute. Hence, it is requested by
learned advocate for the appellants to allow this appeal.
5.    From the other side, learned APP appearing for the
respondent-State and learned advocate for the respondent
no.2 have strongly objected the submissions made by learned
advocate for the appellants and submitted that Section 18
clearly debars the present appellants to pray for anticipatory
bail. It is further submitted that during the course of
investigation, names of the present appellants were revealed
and their participation also and serious allegations are made
against the present appellants by the victim. Hence, no liberty
can be shown by this Court in favour of the present
appellants. Hence, it was requested by learned APP appearing
for the respondent- State to dismiss the criminal appeal.
6.     If we consider the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court
delivered in the case of Subhash Kashinath Mahajan Vs.
State of Maharashtra reported in 2018(6) SCC 454, wherein
the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that there is no absolute
bar against grant of anticipatory bail in cases under the
Atrocities Act if no prima facie case is made out or where on
judicial scrutiny the complaint is found to be prima facie mala
fide. View taken by the High Court of Gujarat in the case of
Pankaj D. Suthar (supra) and Dr.N.T. Desai (supra) was
approved by the Hon'ble Supreme Court. From the averments
made in the complaint, basic ingredients of the offence, as
alleged are missing in the complaint. Merely any particular
word spoken alleging someone caste would not involve the
present appellants in the offence. There are no specific
allegations made by the complainant against the present
appellant in his complaint of committing any offence under
the provisions of Sections 3(2)(5)(a), 3(g),3(p),3(r),3(s)(z)(c)& u/
s. 8 of the Atrocity Act.
7.     In     the    case of  Union        of India    Vs.     State          of
Maharashtra in Review Petition (Cri.) No.228 of 2018 in
Criminal Appeal No.416 of 2018, it was opined that
direction nos.(iii) and (iv) issued by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
deserve to be and are hereby recalled and consequently we
hold that direction no.(v), also vanishes. The other directions
remained as it is as there is no bar in granting anticipatory
bail. This Court has made scrutiny of the complaint and prima
facie, it is found that there are no specific averments,
attracting the provisions of the Act as mentioned in the
8.     In the case of Gorige Pentaiah v. State of Andhra
Pradesh and Ors, reported in (2008)12 Supreme Court Cases
531, it was held that according to Section 3(i)(x) of the Atrocity
Act, the complainant ought to have alleged that the appellant-
accused was not a member of the Scheduled Caste or a
Scheduled Tribe, he was intentionally insulted or intimidated
by the accused with intent to humiliate in a place within
public view.
9.     Having heard learned advocate for the appellants and
learned APP for the respondent-State, it appears that in the
complaint, the respondent no.2 has stated that on 19.11.2020
at about 04:00 p.m., she was returning from Santrod to
Merap, at that time, the accused nos.1 and 2 came and they
have demanded for sexual from her, so she has informed her
husband and thereafter, she along with her husband went to
the house of the accused Hasmukhbhai and as Hasmukhbhai
was present in his house, they went to Jesingbhai’s petrol
pump, at that time, Sureshbhai Jesingbhai, Rajeshbhai
Jesingbhai and Jagdishbhai Jasingbhai came and they have
given abusive words against her caste and have given kick and
first blow to the witness Kamleshbhai, and therefore, she has
filed the complaint under the Atrocities Act. It also appears
that alleged incident occurred on 19.11.2020 while the
complainant has filed present complaint on 21.11.2020 after
three days and looking to the complaint, the names of the
appellants are not shown in the FIR and the complainant has
in the complaint stated that later on, she came to know that
the present appellants were present at the Jesinghbhai’s
petrol pump. It also appears that no offence under the
Atrocities Act is prima facie made out against the appellants
and the appellants have not insulted or used abuse any words
alleged by the complainant and have not spoken any words
against the complainant’s caste mentioned by the complainant
which will amount to the offence punishable under the
Atrocities Act. From the complaint itself, it appears that the
names of the present appellants were not disclosed when the
complain was lodged by the respondent no.2. Thereafter,
during the investigation, their names were revealed by the
prosecution and they are involved in the offence. There is no
allegation made against the present appellants to attack the
provisions of the Atrocities Act and the appellants have not
used abusive language against the complainant.
10.   If we refer Section 3(5) (A) of the Act, it must be within
knowledge of the accused person that such person is a
member of Schedule Caste or Schedule Tribe or such property
belongs to such member. It is nowhere alleged by the
complainant that the accused persons were having knowledge
that the complainant was the member of Schedule Caste or
Schedule Tribe or such property belongs to such member. In
absence of any specific allegations to attract Section 3(5) (A) of
the Act, case of the prosecution cannot be believed at                this
juncture. Considering the schedule prescribed under the Act
and the facts of the case, the prayer made by the present
appellants requires consideration.
11.   In the result, present Criminal Appeal is allowed and
the impugned judgment and order dated 11.01.2021 passed in
Criminal Misc. Application No.15 of 2021 by the Court of
learned 5th Additional Sessions Judge, Panchmahal at Godhra
is hereby quashed and set aside. The appellants are ordered to
be enlarged on bail in the event of their arrest on furnishing a
bond of Rs. 10,000/- each with surety of like amount on the
following conditions that the appellants:-
(a) shall cooperate with the investigation and make
themselves available for interrogation whenever
(b) shall remain present at concerned Police Station
on 22.02.2022 between 11.00 a.m. and 2.00 p.m.;
(c) shall not directly or indirectly make any
inducement, threat or promise to any person
acquainted with the fact of the case so as to
dissuade her from disclosing such facts to the
(d) shall not obstruct or hamper the police
investigation and not to play mischief with the
evidence collected or yet to be collected by the
(e) shall at the time of execution of bond, furnish
the address to the investigating officer and the
court concerned and shall not change his residence
till the final disposal of the case till further orders;
(f) shall not leave India without the permission of
the Trial Court and if having passport shall deposit
the same before the Trial Court within a week; and
(g) it would be open to the Investigating Officer to
file an application for remand if he considers it
proper and just and the learned Magistrate would
12.   Despite this order, it would be open for the Investigating
Agency to apply to the competent Magistrate, for police
remand of the appellants. The appellants shall remain present
before the learned Magistrate on the first date of hearing of
such application and on all subsequent occasions, as may be
directed by the learned Magistrate. This would be sufficient to
treat the accused in the judicial custody for the purpose of
entertaining application of the prosecution for police remand.
13.   This is, however, without prejudice to the right of the
accused to seek stay against an order of remand, if,
ultimately, granted and the power of the learned Magistrate to
consider such a request in accordance with law. It is clarified
that the appellants, even if, remanded to the police custody,
upon completion of such period of police remand, shall be set
free      immediately,   subject    to     other conditions         of     this
anticipatory bail order.
14. At the trial, the trial Court shall not be influenced by the
prima facie observations made by this Court while enlarging
the appellants on bail.
15.      Notice stands discharged.
16.      Registry is directed to send a copy of this order to the
concerned Police Station as well as learned Sessions Court
concerned through fax or email forthwith.