At the outset, learned counsel for the State has frankly referred to the order dated
24.08.2022 passed by a co-ordinate Bench, disapproving the propositions adopted in
several orders by the High Court, imposing the terms of payment for the purpose of
granting the relief of pre-arrest bail and remitting the matter for re-consideration with
several observations.
Having regard to the circumstances of the case, we felt inclined to pass similar
order in the present matter too, where the High Court has proceeded to grant the
concession of pre-arrest bail to the appellants on the condition of their furnishing a bond
in the sum of Rs.25,000/- and also depositing a demand draft in the sum of Rs.7,50,000/-
as an ad-interim victim compensation. However, learned counsel for the respondent No.
2 has submitted that the expression “victim compensation” as used in the impugned order
may not be apt for the reason that it was not a case of recovery of victim compensation
but, otherwise, the condition cannot be said to be unjustified or onerous because
receiving of the said sum of Rs. 7,50,000/- by the appellants at the time of marriage has
not been a fact in dispute.
Even if we take the submissions of the learned counsel for the contesting
respondent on its face value, we are clearly of the view that in essence, the petitions
seeking relief of prearrest bail are not money recovery proceedings and, ordinarily, there
is no justification for adopting such a course that for the purpose of being given the
concession of pre-arrest bail, the person concerned apprehending arrest has to make
While issuing notice in this matter on 16.04.2009, this Court has provided that the
appellants shall not be arrested in connection with Complaint Case No. 1484 of 2017.
Obviously, the said condition of depositing Rs.7,50,000/- stood arrested because of the
stay order of this Court. This position has hitherto continued.
Having regard to the circumstances, in our view, the said condition of depositing a
sum of Rs.7,50,000/- for the purpose of granting the relief of pre-arrest bail cannot be
approved and else, the order granting bail deserves to be maintained. Hence, we are of
the view that no useful purpose would be served by sending the matter for
reconsideration to the High Court and the order impugned deserves to be modified
appropriately in these appeals only.
For what has been observed and discussed hereinabove, the order impugned is
modified in the manner that while other directions and requirements of the order i.e., of
releasing the appellants on bail in the event of arrest on furnishing bond of Rs. 25,000/-,
shall remain intact but the other part of the order, requiring the appellants to deposit a
sum of Rs. 7,50,000/-, shall stand annulled.
The appeals are allowed to the extent and in the manner indicated above.
All pending applications stand disposed of.