The petitioner is the second accused in the case registered as
V.C.No.No.5/2014 by the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Vigilance
2.    The case against the petitioner and the other accused is
registered under Section 13(1)(d)(ii) read with 13(2) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (for short 'the P.C Act') and also
under Sections 465, 471 and 120B of the Indian Penal Code.
3. The allegations in the first information report (Annexure-I)
in the case are as follows: On 11.08.2014, a surprise check was
conducted at the Collectorate, Idukki and the Taluk Office,
Udumbanchola by the Deputy Collector (LR), Idukki in the presence
of the Superintendent of Police, VACB, Eastern Range, Kottayam. It
was revealed during the surprise check that no proper follow up
action was taken in the Taluk Office, Udumbanchola till August,
2010 with regard to the illegal occupation of government land in
Sy.No.87/1     of   Chinnakanal      Village   and     the unauthorized
construction of buildings therein by     M/s.Joys Group (A3) which
had been detected by the Deputy Tahsildar, Task Force-III in
March, 2008. On the basis of a court direction, Sri.V.R.Mohanan
Pillai (A1), who was then the Tahsildar, Udumbanchola, had issued
proceedings dated 11.08.2011, declaring that the land having an
extent of 3.41 acres, including part of the land covered by patta
No.71/72 (2.14 acres), was in the unauthorised possession of
M/s.Joys Group and directing the Village Officer, Chinnakanal to
take steps for resumption of the land. There were two major
procedural irregularities in issuing this order. The first irregularity
was, instead of conducting the hearing personally as prescribed by
the Kerala Land Conservancy Act, the Tahsildar (A1) entrusted that
task to the Head Clerk. The second irregularity was that, the first
accused, in paragraph 8 of his order clearly stated that the party
was free to avail the appellate provisions under the above Act but
he issued notice and conducted summary eviction. The first
accused was convinced that manipulation of records had been done
by M/s. Joys Group with the connivance of revenue officials but he
did not take any legal action against the culprits.        The above
irregularities were done by the first accused deliberately to favour
M/s.Joys Group. M/s.Joys Group challenged the above proceedings
in the court, on the ground that the first accused had not followed
the mandatory procedure before issuing the order. Later, on the
basis of the direction of the court, Sri.P.Sunil Kumar (A2), who was
then the Tahsildar, Udumbanchola, conducted a fresh hearing and
he, without going through the back files and the factual position of
the matter, issued a fresh proceedings dated 24.05.2014, which
gave undue favour to M/s.Joys Group. Thus, the first and the
second accused conspired with M/s.Joys Group and they abused
their official position and allowed M/s.Joys Group to get undue
pecuniary advantage and caused corresponding loss to             the
4. On the basis of the above allegations, Annexure-1 F.I.R
was registered on 14.10.2014.
5.    The petitioner, who is the second accused in the case,
has filed this application under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (for short 'the Code') for quashing Annexure-I
F.I.R registered against him.
6. The investigating officer filed a statement of facts on
14.01.2020 with regard to the investigation so far conducted in the
7.    Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and also the
8.   Learned counsel for the petitioner contended that the sin
committed by the petitioner is that he passed Annexure-VI order
dated 24.05.2014 in compliance with the direction given by this
Court in W.P(C).No.22227/2011. Learned counsel would submit
that the petitioner is needlessly harassed for the sole reason that
the order passed by him, in his capacity as a quasi judicial
authority, was not in favour of the Government. Learned counsel
submitted that, even if the order passed by the petitioner was
erroneous or illegal, he could not be prosecuted for the offences
under the P.C.Act, unless there is an allegation that he was
actuated by extraneous considerations in passing it. Learned
counsel for the petitioner further submitted that, even if the entire
allegations against the petitioner in Annexure-1 F.I.R are accepted
as true, it would not attract any offence against him.
9. The circumstances which led to the issuing of Annexure-VI
order are narrated in the statement filed by the investigating
officer. The only additional fact mentioned in that statement is that
the    petitioner  issued  an   order,  correcting  certain  mistakes
contained in Annexure-VI order and that such correction was made
by him without the concurrence of the District Collector. Inspite of
the investigation conducted for about six years, the          statement
filed by the investigating officer does not reveal that any evidence
has been collected against the petitioner to prove the offences
alleged against him.
10.    Learned     Public   Prosecutor    submitted    that  the
investigation of the case has been almost completed. But, whether
any evidence against the petitioner could be collected or not during
the investigation conducted over a period of more than six years,
remains unanswered. Learned Public Prosecutor has also not made
any submissions to controvert the contentions raised by the
learned counsel for the petitioner.
11.   Before proceeding further, it is necessary to narrate the
circumstances which led to the registration of Annexure-I F.I.R.
There    was    an   allegation  that  M/s.Joys    Enterprises  was  in
unauthorised     occupation     of  government     land  comprised   in
Sy.No.87/1 of the Chinnakanal Village and that they had illegally
constructed buildings in that land.      This allegation was raised on
the ground that patta No.71/72 in respect of a portion of the above
land was a fraudulent document. The first accused Tahsildar
conducted an enquiry in the matter and he passed an order dated
11.08.2011, declaring that the land having an extent of 3.41 acres,
including 2.14 acres covered by patta No. 71/72, was in the
unauthorised     possession      of   M/s.Joys  Group    and   directing
resumption of that land.
12. M/s. Joys Enterprises challenged the above order dated
11.08.2011 before this Court by filing W.P(C) No. 22227/2011. As
per Annexure-III judgment dated 21.12.2011, this Court quashed
the order dated 11.08.2011 issued by the first accused and
directed the Tahsildar, Udumbanchola to conduct a fresh enquiry
and to pass fresh orders within a period of three months from the
date of receipt of a copy of that judgment. This Court also directed
that possession of the property which was taken over from M/s.
Joys Enterprises shall be returned to them forthwith.
13.   The     Government       had   challenged    Annexure-III
judgment      by   filing   the   appeal   W.A.No.139/2012.     As   per
Annexure-IV judgment dated 17.01.2014,             this Court dismissed
the above writ appeal.
14.   The     petitioner    took   charge    as   Tahsildar   at
Udumbanchola only on 20.02.2014. He had worked there only till
15.   In accordance with the direction of this Court in W.P(C)
No. 22227/2011, the petitioner conducted fresh enquiry and he
passed Annexure-VI order dated 24.05.2014.          A perusal of this
order would show that the petitioner conducted personal hearing of
the party (M/s.Joys Enterprises) on 23.04.2014 and verified the
original documents produced by the party.         The petitioner also
conducted site inspection. The petitioner had also examined the
prior documents relating to the disputed land. On scrutiny of the
documents produced during the hearing, the petitioner reached the
conclusion that the patta No.71/72 appeared to be a genuine
document.       He found that the file relating to issue of patta No.
71/72 was not available. He also found that the department could
not trace out any documentary evidence to prove that the patta
issued in L.A No. 71/72 was not a genuine document. Ultimately,
as per Annexure-VI order, the petitioner came to the conclusion
that the patta in L.A No. 71/72 appeared to be a genuine
document issued as per law until documentary evidence could be
traced out against it. A direction was also given to the Head Clerk
concerned to find out documentary evidence, if any, to prove that
the patta issued in L.A No. 71/72 was not a genuine document.
16.   Annexure-VII    is  the   copy   of   the  order   dated
28.06.2014 passed by the petitioner, making some corrections in
Annexure-VI order. On a perusal of Annexure-VII order, it is seen
that the corrections made as per that order were only with regard
to some grammatical and spelling mistakes and modification of the
language used in one or two sentences in Annexure-VI order. The
ultimate conclusion reached by the petitioner in Annexure-VI order
was not in any way corrected or changed as per Annexure-VII
17.   However,    the  District Collector  suo  motu   passed
Annexure-VIII order dated 16.07.2014, cancelling Annexure-VII
order on the ground that the corrections were made by the
petitioner without the concurrence of any superior officer.
18.   The allegation against the petitioner in Annexure-I
F.I.R is that he passed Annexure-VI order without verifying the
back records and without ascertaining the factual position and
therefore, he committed criminal misconduct. Annexure-VI order
dated 24.05.2014 passed by the petitioner is an order passed by
him under Section 12 of the Kerala Land Conservancy Act, 1957.
This provision contemplates issuing notice to the occupant of the
land, recording statement of the parties and receiving evidence before
passing an order.
19.   There can be no dispute with regard to the fact that
the proceeding under Section 12 of the Act is a quasi judicial
proceeding.      In fact, it is specifically mentioned in this provision
that, for the purpose of Section 199 of the Indian Penal Code, the
proceedings taken under this provision shall be deemed to be
judicial proceedings.
20.   An aggrieved party can file appeal as provided under
Section 16(1) against an order passed under Section 12 of the
Kerala Land Conservancy Act. Revision against such order is also
provided under Section 16(2) of the Act,          which states that the
Collector may either suo motu or on application revise any decision
made or order passed under the Act by an authorised officer.
21.   What is the distinction between a quasi judicial order
or an administrative or ministerial order? In Province of Bombay
v. Kushaldas S. Advani : AIR 1950 SC 222, it has been held as
"(i) That, if a statute empowers an authority, not
being a Court in the ordinary sense, to decide
disputes arising out of a claim made by any party
under the statute which claim is opposed by another
party and to determine the respective rights of the
contesting parties who are opposed to each other,
there is a lis and prima facie, and in the absence of
anything in the statute to the contrary it is the duty of
the authority to act judicially and the decision of the
(ii) that if a statutory authority has power to do
any act which will prejudicially affect the subject,
then, although there are not two parties apart
from the authority and the contest is between the
authority proposing to do the act and the subject
opposing     it,  the   final  determination    of the
authority will yet be a quasi-judicial act provided
the authority is required by the statute to act
22. What shall be the criteria to decide whether a decision
is judicial or not? In Jaswant Sugar Mills Limited v. Lakshmi
Chand : AIR 1963 SC 677, the Supreme Court has held as
“To make a decision or an act judicial, the
1) it is in substance a determination upon
investigations of a question by the application
of objective standards to facts found in the light
2) it declares rights or imposes upon parties
obligation affecting their civil rights; and
3) that the investigation,is subject to certain
procedural     attributes    contemplating     an
opportunity of presenting its case to a party,
ascertainment of facts by means of evidence if
a dispute be on questions of fact, and if the
presentation of legal argument, and a decision
resulting in the disposal of the matter on
findings based upon those questions of law and
fact”.
23.   Where (a) a statutory authority empowered under a
statute to do any act (b) which would prejudicially affect the
subject (c) although there is no lis or two contending parties and
the contest is between the authority and the subject and (d) the
statutory authority is required to act judicially under the statute,
the decision of the said authority is quasi judicial. The presence of
a lis or contest between the contending parties before a statutory
authority, in the absence of any other attributes of a quasi judicial
authority, is sufficient to hold that such a statutory authority is
quasi judicial authority. However, in the absence of a lis before a
statutory authority, the authority would be quasi judicial authority
if   it  is  required    to  act   judicially.  What  distinguishes an
administrative act from quasi judicial act is, in the case of quasi
judicial functions under the relevant law, the statutory authority is
required to act judicially. When the law requires that an authority
before arriving at decision must make an enquiry, such a
requirement of law makes the authority a quasi judicial authority.
Another test which distinguishes administrative function from quasi
judicial function is, the authority who acts quasi judicially is
required to act according to the rules, whereas the authority which
acts administratively is dictated by the policy and expediency (See
Indian National Congress v. Institute of Social Welfare : AIR
24.   Before passing an order under Section 12 of the Kerala
Land Conservancy Act, an enquiry is contemplated.       The Tahsildar
has to act judicially in taking a decision in the matter before him.
In such circumstances, if the principles mentioned in the decisions
referred to above are applied, there can be no doubt that he is
acting as a quasi judicial authority in passing an order under
Section 12 of the Kerala Land Conservancy Act.
25.   The question is, can a public servant, who acts as quasi
judicial authority under a statute, be held criminally liable under
the P.C.Act for passing a wrong or illegal order. Annexure-VI order
was passed by the petitioner in revenue proceedings. Assuming
that it was an illegal or wrong order or an example of arbitrary
exercise of jurisdiction, can criminal proceedings be initiated
against him for such quasi judicial adjudication?.
26. Dishonest intention on the part of the public servant
cannot be presumed for the reason that he has passed a quasi
judicial order in favour of one of the parties to the proceedings.
There must be some reasonable and satisfactory material to
proceed against the officer. There is absolutely no allegation
against    the   petitioner  that  he deliberately  committed   any
misconduct for extraneous considerations. No material disclosing
such act on his part has been unearthed during the investigation
conducted for more than six years. If the petitioner has passed a
wrong order, it could be corrected by the appellate or revisional
authority. Criminal proceedings cannot be initiated against a public
servant under the P.C.Act merely for passing a wrong order,
without    any   material   to  demonstrate  that  such order   was
deliberately passed by him for extraneous considerations or on
oblique motives. There shall be legally admissible materials
collected during the investigation to demonstrate such oblique
motives or extraneous considerations. The investigating officer has
got no case that any such material has been collected during the
investigation of the case.
27. Every error committed by a quasi judicial authority,
however gross it may be, should not be attributed to improper
motives. The appellate and revisional forums have been provided
on the pre-supposition that persons may go wrong in decision
making, on facts as well as law. Even when the contest is between
the Government and a private person, a quasi judicial authority
entrusted with the task of decision making should feel fearless to
give honest opinion while acting judicially. Even if there was
possibility on a given set of facts to arrive at a different conclusion,
it is no ground to indict a public servant for misconduct for taking
one view. If a faulty order of a quasi judicial authority is taken as a
ground for initiating criminal proceedings, the officer will be in
constant fear of passing an order which is not favourable to the
Government. Then he would not be able to act independently or
fearlessly. Merely because the order is wrong, it does not warrant
initiation of criminal proceedings against the public servant, unless
he was actuated by extraneous considerations or oblique motives.
The remedy for errors committed by a quasi judicial authority is
appeal or revision to the forum or authority provided under the
statute for that purpose.      It is in public interest that a public
servant acting as quasi judicial authority should be in a position to
discharge his functions with independence and without fear of
consequences. The general rule applicable in the case of the
issuance of a wrong order is that it is liable to be corrected in
appeal or revision. A public servant acting as quasi judicial
authority may become criminally liable for obtaining personal
gains.    But, when he is acting judicially, even if he commits an
error and passes an erroneous order, he would be protected from
legal action. His accountability in respect of the orders passed by
him is ensured by provisions for appeal and revision.
28. What matters is not the end result of the adjudication.
What is of relevance, in attributing criminal misconduct on the part
of a public servant who has acted as a quasi judicial authority, is
whether he had been swayed by extraneous considerations while
conducting the process. The sanctity of decision making process
should not be confused with the       ultimate conclusion reached by
the authority. Erroneous exercise of judicial power, without
anything more, would not amount to criminal misconduct. If the
statutory authorities who exercise quasi judicial powers feel that
they cannot honestly and fearlessly deal with matters that come
before them, then it would not be conducive to the rule of law.
They must be free to express their mind in the matter of
appreciation of the evidence before them. Unless there are clear
allegations of misconduct or extraneous influences or gratification
of any kind, criminal proceedings cannot       be initiated merely on
the basis that a wrong order has been passed by the public servant
or merely on the ground that the order is incorrect. Such decisions
cannot ipso facto result in prosecution, unless the mental element
of dishonesty, to cause advantage of an unwarranted variety to
another is apparent.
29.   If a public servant, acting as a quasi judicial authority
under a statute passes an order and if such order is in favour of a
person other than the Government, any pecuniary advantage
obtained by such person by virtue of such order, cannot be the
basis for prosecution of the public servant under the PC Act,
unless there is an allegation that he was actuated by extraneous
considerations or oblique motives in passing the order.
30.    A bare perusal of Section 13(1)(d)(ii) of the P.C.Act
would reveal that a public servant can be prosecuted under that
provision, only if he has abused his position as public servant and
obtained for himself or for any other person any valuable thing or
pecuniary advantage. There is absolutely no whisper in Annexure-I
F.I.R that the petitioner obtained any valuable thing or pecuniary
advantage by abusing his position as public servant.       As noticed
earlier, by virtue of the quasi judicial order passed by a public
servant, if a party to the proceedings before the public servant had
obtained any pecuniary advantage, it cannot be found that it was
obtained by him as result of abuse of the official position of the
public servant. The legislative intent is not to punish a public
servant for any erroneous decision; but to punish him for
corruption. Thus, to fall within the four corners of sub-clause (ii) of
clause (d) of sub-section (1) of Section 13       of the P.C Act, the
decision/conduct      of  the public   servant  must    be  dishonest
amounting to corruption. Mens rea, the intention and/or knowledge
of wrong doing, is an essential condition of the offence of criminal
misconduct under Section 13(1)(d)(ii) of the P.C.Act.              The
presumption under Section 20 of the P.C Act does not apply to the
offence under Section 13(1)(d)(ii) of that Act.
31.   “Abuse” means misuse i.e. using the official position for
something for which it is not intended (See M. Narayanan
Nambiar v. State of Kerala: AIR 1963 SC 1116). An honest
though erroneous exercise of power or an indecision is not an
abuse of power (See Tarlochan Dev Sharma v. State of
32.   Dishonest intention is the gist of the offence under
Section 13(1)(d) of the P.C.Act.        Mere conduct and action of a
public    servant,   without  dishonest    intention  but contrary   to
departmental norms, does not amount to criminal misconduct (See
Jaffer Sharief v. State: AIR 2013 SC 48).
33.   Therefore, even if it is accepted that the petitioner had
passed Annexure-VI order without perusing the previous records or
properly ascertaining the factual position of the matter, his act
does not attract the offence under Section 13(1)(d)(ii) of the
34.   As noticed earlier, the correction of Annexure-VI order
made by the petitioner as per Annexure-VII order, had not effected
any substantial change to Annexure-VI order or the ultimate
conclusion reached by him in that order. There is also no allegation
against the petitioner in Annexure-I F.I.R that he manipulated or
forged the revenue records for any purpose. Therefore, the
offences punishable under Sections 465 and 471 of the Indian
Penal Code will not lie against him.
35.   The discussion above leads to the conclusion that
Annexure-I F.I.R does not contain allegations against the petitioner
which would attract the offences alleged against him.           Though
investigation has been conducted since the year 2014, the
investigating agency could not unearth any material as against the
36. The salutary principle laid down by the Privy Council in
King Emperor v. Khwaja Nazir Ahmed: AIR 1945 PC 18 and
reiterated by the Supreme Court very often is that, in normal
circumstances, the court shall not thwart any investigation into an
offence but allow it to have its own course under the provisions of
the Code. The power of the police to investigate cases where they
suspect or even have reasons to suspect the commission of a
cognizable offence is unfettered. However, the Privy Council has
also made a note of caution that “if no cognizable offence is
disclosed and still more, if no offence of any kind is disclosed, the
police would have no authority to undertake an investigation".
37.    The condition precedent to the commencement of
investigation is that the F.I.R must disclose, prima facie, that a
cognizable offence has been committed. The right of the police to
conduct investigation is conditioned by the existence of reason to
suspect the commission of a cognizable offence and they cannot,
reasonably have reason so to suspect unless the F.I.R, prima facie,
discloses the commission of offence. If that condition is satisfied,
the investigation must go on. The Court has then no power to stop
the investigation. On the other hand, if the F.I.R does not disclose
the commission of a cognizable offence, the Court would be
justified in quashing the investigation on the basis of the
information as laid or received. A person, against whom no offence
is disclosed, cannot be put to any harassment by the process of
investigation (See State of West Bengal v. Swapan Kumar
Guha : AIR 1982 SC 949). Where the uncontroverted allegations
made in the F.I.R and the evidence collected in support of the
same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out
a case against the accused, the F.I.R as against him is liable to be
quashed (See State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal : AIR 1992 SC
38. Application of the above principles to the facts of the
present case would lead to the conclusion that Annexure-I F.I.R, as
against the petitioner, is liable to be quashed by invoking the
power of this Court under Section 482 of the Code.
39. Consequently, the petition       is  allowed. Annexure-I
F.I.R, as far as it relates to the petitioner, is quashed.