1)     The petitioner has challenged order dated 18.04.2022, passed by
learned Additional Sessions Judge, Sopore, whereby application of the
petitioner under Section 540 of J&K Cr. P. C has been partly allowed.
Vide the impugned order, the learned trial court has allowed the
examination of Fayaz Ahmad Naikoo as a prosecution witness whereas
it has disallowed the examination of other witnesses, namely, Manzoor
Ahmad Naikoo, , Rafiqa, Mst. Fazi and Superintendent of Police, Mr.
Abdul Qayoom, whom the petitioner sought to produce before the trial
court for their examination.
2)     It appears that respondent No.2 is facing trial before the trial
court in a case arising out of FIR No.95/2014 for offences under
Section 302, 307, 109 RPC and 7/25 Arms Act registered with Police
Station, Sopore. During the trial of the case, the petitioner, who happens
to be the complainant and a prosecution witness filed an application
before the said Court under Section 540 of J&K Cr. P. C seeking
permission to summon and examine five witnesses, namely, Manzoor
Ahmad Naikoo, Fayaz Ahmad Naikoo, Rafiqa, Mst. Fazi and
Superintendent of Police, Sopore, Mr. Abdul Qayoom. According to
the petitioner, all these witnesses are acquainted with the facts of the
case as the witnesses viz. Manzoor Ahmad Naikoo, Fayaz Ahmad
Naikoo, Rafiqa and Mst. Fazi were present on spot when the occurrence
took place whereas Superintendent of Police, Sopore, Mr. Abdul
Qayoom had deposed about the occurrence in a press conference.
3)     The learned trial court vide the impugned order, allowed the
application to the extent of witness, namely, Fayaz Ahmad Naikoo but
declined to summon and examine the other witnesses.
4)     I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
record of the case including the trial court record.
5)     Before coming to the merits of the petition and before testing the
legality of the impugned order passed by the learned trial court, it would
be apt to notice the provision contained in Section 540 of the J&K
Criminal Procedure Code. It reads as under:
examine person present.— Any Court may, at any
stage of any inquiry, trial or other proceeding under
this Code, summon any person as a witness, or
examine any person in attendance, though not
summoned as a witness, or recall and re-examine any
person already examined; and the Court shall
summon and examine or recall and re-examine any
such person if his evidence appears to it essential to
the just decision of the case.
6)     From a bare perusal of the aforesaid provision, it is clear that
there is no limitation on the power of the Court at any stage to which
the trial may have reached from summoning and examining any
witness. The expressions used in the provision are “any person and “at
any stage of any enquiry, trial or other proceedings” which means that
the court has unfettered powers to exercise its jurisdiction under Section
540 of J&K Cr. P. C at any stage of the proceedings, even after the
conclusion of the trial before passing of the final judgment. The
proceedings come to an end only after the judgment is pronounced. The
aforesaid provision is in two parts. The first part is discretionary in
nature whereas the second part is mandatory in nature. Thus, a Court
may, in its discretion, summon and examine any person as a witness
who has not been summoned as a witness or recall/re-examine any
person already examined and in case evidence of such person appears
to the Court essential to the just decision of the case, it is the bounden
duty of the Court to exercise its power under this provision. The object
underlying Section 540 of Cr. P. C is that there should be no failure of
justice due to mistake of either party in bringing the valuable evidence
on record.
7)     Now coming to the facts of the instant case, the petitioner
contends that the witness, namely, Fayaz Ahmad Naikoo, Rafiq and
Mst. Fazi were also present on spot at the time of the occurrence and,
as such, recording of their statements is necessary for just decision of
the case.
8)     If we have a look at the statements of prosecution witnesses PW
(1) Khazir Mohammad Naikoo, has stated that at the time of the
occurrence, he alongwith deceased Nazir Ahmad, deceased Shabir
Ahmad and his son Mohammad Sultan as well as his other brother
Mohammad Maqbool were sitting in the kitchen of his house. In the
other room of his house, two daughters of his brother Mohammad
Maqbool, namely, Mst. Rafiqa and Mst. Shahzada were ironing the
clothes whereas his other son Manzoor Ahmad Naikoo was teaching
his children on the upper floor. He has further stated that in the
meantime, the door of the house was banged and the girls ran towards
the kitchen. He has also stated that his brother and the two girls came
down for rescuing the victims whereas his son Manzoor Ahmad Naikoo
was fired upon by accused Mehraj-ud-din Khan when he tried to come
down. On the similar lines is the statement of PW (2)-Mohammad
9)     The aforementioned two witnesses have deposed about the
presence of Manzoor Ahmad Naikoo and Rafiqa, whom the petitioner
seeks to produce as witnesses. Therefore, examination of these
witnesses is essential to the just decision of the case. The learned trial
court has not assigned any reason for declining the application to the
extent of Manzoor Ahmad Naikoo and Mst. Rafiqa. So far as the
presence of Mst. Fazi on spot is concerned, the same has not been
deposed to by any of the prosecution witnesses. The press conference
given by Superintendent of Police, Sopore, Mr. Abdul Qayoom, is
based upon the investigation of the case. Therefore, his statement is not
necessary for the purpose of ascertaining the truth.
10)     It has been contended by learned counsel for respondent No.2
that the petitioner, who is the complainant in the instant case, has no
right to file an application or to intermeddle on behalf of the prosecution
as it is only the Public Prosecutor who is vested with power to conduct
the prosecution.
11)     There cannot be any dispute with regard to the proposition of
law urged by learned counsel for respondent No.2 but in the instant
case, the application, which has been filed by the complainant, has been
adopted by the prosecution, meaning thereby that the application has
been virtually filed on behalf of the prosecution.        Even during the
present proceedings, nothing contrary has been urged by the
prosecution. Therefore, contention of learned counsel for respondent
No.2 does not hold much merit.
12)     For what has been discussed hereinabove, the petition is allowed
and the impugned order passed by the learned trial court to the extent
of declining the prayer regarding summoning of witnesses, namely,
Manzoor Ahmad Naikoo and Mst. Rafiqa, is set aside. The learned trial
court is directed to summon and examine the above named two
witnesses and conclude the trial of the case expeditiously, preferably
within a period of two months from the date a copy of this order is made
available to the trial court. The prosecution is directed to extend all
necessary cooperation to the trial court in this regard.
13)     A copy of this order be sent to the learned trial court for
information and compliance.