Case :- SECOND APPEAL No. - 1698 of 1990
Counsel for Appellant :- S. Chatharjee,Santosh Kumar,Satya
Counsel for Respondent :- Akhileshwar Mishra,Aniruddh
1.     This is a plaintiff’s appeal, arising out of a suit for
declaration and permanent prohibitory injunction.
2.     The facts giving rise to this appeal are these:
The plaintiff-appellant, Rama Nand, who shall hereinafter
be referred to as the ‘plaintiff’, instituted O.S. No. 390 of 1985 in
the Ex-Court of Munsif Havali, Varanasi, seeking a declaration
to the effect that the proceedings of revenue sale dated
04.12.1982 and the sale letter based on it relating to land,
detailed at the foot of the plaint, be declared void and a decree
of permanent injunction granted, restraining the defendant-
respondent, Hira Lal (for short, ‘the defendant’) from interfering
with the plaintiff’s possession over the suit property or changing
its nature and character.
3.     The plaintiff's case is that Smt. Usha Devi brought
proceedings against him under Section 125 Cr.P.C. in the Court
of the Metropolitan Magistrate, Kanpur Nagar seeking award of
maintenance.       In  the  maintenance        case  aforesaid,  the
Magistrate passed an ex parte order, granting maintenance to
Smt. Usha Devi on 13.01.1982. The ex parte maintenance
order dated 13.01.1982 was passed against the plaintiff. The
plaintiff, upon coming to know of the ex parte order, made an
application to the Metropolitan Magistrate, Kanpur Nagar,
seeking to set aside the sale. The Magistrate on 17.05.1982
allowed the plaintiff's application and set aside the ex parte
maintenance order dated 13.01.1982. In the meantime, on the
basis of the ex parte maintenance order dated 13.01.1982, the
defendant, in connivance with the Tehsildar and Naib Tehsildar,
Varanasi, brought the plaintiff's immovable property, detailed at
the foot of the plaint (for short, 'the suit property') to sale on
04.12.1982. The plaintiff’s wife applied for the recovery of dues
under the ex parte maintenance order. The plaintiff did not know
anything about the revenue sale held, creating rights in favour
of the defendant.
4.     It is the plaintiff's case that after the maintenance order
dated 13.01.1982 had been set aside on 17.05.1982, sale of
the plaintiff's property on 04.12.1982 was one made without
jurisdiction, as there was no maintenance order in existence
then to execute. It was also pleaded that the proceedings of the
revenue sale are vitiated, because there was no proclamation
by beat of drum, nor proceedings taken in accordance with law.
The sale is fraudulent and illegal. The further case is that the
defendant, on the basis of the revenue sale concluded in his
favour, is moving to forcefully dispossess the plaintiff.
5.     The defendant put in a written statement, pleading that he
had purchased the suit property in the revenue sale held,
wherein there was no illegality or irregularity. The defendant on
04.12.1982, upon payment of sale consideration, that was
fetched in the auction proceedings, purchased the suit property
bona fide. He had paid a total consideration of Rs.10,000/-. The
proceedings of the auction sale have been confirmed and the
sale certificate issued in favour of the defendant. The legality or
irregularity in conducting the sale cannot be questioned before
the Civil Court. The defendant never connived with Smt. Usha
Devi nor did he procure a judgment, based on any kind of
conspiracy with Smt. Usha Devi, or got the revenue sale held in
furtherance of any conspiracy, as alleged by the plaintiff. The
Tehsildar and the Naib Tehsildar did not take proceedings of the
revenue sale in a manner that is bogus or fraudulent. The
defendant, Hira Lal never had knowledge of the fact about the
maintenance order passed ex parte under Section 125 Cr.P.C.
against the plaintiff being set aside. The further case is that
even if the order of maintenance ex parte was set aside, the
revenue sale held on 04.12.1982, cannot be set aside, because
the defendant is a bona fide purchaser for value without notice
and further the auction sale has been confirmed.
6.     The defendant has averred that the plaintiff did not object
to the auction proceedings before the Revenue Authorities. The
Court has no jurisdiction to set aside the auction sale. The
mutation order has been made on the basis of the auction sale
directing mutation of the defendant’s name over the suit
property on 11.01.1985, whereagainst the plaintiff had objected.
His objections were, however, rejected on 30.01.1985. The suit
is barred by limitation. The suit property is in the ownership
possession of the defendant. The suit is barred by the
provisions of Section 331 of the U.P. Z.A. & L.R. Act and the
Civil Court has no jurisdiction to try the suit.
7.     On the pleadings of parties, the following issues were
struck (translated into English from Hindi):
(1) Whether on the grounds set forth in the plaint, the
proceedings of auction sale dated 04.12.1982 are illegal
(2) Whether the plaintiff is entitled to the relief of
(3) Whether this Court has no jurisdiction to try the suit?
(4) Whether the suit is undervalued and the court-fee
(5) To what relief is the plaintiff entitled to?
8.     Before the Trial Court, the plaintiff examined himself as
PW-1 and one Bechan Mishra as PW-2. The plaintiff in his
documentary evidence filed three documents vide a list, bearing
Paper No. 8-Ga, one document vide list, bearing Paper No. 33-
Ga, another three documents vide Paper No. 53-Ga and two
more documents vide list, bearing Paper No. 60-Ga.
9.     The defendant examined himself as DW-1. In his
documentary evidence, he filed some 11 documents vide list,
bearing Paper No. 17-Ga, another 9 documents vide list,
bearing Paper No. 37-Ga and 14 more documents vide list,
10.    The issue, about the jurisdiction of the Civil Court to try
the suit, was not pressed before the Trial Court on 24.12.1987,
and the issue of valuation was decided on 28.05.1986. These
issues were dealt with at interlocutory stages and a record of
determination thereof forms part of the Trial Court's judgment. It
was Issue No.1, that was the substantial issue, on which event
in the suit would turn. The Trial Court in its judgment has
blamed the conduct of the plaintiff in not communicating the
order dated 17.05.1982, setting aside the ex parte maintenance
order dated 13.01.1982 to the Collector, Varanasi, as the
reason why the revenue sale was held and the impugned sale
certificate issued in the defendant's favour. The Trial Court also
held that the defendant was a bona fide purchaser for value
without    notice,    whose     rights   ought     to   be protected.
Nevertheless, the Trial Court held that the proceedings of the
sale held on 04.12.1982 were illegal and void, but the decree of
the Trial Court would be effective only upon the plaintiff paying
the defendant a sum of Rs.10,000/- together with interest at the
rate of 18% per annum from the date of the auction sale in the
defendant's favour. The suit was, therefore, decreed in part vide
judgment and decree dated 22.04.1989 passed by the 12 th
Additional Munsif, Varanasi with a conditional injunction that the
injunction would become effective after the plaintiff paid the
entire sum of Rs.10,000/- together with interest as directed.
11.   Upon the defendant's appeal carried to the District Judge
of Varanasi, being Civil Appeal No. 119 of 1989, the learned 9 th
Additional District Judge, Varanasi vide his judgment and
decree dated 14.05.1990, allowed the appeal, set aside the
Trial Court's judgment and decree dated 22.04.1989, and
dismissed the suit. There was a cross-objection also preferred
by the defendant before the Lower Appellate Court, which too
was dismissed.
12.   Dissatisfied with the judgment and decree passed by the
Lower Appellate Court, the plaintiff has moved this Court,
invoking our jurisdiction under Section 100 of the Code of Civil
13.   This appeal was admitted to hearing vide order dated
09.11.1990, without any substantial question of law being
formulated. Before proceeding with the hearing, therefore,
based on the submissions of parties, particularly, the learned
Counsel for the appellant, this Court formulated the following
substantial question of law vide order dated 26.02.2020:
Whether it is open to a Magistrate to enforce an order of
maintenance passed under Section 125 Cr.P.C. by
forwarding a recovery certificate to the Collector, and to
recover the sum of money due under the maintenance
order as arrears of land revenue?
14.    Heard Mr. S.D. Ojha, learned Counsel for the plaintiff-
appellant and Mr. S.N. Tripathi, Advocate holding brief of Mr.
Akhileshwar Mishra, learned Counsel for the defendant-
15.    The Lower Appellate Court went into wholesome detail of
evidence bearing on the issues of fact and law involved and
held that a copy of the order dated 17.05.1982, setting aside
the ex parte maintenance order dated 13.01.1982, had not
been produced in evidence by the plaintiff. Rather, there is a
record of a later order dated 20.09.1982, again ordering ex
parte maintenance, which bears Paper No. 34-Ga. The Lower
Appellate Court also took note of some orders made by this
Court in Criminal Misc. Application No. 264 of 1983, where the
auction sale of the suit property in execution of the ex parte
maintenance order, which was then awaiting recall, was
challenged. The Lower Appellate Court has recorded that the
said 482 Application was rejected by this Court vide order dated
22.10.1983 and a certified copy of the order was on record as
Paper No. 26-Ga. This Court too has found on record a
document, marked Ex. A1.
16.    The Lower Appellate Court has held further that the
plaintiff has urged a case that proceedings of the auction were
illegal, but if that were so, the plaintiff had the right to move the
Revenue Authorities and get the sale set aside. This has not
been done. The case of a conspiracy between the plaintiff's wife
and the defendant has too been disbelieved by the Lower
Appellate Court in the absence of the slightest of evidence.
What has further been observed is that if the plaintiff's case of
the ex parte maintenance order being set aside is believed,
though there is no evidence about it, the defendant is a bona
fide purchaser. The auction sale in his favour has been
confirmed. In such circumstances, the consequence of the sale,
even if it were set aside, would not be to deprive auction
purchaser of his rights in the suit property.
17.    The Lower Appellate Court has also recorded facts to the
effect that pursuant to the sale certificate, the defendant's name
has been mutated in the revenue records, of which certified
copies are on record. There are also records of Khasra across
a period of three years, showing recorded possession in favour
of the defendant. There are also irrigation receipts brought on
record to show that the defendant is in possession.
18.    It is on all these findings that the Lower Appellate Court
has reached the conclusion that it did.
19.    Mr. S.D. Ojha, learned Counsel for the plaintiff at the
hearing before this Court has but logically confined himself to
the substantial question of law, on which this appeal has been
admitted and heard. He submits that it was not open to the
Magistrate, who had the execution of the ex parte maintenance
order before him, to enforce it by forwarding a recovery
certificate to the Collector. As such, all proceedings taken by
the Revenue Authorities at Varanasi, pursuant to the recovery
certificate issued by the Magistrate for enforcement of the ex
parte maintenance order, are without jurisdiction.
20.    Mr.    S.N.   Tripathi, Advocate    holding    brief of  Mr.
Akhileshwar Mishra, learned Counsel for the defendant submits
that there is jurisdiction under the law available to the
Magistrate to issue a recovery certificate to the Collector by
virtue of the provisions of Section 125(3) Cr.P.C.
21.    Upon hearing the learned Counsel for parties with
reference to the substantial question of law involved, this Court
thinks that a reference to the provisions of Section 125(3)
Cr.P.C. is necessary. Section 125(3) Cr.P.C. reads:
125.   Order    for   maintenance      of    wives,
(3) If any person so ordered fails without
sufficient cause to comply with the order, any
such Magistrate may, for every breach of the
order, issue a warrant for levying the amount
due in the manner provided for levying fines,
and may sentence such person, for the whole or
any part of each month's allowance for the
maintenance or the interim maintenance and
expenses of proceeding, as the case may be,
remaining unpaid after the execution of the
warrant, to imprisonment for a term which may
extend to one month or until payment if sooner
Provided that no warrant shall be issued for
the recovery of any amount due under this
section unless application be made to the Court
to levy such amount within a period of one year
from the date on which it became due:
Provided further that if such person offers
to maintain his wife on condition of her living
with him, and she refuses to live with him,
such Magistrate may consider any grounds of
refusal stated by her, and may make an order
under this section notwithstanding such offer,
if he is satisfied that there is just ground
for so doing.
Explanation.—If a husband has contracted
marriage    with   another    woman    or    keeps   a
mistress, it shall be considered to be just
ground for his wife's refusal to live with him.
(emphasis by Court)
22.   Now, the manner of levying fines under the Code of
Criminal Procedure finds place in Section 421(1) of the said
Code. Section 421 reads:
421. Warrant for levy of fine.—(1) When              an
offender has been sentenced to pay a fine,              the
Court passing the sentence may take action              for
the recovery of the fine in either or both of           the
following ways, that is to say, it may—
(a) issue a warrant for the levy of the amount by
attachment and sale of any movable property
belonging to the offender;
(b) issue a warrant to the Collector of the
district, authorising him to realise the amount
as arrears of land revenue from the movable or
immovable property, or both, of the defaulter:
Provided that, if the sentence directs that in
default of payment of the fine, the offender
shall be imprisoned, and if such offender has
undergone the whole of such imprisonment in
default, no Court shall issue such warrant
unless, for special reasons to be recorded in
writing, it considers it necessary so to do, or
unless it has made an order for the payment of
expenses or compensation out of the fine under
(2)    The   State     Government     may    make     rules
regulating the manner in which warrants under
clause (a) of sub-section (1) are to be executed,
and for the summary determination of any claims
made by any person other than the offender in
respect of any property attached in execution of
such warrant.
(3) Where the Court issues a warrant to the
Collector under clause (b) of sub-section (1),
the Collector shall realise the amount in
accordance with the law relating to recovery of
arrears of land revenue, as if such warrant were
a certificate issued under such law:
Provided that no such warrant shall be executed
by the arrest or detention in prison of the
offender.
23.    A conjoint reading of the provisions of Sections 125(3)
and 421(1) of the Code shows that it is open to the Magistrate
to enforce an order of maintenance that remains uncomplied
with, for every breach of it, by the issue of a warrant for levying
the amount due in the manner provided for levying fines.
Section 421(1) gives two options to the Magistrate: firstly, under
Clause (a) of sub-Section (1) of Section 421, he may issue a
warrant for levying of the amount by attachment and sale of any
movable property belonging to the offender. In the context of
maintenance proceedings, the provision would bear reference
to the person in default of the maintenance order in place of the
offender. Secondly, the Magistrate may issue a warrant to the
Collector of the district, authorizing him to realize the amount as
arrears of land revenue from the movable or immovable
property, or both, belonging to the defaulter. Sub-Section (3) of
Section 421 obliges the Collector, whenever a warrant is issued
to him, to recover any amount, that qualifies for a fine, as
arrears of land revenue in accordance with law, treating the
warrant to be a recovery certificate issued under the law
relating to land revenue recovery.
24.    It is the discretion of the Magistrate, before whom an
application for enforcement of the maintenance order comes
up, either to issue a warrant for the levy of the amount by
attachment and sale of movables of the defaulter under Section
421(1)(a) of the Code, or to issue a warrant to the Collector,
authorizing him to realize the amount as arrears of land
revenue.     It is  open     to  issue   both   kind    of warrants
simultaneously also. Acknowledgment of the Magistrate's power
to simultaneously issue both kind of warrants or either of them,
under Section 421(1)(a) or 421(1)(b) is there, albeit in a
different context in Om Parkash v. Vidhya Devi, 1991 SCC
OnLine P&H 387. In Om Parkash (supra), it has been held:
The perusal of the above-quoted section 421
reveals that there are two methods for levying
fine and the Court has been empowered to opt for
either of these two modes or both at one and the
same time. One of these modes provided under sub-
section (1)(a) is to issue a warrant for levy of
the amount by attachment and sale of movable
property belonging to the offender and the other
being issuance of a warrant to the Collector
authorising him to realise the amount as arrears
of land revenue from the movable or immovable
property, or both. In the case in hand, the trial
Court had not resorted to any of these coercive
measures for the recovery of the arrears of
maintenance allowance although it is mentioned in
the impugned order of the trial Court that the
husband is a man of means. Thus, legally the
impugned order of the trial Court being not
sustainable calls for quashment.
25.   Again, the principle that the Magistrate, before whom a
maintenance order comes for enforcement, can simultaneously
issue both kind of warrants under Sections 421(1)(a) and
421(1)(b) of the Code, was wholesomely endorsed by the
Kerala High Court in Ramakrishnan T.K. v. C.N. Subhadra &
another, 2009 SCC OnLine Ker 6397, where it was held:
15. The express language of Secs. 421(1)(a) and
(b) Cr. P.C. is that either or both of the
following ways (ie., issue a warrant for
attachment of movable and issue of a warrant to
the Collector to attach the movable and immovable
properties) can be resorted to by the court. I
find the said submission to be very impressive.
This court in Nithiyanandan and Kuttappan had no
occasion to consider that question. The express
language employee by the Code makes it very clear
that when it comes to levy of fines the court is
no obliged to resort to both the methods under
Secs. 421(1)(a) and (b) Cr. P.C. Either of the
two or both can be pursued by the court in its
discretion.
26.   Here, the plaintiff questions the jurisdiction of the
Magistrate to issue a warrant to the Collector for the recovery of
the amount of maintenance in default as arrears of land
revenue, because he says that the Magistrate had no such
power. The said proposition is only stated to be rejected. The
provisions of Section 125(3) and Section 421 read conjointly
are a complete answer to the plaintiff's denial of jurisdiction with
the Magistrate to issue a warrant to the Collector for recovering
the defaulted maintenance as arrears of land revenue.
27.   The substantial question of law framed is, accordingly,
answered in the affirmative and it is held that the Magistrate
has power to enforce an order of maintenance passed
under Section 125 Cr.P.C. by issuing a warrant to the
Collector to recover the same as arrears of land revenue.
28.   No other point was pressed.
29.   The appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.
30.   Let a decree be drawn up, accordingly.
Location: High Court of Judicature at