1.     By this appeal, the appellant challenges the judgment dated 5th July,
2019 convicting the appellant for offence punishable under Section 397 IPC
and the order on sentence dated 17th July, 2019 directing him to undergo
sentence of seven years imprisonment.
2.     Learned counsel for the appellant assailing the conviction contends
that the learned Trial Court failed to notice glaring contradictions in the
testimonies of PW-1, PW-2 and PW-4 who gave altogether different
versions in respect of the manner of commission of alleged robbery and the
investigation carried out by the police qua the three witnesses. Admittedly,
Mohd. Ibrahim (PW-1) is not an eye-witness as he himself admitted in his
testimony that he was walking ahead of PW-2 and PW-4. He further stated
that his statement was never recorded by the police during the investigation
either at the spot or thereafter. Testimony of PW-2 does not inspire
confidence and his version is not corroborated by PW-1, PW-4 and PW-8.
As per rukka, PW-2 alleged that both the SIM cards were taken out by the
accused from his mobile phone and returned back to him, however, in his
testimony before the Court, he is silent about the removal and handing over
of the SIM cards. Further, PW-2 stated that he never visited the place of
occurrence after the incident and all the written work was done at the Police
Station. PW-8 stated that he went to the spot with PW-2 and prepared the
site plan. PW-4 altogether contradicted the version of PW-2 as he deposed
that the appellant took out the blade and took Sonu (PW-2) with him,
whereas PW-2 stated that the appellant took out the blade, kicked him and
PW-4 tried to stop him, when co-accused helped the appellant, the appellant
hit PW-2 and ran away. The alleged weapon of offence i.e. the blade has not
been recovered and in the absence thereof, it cannot be said that it was a
deadly weapon. No injury has been caused to the victim. Even as per the
prosecution, the weapon was used after the alleged snatching, hence the
appellant cannot be convicted for the offence punishable under Section 397
IPC. Reliance in this regard is placed on the decisions of this Court in
Samiuddin @ Chotu vs. State of NCT of Delhi, Crl. Appeal No.461/2016,
decided on 9th November, 2010, Bishan vs. State, 1984 (6) DRJ 78, Rakesh
Kumar vs. The State of NCT of Delhi, 2005 (1) JCC 334 and Sunil @ Munna
vs. The State (Govt. of NCT) 2010 (1) JCC 388.
3.     Countering the contentions of the learned counsel for the appellant,
Mr. Amit Gupta, learned APP for the State submitted that the version of the
complainant Sonu (PW-2) is duly corroborated by PW-1 and PW-4. Even if
PW-1 stated that he was walking a few steps ahead, the same does not mean
that he did not witness the incident, when the complainant was waylaid by
the appellant and his associate, who snatched the mobile phone and fled
away from the scene. Call to the PCR was made by PW-1 from the spot and
hence his presence at the spot, thereby witnessing the incident stands
proved. Version of the complainant is also corroborated by PW-4. A mere
detail testimony of one of the witnesses would not go to show that the
complainant’s version is not corroborated.      Once the deadly weapon is
shown, which in the present case was a blade, offence under Section 397
IPC is made out. Ingredients of the offence punishable under Section 397
IPC are satisfied once the weapon of offence is used and infliction of injury
or that the weapon of offence should be recovered is not essential to prove
the offence under Section 397 IPC. Since the blade causes serious incised
wound injury, it falls within the category of deadly weapon. As per the
nominal roll, the appellant is involved in four other cases of similar nature.
Hence, there is no error in the impugned judgment of conviction and order
on sentence, the appeal be dismissed.
4.     FIR No.21/2015 was registered at Police Station Ranjit Nagar for
offence punishable under Sections 392/397/34 IPC on the statement of the
complainant Sonu who stated that on 9th January, 2015 at about 10:30 p.m.
opposite Satyam Cinema, Ranjit Nagar, Delhi the appellant and co-accused
Moideen @ Tinku committed robbery of his mobile phone made Karbon
from his possession by showing him a deadly weapon, that is the blade.
5.     In his deposition before the Court, the complainant stated that on 9th
January, 2015 he along with Mohd. Ibrahim (PW-1) and Abdul Hamid
(PW-4) were going to their house from their workplace, that is, Main Bazar,
Patel Nagar Delhi.     When they reached at Satyam Cinema and Mohd.
Ibrahim was 40-50 paces in front of them, one Asif, who worked with him
earlier met them opposite Satyam Cinema. Asif asked for ₹50/-. When the
complainant refused to give the money, Asif took out the mobile phone of
the complainant make Karbon from his pocket of the pant. His friend Abdul
Hamid tried to stop him when Asif took out a blade. Asif could not identify
the complainant as his face was covered with muffler. However, the
complainant duly identified him. In the meantime, one associate of Asif,
who was present in the Court, hit him and both of them ran away. They
chased the appellant and his associate but they disappeared. He went to the
house of Asif but Asif was not present there. In the meantime, his friend
Mohd. Ibrahim had already made a call to the police. Thus, three of them,
that is, Sonu, Abdul Hamid and Mohd. Ibrahim went to the Police Station
and lodged the FIR.
6.     Statement of Sonu (Ex.PW-2/A) on which the FIR was registered
immediately after the incident, had named Asif as the boy who had first
stopped him and demanded ₹50/-. Mohd. Ibrahim also stated that all three
of them were going to their home from the work place and he was walking
fast. He was 40-50 paces ahead of Abdul Hamid and Sonu, who was
stopped by one person near Satyam Cinema. He was called by Abdul
Hamid by saying that ‘Sonu ka mobile kisi ne chhin liya hai, tum ghar ja kar
abbu ko bula lao’ and he went home and called the father of Abdul Hamid,
who is his uncle and also made a call at 100 number. This witness in his
cross-examination has clarified that when he turned back after hearing the
voice of Abdul Hamid, the snatcher was running after snatching.
7.     Though Mohd. Ibrahim in his examination-in-chief and cross-
examination does not identify the appellant as the accused who had snatched
but corroborated the version of the complainant and Abdul Hamid to the
extent that at around 10:30 p.m. after he closed the shop at Friday weekly
market and they were going home, the incident took place and Mohd.
Ibrahim made the PCR call.
8.     Abdul Haimd, who appeared as PW-4, stated that though he did not
remember the date and month in the year 2015, on the date of incident he
along with Sonu and Mohd. Ibrahim was going from the duty and when they
reached Satyam Cinema at around 11:00 p.m., accused Asif met them and
snatched the mobile phone of Sonu. When they asked him to return the
mobile phone, Asif took out the blade. Mohd. Ibrahim went to the house,
called Sonu's father at the spot and also made a call to the police. Thus, this
witness did not depose the fact that first Asif asked for ₹50/- from Sonu and
when he refused, he took out the mobile phone. On being cross-examined
by the learned APP for the State he accepted that Asif was demanding ₹50/-
from Sonu and when he refused to give him ₹50/- then Asif took out mobile
phone make Karbon from his pocket of pant. In the cross-examination he
also accepted that Asif removed the two SIMs and handed over the same to
Sonu and refused to return the mobile phone and that Asif gave kick blow to
Sonu and thereafter fled from the spot. In his cross-examination he clarified
that the blade taken out by the accused was a small blade and not a shaving
blade but it was of different type. Thus, even if Mohd. Ibrahim does not
claim to have witnessed the incident as he was 40-50 paces ahead and had
only heard Abdul Hamid calling that Sonu’s mobile has been snatched,
however, the version of Sonu is duly corroborated by Abdul Hamid in
respect of the incident who has clearly stated about snatching of the mobile
phone and when asked to return the mobile phone then appellant took out a
9.     It is trite law that even if the weapon of offence is shown after
snatching had taken place for running away along with snatched article,
offence under Section 397 IPC is attracted. Section 390 Cr.P.C. provides
that in a robbery, there is either theft or extortion. It is further provided that
theft is 'robbery' if, in order to committing of the theft or in committing the
theft, or in carrying away or attempting to carry away property obtained by
theft, the offender, for that end, voluntarily causes or attempts to cause to
any person death or hurt or wrongful restraint, or fear of instant death or of
instant hurt, or of instant wrongful restraint. Thus, if the offender uses the
deadly weapon at the time of committing robbery or dacoity which would
include even the fear of instant death or instant hurt or wrongful restrain or
an attempt to cause death or hurt or wrongful restraint even while carrying
away or attempting to carry away the property obtained by theft, the act of
the offender will fall within the four corners of Section 397 IPC. Thus the
contention of learned counsel for the appellant that Section 397 IPC is not
made out as the blade was allegedly shown after the mobile phone was
robbed, deserves to be rejected. The decisions relied upon by the learned
counsel for the appellant did not consider the necessary ingredients of an
offence of robbery which in turn is a necessary ingredient of an offence
punishable under Section 397 IPC.
10.    In respect of the second contention of the appellant that since the
blade has not been recovered, it cannot be held that the same was a deadly
weapon, it is well settled that whether the weapon of offence is deadly or
not, is a question of fact which would depend on the nature of weapon used
in the offence. A pistol, revolver, sword, axe or even a knife are deadly
weapons.      However, in the case of knife, the length of the knife, its
sharpness and the pointed edge has to be seen to ascertain whether the knife
is a deadly weapon or not.        In the present case, the evidence of the
prosecution is that the appellant took out a blade and           kicked            the
complainant. In cross-examination it is further stated that the blade was not
a shaving blade, hence the kind of blade used is not proved even by the
ocular evidence of the witnesses. Though it is not essential that the weapon
of offence should be recovered to prove the nature of the weapon used and
that a deadly weapon was used at the time of commission of the offence,
however, the prosecution is required to prove the nature of the weapon of
offence used specially in the case of knife or blade. Since from the evidence
of the prosecution witnesses the size and sharpness of the blade is not
proved, hence the prosecution has failed to prove that the appellant used a
deadly weapon.
11.    In the decision reported as MANU/DE/3330/2009 Sanjay and Ors. vs.
The State of NCT Delhi this Court held as under:-
"12. The Investigating Officer has not prepared any sketch of
the surgical blade alleged to have been recovered from the
possession of the appellant Sanjay. The seizure memo of the
blade does not show what its size or shape was. Though the
police officials have described the instrument recovered from
the possession of the appellant as a surgical blade, none of the
witness has given any description of the blade which has been
referred by them as a surgical blade. The trial court has also
not made any observation as regards the size, shape or design
of the blade produced during trial. Unless size and shape etc. of
the blade recovered from the appellant is given or a sketch is
prepared from which these particulars may be ascertained, or a
photograph of the weapon is produced, it is not possible for this
Court to ascertain whether the blade recovered from the
possession of the appellant was actually a surgical blade or not
and whether it was a deadly weapon or not. There is no
evidence or opinion on record to show that the blade recovered
from the appellant was such, as would ordinarily result in death
by its use. What would make a blade deadly is its size, design
and shape etc. and a weapon cannot be said to be a deadly
weapon merely because the witnesses described it as a surgical
blade. This is more so when neither any sketch or photograph is
produced nor any particulars of the instrument are given
during evidence and the trial court also does not make a note
as regards the size, shape and design etc. of the blade produced
12.    In the absence of the use of a deadly weapon being proved by the
prosecution, the conviction of the appellant for offence punishable under
Section 397 IPC cannot be sustained and is required to be modified to an
offence punishable under Section 392 IPC. A perusal of the nominal roll of
the appellant would reveal that the appellant has undergone approximately 3
years and 9 months of sentence including remissions and the appellant is
involved in four other FIRs including three FIRs relating to similar offences.
13.    Consequently, the conviction of the appellant is altered to for an
offence punishable under Section 392 IPC and the sentence of the appellant
is modified to rigorous imprisonment for a period of five years.
14.    Appeal is disposed of.
15.    Judgement be uploaded on the website of the Court and be conveyed
to the Superintendent Jail for updation of the record and intimation to the