Ms Neerja Choube, Advocate for respondent Nos.1 to 3.
Date on which arguments were heard      : February 24, 2022
Date on which Judgment is pronounced : March 31, 2022
(As per Chapter XI Rule 1 of the Bombay High Court Appellate Side Rules, 1960)
Rule.   Rule made returnable forthwith and heard the learned
counsel for the parties.
The petitioner was appointed as Danger Building Worker (Semi
skilled)-DBW (SS) in the Ordnance Factory, Chandrapur in 2003. He was
thereafter promoted and while he was holding the post of DBW (HS)-II an
offence under Section 419 read with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code was
registered against him. When the offence was registered the petitioner was
placed under suspension by the order dated 12/11/2009.             After Crime
No.308/2009 was investigated, the petitioner was tried as accused No.7 by
the learned Junior Magistrate (First Class), Bhadrawati in Regular Criminal
Case No.93/2010. The learned Magistrate by his judgment dated
16/07/2014 was pleased to acquit the petitioner along with some other
accused in the said trial.     After his acquittal in the criminal case,    the
petitioner on 12/08/2014 issued a communication to the General Manager of
the Ordnance Factory informing him of the fact of his acquittal and
requested that his suspension be revoked. On 08/10/2014 the Competent
Authority in exercise of power under Rule 10(5) (C) of the Central Civil
Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965 (for short, CCA
Rules, 1965) revoked the order of suspension.      The petitioner then made a
request for treating the period of suspension from 12/11/2009 to
15/10/2014 as period spent on duty. The General Manager on 16/10/2015
issued a show cause notice to the petitioner that as he had been acquitted in
the trial by granting him the benefit of doubt, his acquittal could not be said
to be honourable.     It was therefore proposed to treat his suspension from
12/11/2009 to 15/10/2014 as justified suspension and the period was to be
treated as “not on duty” for all purposes. The petitioner was thus granted an
opportunity to make a representation on the proposal. The petitioner on
26/10/2015 replied to the notice and stated that he had been honourably
acquitted and therefore the period of suspension was liable to be treated as
period on duty. On 13/04/2016 the Competent Authority regularised the
period from 12/11/2009 to 15/10/2014 as “not spent on duty” for all intents
and purposes.
2.           The petitioner being aggrieved by the aforesaid order filed
Original Application No.2167/2016 before the Central Administrative
Tribunal. The Tribunal after considering the case of the petitioner as well as
the stand of the respondents referred to Fundamental Rule 54-B(3) and
found that the suspension of the petitioner was not wholly unjustified. The
acquittal in criminal case was after granting the petitioner the benefit of
doubt and hence by the judgment dated 20/08/2019 the Tribunal dismissed
the Original Application. Being aggrieved the petitioner has challenged the
aforesaid judgment of the Tribunal in this writ petition.
3.           Ms Kirti Satpute, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that
the petitioner had been hounourably acquitted in the criminal trial.     In view
of the judgment of acquittal the suspension of the petitioner from service was
not at all justified and therefore the period from 12/11/2009 to 15/10/2014
ought to be treated as period spent on duty. Referring to the judgment of the
learned Judicial Magistrate (First Class) dated 16/07/2014 it was submitted
that the trial insofar as the present petitioner and some accused was
separated from that of other accused. The evidence on record led by the
prosecution was found to be insufficient and therefore the petitioner came to
be acquitted. The respondents were not justified in relying upon the opinion
expressed by the learned District Government Pleader dated 21/05/2015
that the petitioner had been acquitted by granting him benefit of doubt.
Reference was then made to the provisions of Fundamental Rule 54-B as well
as Rule 5 of the Disciplinary Rules to urge that on the petitioner’s acquittal he
was entitled to reinstatement along with full pay and allowances.            The
respondents did not choose to initiate any disciplinary proceedings against
the petitioner and hence there was no reason to deprive him of salary and
allowances for the period between 12/11/2009 to 15/10/2014. In support
of her submissions learned counsel placed reliance on the decisions in
Mohinder Singh vs. BSES Rajdhani Power Limited (2014) 2 CLR 321 and
Commissioner of Police, Delhi vs. H. C. Laxmi Chand ILR (2012) I DELHI 46. It
was thus submitted that the Tribunal erred in dismissing the Original
Application and refusing to grant the relief as prayed for.          It was thus
submitted that the writ petition was liable to be allowed.
4.           Ms Neerja Choube, learned counsel for the respondents opposed
the aforesaid submissions and supported the order passed by the Tribunal.
She submitted that the acquittal of the petitioner was on a technical ground
and it was not an honourable acquittal. This was clear from a complete
reading of the judgment passed by the learned Judicial Magistrate (First
Class). Even though the respondents did not hold any disciplinary enquiry
that would be no reason to hold that the period from 12/11/2009 to
15/10/2014 was period spent on duty. The suspension of the petitioner
during that period was wholly justified considering the nature of allegation in
the criminal trial.   Since it could not be said that the suspension of the
petitioner was wholly unjustified, the Tribunal did not commit any error in
dismissing the Original Application. In support of the aforesaid submissions,
the learned counsel placed reliance on the decision in Dinesh Kumar Kain vs.
Assistant General Manager 131 (2006) DLT 550 and the judgment of the Andhra
Pradesh High Court in Kudikyala Kankaiah S/o Bakkaiah vs The
Superintending Engineer decided 07/08/2017. It was thus submitted that
the writ petition was liable to be dismissed.
5.           We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and we have
perused the documents placed on record. Having given due consideration to
the rival submissions, we are of the view that the judgment of the Tribunal
does not call for any interference and the petitioner is not entitled for the
relief as prayed for by him.
6.           The facts indicate that in view of registration of Crime
No.308/2009 under Sections 419 and 34 of the Indian Penal Code at Police
Station Bhadrawati in which the petitioner was arrayed as an accused, he
was placed under suspension on 12/11/2009 under Rule 10(1)(b) of the
CCA Rules, 1965.      On completion of investigation in the aforesaid crime,
trial was conducted before the learned Judicial Magistrate (First Class)
Bhadrawati vide Regular Criminal Case No.93/2010. Besides the petitioner
there were six other accused therein.     The case of the prosecution therein
was that accused Nos.2, 4 and 6 were candidates for the examination
conducted for the post of Fireman Grade-II. However, in their place accused
Nos.1, 3 and 5 appeared on their behalf in that examination. It was the
further case of the prosecution that the petitioner as accused No.7 had
contacted the original candidates, accused Nos.2, 4 and 6 and thereafter
permitted accused Nos.1, 3 and 5 to appear in that examination on their
behalf.    Before the trial Court accused Nos.1, 3 and 5 remained absent.
Their trial was then separated and accused Nos.2,4,6 and 7 were proceeded
against.     It was noted that the Investigating Officer remained absent and
that the eye-witnesses had not supported the case of the prosecution. The
learned Judicial Magistrate then observed in paragraph 8 of his judgment
that considering the nature of evidence on record the charge against the
accused could not be proved beyond reasonable doubt. On that premise the
said accused were acquitted.
7.           According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the petitioner
was honourably acquitted in the criminal trial and thus there was no basis for
suspending the petitioner from service from 12/11/2009 to 15/10/2014. In
other words, it was submitted that on account of such hounourable acquittal
the petitioner’s suspension was “wholly unjustified”. Before considering this
aspect it would be useful to refer to following observations in paragraph 13
of the recent decision of the Honourable Supreme Court in Union of India and
“ 13. The expression “honourable acquittal” has been considered in
State vs S. Samuthiram (2013) 1 SCC 598 after considering the
judgments in RIB vs. Bhopal Singh Panchal (1994) 1 SCC 541, R. P.
Kapur vs. Union of India AIR 1964 SC 787 and State of Assam vs.
Raghava Rajgopalachari 1967 SCC Online SC 1, this Court observed
that the standard of proof required for holding a person guilty by a
criminal court and enquiry conducted by way of disciplinary
proceeding is entirely different.   In a criminal case, the onus of
establishing guilt of the accused is on the prosecution, until proved
beyond reasonable doubt. In case, the prosecution failed to take steps
to examine crucial witnesses or the witnesses turned hostile, such
acquittal would fall within the purview of giving benefit of doubt and
the accused cannot be treated as honourably acquitted by the criminal
court.”
In Deputy Inspector General of Police vs. S. Samuthiram (2013) 1 SCC
598 the Honourable Supreme Court observed that the expressions
“honourable acquittal”, “acquitted of blame”, “fully exonerated” are unknown
to the Code of Criminal Procedure or the Penal Code and said expressions
were coined by judicial pronouncements.
8.           On perusing the judgment of the learned Judicial Magistrate (First
Class) in the aforesaid context, it becomes clear that it was found that the
eye-witnesses examined had not supported the case of the prosecution and
the Investigating Officer had not been examined to prove the inconsistencies
in the statements of the witnesses. On that premise the learned Magistrate
observed that the charge against the petitioner was not proved beyond
reasonable doubt. These observations when considered in the light of the
law laid down in Methu Meda (supra) lead no manner of doubt that such
acquittal was after giving the petitioner the benefit of doubt and the acquittal
could not be treated as to be a honourable acquittal.
9.           After   the   petitioner’s  acquittal  the   Competent      Authority
considered the request of the petitioner to treat the period of suspension as
period spent on duty. In that context a show cause notice dated 16/10/2015
was issued to the petitioner. After considering the reply of the petitioner, the
Competent Authority on 13/04/2016 held that the petitioner’s suspension
from 12/11/2009 to 15/10/2014 was justified and said period ought to be
treated as “not spent on duty” for all purposes. Fundamental Rule 54-B(3)
insofar as it is relevant for the present purpose reads as under :
54-B(3) : Where the authority competent to order reinstatement is
of the opinion that the suspension was wholly unjustified, the
Government servant shall, subject to the provisions of sub-rule (8) be
paid the full pay and allowances to which he would have been entitled,
had he not been suspended.
10.          It is thus seen that only if the Competent Authority is of the
opinion that the suspension in question was wholly unjustified that the
Government servant would be entitled to full pay and allowances to which
the Government servant would have been entitled had he not been
suspended. Considering the nature of allegations made against the petitioner
that led to registration of Crime No.308/2009, we find that the suspension of
the petitioner on 12/11/2009 was infact justified.           The petitioner while
working as Danger Building Worker (Semi skilled) II was alleged to have
permitted accused Nos.1,3 and 5 to appear for the examination for the post
of Fireman Grade-II in place of the actual candidates who were accused
Nos.2,4 and 6. The accusations as made were on account of the conduct of
the petitioner himself during the course of employment with the respondent
No.3-Ordnance Factory. Though it is true that the petitioner was ultimately
acquitted in the criminal trial, the nature of allegation that led to his
suspension on 12/11/2009 would be relevant for considering whether his
suspension was justified or not. It would have been a different matter if the
petitioner’s conduct that led to his suspension was based on an act that did
not have any connection with discharge of his duties. That is not the case
here.    The Competent Authority therefore was justified in placing the
petitioner under suspension on registration of such offence against him.
In this regard we may refer to the decision of the Honourable
Supreme Court in Krishnakant Raghunath Bibhavnekar vs. State of Maharashtra
and ors. 1997 3 SCC 636 .         The cause of suspension and initiation of punitive
action based on the petitioner’s conduct leading to his prosecution were
found to be sufficient to hold such suspension to be justified therein.                   The
following observations in paragraph 4 are relevant and the same are
“4. … If the conduct alleged is the foundation for prosecution, though it may
end in acquittal on appreciation or lack of sufficient evidence, the question
emerges whether the government servant prosecuted for commission of
defalcation of public funds and fabrication of the records, though culminated
into acquittal, is entitled to be reinstated with consequential benefits. In our
considered view this grant of consequential benefits with all back wages etc.
cannot be as a matter of course. We think that it would be deleterious to the
maintenance of the discipline if a person suspended on valid considerations is
given full back wages as a matter of course on his acquittal. Two courses are
open to the disciplinary authority, viz., it may enquire into the misconduct
unless, the selfsame conduct was subject of charge and on trial the acquittal
was recorded on a positive finding that the accused did not commit the offence
at all; but acquittal is not on benefit of doubt given. Appropriate action may be
taken thereon. Even otherwise, the authority may, on reinstatement after
following the principle of natural justice, pass appropriate order including
treating suspension period as period of not on duty (and on payment of
subsistence allowance etc.). Rules 72(3), 72(5) and 72(7) of the Rules give
discretion to the disciplinary authority. Rule 72 also applies, as the action was
taken after the acquittal by which date the Rule was in force. Therefore, when
the suspension period was treated to be a suspension pending the trial and even
after acquittal, he was reinstated into service, he would not be entitled to the
consequential benefits. …”
11.          The Tribunal while considering the Original Application preferred by
the petitioner has rightly held that the acquittal of the petitioner was after grant
of benefit of doubt. Since the involvement of the petitioner was in a serious
criminal offence and he was acquitted by giving him the benefit of doubt, it was
held that the petitioner was not entitled for regularisation of the period of
suspension by treating him to be “on duty”. All relevant aspects of the matter
have been considered by the Tribunal and we do not find any reason to take a
different view from the one taken by it.
The decision in Dineshkumar Kain (supra) supports the conclusion that
we have recorded. It cannot be said that while passing the impugned order dated
13/04/2016 holding the petitioner not entitled to pay and allowances for the
period of suspension, the Competent Authority acted arbitrarily.             The decisions
relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner in these facts are clearly
distinguishable and hence the ratio therein cannot be applied to the facts of the
present case.
For aforesaid reasons there is no merit in the challenge as raised. The
writ petition is thus dismissed. Rule stands discharged. No order as to costs.