Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Praveen Kumar Singh,Syed Imran Ibrahim
Supplementary affidavit and supplementary counter affidavit filed today is taken
on record.
Heard learned counsel for the applicant, learned A.G.A. for the State as well as
learned counsel for the informant and perused the record.
The present bail application has been filed by the applicant with the prayer to
enlarge him on bail in Case Crime No. 1611 of 2019, under Sections 419, 420,
Learned counsel for the applicant submits that according to FIR version,
husband of informant established Vaishali Real Estate Pvt. Ltd. in the year 2005,
which worked for purchase and sale of land and initially directors of the
company were Ravindra Kumar and Ajay Rai. In the year 2009 Ajay Rai
resigned and informant was made director along with Kripa Shankar Rai. In the
year 2016 one Neetu Tripathi came in the contact of her husband and they
developed intimacy and due to intimacy of the applicant with the informant's
husband relation of informant with her husband started deteriorating. Applicant
preparing forged papers and forged signature of the informant transferred the
Company's office at her own residence, ousted the informant from the company
and misappropriated her Company shares. On the basis of forged signatures a
new account was opened in the SBI, Rath Yatra, Varanasi and money was
transferred in the aforesaid account and was misappropriated by her personal
expenditure. He further submits that the statement of informant was supported
by Kripa Shankar Rai, she used to put her signature in English language and for
resignation from the company signature has been appended in Hindi. He next
submits that an application for registration of FIR has been moved by the
informant by putting signature in Hindi, therefore, her statement that she put her
signature in English only is falsified. He next submits that as per statement of
the Branch Manager, account was opened in presence of Neetu Tripathi and
Ravindra Kumar, informant's husband. He further submits that Kripa Shankar
Rai registered FIR as Case Crime No. 1590 of 2019, under Sections 419, 46,
471, 406, 506 IPC, P.S. Cantt. Varanasi in which too similar allegations were
levelled in which applicant has been enlarged on bail by this court vide order
dated 22.10.2020 in Case Crime No.3309 of 2020 against which informant
approached The Hon'ble Apex Court but order of this Court has been affirmed
by Apex Court vide its order dated 08.03.2021. Applicant has criminal history
of 10 cases, which have been explained in para 17 of the affidavit filed in
support of bail application and as well as in para 3 of the supplementary
affidavit. He also submits that in one Gangster Case Crime No. 676 of 2020 he
has not moved bail application before this Court. He next submits that the
applicant is lady and claims benefit of Section 437 of Cr.P.C. He further submits
that there is no possibility of the applicant of fleeing away from the judicial
process or tampering with the witnesses and, in case, the applicant is enlarged on
bail,the applicant shall not misuse the liberty of bail and the applicant is
languishing in jail since 04.07.2020
Per contra, learned A.G.A as well as learned counsel for the informant oppose
the bail prayer by submitting that informant has been ousted from the company
by means of forged signature and money has been transferred in the account
opened by means of forged documents and different persons have lodged FIR
against the applicant. They further submit that as per statement of chartered
accountant at page 32 of the supplementary counter affidavit, on asking by the
I.O. that who and to whom shares of the informant were transferred, he kept
mum and a perusal of annual return of the company of the year 2016 -2017
would show that 1200 shares of informant have been reduced to zero and
inducted in the applicant's account, which impliedly supports version of the
informant that the shares of informant were transferred fraudulently in favour of
applicant. They also submit that as per paper no.22 of the supplementary
counter affidavit by undated resolution applicant and co-accused Ravindra
opened account no. 37657013838 and when due to fraudulent opening of the
account information was given to the Bank then it was seized. They next submit
that as per paper no.31 of the counter affidavit, details of 10 criminal history of
the applicant has been disclosed. They further submit that as per investigation
several letters were sent by the I.O. to the applicant for making available the
signature on the resignation letter but same was not given to the informant.
Considering the facts and circumstances of the case as well as submissions
advanced by learned counsel for the parties, as per statement of Bank Manager,
in presence of applicant and co-accused Ravindra Kumar account was opened
without knowledge of the informant and transfer of all the 1200 shares of
informant to the applicant and also perusing the material on record, without
expressing any opinion on merit of the case, I do not find a fit case for bail.
Consequently, the prayer for bail of the applicant Neetu Tripathi is hereby
refused and the bail application is rejected.
However, the trial court is directed to expedite the aforesaid case in accordance
with law without granting unnecessary adjournments to either of the parties as
expeditiously as possible.