Sub.: Operationalisation of the subsidiary company for
Consequent upon the incorporation of a Wholly Owned
Subsidiary of the Corporation, namely PFC Consulting Limited
to promote, organize and carry on Consultancy Services in the
related activities of PFC, the services of Shri N.D. Tyagi, ED
(CSG) stands transferred to the newly formed company on the
existing terms and conditions till further orders with immediate
effect. He is designated as Chief Executive Officer.
This issues with the approval of the Competent Authority.
LPA 373/2022                                                         Page 2 of 28
4.     The undisputed facts further reveal that on 02.12.2013, the Assistant
General Manager – HR, passed an order transferring the Appellant back to
PFCL, and he was posted as Executive Director (Felicitation Group).
5.     After the Petitioner was posted back to PFCL Company, a complaint
was received by Central Vigilance Commission, and the same was
forwarded to the Ministry of Power.
6.     The Respondent No.1 (in the Writ Petition) sought information from
Respondent No.4 as well as point wise reply in respect of the same
complaint, and the Ministry of Power – after receiving the report from the
Chief Vigilance Officer of Respondent No.4 (in the Writ Petition), opined
that the Petitioner should be placed under suspension, and disciplinary
proceedings be initiated against him, and, in those circumstances,
respondent No.1 vide letter dated 08.02.2014 stated that in order to follow
the principles of natural justice and fairplay, an enquiry is required to be
done in the matter and disciplinary proceedings was initiated on 29.10.2014.
Meaning thereby, there was an effective consultation between PFCL and
PFCCL while initiating disciplinary proceedings against the Appellant/
7.     A Show Cause notice was issued by PFCL seeking explanation from
the Petitioner as to why Disciplinary Proceedings should not be initiated
against him in respect of the services rendered by him while he was serving
Respondent No.4, and he did submit a detailed reply in the matter.
8.     The competent Disciplinary Authority, after careful consideration of
the response of the Appellant issued a chargesheet on 09.03.2015, and the
LPA 373/2022                                                        Page 3 of 28
Appellant again submitted reply to the chargesheet on 08.04.2015. The
Disciplinary Authority after careful consideration of the reply appointed an
Enquiry Officer on 08.04.2015, and also appointed a Presiding Officer in the
matter.
9.     The enquiry proceedings continued upto 03.08.2015, and the
Appellant being aggrieved by the chargesheet and the disciplinary
proceedings preferred a Writ Petition before this Court i.e W.P.(C) No.
7741/2015, and this Court on 14.08.2015 has issued notice in the matter.
The matter was then listed on 21.09.2015 and the Counsel appearing for
Respondent No.1 gave an undertaking that the enquiry officer will not
proceed with the enquiry till the next date. The matter was adjourned.
10.    The stay/ undertaking in respect of the departmental enquiry – which
was granted on 21.09.2015 continued till 18.05.2022 i.e. till the matter was
decided by the Learned Single Judge, and the Learned Single Judge has
dismissed the Writ Petition.
11.    The facts of the case – as reflected from the record, reveal that the
Petitioner was primarily aggrieved by denial of his request to change the
Enquiry Officer, and the Petitioner himself wrote to the Disciplinary
Authority on 20.07.2015 for change of Enquiry Officer, and also made a
prayer that Central Vigilance Commission may be approached for
nominating the Commissioner of departmental enquiry to conduct the
enquiry. However, he immediately rushed to this Court challenging the
chargesheet.
12.    Another important aspect of the case is that the Enquiry Officer was
also changed during the pendency of the Writ Petition before the Learned
13.    The Petitioner before the Learned Single Judge also raised a ground
that the misconduct, if any, relates to a period when the Petitioner was
serving PFCCL on deputation, and PFCL was not having any authority or
jurisdiction to institute a departmental enquiry, and to impose a penalty
based upon the alleged acts of misconduct committed by the Petitioner while
he was posted on PFCCL.
14.    Learned Counsel for the Petitioner also placed reliance upon a
judgement delivered in the case of B. L. Satyarthi Vs. State of M. P., 2014
SCC OnLine MP 5735, and prayed for quashment of the chargement.
15.    The Learned Single Judge has dismissed the Writ Petition after
holding that the services of the Petitioner were temporarily transferred to
16.    Paragraphs 20 to 31 of the order passed by the learned Single Judge
“20. The Court then notes that both Mr. Chandiok as well
as the learned ASG had raised the issue of a compendious
Annual Report of PFCL and PFCCL as being liable to be
read as evidence of the two corporations in a sense not
being separate entities. The Court finds itself unable to
sustain the submission as advanced along the aforesaid
lines for the following reasons. A subsidiary, even if it be a
wholly owned subsidiary, upon incorporation under statute
is and has always been recognised to be a separate legal
LPA 373/2022                                                          Page 5 of 28
entity. The act of incorporation gives birth to a distinct legal
entity and is so recognised in law. While there cannot
possibly be a doubt with respect to this well settled legal
proposition, the Court deems it appropriate to advert to the
following pertinent observations as made by the Supreme
Court in Vodafone International Holdings BV Vs. Union of
71. In the thirteenth century, Pope Innocent IV
espoused the theory of the legal fiction by
saying that corporate bodies could not be
excommunicated because they only exist in
abstract. This enunciation is the foundation of
the separate entity principle.
75. The common law jurisdictions do
invariably impose taxation against a
corporation based on the legal principle that
the corporation is “a person” that is separate
from its members. It is the decision of the
House of Lords in Salomon v. Salomon and Co.
(HL)] that opened the door to the formation of
a corporate group. If a “one man” corporation
could be incorporated, then it would follow
that one corporation could be a subsidiary of
another. This legal principle is the basis of
holding structures.
101. A company is a separate legal persona
and the fact that all its shares are owned by
one person or by the parent company has
nothing to do with its separate legal existence.
If the owned company is wound up, the
liquidator, and not its parent company, would
get hold of the assets of the subsidiary. In none
of the authorities have the assets of the
subsidiary been held to be those of the parent
unless it is acting as an agent. Thus, even
though a subsidiary may normally comply with
LPA 373/2022                                                            Page 6 of 28
the request of a parent company it is not just a
puppet of the parent company. The difference is
between having power or having a persuasive
position. Though it may be advantageous for
parent and subsidiary companies to work as a
group, each subsidiary will look to see whether
there are separate commercial interests which
should be guarded.
257. The legal relationship between a holding
company and WOS is that they are two distinct
legal persons and the holding company does
not own the assets of the subsidiary and, in
LPA 373/2022                                                  Page 7 of 28
law, the management of the business of the
subsidiary also vests in its Board of Directors.
In Bacha F. Guzdar v. CIT [AIR 1955 SC 74] ,
this Court held that shareholders' only right is
to get dividend if and when the company
declares it, to participate in the liquidation
proceeds and to vote at the shareholders'
meeting. Refer also to Carew and Co. Ltd. v.
Union of India [(1975) 2 SCC 791] and
Carrasco Investments Ltd. v. Directorate of
258. Holding company, of course, if the
subsidiary is a WOS, may appoint or remove
any Director if it so desires by a resolution in
the general body meeting of the subsidiary.
Holding companies and subsidiaries can be
considered as single economic entity and
consolidated balance sheet is the accounting
relationship between the holding company and
subsidiary company, which shows the status of
the entire business enterprises. Shares of stock
in the subsidiary company are held as assets on
the books of the parent company and can be
issued as collateral for additional debt
financing. Holding company and subsidiary
company are, however, considered as separate
legal entities, and subsidiary is allowed
decentralised management. Each subsidiary
can reform its own management personnel and
holding company may also provide expert,
efficient and competent services for the benefit
of the subsidiaries.
259. The US Supreme Court in United States v.
explained that it is a general principle of
corporate law and legal systems that a parent
corporation is not liable for the acts of its
LPA 373/2022                                                  Page 8 of 28
subsidiary, but the Court went on to explain
that corporate veil can be pierced and the
parent company can be held liable for the
conduct of its subsidiary, if the corporal form is
misused to accomplish certain wrongful
purposes, when the parent company is directly
a participant in the wrong complained of. Mere
ownership, parental control, management, etc.
of a subsidiary is not sufficient to pierce the
status of their relationship and, to hold parent
company liable. In Adams v. Cape Industries
1 All ER 929 (CA)] , the Court of Appeal
emphasised that it is appropriate to pierce the
corporate veil where special circumstances
exist indicating that it is mere facade
concealing true facts.
21. Insofar as the impact of the accounts of both the
companies appearing in a common Annual Account
statement is concerned, it becomes pertinent to note that the
same was in accordance with the statutory mandate of the
provisions contained in the erstwhile Companies Act, 1956.
Nothing worthwhile can be read or deduced from the
aforesaid fact except to hold that the disclosures with
respect to the accounts and turnover of PFCCL was
inserted in the Annual Report of PFCL in compliance with
statutory provisions. Additionally, regard must also be had
to the well recognised exceptions when the corporate veil of
a corporate entity is liable to be pierced or lifted. This
position was recognised and explained by our Court in
Del. 139 as follows: -
“Mr. P.N. Lekhi and Mr. K.K. Jain, the learned
counsels for the respondents, contended that if
I tear as under the corporate veil of the
subsidiary-company it will lead me to an
inescapable conclusion that the subsidiary
LPA 373/2022                                                         Page 9 of 28
company is, in fact, not a separate entity but
merely an agent or trustee of the holding
company, so that the assets of the subsidiary
company are really the assets of the holding
company. The learned counsel contended that
the development and growth of corporations
and the necessity of striking a balance between
the theory of indoor management by the
corporations and the public gaze and control in
the corporate sector had led the courts to tear
the veil woven by Salomon v. Salomon and Co.,
(1897) A.C. 22 and the present day tendency of
the courts is to peep deeper into the matter to
find out whether or not the subsidiary company
is, in fact a separate legal entity. It is true that
Salomon's case has, in certain spheres of
commercial enterprise suffered a demise at the
hands of Legislature and the Companies Act
has made various provisions qualifing the rule
that each company constitutes a separate legal
entity. The most striking examples of such
qualifications lie in the provisions relating to
accounts, which provisions have been designed
primarily to give better information of the
accounts and financial position of the group as
a whole to the creditors, shareholders and the
public. The learned Single Judge has dealt with
those provisions, and it is not necessary to very
much elaborate on the same. Section 212 inter
alia requires each holding company attach to
its balance sheet a copy of the balance-sheet
and profit and loss accounts of the subsidiary
company, copies of the reports of the
subsidiary company Board of Directors and
Auditors, and a statement of the holding
company's interest in the subsidiary company.
The said provision enjoins the holding
company to disclose diverse other informations
LPA 373/2022                                                      Page 10 of 28
with its balance sheet. Sub-Section (5) of the
section 212 deals with a situation where the
financial year of a subsidiary company does
not coincide with the financial year of the
holding company and requires the disclosure of
information regarding changes in holding
company's interest in the subsidiary company
between the end of the financial year of the
subsidiary and the end of the holding
company's financial year, and details of any
material changes which may have occurred
between the end of the financial year of the
subsidiary and the end of the holding
company's financial year in respect of the
subsidiary's fixed assets, its investments, the
moneys lent by it, and the moneys borrowed by
it. Towards the same end are directed the
provisions of section 214. Section 31 deprives a
director of the holding company of his rights to
compensation for loss of office if he has been
guilty of fraud etc. in the conduct of the affairs
of the subsidiary company. Similarly, company
may by a special resolution remove its
managing agent from office for gross
negligence in or for gross mismanagement of
the affairs of the subsidiary company (Section
338). These provisions inter alia indicate the
leaning of the Legislature to treat all
companies within a group as part of the same
entity as against the arbitrary unit-wise
distinction of each company. To that extent, it
will not be incorrect to say, as suggested by the
learned counsel for the respondents, that the
Legislature has itself rent the veil of protection
thrown round corporations by the house of
Lords in Salomon's case. There are, however,
limitations to rending the veil, and the Court
will not do so except for specific purposes and
LPA 373/2022                                                    Page 11 of 28
when compelled by the clear words of the
statute. The Law Reports abound with
decisions showing the tendency of the different
Courts to tear the veil in varying
circumstances. For instance, in Apthorpe v.
41 the finding of fact arrived at by the
Commissioners that the property ostensibly in
the name of the New York Company was, in
fact, that of the English Company liable to
English income-tax on the ground that the
business was being carried on partly in London
was upheld. Again, in some cases the Courts
have come to the conclusion that the subsidiary
company was merely an agent of the holding
company. It may not be possible to put in a
strait jacket of judicial definition as to when
the subsidiary Company can really be treated
as a branch, or an agent, or a trustee of the
holding company. Each case must necessarily
turn on its own facts. Circumstances, such as,
the profits of the subsidiary company being
treated as those of the parent company, the
control and conduct of business of the
subsidiary company resting completely in the
nominees of the holding company, and the
brain behind the trade of the subsidiary
company being really the holding company,
may indicate that in fact the subsidiary
company is only a branch of the holding
company. Basically, however, the fundamental
concept must always to kept in view that each
company is a distinct legal entity. Again the
purpose for which the veil has to be rent must
be kept in view, and the doctrine of the tearing
of the veil cannot be blindly extended to each
and every purpose. It is unnecessary to
elaborate on this aspect any more, as here the
LPA 373/2022                                                  Page 12 of 28
parent company holds only a nominal majority
in the share capital of the subsidiary, which
holding is 52 per cent. With that meagre
majority alone I am not prepared to hold, even
if it were possible to do so for such a purpose,
that the subsidiary company has lost its
indentity as a separate legal entity. Mr. Lekhi
went to the extent of saying that not only for
this purpose but in all cases a subsidiary
company must be treated as an asset of the
holding company. This contention is beyond the
reach of sustained argument. I am, in the
circumstances, of the opinion that the
subsidiary company has neither lost its identity
nor merged itself into a group consisting of the
parent company and the subsidiary company. If
Mr. Lekhi's argument were to be accepted then
each subsidiary company will, crack not only
under the pressure of its own uncongenial
shareholders, which may invariably exist in
every company, but also of the pressure of the
shareholders and creditors of the holding
company.”
22. In any case, this Court finds no justification to hold
against the petitioner on the aforesaid score since the
validity of the disciplinary proceedings must firstly be
answered in the backdrop of the Rules which apply. The
submission of PFCCL being a mere agent of PFCL based
on common published accounts, a joint seniority list, a
common Provident Fund structure would be factors which
may have been of relevance if the Court were to find that the
disciplinary proceedings cannot be sustained on the anvil of
Rule 37.1. However, the Court finds that the challenge to
the disciplinary proceedings as urged on the basis of the
Rules which apply, is liable to be negatived for reasons
which stand recorded hereinafter
LPA 373/2022                                                        Page 13 of 28
23. Rule 37.1 deals with a situation where an employee lent
by PFCL to PFCCL may be found to have committed acts of
misconduct and thus warranting disciplinary proceedings
being initiated. The aforesaid Rule on its plain reading
would apply to the trial of allegations of misconduct
committed by an officer or employee of PFCL while he is
still serving under PFCCL, the Borrowing Authority. In
order to meet such an exigency Rule 37.1 prescribes that the
Borrowing Authority shall have the powers of the
Appointing Authority for the purposes of placing such an
employee under suspension and for conducting disciplinary
proceedings. Rule 37.2(a) then proceeds to mandate that if
the Borrowing Authority comes to the conclusion that a
minor penalty is liable to be imposed, it may after
consultation with the Lending Authority make such orders
as circumstances may warrant. Significantly Rule 37.2(b),
on the other hand, prescribes that if the Borrowing
Authority were to form the opinion that the misconduct
would warrant the imposition of a major penalty, it would
transmit the relevant proceedings of the enquiry to the
Lending Authority leaving it open to it to take such action as
may be deemed necessary. The Explanation to Rule 37.2(b)
provides that upon receipt of the records of enquiry which
may have been undertaken, the Disciplinary Authority may
proceed to pass such further orders as may be justified in
the facts and circumstances of the case. It further leaves it
open to the Disciplinary Authority of the lending entity to
independently conduct an enquiry as contemplated under
Rules 30, 31 and 32. A holistic reading of Rules 37.1 and
37.2 would establish that the Borrowing Authority has been
conferred the jurisdiction to proceed departmentally against
an officer or employee whose services are lent to it and
exercise the very same powers which may otherwise be
available to the Disciplinary Authority subject only to the
caveat that if in those proceedings it comes to conclude that
a major penalty is liable to be imposed, it would be obliged
to transmit the entire proceedings of enquiry to the
Disciplinary Authority of the lending institution for taking
LPA 373/2022                                                         Page 14 of 28
further action in terms of the Explanation noticed above. If
on a culmination of the proceedings as drawn, the
competent authority finds that a minor penalty is liable to be
imposed, it stands sufficiently empowered in terms of Rule
37.2(a) to proceed to do so subject to the caveat that the
same would have to be made with due consultation with the
24. As this Court construes Rule 37.1, it is evident that the
competent authority in PFCCL would have been entitled to
exercise all powers as otherwise inhering in the
Disciplinary Authority of the petitioner during the period
while he was still serving in the said organisation. Those
rules introduce a legal fiction in terms of which the
competent authority of the borrowing entity stands
conferred with all powers that are otherwise vested in the
appointing authority of the lending entity. However Rules
37.1 and 37.2 cannot possibly be read as conferring a
power or authority on PFCCL to proceed against the
petitioner even after his services stood repatriated to PFCL.
The Court also finds itself unable to sustain the submission
of Mr. Gupta who had contended that no proceedings at all
could have been drawn by PFCL in the absence of any
proceedings having been initiated while he was still serving
in PFCCL. This Court is of the firm opinion that an act of
misconduct is always open to be tried by the Disciplinary
Authority in accordance with the Rules which would apply.
The Court finds itself unable to either countenance or
accept the submission that since PFCCL had failed to try
the petitioner for the alleged acts of misconduct, that power
would cease to exist once the petitioner reverted to PFCL.
An act of misconduct would be open to be tried by a
Disciplinary Authority notwithstanding the reversion of the
petitioner to PFCL. Regard must be had to the fact that the
reversion of the petitioner to PFCL cannot possibly be
construed as either effacing the allegation of the
commission of misconduct nor can it possibly be interpreted
as denuding the Disciplinary Authority to try the allegations
of misconduct in accordance with the Rules.
LPA 373/2022                                                         Page 15 of 28
25. Regard must also be had to the fact that the services of
the petitioner were only temporarily lent to PFCCL. He
continued to hold a lien in the cadre of officers of PFCL. A
deputation of an officer or his temporary placement in a
related entity does not sever all relations of master and
servant that exists between the principal employer and that
officer or employee. The services of the petitioner were
temporarily assigned to PFCCL. The order in terms of
which the petitioner was posted in PFCCL cannot possibly
be construed or interpreted to embody a termination of his
lien on the permanent post that he held in PFCL. In fact, it
was not even the case of the petitioner that he had acquired
a permanent lien on the post of Chief Executive Officer in
PFCCL. The petitioner also did not question his
repatriation to PFCL. The concept of lien and the impact of
deputation was succinctly explained by the Supreme Court
in State of Rajasthan Vs. S.N. Tiwari (2009) 4 SCC 700 in
the following terms:-
“16. It is not the case of the State that the
respondent employee was made permanent as a
homoeopathic doctor in ESI Corporation. The
respondent employee did not acquire any lien
in ESI Corporation. The question of
termination of lien does not arise since the
respondent employee did not acquire a lien on
a permanent post outside the cadre on which
he is borne.
17. It is very well settled that when a person
with a lien against the post is appointed
substantively to another post, only then he
acquires a lien against the latter post. Then
and then alone the lien against the previous
post disappears. Lien connotes the right of a
civil servant to hold the post substantively to
which he is appointed. The lien of a
government employee over the previous post
ends if he is appointed to another permanent
LPA 373/2022                                                        Page 16 of 28
post on permanent basis. In such a case the
lien of the employee shifts to the new
permanent post. It may not require a formal
termination of lien over the previous
permanent post.
18. This Court in Ramlal Khurana v. State of
644 : (1984) 11 ATC 841] observed that: (SCC
p. 102, para 8) “8. … Lien is not a word of art.
It just connotes the right of a civil servant to
hold the post substantively to which he is
appointed.”
19. The term “lien” comes from the Latin term
“ligament” meaning “binding”. The meaning
of lien in service law is different from other
meanings in the context of contract, common
law, equity, etc. The lien of a government
employee in service law is the right of the
government employee to hold a permanent post
substantively to which he has been permanently
appointed. (See Triveni Shankar Saxena v.
State of U.P. [1992 Supp (1) SCC 524 : 1992
20. The High Court upon appreciation of the
material available on record found that lien of
the respondent employee always continued in
the Department of Economics and Statistics.
His urgent temporary appointment as
homoeopathic doctor vide order dated 3-12-
1980 was not a substantive appointment for
any definite period. The mere fact that the
respondent employee continued to work for a
long period itself would not result in loss of
lien in the parent Department of Economics
and Statistics. That even after the respondent
employee joined as homoeopathic doctor in
ESI Corporation in 1980 the parent department
LPA 373/2022                                                  Page 17 of 28
treated the respondent employee as belonging
to its own cadre. We find no infirmity in the
order passed by the High Court.”
26. The submission of Mr. Gupta with respect to the
competence and jurisdiction to hold a disciplinary enquiry
essentially rested on the decision of the Madhya Pradesh
High Court in B.L. Satyarthi. However, in the considered
view of the Court quite far from supporting the case of the
petitioner, that decision in fact would buttress and lend
support to the conclusions recorded hereinabove. It
becomes pertinent to note that in B.L. Satyarthi, the
petitioner who was an employee of the Forest Department
had been sent on deputation to the Madhya Pradesh Rajya
Van Vikas Nigam, an autonomous corporation. He
continued on deputation in the Nigam upto 6 November
1989 whereafter he was repatriated to the Forest
Department. The Nigam issued a charge sheet against the
petitioner there after he had been reverted to the Forest
Department. It was the validity of the aforesaid action of the
Corporation that led to the litigation. The Madhya Pradesh
High Court while examining the challenge had taken into
consideration the provisions made in Rule 20 of the Madhya
Pradesh Civil Services (CCA) Rules, 1966 which are in pari
materia with Rule 37.1. Upon a consideration of the
submissions which were addressed, the High Court
concluded that when an employee who holds a lien in a
Government Department is sent on deputation to either
another Department or an autonomous corporation, a
temporary contract of service comes into being between the
borrowing department and the employee concerned. The
Court noted that as long as the said contract of employment
subsists, the borrowing department could invoke the
provisions of Rule 20 and initiate disciplinary proceedings.
However, and significantly the Court in B.L. Satyarthi
further observed that once the employee is repatriated back
to the lending department, the contract of employment
temporarily created during the period of deputation ceases
and in that situation the borrowing department would have
LPA 373/2022                                                         Page 18 of 28
no authority to take action against the employee concerned.
It also took note of the decision of the Madras High Court in
K. Kanagasabapathy v. City Supply Officer, Civil(1978) 1
MLJ 184 which had also clearly held that a borrowing
department would have no authority to initiate disciplinary
proceedings once the employee stood repatriated. It
accordingly allowed the appeal and while quashing the
punishment order which had been imposed by the Nigam,
accorded liberty to transmit the proceedings of enquiry to
the Forest Department for taking further action if
warranted. B.L. Satyarthi thus cannot possibly be read as
an authority which may have laid down a principle
supporting the contentions advanced by Mr. Gupta. In fact,
it holds to the contrary and is in consonance with the
conclusions reached by this Court. The Court is thus of the
firm opinion that once the petitioner stood repatriated to
PFCL, no action could have possibly been initiated by
PFCCL for alleged acts of misconduct committed while the
petitioner was serving in that organization. In fact once the
petitioner stood repatriated to his original cadre, it was the
Disciplinary Authority of PFCL alone which could have
initiated departmental proceedings against him.
27. Mr. Gupta had further submitted that in the absence of
any requisite satisfaction having been recorded or reached
by the competent authority of PFCCL, no proceedings could
have been initiated by the respondents. It was also argued
that the entire chargesheet rests on material and evidence
which would be with PFCCL. In view of the above, it was
contended that the initiation of disciplinary proceedings
suffers from a jurisdictional error.
28. The Court finds itself unable to either countenance or
accept this contention for the following reasons. As has
been found in the preceding paragraphs of this judgment,
the competent authority in PFCCL could have exercised
jurisdiction in this regard only while the petitioner was
serving in that organization. Rules 37.1 and 37.2 put in
place and introduce an impermanent legal fiction which
LPA 373/2022                                                         Page 19 of 28
would be deemed to operate only during the tenure of
service rendered by the officer in the borrowing entity.
However, and as has been held hereinabove, once that
temporary period of service comes to an end and the officer
reverts to his parent cadre, the authority in the borrowing
department ceases to have jurisdiction or authority to
proceed against the concerned employee. Upon
repatriation, it is the competent authority in the parent body
who alone would have the requisite jurisdiction to form an
opinion whether the officer or employee is liable to be
proceeded against departmentally. That discretion and
authority of the competent authority cannot possibly be held
to be dependent upon the formation of opinion by an
authority of the borrowing department, corporation or
company. As was noticed hereinbefore, the petitioner did
not lose or surrender his lien in PFCL. His placement in
PFCCL was merely a temporary transfer and placement.
Once he came back to the parent organization, the authority
which had been temporarily conferred upon the borrowing
entity in terms of the legal fiction contained in Rule 37.1
ceased to operate. It was thus the Disciplinary Authority of
PFCL alone who could have taken a decision whether the
petitioner was liable to be proceeded with departmentally
for trial of charges of misconduct.
29. Regard must also be had to the fact that an act of
misconduct stands attached to the officer or employee
personally. The fact that the alleged misdemeanor was
committed while the petitioner was serving on deputation
does not detract from the commission of misconduct. An act
of alleged misconduct is a fact which would remain and
survive to be tried notwithstanding the deputation having
come to an end. Merely because the period of deputation
may have come to an end, it would not divest the
Disciplinary Authority of PFCL from initiating an enquiry.
If the submission of Mr. Gupta were to be accepted, it would
amount to laying down a principle that misconduct when
committed during deputation cannot be enquired into once
the same comes to an end. The Court finds itself unable to
LPA 373/2022                                                          Page 20 of 28
accord a legal imprimatur to the aforenoted submission
bearing in mind the serious repercussions that would ensue
if the same were accepted. This since it would essentially
mean that the right of an employer to enquire into an act of
alleged misconduct would stand lost forever merely because
the authority in the borrowing department had failed to
initiate action. The Court finds itself unable to interpret
Rules 37.1 and 37.2 as providing for or envisaging such a
consequence. The Court fails to discern a legal principle
which may support this contention. In any case and in light
of the interpretation accorded to the relevant Rules, the
Court finds that PFCL did retain the right to proceed
against the petitioner.
30. The submission that the enquiry proceedings are liable
to be interdicted since the relevant records are available
with PFCCL is also wholly without merit and untenable.
The enquiry proceedings would continue based on the
material which has been gathered and is in the possession
of the respondents. The evidence on which the charges are
sought to be established have been duly set out in the
chargesheet. Ultimately, the onus to prove the charges
levelled lies upon the respondents. If there be absence of
evidence, they would be unable to prove the charge.
However, whether sufficient material or evidence exists to
support the charges levelled, is a question which must be
left for the Enquiry Officer to consider. There exists no
justification for the Court to go into this question at this
stage especially when that aspect is yet to be considered by
the Enquiry Officer.
31. Accordingly, and for all the aforesaid reasons, the writ
petition fails and shall stand dismissed.”
LPA 373/2022                                                        Page 21 of 28
17.    This Court has carefully gone through the order passed by the learned
Single Judge, and the facts of the case reveal that the petitioner projected a
case that he was on deputation and after his repatriation to the parent
department, by no stretch of imagination; the proceedings against him could
have been initiated by PFCL (Parent Organization) for any event which took
place while he was on deputation to PFCCL.
18.    The conduct and discipline rules as contained under Rules 36.1, 37.1
and 37.2 are reproduced as under:
“36.1 Where an order of suspension is made or disciplinary
proceedings are initiated against an employee, who is on
deputation to the Corporation from the Central or State
Government or another Public Undertaking or a local authority
etc., the authority lending his services (hereinafter referred to
as the "Lending Authority") shall forthwith be informed of the
circumstances leading to the order of his/her suspension, or the
commencement of the disciplinary proceedings as the case may
37.1 Where the services of an employee are lent to the
Government or any authority subordinate thereto or to any
other Public Undertaking etc., (hereinafter referred to as the
“Borrowing Authority”) the Borrowing Authority shall have the
powers of the Appointing Authority for the purpose of placing
such an employee under suspension and of the Disciplinary
Authority for the purpose of conducting disciplinary
proceedings against him; Provided that the Borrowing
Authority shall forthwith inform Power Finance Corporation
Limited (hereinafter referred to as the “Lending Authority”) of
the circumstances leading to the order of suspension of an
employee or the commencement of the disciplinary
proceedings, as the case may be.
37.2 In the light of the findings of the Inquiring Authority
against the employee:- a) If the Borrowing Authority is of the
LPA 373/2022                                                        Page 22 of 28
opinion that any of the minor penalties specified in Rule 28.1
should be imposed on the employee, if any, after consultation
with the Corporation, it make such orders in the case as it
deems necessary: Provided that in the event of a difference of
opinion between the Borrowing Authority and the Lending
Authority, the services of the employee shall be replaced at the
disposal of the Corporation. b) If the Borrowing Authority is of
the opinion that any of the major penalties specified in Rule
28.2 should be imposed on the employee, it shall replace
his/her services at the disposal of the Corporation and transmit
to it the proceedings of the inquiry for such action as deemed
The Disciplinary Authority may make an order under this
clause on the record of inquiry transmitted to it by the
Borrowing Authority of by holding such further inquiry as it
may deem necessary, as far as may be, in accordance with
Rules 30, 31 or 32.”
19.    Learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently argued before this
Court that only PFCCL which was the borrowing authority was having
jurisdiction to conduct disciplinary proceedings in respect of the alleged
misconduct and by no stretch of imagination, a charge sheet could have been
issued by the parent organisation.
20.    This Court has carefully gone through the entire record of the case
and the same reveals that the charge sheet has been issued in the present
case after effective consultation between PFCL and PFCCL that too at the
instance of the Central Vigilance Commission.         Therefore, the learned
Single Judge was justified in holding that as the writ petitioner was an
employee of PFCL, he was temporarily posted to PFCCL, the charge sheet
LPA 373/2022                                                        Page 23 of 28
was rightly issued by competent disciplinary authority even though the
misconduct was committed by him while serving PFCCL.
21.     The statutory provisions quoted above makes it very clear that they
relates to a period during which an employee is on deputation and would
operate only during the tenure of service rendered by an employee in the
borrowing entity. Once the employee is sent back to his parent department,
it is the competent disciplinary authority of the parent organisation which
can issue a charge sheet against the misconduct even though it has taken
place in the borrowing department.
22.     In the present case, the charges levelled against the petitioner reads as
That the said Shri N.D. Tyagi while functioning as CEO,
PFCCL was responsible for formulation of policy, with the
approval of Competent Authority, relating to Travel/ Hotel/
Local Conveyance and Daily Allowance entitlements of casual
staff (in case need arises to send casual staff on outstation tours
for official work related to PFCCL). Shri N.D. Tyagi has failed
to put in place the policy duly approved by the Competent
Authority relating to Travel/ Hotel/ Local Conveyance and
Daily Allowance entitlements of casual staff before permitting
them to travel on out station tours.
Shri N.D. Tyagi, while functioning as CEO, PFCCL permitted
casual staff to travel on outstation toufs without having
LPA 373/2022                                                            Page 24 of 28
Competent Authority approved policy on Travel/ Hotel/ Local
Conveyance/ and Daily Allowance entitlements of casual staff
That while functioning in the aforesaid office, the said Shri
N.D. Tyagi, while functioning as CEO, PFCCL allowed
expenditure and payment of Travel/ Hotel/ Local Conveyance
etc. in respect of casual staff without having approved policy in
place with regard to their entitlements. This action on his part
has resulted in enhanced financial outgo which could have been
avoided.”
The above actions on the part of Shri N.D.Tyagi tantamount to
misconduct and the Disciplinary Authority have decided to
charge him under the PFC Conduct, Discipline & Appeal Rules
(PFC CDA Rules) for misconduct as contained in the following
Article of Charges:
Shri N.D.Tyagi, as CEO, PFCCL was responsible for the
smooth functioning of the Company including framing of
policies (if required adoption of policies from the parent
company PFC) relating to personnel matters.
PFCCL entered into Contract Agreement with M/s Sybex
Computer Systems Pvt. Ltd. for providing staff on contract
basis to PFCCL as required from time to time. In the Contract.
Agreement dated 19th October 2012 signed between PFCCL
and M/s Sybex Computer Systems Pvt. Ltd. there was no
provision for regulation of payment of Travel tickets, Hotel
accommodation charges, Local Conveyance Charges, Daily
Allowance etc., in case any staff deployed by M/s Sybex
Computers Pvt. Ltd. is required to undertake outstation
journeys for PFCCL related work.
LPA 373/2022                                                        Page 25 of 28
Shri N.D.Tyagi, while functioning as CEO, PFCCL permitted
casual staff to travel on outstation tours without having
Competent Authority approved policy on Travel/ Hotel/ Local
Conveyance/ and Daily Allowance entitlements of casual staff.
The above action on the part of Shri N.D.Tyagi tantamount to
misconduct. He is therefore charged under Clause No. 5.5 &
5.9 of PFC CDA Rules which reads as under:
Clause 5.5 "Acting in a manner prejudicial to the interest of the
Clause No. 5.9 "Neglect of work or negligence in the
performance of duty including malingering or slowing down of
work."
That while functioning in the aforesaid office, the said Shri
N.D.Tyagi, while functioning as CEO, PFCCL allowed
expenditure and payment of Travel/ Hotel/ Local Conveyance
etc. in respect of casual staff without having approved policy in
place with regard to their entitlements. This action on his part
has resulted in enhanced financial outgo which could have been
avoided.
The above action on the part of Shri N.D.Tyagi tantamount to
misconduct. He is therefore charged under Clause No. 5.5 of
PFC CDA Rules which reads as under:
Clause 5.5 "Acting in a manner prejudicial to the interest of the
23.    The aforesaid charges make it very clear that the charges are not
vague/ absurd charges and it is the employer who has to establish charges
based upon the evidence.
24.    The present case is a case where the validity of the charge sheet is
under question. The Apex Court in the case of Union of India and Another
LPA 373/2022                                                        Page 26 of 28
v. Kunisetty Satyanarayana, (2006) 12 SCC 28, in paragraphs 13,14,15 and
16 has held as under:
“13. It is well settled by a series of decisions of this Court that
ordinarily no writ lies against a charge-sheet or show-cause
notice vide Executive Engineer, Bihar State Housing
Board v. Ramesh Kumar Singh [(1996) 1 SCC 327 : JT (1995)
8 SC 331] , Special Director v. Mohd. Ghulam Ghouse [(2004)
, Ulagappa v. Divisional Commr., Mysore [(2001) 10 SCC 639]
, State of U.P. v. Brahm Datt Sharma [(1987) 2 SCC 179 :
(1987) 3 ATC 319 : AIR 1987 SC 943] , etc.
14. The reason why ordinarily a writ petition should not be
entertained against a mere show-cause notice or charge-sheet
is that at that stage the writ petition may be held to be
premature. A mere charge-sheet or show-cause notice does not
give rise to any cause of action, because it does not amount to
an adverse order which affects the rights of any party unless the
same has been issued by a person having no jurisdiction to do
so. It is quite possible that after considering the reply to the
show-cause notice or after holding an enquiry the authority
concerned may drop the proceedings and/or hold that the
charges are not established. It is well settled that a writ petition
lies when some right of any party is infringed. A mere show-
cause notice or charge-sheet does not infringe the right of
anyone. It is only when a final order imposing some punishment
or otherwise adversely affecting a party is passed, that the said
party can be said to have any grievance.
15. Writ jurisdiction is discretionary jurisdiction and hence
such discretion under Article 226 should not ordinarily be
exercised by quashing a show-cause notice or charge-sheet.
16. No doubt, in some very rare and exceptional cases the High
Court can quash a charge-sheet or show-cause notice if it is
found to be wholly without jurisdiction or for some other
reason if it is wholly illegal. However, ordinarily the High
Court should not interfere in such a matter.”
LPA 373/2022                                                           Page 27 of 28
25.     Therefore, as the charges are not vague, the charge sheet has been
issued by the competent disciplinary authority, the question of interference
by this Court, at this stage, does not arise. Resultantly, this Court does not
find any reason to interfere with the order passed by the learned Single
Judge. The appeal is accordingly dismissed.