The revision petitioner is the second defendant in O.S.No.81 of 2011 on the file of
Sub-Court, Gudiyattam, Vellore District. He has moved this Court under Article
227 of the Constitution challenging what passes for a decree dated 02-06-2015,
passed with the consent of the defendants declaring the title of the plaintiff to the
suit property.
2. The facts that provide the backdrop for the present revision may be bullet-
●     The plaintiff/the first respondent herein had laid a suit in O.S.81/2012 for
declaration of title allegedly on the strength of an unregistered sale deed. The
second respondent herein was arrayed as the sole defendant to the suit. He is
stated to be a close relative of the plaintiff.
●     Claiming that he is the owner of the suit property along with another, the
revision petitioner herein had filed I.A.17/2012 to implead himself.
●     On 24.08.2012, I.A.17 of 2012 was allowed. On the procedural front, this
necessitated an amendment to the cause-title of the plaint. However, the
plaintiff/first respondent failed to carry out the same, with the result that the
suit was dismissed for default on 27-11-2012.
●     Long after the dismissal of the suit, 767 days to be precise, the plaintiff filed
I.A.31/2015 for restoration of the suit along with another application for
condoning the delay of 767 days. While it is not exactly clear as to what
happened to the application for condonation of delay, the fact remains that
posting of I.A.31/2015 came to be advanced and was eventually allowed.
Then, the suit itself was restored to file vide order dated 27.04.2015.
●     At the time when the suit was restored, there was still only one defendant: the
second respondent herein. The plaintiff carried out amendment to the cause
title of the plaint, and the revision petitioner came to be arrayed as the second
defendant.
●     Subsequently, on 29-04-2015 a Memo is alleged to have been filed by the
counsel for the revision petitioner informing the Court that the second
defendant/revision petitioner 'submits to the decree', recording which on 02-
06-2015, the Court decreed the suit.
●     After obtaining the said decree, the plaintiff/decree holder applied for transfer
of patta, and for which purpose, he filed W.P.No.6934 of 2021. This was
allowed by this Court on 18.03.2021 (Order by N. Seshasayee J), and in its
order, it directed the revenue officials to issue notice to all the parties who are
likely to be affected by the intended action. The Tahsildar accordingly issued
a notice to the present revision petitioner, and it is upon receiving this notice
did the revision petitioner learn about the passing of the decree.
Challenging that the decree dated 02-06-2015 is vitiated by fraud, the second-
defendant has laid this revision.
3. Mr. Sharath Chandran, the learned counsel for the revision petitioner contended
that the trial Court ought to have realised that the Memo was allegedly signed only
by the counsel, and that it should not have skipped or short circuited the procedure
contemplated under Order XXIII Rule 3 CPC, and should have satisfied itself that
there was a conscious relinquishment on the part of the second defendant before
proceeding to pass a decree. Even if this is complied with, still the decree declaring
the title to the property would have to be passed based on an unregistered sale deed.
This would mean that the court was called upon to pass a decree, based on a certain
Memo of the defendants, which it could not pass legally, and the trial Court was
unwittingly sucked into the trap well laid by the plaintiff to pass the decree. He
added that as per his instructions, the counsel for the revision petitioner before the
trial court has already filed an affidavit before this Court disowning the said
document. Inasmuch as the decree is vitiated by a calculated fraud on the judicial
process, there is no legitimacy attached to it. He relied on the ratio in Devaki and
Himalayan Coop. Group Housing Society Vs. Balwan Singh and Others [(2015) 7
Palanisamy & Others [2011 (3) MWN (Civil) 469]; J.Sivasubramanian and
another Vs. N.Govindarajan and another [1998-1-L.W.372]; Renuka Devi Vs.
4. Per contra, Mr.G.Vinodh Kumar, the learned counsel appearing for the
●     If at all the revision petitioner is aggrieved, he ought to have moved the very
Court that passed the decree to have the decree recalled and the same cannot
be challenged under Article 227 of the Constitution.
●     It is not that the trial Court has granted a decree based on the unregistered
sale deed but on the basis of a Memo filed by the counsel for the 2nd
defendant. Therefore, it cannot be said that the trial Court has passed a decree
based on the unregistered sale deed.
He relied on the authorities in Garment Craft Vs Prakash Chand Goel [(2022) 4
Another [ (2015) 5 SCC 747 : (2015) 3 SCC (Civ) 35] and P.Chinnaraj @ P.Rajan
Vs. C.Ramasamy and others [2014 SCC Online Mad 11875; (2015) 1 MWN
5. The allegation on which this revision is pivoted is that the judicial process has
been deftly and nefariously manoeuvred by the plaintiff to obtain a decree which
substantive law and procedure does not accommodate. The resistance to it from the
first respondent/plaintiff is directed to the jurisdiction of this Court under Art.227
of the Constitution to embark on an enquiry into a disputed question of fact viz.,
whether the counsel for the revision petitioner/2nd defendant before the trial court
had filed a memo on 29-04-2015? This exercise would be beyond the ambit of
powers of superintendence under Article 227 of the Constitution, argued the
counsel.
6. This Court perused the records, and a reference to what it discloses will be made
later. The issue here is not confined to whether or not Mr.Theerthagiri, the counsel
of the revision petitioner before the trial court, had filed a Memo dated 29-04-2015
that led to the Court passing the decree. It goes beyond.
7. The facts may be reiterated for a convenient opening, for doing which this court
considers it appropriate to refer to the records of the trial court.            They disclose:
1   19.09.2011 Suit filed by the first respondent against the second
2   11.03.2011 Summons to defendant served.            Defendant called
3   22.11.2011 Exparte evidence taken. Exhibits A1 to A7 marked.
Posted for arguments on 08.12.2011.
4   08.12.2011   Post to 20.12.2011.
5   20.12.2011   For adducing better evidence, posted to 24.01.2012.
6   24.01.2012  For adducing better evidence, posted to 10.02.2012.
7   10.02.2012 I.A.No.17/2012 filed by the revision petitioner for
8   24.08.2012 I.A.No.17/2012 allowed.      Posted for steps to amend
the plaint on 17.09.2012.
9   17.09.2012 Posted to 19.11.2012, and then to 27.11.2012.
10   27.11.2012 Steps not taken. Counsel for the plaintiff represented.
Party may be called. Suit dismissed for default.
11   02.02.2015 I.A.31/2015 filed by the plaintiff for condonation of
delay of 767 days for filing I.A., for restoration of suit,
filed along with application for Order IX Rule 9 CPC.
Notice was ordered. Notice was served only on second
respondent (No notice taken on revision petitioner).
12   31.03.2015 I.A.No.56/2015 filed by the plaintiff to advance
hearing of I.A.No.31/2015 from 27.04.2015. Petition
13       ----   Application under Order IX Rule 9 for restoration of
14   17.04.2015 Learned Judge was on leave. But endorsement made
by the some counsel that 'No counter, petition may be
allowed'. Case posted to 22.04.2015.
15   22.04.2015 Notice of hearing filed on 16.04.2015. Memo filed by
second defendant on 21.04.2015.         Judge on OD.
Reposted to 27.04.2015.
16   29.04.2015 Memo filed by the second defendant – "Submitting to
8. Couple of facts disclosed above require a certain degree of emphasis as it
seemingly sets up the stage for the passing of the decree:
●     First the suit was laid for declaration of title on the strength of an
unregistered sale deed against a sole defendant, the second respondent herein.
He, is stated to be a close relative of the plaintiff, and he chose to remain
exparte. Should it be presumed as an expected line of the game plan?
●     On 24-11-2011, the trial Court proceeds to record the exparte evidence of the
plaintiff, and marks the documents produced by him as Exts.A-1 to A-7. But
it did not proceed to pass an exparte decree. It appears to have entertained
the doubts on the sustainability of the plaintiff's right to relief (as it is
founded on an unregistered sale). It therefore, posted the case for arguments
to 08-12-2011, and then specifically posted the case for adducing better
evidence to 20-12-2011, 24-01-2012 and to 10-02-2012. It is now evident
that the Court is less inclined to grant a decree for declaring the title of the
plaintiff on the strength of an unregistered sale deed in an uncontested suit.
●     On 10-02-2012, the date on which the case was posted for the plaintiff to
adduce better evidence, the revision petitioner makes his entry when he came
up with his application in I.A.17/2012 for impleading himself in the suit as
the second defendant.        Paragraph 3 of his affidavit filed in aid of this
application discloses why the revision petitioner seeks his impleadment and
also his just apprehension as to how his right to the suit-property might be
"3. I state that I am one of the absolute owner of the suit property and
myself and T.Aslam Basha were purchased the said property under a
registered Sale Deed dated 01/03/1991 executed by Ganesan for
himself and on behalf of his minor children in Document
No.889/1991 of SRO, Guidyatham. We were in joint possession and
enjoyment of the said property.     Myself and T.Aslam Basha were the
partners of the company in the name and style of "M/s.Eastern Leather
Company". The abovesaid company was started by us with plant and
machinery.   The TNEB service connection stands in the name of
T.Aslam Basha. And all the revenue records stand in the name of us."
●     I.A.17/2012 was allowed, and the revision petitioner was impleaded. The
next stage is a procedural step which requires formally amending the cause-
title of the plaint for disclosing the name of the revision-petitioner as the
second defendant in the suit. The trial Court granted two postings for the
same, and as it was not done, consequent to which it dismissed the suit for
default on 27.11.2012. It is doubtful if this procedure is entirely correct, but
this is not very germane for the current purposes. Uptil this point there is
hardly any significant procedural default. Indeed the trial Court deserves
appreciation when it did not rush to pass an exparte decree as it chose to wait
for better evidence for considering the plaintiff's claim of title to the suit
property.
●     The problem comes thereafter. Some 767 days later, the plaintiff comes up
with applications under Order IX Rule 9 CPC for restoring the suit, and
another for condonation of delay in filing the former application under Sec.5
of the Limitation Act.
●     On 02.02.2015, the application under Sec.5 of the Limitation Act was taken
on record as I.A.31/2015. Justly the Court ordered notice on it. And, the
notice appears to have been taken only on the second respondent, who had
chosen to remain exparte, but not on the revision petitioner, who by now had
been impleaded as the second defendant.
●     The case was posted to 27.04.2015. But it was hurriedly advanced when the
plaintiff filed I.A.No.56/2015 for the purpose, with the counsel for the
defendant, whom only God knows who, endorsing no objection, advanced to
31-03-2015, and I.A.31/2015 was allowed.         A delay of 767 days was
condoned in no time, but was the revision petitioner heard?
●     Now, the case travels to the next stage. And it assumes a 'Solomon Grundy'
pattern. The application filed by the plaintiff under Order IX Rule 9 CPC
was promptly taken on record in I.A.57/2015. Application also was filed to
carry out amendment to the plaint for including the name of the revision
petitioner in the party array. The suit was restored on 20.04.2015, and the
plaint was amended. On 21.04.2015, the counsel for the first defendant filed
his Memo submitting to the decree. But the first defendant has been set
exparte on the first hearing of the suit, and there is nothing on record to show
when this order was set aside,         and since when the first defendant was
allowed to participate in the suit. The case stood adjourned to 02-06-2015,
immediately after a four week summer recess. In between, on 29-04-2015,
the counsel for the revision-petitioner/second defendant, Mr.Theerthagiri had
“It is humbly prayed that the 2nd Defendant is submitting to Decree
and the above suit may be decreed without costs and this Memo may
kindly be recorded.”
●     On 02-06-2015, the trial court acted on the Memo and decreed the suit.
Interestingly enough the trial court has referred to the evidence on record
before acting on the Memo of the counsel.
9.        The counsel for the revision petitioner claims on instructions that
Mr.Theerthagiri had not filed any such Memo, and that he had filed an affidavit to
the effect. The counsel for the first respondent/plaintiff would contend that the
issue, whether or not Mr.Theerthagiri had filed the Memo is a disputed question of
fact, and the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 227 of the Constitution does
not authorise the Court to travel into the domain of disputed facts.     As indicated in
paragraph 6 above earlier, the issue involved goes far beyond the Memo, both
alleged and denied to have been filed by the counsel for the revision petitioner
before the trial court.
10.1 The power of superintendence of the High Court which the Constitution
speaks of is more an aspect of duty than an idea of authority. Courts may have been
a creation of the Constitution and the statutes, but the force that sustains their
vitality and institutional relevance is defined not by the authority which are vested
in them by the sources of their creation, but by the public trust in them. If rights are
wronged, then the Courts, as an impartial arbiter, assure the aggrieved that the
wrong would be set right. It is a promise they hold for justifying their
establishment, and is the consideration they pay the public for investing its trust in
them. In a republic under a normative constitution, this process is open and
transparent as they guarantee greater clarity to the litigants that justice is both done
and is also seen to be done – both substantive and procedural. 'Justice must be seen
to be done' is not an ordinary statement on the optics of justice dispensation but is
an inalienable aspect of judicial accountability that reassures the public of the
commitment of the Court to sustain the faith reposed in it. The power of
superintendence, nay the duty to supervise which the Constitution has enjoined this
Court with under Article 227 of the Constitution, in essence, is intended to secure
and sustain the public faith in the judicial system. It may be understood as a duty to
drone-cam the functioning of the courts subordinate to it to ensure that the quality
of its functioning is effective and is worthy of sustaining the trust of the litigant
public.
10.2 Contextually the phrase 'seen to be done' is an aspect of procedure. Procedure
is the path, travelling through which substantive justice in a cause is attained. When
a procedure is mishandled or manipulated to derive an unmerited advantage by one
of the parties to the litigation, it, in effect, corrodes the public faith in the judiciary.
It will sound a knell that this Court cannot afford to ignore. Power of
superintendence, therefore, is not ornamental, but are facets of serious
Constitutional responsibility. It is an internal check to assure the litigants that their
faith in the judiciary is rewarding.
10.3 The power of superintendence is not a free-roaming authority since the Courts
subordinate to the High Court are independent within their spheres of power,
function and authority. It is not an invisible string for this Court to pull from
behind or above as if in a puppet-show. Hence, power of superintendence may not
be construed as authorising the High Court to shadow-participate in every judicial
proceeding of the courts subordinate to it, nor interfere with that, for doing which
those courts have been vested with the authority to do. In the realm of their
authority, the courts subordinate to the High Court are supreme, and duty of
supervision does not permit needling with that supremacy. It is similar (though not
the same) as a referee making a line-call. Only where the Courts subordinate to
this Court breach the rule of procedural and processual fairness of the kind already
indicated, this Court will contemplate assuming its constitutional responsibility to
step in and restore fairness in procedure and substance.
10.4 When Article 227 is invoked, this Court scans the judicial process applied in a
litigation to ascertain the quality of processual justice and evaluates the
consequences produced. Not all the mishandled procedure affects the substantive
right to litigate or defend or produce unfair results, as many may fall within the
domain of the discretionary space made available to the courts subordinate to this
Court. Where the procedure is mishandled, or manipulated (commonly understood
as abuse of judicial process or fraud on court) to produce an unfair result adverse to
one of the litigants with the potential to impair the litigant's faith in the Court, it
will be a clarion call for this Court to step in. This Court's claim that it is a sentinel
on the qui vive in protecting the rights of the citizens will then go hollow and
weather beaten, if it compromises its Constitutional conscience, and forsakes its
duty to correct a wrong in exercise of its powers under Article 227 of the
Constitution. This is the soul of its supervisory power: of identifying a wrong which
holds the potential to imperil the public faith in the judiciary or challenges its own
purity and effectiveness of its functioning, and then following it with curial
measures. To complete the narrative, it is necessary to point out that allegations of
fraud is not rain seeding power of courts to come down and wash away all
procedural and substantive aspects in a suit. Fraud on court empowers the same
court as well as this Court to interfere in appropriate cases under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India. However, fraud on a party is a voidable act and it has be
investigated and dealt with by way of an appropriate application or a separate suit.
11. When can this Court engage in a process of identifying a wrong to contemplate
a correction? Here, it needs to be emphasised that the legitimacy of judicial process
may not be evaluated solely by its validation in an apparent or ostensible procedural
compliance, but by its proximity to fairness needed for its compliance. A procedure
represents the body of rules navigating through which justice could be obtained. It
is the means to an end and not an end in itself. Any understanding of the procedural
law as a mere statute providing a check-list for mandatory compliance is an
oversimplification of what it signifies. The soul of procedure is its fairness, which
the expressions embodying it may not adequately highlight. Indeed, procedural law
is written with fairest of inks on the parchment of fairness, and if fairness is
separated from the procedural law - its application and handling, the judicial
process will be at the risk of losing its vitality and relevance. An unfair procedure
is per se oppressive and is anathema to substantive justice.          Accordingly, if
unfairness is seen manifest in an apparent procedural compliance which is shown to
have produced unfair consequences, and thereby threatens the faith the litigant has
in judicial system, then notwithstanding what may pass for procedural compliance,
this Court may find a moment to exercise its powers under Article 227 of the
12.1 Now, the quintessential facts are re-visited for testing them on the plane of
principles herein above stated. It will be convenient to commence the narrative
from what happened in the suit on 10.02.2012. On that date, the revision petitioner
approached the Court with I.A.No.17/2012 for impleading himself. On 24.08.2012,
the trial Court did find reasons to implead him when it allowed the application.
Here it is necessary to refer to paragraph No.3 of his affidavit, extracted in one of
the earlier paragraphs. Subsequently, on 27.11.2012, the suit came to be dismissed
essentially, because the plaintiff has not taken steps to carry out the amendment in
the plaint to include the name of the revision petitioner as the second defendant.
Then, there was a lull for close to three years, when on 02.02.2015, the plaintiff
filed I.A.No.31/2015 for condoning a delay of 767 days in filing his application for
restoration of the suit. No notice is seen to have been served on the revision
petitioner.
12.2 Here there is a possible technical plea available to the plaintiff in that, since
plaint was not amended consequent to the order allowing the impleadment of the
revision petitioner, notice might not be necessary. But amending the plaint
consequent to an order allowing impleadment of a defendant under Order I Rule 10
(4) though is mandatory, yet a breach does not imply that the newly impleaded
defendant can be unfairly treated. In that sense Order I Rule 10(4) compliance is
cosmetic viz-a viz the right of the newly impleaded defendant - both substantive
and procedural. After all, when the trial court chose to allow I.A.17/2012, it has
taken a conscious call to hear him whose effect, a mere failure to carry out an
amendment to the plaint cannot efface. Even if it is presumed that the Court was on
the right track procedurally, yet quo vadis fairness? Hence, an ostensible procedural
compliance may not be adequate unless it is validated in the rule of fairness.
Alternatively, if Mr.Theerthagiri, the counsel for the revision petitioner had adopted
the line of least resistance to let I.A.31/15 to be advanced and also offered no
objection for condonation of delay, then how this is to be appreciated in the face of
the facts alleged in paragraph 3 of the affidavit filed in support of I.A.17/2012?
13. When I.A.No.31/2015 was filed, the suit became a pheonix, suddenly came
alive from the ashes, and soon it was into a flying mode. I.A.No.31/2015 was
initially posted to 27.04.2015, then it was advanced to 31.03.2015, and was allowed
on the same date, and almost immediately the application filed under Order IX Rule
9 CPC was numbered, and the counsel for defendants 1 and 2 filed a memo one
after another and submitted to the decree. The Court apparently was closed for
summer vacation, and immediately on re-opening on 02.06.2015, the suit came be
decreed. Procedurally, a couple of aspects are baffling. But before that, the role
which the counsel of the revision petitioner before the trial court was alleged to
have played in filing the said Memo may require a reference.
14. There are allegations and counter-allegations as to whether the counsel for the
revision petitioner had filed a Memo dated 29-04-2012 before the trial Court. The
determination of this issue, as the counsel for the plaintiff/first respondent has
argued, may not be undertaken by this Court. Now, if he had not filed the Memo
before the Court, it is a plain fraud on the Court. If, however, he had filed that
Memo, he is more likely to have tread the path of ethical infidelity. Here it needs to
●     It is not for nothing that the revision petitioner got himself impleaded, but for
resisting the suit for declaration of title on the basis of an unregistered sale
deed with a claim of title in himself and another, and has averred it in
paragraph No.3 of the affidavit in I.A.No.17/2012. No sensible person given
to ordinary prudence will ever concede to surrender his title when he has
disclosed to the Court, his need to implead himself in the suit. And, if only he
had wanted to concede and surrender his assertion of title to the one who
claims title on the basis of an unregistered sale deed (read, the plaintiff/the
first respondent herein), he need not have rushed to the Court seeking his
impleadment. Unless there is proof of any change of mind of the revision
petitioner, the Memo alleged to have been filed by his counsel should only
kindle a prima facie suspicion about how things have happened.
●     Secondly, when the revision petitioner became aware of the decree dated 02-
06-2015, pursuant to the notice issued by the Tahsildar for mutating the patta
in the name of the plaintiff in terms of the order of this Court in W.P.6394 of
2021, he did not keep quiet, but rushed to this Court. If only he had instructed
his counsel to file a Memo dated 29-04-2015, his conduct thereafter is
inconsistent. Unless an owner of a property is in a state of renunciation or is
excessively charitable, he is not going to concede his title over a piece of
immovable property to one who claims title based on an unregistered sale
deed. Does not his ex-post conduct feed ex-ante suspicion?
15. If a counsel of a litigant breaches the rules of professional fidelity which he/she
at all times is under a duty to observe, and owes it to his/her client and prompts the
court to pass a decree adverse to the interest of such client, then it cannot be simply
rejected as a matter between an Advocate and his client. When judicial process is
set in motion to adopt a certain course which the Court would not have adopted but
for believing in the statements borne of professional infidelity of the counsel, and
goes on to produce results consistent with such statements, then the Court also has
to take responsibility. After all, what is exposed to risk is the public trust in the
Court. The Court cannot blame it on the counsel, and show the litigant an alternate
path and seek an escape route from the situation which is partly its own doing.
16. The stage is now set for this Court to intervene under Article 227 of the
Constitution. The focus, however, is not on the counsel for the revision petitioner
before the trial court – whether he filed a Memo or not, but how the trial court has
approached the Case. The baffling aspects are: (a) Why the trial Court did not
ensure the presence of the second defendant before it? And (b) Why did it choose to
act on a memo allegedly filed by the counsel for the second defendant/revision
Advisability of the Court Acting on a Counsel's Memo:
17.1 Is it wrong for a Court to act on a memo of the counsel of a litigant for passing
an order? In Syed Yousuf Ali v Mohd Yousuf [(2016) 3 ALD 235] a learned Single
Judge of the Andhra Pradesh High Court has taken an extreme view and has held as
“The first and foremost contention of the learned counsel for the
respondents is that no judicial order be passed based on memo. Filing of
memo is not contemplated either under Code of Civil Procedure or under
Civil Rules of Practice. The purpose of receiving memos by the Courts is
only to receive certain intimation pertaining to the lis pending before it.
Since filing of memo is not contemplated under Code of Civil Procedure or
Civil Rules of Practice, no judicial order can be passed on memo. But the
trial Court passed a judicial order based on memo which is contrary to the
established practice. Therefore, the order passed by the trail Court basing
on memo ....... filed before the trial Court is erroneous and it is an illegal
exercise of jurisdiction which is conferred on it.”
This Court, however, marginally differs from the aforesaid view of the Andhra
Pradesh High Court, and is of the view that Court's practice may accommodate a
Court acting on a memo of the counsel of a party, but its permissibility depends on
the situations in which the Court intends to act. For greater clarity on the topic, it is
necessary to delve deep into the fundamentals which, though might be familiar to
all those who are connected to the legal system, still may provide a convenient
opening for the narrative.
18.1 A judicial process encounters two categories of rights – substantive and
procedural. The substantive rights are those on which the plaintiff rests the cause of
action for a suit, and those based on which the defendant resists the suit. On the
contrary, the procedural rights are those which are associated with the mode of
accessing the court in instituting a suit and the various stages through which a suit
passes through before it is disposed of by a court.
18.2 If procedural rights as embodied in the CPC are broadly analysed, they fall
into two categories: (a) That aspect of the procedure which affects the right of
action or right to sue, and the right of defence. Both these rights will have the effect
of affecting the substantial right of a litigant either to access the court for a remedy,
or to resist the grant of a remedy, as the case may be, in relation to the subject
matter of the suit; and (b) those which aid the Court, or the litigant in the various
stages of suit, or in the effective participation of a litigant in the judicial process.
18.3(a) If Order XLIII Rule 1 CPC is probed, the Code has provided for an appeal
against all categories of procedural orders which either directly affect the right to
sue, or right of defence, or right over the subject matter of the suit. All other
categories of orders not falling under the Order XLIII Rule 1 class of orders are
purely procedural in nature, which may be of assistance either to the Court, or the
litigant but may not immediately or directly impact the substantive right of the
parties viz-a-viz the subject matter of the suit, or their right of action or defence. To
this may be added four other classes of orders which the Code treats as decrees,
though they are essentially procedural orders. They are: (a) an Order under Sec.144
CPC concerning restitution of a property; (b) an Order rejecting a plaint under
Order VII Rule 11 CPC; (c) an Order passed under Order XXI Rule 58, in an
application filed by a third party challenging an order of attachment of a property in
execution of a money-decree; and (d) Order passed under Order XXI Rule 98 or
100 of the Code. Of them, except the order rejecting the plaint, rest of the orders
directly affect the right of a party over the subject matter in lis. And, so far as an
order rejecting the plaint is concerned, it has the potential to deny access to the
plaintiff to remedy his cause. When it is a decree, it becomes appealable under the
CPC. Another reason for differentiating rejection of plaint from other categories is
where a suit is rejected, the code permits the plaintiff, to resort to Order VII Rule 13
and present a fresh suit on the same cause of action, if permissible. In other cases,
the order could operate as res judicata.
18.3(b) In all cases of non-appealable procedural orders (to repeat that which do not
affect the substantive rights of the parties), a party aggrieved may only challenge
the same only if the Court below has committed, what is conveniently and
compendiously referred to as, a jurisdictional error. Prior to the CPC Amendment
Act, 1999 (Act 46/1999) amending the Code, these categories of orders had to fall
within the meaning of the expression 'case decided' for a revision to lie under
Section 115 of the Code. Post amendment, a revision against these type of orders
would lie under Section 115 CPC only if those orders also have the effect of finally
disposing any suit or other proceedings. Any orders that do not fall under the
category of revisable orders under Sec.115 CPC, can still be challenged under
Article 227 of the Constitution, where the criterion, though may include errors of
jurisdiction, need not have the effect of finally disposing of the suit or proceedings.
They may include cases where the Courts' procedure prejudices a substantive or a
procedural right of the litigant or is inconsistent with the rules of procedure and
practice (which necessarily would include rules of fairness) or impairs the purity
and effectiveness of the judicial machinery.
19. The moot question here is, when can a Court act on a Memo of a counsel of a
party to a suit? Finding an answer to it lies in understanding the distinction between
a substantive and a procedural right vis-a-vis the category of orders that may be
procedurally passed by the court etc. Here, this Court cannot ignore the basic
premise in our processual jurisprudence: That a counsel, as an agent of a party, has
a right to make a statement of fact on behalf of his client, which includes his right to
concede on a fact relating to the dispute. If this basic premise is considered
alongside the preludial statements made in paragraph 18.1 and 18.3 above, the
a) As per the scheme of the Code, the Court has the authority to pass a decree
without a trial under Order X Rule 1, Order XII Rule 6, Order XV Rule 1,
and Order XXIII Rule 3. Under Order X Rule 1 the Court, upon an
examination of the parties, ascertains directly from the defendant whether
they concede or oppose the claim of the plaintiff, whereas in all the
remaining three situations Court requires definite materials to act. To
elaborate, for passing a decree under Order XII Rule 6 CPC, the Court must
satisfy itself that the defendant indeed had made an admission. Similarly, to
pass a decree without a trial under Order XV Rule 1, the Court should satisfy
itself that the materials available before it are adequate to pass a decree
without a trial. Turning to Order XXIII Rule 3, the Courts passes a decree
based on a compromise which operates as an independent contract between
the parties. But the Courts are under an obligation to satisfy themselves that
such contracts are lawful. To repeat and re-emphasize, these are situations
where the Court is required to decide on anything that has the potential to
affect the substantive right of the parties on which parties rest either their
cause of action or defence – more specifically their right, title or interest in
the subject matter of the suit, or their right to institute a suit or defence. A
scrutiny of the scheme of the CPC informs that these are the situations where
the Courts are required to adjudicate on the rights of the parties over the
subject matter of the suit based on evidence, and where the Courts do not
enjoy any discretion of its own in the procedure. They literally decide the fate
of a litigant vis-a- vis the suit.
b) The Second category of cases are those where the Court has considerable
discretionary space within the realm of procedure, where it may act on its
perception guided by its sense of justice and fairness. Instances such as
whether the Court should order fresh summons to the defendant or to direct
service by substituted summons, whether it needs to allow amendment of
pleadings, whether it should allow additional pleadings in a particular case,
whether it should summon a witness or allow production of documents, or
appoint a commission, and so on. Here the Court has greater discretion, and
not one of them may immediately affect the right of the parties viz-a-viz the
subject matter of the suit, or their right to sue or defend. In these categories of
cases, the Court may act on the Memo of a counsel of the parties to pass a
judicial order. For an illustration, See Mangayakarasi v Suseela [AIR 2000
20. Now, in which of the aforestated two situations can a Court act on the Memo of
the counsel of a party to conclude the suit or proceedings? The nearest procedural
aspect which this Court may refer to as an analogy is the authority of the counsel of
a party to compromise the suit without his client signing the written compromise.
In a compromise, parties settle their conflicting claims over the subject matter of the
suit through a lawful contract, which in terms of the discussion above, will fall
under the class of procedure affecting the substantive right of the litigants.
Contextually A memo of a counsel of the defendant conceding the claim of the
plaintiff, if acted upon by the court, will leave an identical consequence.
21. Order XXIII Rule 3 of the Code has both a legislative and interpretational
history which must be briefly noticed. Order XXIII Rule 3, as originally enacted,
“Where it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that a suit has been
adjusted wholly or in part by any lawful agreement or compromise, or
where the defendant satisfies the plaintiff in respect of the while or any part
of the subject-matter of the suit, the Court shall order such agreement,
compromise or satisfaction to be recorded, and shall pass a decree in
accordance therewith so far as it relates to the suit.”
This rule does not provide how a compromise must be presented before the Court.
This was introduced, vide Section 74 of the CPC (Amendment) Act, 1976, (w.e.f
01.12.1976), whereinafter Rule 3 reads (the entire provision is extracted as it has
some relevance in the later part of this order) as under:
“Where it is proved to the satisfaction of the Court that a suit has been
adjusted wholly or in part by any lawful agreement or compromise in
writing and signed by the parties or where the defendant satisfied the
plaintiff in respect to the whole or any part of the subject-matter of the
suit....”, the Court shall order such agreement, compromise or
satisfaction to be recorded, and shall pass a decree in accordance
therewith so far as it relates to the parties to the suit, whether or not the
subject matter of the agreement, compromise or satisfaction is the same as
Provided that .....
Explanation.—An agreement or compromise which is void or voidable
under the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), shall not be deemed to
be lawful within the meaning of this rule.”
22.1 Now, notwithstanding the letter of Order XXIII Rule 3 requiring a written
contract signed by the parties, Courts are nevertheless required to decide the
question as to whether it is lawful for the court to act on a contract of compromise
signed only by the counsel of a party. The import of the expression “in writing and
signed by the parties“ came up for consideration before the Supreme Court in
Gurpreet Singh v Chatur Bhuj Goel [(1988) 1 SCC 270], where a two judge bench
“Under Rule 3 as it now stands, when a claim in suit has been adjusted
wholly or in part by any lawful agreement or compromise, the
compromise must be in writing and signed by the parties and there must
be a completed agreement between them. To constitute an adjustment, the
agreement or compromise must itself be capable of being embodied in a
decree. When the parties enter into a compromise during the hearing of a
suit or appeal, there is no reason why the requirement that the
compromise should be reduced in writing in the form of an instrument
signed by the parties should be dispensed with. The court must therefore
insist upon the parties to reduce the terms into writing.”
However, in Byram Pestonji Gariwala v Union Bank of India [(1992) 1 SCC 31]
another two judge bench (T.K Thommen and R.M Sahai, JJ) had held that the
counsel “possessed of the requisite authorisation by vakalatnama ” can act on behalf
of his client to enter into a compromise without there being any agreement in
writing between the parties.            The Court held that the scope of the expression “in
writing and signed by the parties” must be read in conjunction with the power
conferred on counsel under Order III Rule 1 of the Code. It is seen from the
judgment that the earlier decision of the coordinate bench in Gurpreet Singh v
Chatur Bhuj Goel [(1988) 1 SCC 270], was not brought to the notice of the Court.
22.2 The subsequent authorities of two various two judge Bench of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court Banwari Lal v Chando Devi [(1993 1 SCC 581)], Arjan Singh v
Punit Alhuwalia [(2008) 8 SCC 348], Jigneshwardas v Jagrani, [(2003) 11 SCC
372], Pushpa Devi Bhagat v Rajinder Singh [(2006) 5 SCC 566] and
Y.Sleebachen v State of Tamil Nadu, [(2015) 5 SCC 747] followed one of the two
views, but the predominant view was that advocates can act for their clients in
signing the compromise if requisite authority was granted to them in their vakalat.
23. It now boils down to the question of ascertaining if an Advocate has the
authority for compromising a suit on behalf of his client: Where he has, he can, and
where he has not, he cannot. The legal position is seen to have been settled by this
Court in Ramappayya v Subbamma [(1947) 2 MLJ 580], where a Division Bench
of this Court (Fredrick Gentle, CJ and Tyagarajan, J) had held:
“6. Before referring to the decided cases I desire to make two
observations. It is difficult to see how an express and explicit direction
or power to conduct and defend a suit, which must mean to contest it,
includes a direction or power to compromise, it. The vakalatnama
confers, in detail, six separate and distinct powers and the absence of a
power or direction to compromise is not without significance.
11. Whether it is called a power of attorney or a vakalatnama the
authority of the advocate in the present instance, is derived from the
written document. In principle, there is no difference whether the client is
a pardanashin lady or a lady who does not observe gosha or anybody
else. The fourth defendant empowered the advocate to appear for her and
to conduct and defend the suit; did not empower him to settle it on her
behalf. He had no express authority to effect a compromise, but solely to
contest the suit. In those circumstances no implied authority arises or can
be deemed to have been conferred upon him to make a compromise which
was binding upon his client.”
In Himalayan Coop. Group Housing Society v. Balwan Singh, [(2015) 7 SCC
373], a three-judge bench of the Supreme Court speaking through H.L Dattu, CJ
arrived at a conclusion similar to that of the Division Bench of this Court in
Ramappayya v Subbamma [(1947) 2 MLJ 580]. The Supreme Court has observed
“The law is now well settled that a lawyer must be specifically authorised
to settle and compromise a claim, that merely on the basis of his
employment he has no implied or ostensible authority to bind his client to
a compromise/settlement. To put it alternatively that a lawyer by virtue of
retention, has the authority to choose the means for achieving the client's
legal goal, while the client has the right to decide on what the goal will
A lawyer generally has no implied or apparent authority to make an
admission or statement which would directly surrender or conclude the
substantial legal rights of the client unless such an admission or
statement is clearly a proper step in accomplishing the purpose for
which the lawyer was employed. ”
In this regard it may be mentioned that in Y.Sleebachen & Others Vs
Superintendent Engineer WRO/PWD & another [2015(2) CTC 452 : 2015-1-LW
713], a two judges bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that a Govt.
pleader has an implied authority to compromise on behalf of the Govt. It however,
may have to be stated that this Court is bound by the ratio in Himalayan Coop.
Group Housing Society as it was delivered by a larger bench, which now settles
the position that an Advocate has no implied authority to concede the substantive
rights of his client in a litigation. Also see: Govindammal Vs. Marimuthu Maistry
24. In terms of the authority in Himalayan Coop. Group Housing Society case, the
counsel for the revision petitioner does not have the authority to file a Memo (if at
all he had filed), conceding the right of the revision petitioner/ the second
defendant. This apart, even if the vakalat he had filed is scrutinised, he was not
given any authority to enter into a compromise on behalf of the revision petitioner,
nor any authority to concede his client's interest. Whichever way the issue is
viewed, it is evident that the Memo dated 29-04-2015 stated to have been filed by
the counsel of the revision petitioner is beyond his authority to file and is plainly
incompetent. The trial Court has egregiously erred in acting on it without
ascertaining if it could act upon it.
25.There is yet another aspect to it. This is more in line with the Explanation to
Order XXIII Rule 3 CPC. In every case it is imperative for the court to satisfy itself
that the decree that it intends to pass must not fall foul of the provisions of law
irrespective of whether it is passed on a compromise or under any other provisions
like Order X Rule 1 CPC, Order XII Rule 6 CPC, or Order XV Rule 1 CPC. No
court can be dragged or hoodwinked by a party or a litigant to pass a decree or an
order which it either does not have an authority in law to pass, or cannot be
sustained in substantive law. And if it is found to be passed, then the decree or
order so passed will be invalid, and is vitiated for abuse of the judicial process.
26. Turning to the facts of the case, the trial Court has passed a decree declaring the
right of the plaintiff/first defendant based on unregistered sale deed, which on the
face of it, goes against Sec.17 of the Registration Act, read with Sec.54 of the
Transfer of Property Act. Therefore, irrespective of whether the Memo alleged to
have been filed by the counsel for the revision petitioner in the trial court can be
acted upon by the court or not, in terms of the result produced by the decree passed
by the trial court, the same cannot be sustained in law. If only the trial court had
read its earlier jottings of its notes-paper where it had impliedly indicated its doubt
over the right of the plaintiff to sustain his claim of declaration of title over the suit
property on the basis of an unregistered sale deed, it might not have ventured to
pass a decree. The trial court appears to have ignored caution from its line of
consideration, trusted and acted on the Memo when it ought to have suspected it.
The consequence is that the revision petitioner has suffered a decree without him
knowing about it.
27. The revision petitioner has been plainly wronged in procedure and has lost his
right to defend the suit and establish the better title he claims over the subject
matter of the suit. This Court now steps in to exercise its power of superintendence
under Article 227 of the Constitution to set right the wrong that judicial process has
inflicted on the revision petitioner, both for its illegality and for abuse of its process.
28. This case leaves certain strong messages for a Court in yielding to the
temptation of acting on the Memo of an advocate. This is now set forth as a set of
directions to the Courts subordinate to this Court.
(a) Unless a court decides to proceed exparte, no Court should act solely on a
Memo of the counsel of the party conceding the substantive right of the party
viz-a-viz the subject matter of the suit, or right of defence, for passing any
non-adjudicatory decree or appealable orders. Before passing any such
decree, the Court should apply its mind and satisfy itself in a manner that it
considers appropriate and adequate that the defendant in the suit has
conceded to the plaintiff's claim. In cases of appealable orders of similar
nature, before passing it, Court should ensure that the respondent in the
application has filed at least an affidavit conceding to the interim prayer
sought. This will also save the Advocate concerned from a possible
embarrassment.
(b) In other category of procedural orders not affecting the substantive rights of
the parties, Court may act on a Memo of the counsel of the party, but it is not
bound to act so.
(c) It is advisable that in every case where the Court chooses to act on any Memo
of the counsel, it is required to evaluate the consequences of acting on such
Memo.      After all in a functional audit of its performance only the Courts
become accountable to the litigant in particular, and public general, and its
imprudence in mindlessly acting on the Memo of the counsel, it may invite
embarrassment upon itself.
(d) In no case the Court can pass a decree or an order which it is not competent
to pass, or which violates any of the mandatory provisions of law.
29. Time to conclude, and the conclusion is a literal writing on the wall. This
revision is allowed, the decree passed by Subordinate Court, Gudiyatham in
O.S.81/2011, dated 02-06-2015 is set aside, and the suit is directed to be resumed
from the date of carrying out the amendment in the plaint after the restoration of
suit in 2015. No costs. Consequently, connected miscellaneous petition is closed.
Registry is directed to communicate a copy of this order to all Courts subordinate to
this High Court, after obtaining necessary orders from Hon'ble The Chief Justice.