This   proceeding    arises   out  of    a  commercial    dispute
between    the  parties   over   supply   of   certain    items  (spray
dryer). The respondents were meant to install the same in the
petitioners’ manufacturing unit. The petitioners contend that
they   had   filed  an   earlier   suit  in   the   Commercial   Court,
Ahmedabad    seeking   compensation    and   damages    on  account  of
failure on the part of the respondents in effecting proper
installation of the same. The petitioners ask for transfer of
a  subsequent    suit   (Special   Civil   Suit   No.   1478  of  2019)
instituted by the respondents against them in the Court of
learned Civil Judge, Senior Division, Pune to the Commerical
Court, Ahmedabad.      In this suit, the respondents in substance
have claimed specific performance of the contract relating to
installation and commissioning of spray dryer. The petitioners
argue that there are common issues involved in both the suits,
which are between the same parties. Learned counsel for the
petitioners has relied on a decision of this Court in the case
of Chitivilasa Jute Mills vs. Jaypee Rewa Cement [(2004) 3 SCC
85] in support of his clients’ plea for transfer to enable
both the suits to be tried in the same court.
The petitioners are not asserting that the Court at Pune
lacks jurisdiction to entertain, try and determine the suit
instituted  by  the   respondents.  There  may  also   be  some
overlapping issues involved in both the suits. But that factor
alone, in my opinion, does not confer right on the petitioners
to bring the suit of the respondents to the jurisdiction of
their choice where they have already instituted a suit, albeit
for an independent set of reliefs. There is no bar in the Code
of Civil Procedure (the Code) in institution of two different
suits in two Courts by the same set of parties on same set of
facts. The party having approached the Court first however has
the right to apply before the Court in which the subsequent
suit  is instituted  for  stay  of the  latter  proceeding,  as
stipulated in Section 10 of the Code, if the matters in issue
in both the suits are directly and substantially the same.
The factor which needs consideration while examining a
plea for transfer in a petition under Section 25 of the code
is whether allowing such petition would be expedient in the
ends of justice or not. This Court has to consider the prayer
for transfer with an element of equity. The petitioners’ case
is  largely    founded    on   the  claim     of   having   approached   a
judicial forum before the respondents did and both the suits
emanate   from  the   same   set   of   facts    with  the   same  set  of
parties. These factors, by themselves cannot be the ground for
invoking the provisions of Section 25 of the Code.
The ratio of the decision in the case of Chitivalsa Jute
Mills (supra) cannot be applied in the facts of this case. In
that case, there was an application under Section 10 of the
Code by the party who brought the action first and finding in
that  case   was   that    the   said    application     was   erroneously
rejected. It was thereafter the petition under Section 25 of
the Code was filed. So far as this proceeding is concerned,
the petitioners have bypassed the route specified in Section
10 of the Code and seek to apply the principles embodied in
the said provision of the Code in a petition under Section 25
Functional     convenience      of    one    of   the    parties   in
commercial     litigations       cannot      determine      exercise    of
jurisdiction of this Court under Section 25 of the Code. The
yardstick   applied    in   entertaining     transfer    petition   of  an
estranged homemaker having no independent income to bring a
matrimonial action instituted by the husband to a Court within
whose jurisdiction she has taken shelter in her parental home
cannot   be  followed     in    commercial     disputes.    A   petitioner
seeking transfer of a case involving business-related disputes
from one jurisdiction to another will have            to  establish some
grave difficulty or prejudice in prosecuting or defending the
case  in  a  forum   otherwise   having  power  to  adjudicate  the
cause. No such case of outstanding prejudice has been made out
by the petitioners. What has been submitted is that the senior
management    executives   of    the   petitioners   arraigned   as
defendants are foreign national running business operations in
Ahmedabad   and   they  are   more   familiar  and   accustomed  to
Ahmedabad. This is not good enough reason, and transfer of the
second suit cannot be directed to accommodate them. I am not
satisfied that an order for transfer as prayed for in this
petition, is expedient for the ends of justice.
Under   such   circumstances,    the   transfer   petition  is
dismissed.
There shall be no order as to costs.