Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
1.    Heard   Sri  Rajesh   Yadav,  learned  counsel   for  the
appellant-applicant and Ms. Nandprabha Shukla, learned
A.G.A. appearing for the State.
2.    As already held by this Court in number of cases that
leave application filed under Section 378(3) Cr.P.C. is not
required in the appeal filed by the victim under Section 372
Cr.P.C. like the present appeal. A reference may be made to
the order dated 4.8.2021 passed in Criminal Appeal U/S 372
Cr.P.C. No. 123 of 2021 (Rita Devi vs. State of U.P. and
another). As such, the application for leave to appeal stands
rejected as not maintainable and / or not required.
3.    This appeal has been filed against the order dated
12.7.2017 passed by the Additional Sessions Judge, Court No.
5, Mathura acquitting the respondent nos. 2, 3 and 4 under
Section 302 I.P.C. and Section 25 of Arms Act in Sessions Trial
No. 764 of 2013 arising out of Case Crime No. 85 of 2012,
under Section 302 I.P.C. and Session Trial No. 765 of 2013
arising out of Case Crime No. 97 of 2012, under Section 25 of
4.    According to the first information report on 4.6.2012 at
about 09:00 P.M. certain persons on highway were committing
theft of electricity cable from the electricity poll. On coming to
know father of the informant (Virendra Singh) deceased
Dorilal s/o Chhitariya reached on the spot along with certain
other persons. The persons, who were committing theft, fired
hitting the chest of Dorilal (father of the informant), who died
on the spot. First information report was registered at 21:50
against unknown persons as Case Crime No. 85 of 2012,
5.    In support of prosecution case P.W.-1 Virendra, P.W.-2
and P.W.-12 Sri Sri Omprakash were produced. Two accused
persons Geetaram s/o Jagna and Talewar s/o Ramjilal were
arrested by the police on pointing out of the informant in the
night of 12/13.7.2012 at about 01:00 A.M and a countrymade
pistol of 315 bore with one live and one empty cartridge were
recovered from the possession of Geetaram. No other
recovery was made by other co-accused Talewar. The Case
Crime No. 97 of 2012, under Section 25 of Arms Act, P.S.
Maant, District Mathura was registered against Geetaram. In
the statement recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C. the accused
persons denied the incident and submitted that they have not
committed the offence and their claim was that some other
unidentified persons, who were committing theft of electricity
cable, had committed the crime.
6.   The accused persons were acquitted by the trial court on
the ground that all the witnesses are related witnesses and
the recovered weapon could not be connected with the crime.
It was further found that the statement made by the
prosecution witnesses were contradictory in nature and the
incident was described in different ways and there was no eye
witness of the spot. It was found by the trial court that all the
alleged eye witnesses have not proved the incident. It was
also found that the eye witnesses were present when report
was given by the informant but names of such persons were
not disclosed in the first information report and it was alleged
that some unidentified persons have committed the crime. It
was further found that the incident had taken place in the
night of 4.6.2012 at about 09:00 P.M., whereas the accused
persons Geetaram and Talewar were arrested after about 5-6
weeks on 12/13.7.2012 and apart from countrymade pistol of
315 bore one live cartridge and one empty cartridge were also
recovered from them. Since, it was not understandable that
how the used cartridge is connected with the incident herein,
therefore, the F.S.L. report was found not worth-believe and
no assistance could have taken therefrom by the prosecution.
Regarding arrest of the persons it was found that site plan is
incorrect and was not supported by the formal witnesses. On
the site plan one hut, wherefrom arrest of the accused and
recovery of weapon was made, was shown, whereas there
was no such hut on the spot. It was also found that the site
plan (Ex. 6) and (Ex. 14) are of the same spot but there was
material difference in the same. It was also found that
countrymade pistol recovered from Geetaram was rusted,
therefore, could not have been used in the incident. Insofar as
arrest of the accused persons are concerned, the G.D. report
dated 12.7.2012 indicates the police party was gone out for
patrolling was not proved and there was no independent
witness of the arrest of the accused persons and recovery. It
was also found that it is proved from the witnesses that one
of the accused Talewar was a Panchayatnama witness. The
court also observed that as per the statement recorded under
Section 313 Cr.P.C. Geetaram was aged about 75 years and
therefore, at the time of incident he must be aged about 70
years and under all circumstances trial court found that the
prosecution has failed to prove its case beyond doubt.
7.   Submission of learned counsel for the appellant is that
the accused persons were arrested and weapon used in the
incident was recovered from the possession of the accused
Geetaram and even the F.S.L. report Ex. 22 has proved that
one empty cartridge which was recovered from the possession
of Geetaram was fired from the same countrymade pistol,
which was recovered from the possession of the accused.
Therefore, it is clear that the said weapon was used in the
incident. He further submitted that all the statement of the
eye witnesses have been incorrectly rejected on the ground
that the prosecution witnesses are related to the deceased
and the informant. He further submitted that the presence of
the eye witnesses on the spot is natural in such circumstances
and even otherwise no other person, who is not related,
usually does not come forward to give evidence. He,
therefore, submitted that merely because they were relative
of the deceased, their eye witness account could not have
been rejected. He further pointed out that once there is a
direct evidence, the motive is not relevant and, as such, the
judgment of the trial court acquitting the accused persons is
liable to be reversed and the accused persons are liable to be
punished under Section 302 I.P.C. and Geetaram is liable to
be punished under Section 25 of Arms Act as well.
8.    We have considered the submissions and perused the
original record.
9.    Before proceeding further it would be appropriate to take
note of the law laid down by Supreme Court on the issue
10. In the case of Babu vs. State of Kerala (2010) 9 SCC
189 : (2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 1179, the Hon'ble Apex Court has
observed that while dealing with a judgment of acquittal, the
appellate court has to consider the entire evidence on record,
so as to arrive at a finding as to whether the views of the trial
Court     were        perverse       or    otherwise          unsustainable.            The
appellate court is entitled to consider whether in arriving at a
finding of fact, the trial Court had failed to take into
consideration admissible evidence and/or had taken into
consideration the evidence brought on record contrary to law.
Paragraphs 12 to 19 of the aforesaid judgment are quoted as
"12. This court time and again has laid down the guidelines for the High Court to
interfere with the judgment and order of acquittal passed by the Trial Court. The
appellate court should not ordinarily set aside a judgment of acquittal in a case
where two views are possible, though the view of the appellate court may be more,
the probable one. While dealing with a judgment of acquittal, the appellate court has
to consider the entire evidence on record, so as to arrive at a finding as to whether
the views of the trial Court were perverse or otherwise unsustainable. The appellate
court is entitled to consider whether in arriving at a finding of fact, the trial Court
had failed to take into consideration admissible evidence and/or had taken into
evidence brought on record contrary to law. Similarly, wrong
placing of burden of proof may also be a subject matter of scrutiny by the appellate
court. (Vide Balak Ram v. State of U.P. AIR 1974 SC 2165; Shambhoo Missir &
Anr. v. State of Bihar AIR 1991 SC 315; Shailendra Pratap & Anr. v. State of U.P.
AIR 2003 SC 1104; Narendra Singh v. State of M.P. (2004) 10 SCC 699; Budh
Singh & Ors. v. State of U.P. AIR 2006 SC 2500; State of U.P. v. Ramveer Singh
AIR 2007 SC 3075; S. Rama Krishna v. S. Rami Reddy (D) by his LRs. & Ors. AIR
Reddy & Ors. v. State of A.P. (2009) 16 SCC 98; and Ram Singh alias Chhaju v.
State of Himachal Pradesh (2010) 2 SCC 445).
13. In Sheo Swarup and Ors. King Emperor AIR 1934 PC 227, the Privy Council
"...the High Court should and will always give proper weight and
consideration to such matters as (1) the views of the trial Judge as to the
credibility of the witnesses, (2) the presumption of innocence in favour of
the accused, a presumption certainly not weakened by the fact that he has
been acquitted at his trial, (3) the right of the accused to the benefit of any
doubt, and (4) the slowness of an appellate court in disturbing a finding of
fact arrived at by a Judge who had the advantage of seeing the witnesses.…"
14. The aforesaid principle of law has consistently been followed by this Court.
(See: Tulsiram Kanu v. The State AIR 1954 SC 1; Balbir Singh v. State of Punjab
AIR 1957 SC 216; M.G. Agarwal v. State of Maharashtra AIR 1963 SC 200; Khedu
Mohton & Ors. v. State of Bihar AIR 1970 SC 66; Sambasivan and Ors. State of
Kerala (1998) 5 SCC 412; Bhagwan Singh and Ors. v. State of M.P. (2002) 4 SCC
85; and State of Goa v. Sanjay Thakran and Anr. (2007) 3 SCC 755).
15. In Chandrappa and Ors. v. State of Karnataka (2007) 4 SCC 415, this Court
"(1) An appellate court has full power to review, re-appreciate and
reconsider the evidence upon which the order of acquittal is founded.
(2) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 puts no limitation, restriction or
condition on exercise of such power and an appellate court on the evidence
before it may reach its own conclusion, both on questions of fact and of law.
(3) Various expressions, such as, "substantial and compelling reasons",
"good and sufficient grounds", "very strong circumstances", "distorted
conclusions", "glaring mistakes", etc. are not intended to curtail extensive
powers of an appellate court in an appeal against acquittal. Such
phraseologies are more in the nature of "flourishes of language" to
emphasise the reluctance of an appellate court to interfere with acquittal than
to curtail the power of the court to review the evidence and to come to its
own conclusion.
(4) An appellate court, however, must bear in mind that in case of acquittal,
there is double presumption in favour of the accused. Firstly, the
presumption of innocence is available to him under the fundamental
principle of criminal jurisprudence that every person shall be presumed to be
innocent unless he is proved guilty by a competent court of law. Secondly,
the accused having secured his acquittal, the presumption of his innocence is
further reinforced, reaffirmed and strengthened by the trial court.
(5) If two reasonable conclusions are possible on the basis of the evidence
on record, the appellate court should not disturb the finding of acquittal
16. In Ghurey Lal v. State of Uttar Pradesh (2008) 10 SCC 450, this Court re-
iterated the said view, observing that the appellate court in dealing with the cases in
which the trial courts have acquitted the accused, should bear in mind that the trial
court's acquittal bolsters the presumption that he is innocent. The appellate court
must give due weight and consideration to the decision of the trial court as the trial
court had the distinct advantage of watching the demeanour of the witnesses, and
was in a better position to evaluate the credibility of the witnesses.
17. In State of Rajasthan v. Naresh @ Ram Naresh (2009) 9 SCC 368, the Court
again examined the earlier judgments of this Court and laid down that an "order of
acquittal should not be lightly interfered with even if the court believes that there is
some evidence pointing out the finger towards the accused."
18. In State of Uttar Pradesh v. Banne alias Baijnath & Ors. (2009) 4 SCC 271, this
Court gave certain illustrative circumstances in which the Court would be justified
in interfering with a judgment of acquittal by the High Court. The circumstances
i) The High Court's decision is based on totally erroneous view of law by
ii) The High Court's conclusions are contrary to evidence and documents on
iii) The entire approach of the High Court in dealing with the evidence was
patently illegal leading to grave miscarriage of justice;
iv) The High Court's judgment is manifestly unjust and unreasonable based
on erroneous law and facts on the record of the case;
v) This Court must always give proper weight and consideration to the
vi) This Court would be extremely reluctant in interfering with a case when
both the Sessions Court and the High Court have recorded an order of
acquittal.
A similar view has been reiterated by this Court in Dhanapal v. State by Public
19. Thus, the law on the issue can be summarised to the effect that in exceptional
cases where there are compelling circumstances, and the judgment under appeal is
found to be perverse, the appellate court can interfere with the order of acquittal.
The appellate court should bear in mind the presumption of innocence of the
accused and further that the trial Court's acquittal bolsters the presumption of his
innocence. Interference in a routine manner where the other view is possible should
be avoided, unless there are good reasons for interference."
11. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Ramesh Babulal
Doshi vs. State of Gujarat (1996) 9 SCC 225 : 1996 SCC
(Cri) 972 has observed that while deciding appeal against
acquittal, the High Court has to first record its conclusion on
the question whether the approach of the trial court dealing
was patently illegal or conclusion arrived by
it is wholly untenable which alone will justify interference in
an order of acquittal.
12. The aforesaid judgments were taken note of with
approval by Supreme Court in the case of Anwar Ali and
another vs. State of Himachal Pradesh (2020) 10 SCC
166, Nagabhushan vs. State of Karnataka (2021) 5 SCC
222, and Babu (supra) in Achhar Singh vs. State of
13. Hon'ble Supreme Court, in the case of Rajput Ruda
Maha and others vs. State of Gujarat 1980 SCR (2) 353
after hearing the learned counsel and examining the petition
of appeal and after going through the relevant parts of the
judgment of the High Court, after recording that there are no
sufficient  grounds    of interference  dismissed   the   appeal
summarily under Section 384 of the Code of Criminal
14. Now we proceed to consider the present appeal on
15. It is not in dispute that the first information report was
registered with the allegation that the incident had taken
place on 4.6.2012 at about 09:00 P.M. and the first
information report was registered at 21:50 on the same date
and the distance of the police station is about 4 kms. Thus, a
prompt first information report was lodged. First information
report was undisputedly lodged against unknown persons and
no eye witness has been named. The alleged eye witnesses
have come only through affidavits that too after about eight
days. It is also not in dispute that no empty cartridge was
recovered from the spot. P.W.-1 the informant, namely,
Virendra is son of the deceased and P.W.-5, Phoolwati, is the
wife of the deceased. A categorical finding was recorded that
the bloodstained clothes of Phoolwati, who embraced the dead
body    of   Dorilal   and    claimed   that   her   clothes were
bloodstained, were not produced or made exhibits in the
present case. The accused persons were allegedly arrested
after a long gap on 12/13.7.2012 and it is highly improbable
that the accused Geetaram would be carrying empty cartridge
used in the incident with him. Therefore, in our opinion the
importance of F.S.L. report that empty cartridge recovered
from the accused Geetaram was fired from the same
countrymade pistol of 315 bore, lost its important in the
present case.
16. It is settled law that the eye witness account of related
witnesses cannot be rejected merely on the ground that they
are relatives of the deceased. However, we find that in the
present case the alleged witnesses have come in picture only
through     affidavits    after   about   eight    days   whereas,
significantly, the first information report was lodged promptly,
which was allegedly written in the presence of the eye
witnesses but still their names were not mentioned in the first
information report. Therefore, we also find that it was rightly
observed     by   the   trial   court that   there   was   material
contradiction regarding their presence and description of the
alleged incident that had taken place. That apart, we also
noticed that in the first information report itself it has been
stated that the incident had taken place when certain persons
were committing theft of electricity cable from electricity poll
but they could not succeed and the cable was found hanging
from the electricity poll itself, as has been clearly mentioned
in the judgment.
17. Further, if as per the eye witness account the accused-
respondents were seen to have committed the offence, they
were not named in the first information report. On the
contrary, PW-1, Phoolwati had stated that the accused
persons were present at the time of preparation of papers by
the police and they had gone to Mathura and brought the
dead body after postmortem and were also present at the
time of cremation.
18. Even in regard to the affidavits of alleged eye witnesses
sworn    on  22.6.2012     they    have  stated  in  the cross-
examination that they have not executed any such affidavits
and further P.W.-1 has barely signed the affidavit and other
two witnesses have clearly stated that they are illiterate and
they have put their thumb impression in the affidavit but
correctness   of   the   affidavits   was    denied   by  giving
contradictory stand, therefore, the same cannot be form basis
of eye witness account of the incident, which otherwise, as
held by the trial court, could not be proved by the
19. In above circumstances, it cannot be said that the trial
court has failed to take into consideration the admissible
evidence or had taken into consideration the evidence brought
on record contrary to law on reaching above finding.
20. In such view of the matter, we find that the view as has
been taken by the trial court and the judgment of the trial
court is not perverse in nature so as to call interference of this
21. Consequently, after hearing the learned counsel for the
applicant and examining the petition of appeal and after going
through the detailed discussion of evidence on record, we are
of the opinion that the finding recorded by the trial court
recording acquittal of the accused is according to the law and
we find that there is no sufficient ground for interference. The
appeal is summarily dismissed under Section 384 of the Code