These two cases involve rival claims for the custody
of a toddler between a genetic mother and a foster
mother; this child is christened by the genetic parents as
“Master Mohammed Arhaan” and later named by the
foster mother as “ADWIK”. In a sense this matter
reminds of the Jewish King Solomon (1010-931 BCE)
who resolved such a dispute centuries ago and handed
the child to the true mother after wisely identifying her
and sent the pseudo-mother to the gaol; however, that is
not much the case here and what pleasantly surprises
the Court is the grace with which these two gentle women
hailing   from   two   different  religious   backgrounds
conducted themselves during the course of proceedings.
2.    With the above prelude, let me advert to the
brief facts, now.   The case in W.P. No. 16729/2021 is
filed by the genetic mother of the child, namely Smt.
Husna Banu (hereafter 'genetic mother'); it is essentially
for the custody of the child which has been with the
foster mother Smt. Anupama Desai (hereafter 'foster
mother') for a year or so;   there was a Habeas Corpus
case filed by the genetic mother in W.P.(H.C.) 60/2020,
which eventually resulted in the child being traced at the
lap of foster mother; the Chamrajpet Police, Bengaluru
having registered Crime No. 54/2020, are investigating
into the matter, is not much relevant for adjudication
3.   The companion case in W.P.No. 15044/2021 is
filed by the foster mother & her husband wherein they
lay a challenge to the Police Notice dated 12.08.2021
whereby they have been directed to produce the child
before the Child Welfare Committee on 18.08.2021; this
notice owes its origin to the instruction of the said
Committee issued to the Police, on the eve; strangely the
genetic parents of the child do not figure as respondents
in this case; however both the battling parties being
before the Court the “clubbed cases”, the arguable
ground of non-impleadment of proper/necessary party
pales into insignificance.
4.     Both the writ petitions are taken together for
disposal at the request of Bar; this Court vide interim
order   dated   21.09.2021     had   issued   the  following
direction, keeping in view the concerns expressed by the
" .... Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner
in the connected case Sri. Subramanya S submits
that his client and the baby shall be present
before the Court on 24.09.20021 at 10:30 a.m.
This Court very reluctantly adjourns the matter
to Friday with the rider that in the event the
respondent No.3 is not here with the baby, she
runs the risk of being arrested and brought
before the Court since the question of child's
safety is involved in the matter.
The jurisdictional Child Welfare Officer shall
keep vigilance on the movement of respondent
No.3, her family and the baby in question; the
said Officer will have all powers as are required
for accomplishing this task.
Registry to hand a copy of this order to the
learned AGA who in turn shall hand it to
jurisdictional Police with instructions to keep co-
vigilance with the Child Protection Officer, as
In due obedience to the above direction, the foster
mother appeared before the Court along with the child,
this day.
5. The counsel for foster mother        passionately
argues for the dismissal of     writ petition of the genetic
parents and for allowing the one filed by his client; the
gist of his argument is that: his client is absolutely
innocent of the allegations made against her; she is only
a victim of circumstances; she having fostered the child
all these months abundant with love, affection & care
should retain & rear it; that the genetic mother already
has two children whereas the foster mother has none; a
child well fostered for long cannot be parted away to the
genetic mother without causing enormous violence to it;
in matters of custody, interest of the child is paramount
and therefore the claims founded on genealogy, per se, do
not merit favour; in support of his submission he cites
episodes from Bhaagavatam and mentions about Devaki,
i.e., the   genetic mother of Lord Krishna, permitting
Yashoda, i.e., the foster mother to       retain custody of
6.   The learned advocate appearing for the genetic
mother per contra, contends that in matters of custody of
the child as between the parents, the above argument of
foster mother may be true; however as between a genetic
mother and a foster one, the claim of the latter should
yield to that of the former; he also notifies to the Court
the agony which the genetic parents of the child have
undergone since a year or so;        he also highlights the
difficulties of a lactating mother from whom the suckling
infant is kept away; thus he seeks dismissal of the other
petition and allowing of his clients’.
7.   I have heard the learned advocates appearing
for   the   parties   and   perused   the  petition papers;
peculiarity    of  the   case  had   generated    a charged
atmosphere in the Court Hall, for some time; learned
members of the Bar namely; Smt. Rashmi Patel (HCGP),
Nagaraj, on request, rendered a valuable assistance in
the matter. This Court is of a considered opinion that the
custody of the minor child needs to be given to the
genetic mother for the following reasons:
(a)  The child in question took birth in a maternity
home in Bengaluru city in the last summer and thus it is
only a toddler as yet; this child having been lifted from
the cradle of the hospital allegedly by some unscrupulous
persons, ultimately landed on the lap of foster mother, is
not in dispute; shorn of the pleadings, it is submitted at
the Bar that the foster mother is only an innocent victim
of circumstances;     that was her case too; whatever be
the epicenter of the lis, the undisputed fact remains that
Smt. Husna Banu is the DNA-tested genetic mother of
the child; as between the genetic mother and the foster
mother, the claim of the former should have priority over
the latter, subject to all just exceptions, into which
argued case of the foster mother is not shown to fall; this
augers well with reason, with law and with justice.
(b)     The trouble with the case at hand is that it is
of a kind not frequently recurring so as to enable any
given Judge to profit merely by experience and thereby
enable him to lay down thumb rules, especially when the
elements involved are so complex; however a broadnorm
that in the matters of child custody, the claim of the
strangers should yield to that of the genetic parents,
gains support from TEJASWINI GAUD vs. SHEKAR
JAGADISH PRASAD TEWARI (2019) 7 SCC 42; the
Apex Court in the said case observed as under:
" Taking away the child from the custody of
the appellants and handing over the custody of
the child to the first respondent might cause
some problem initially; but, in our view, that will
be neutralized with the passage of time.
However, till the child is settled down in the
atmosphere       of    the    first    respondent-
father’s house, the appellants No.2 and 3 shall
have access to the child initially for a period of
three months for the entire day i.e. 08.00 AM to
06.00 PM at the residence of the first respondent.
The first respondent shall ensure the comfort of
appellants No.2 and 3 during such time of their
stay in his house. After three months, the
appellants No.2 and 3 shall visit the child at the
first respondent’s house from 10.00 AM to 04.00
PM on Saturdays and Sundays. After the child
completes four years, the appellants No.2 and 3
are permitted to take the child on every Saturday
and Sunday from the residence of the father from
11.00 AM to 05.00 PM and shall hand over the
custody of the child back to the first respondent-
father before 05.00 PM. For any further
modification of the visitation rights, either parties
are at liberty to approach the High Court".
(c)      In all civilized jurisdictions the rules of
international law animate the norms of domestic law,
unless they are inconsistent: vide JOLLY GEORGE
VERGHESE vs. BANK OF COCHIN, (1980) 2 SCC 360;
the principle of “the best interest of the child” is enshrined
in the    International Convention on the Rights of the
Child, 1989; Article 3 (1) of this Convention provides:
"…in all actions concerning children, whether
undertaken by public or private social welfare
institutions, court of law, administrative
authorities or legislative bodies, the best
interests of the child shall be a primary
consideration . . .”
Similarly, Article 7(1) of the Convention says:
“The child shall be registered immediately after
birth and shall have the right from birth to a
name, the right to acquire a nationality and as
far as possible, the right to know and be
cared for by his or her parents”.
Article 8 (1) & (2) of the Convention provide for the State
Parties to respect the right of child inter alia to preserve its
identity, ‘name and family relations as recognized by
law’.    It also provides that where a child is illegally
deprived of some or all of the elements of its identity,
State Parties shall provide appropriate assistance and
protection, with a view to re-establishing speedily its
(d)    Article 25 (2) of the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights provides: “Motherhood and childhood are
entitled to special care and assistance…”.       Article 24(1)
of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(ICCPR, 1966) recognizes right of the child             to the
measures of protection as are required by its status as a
minor and the correlative duty resting on the shoulders
of its family, society and the State.       In October 1979 a
Joint WHO/UNICEF Meeting on Infant & Young Child
Feeding adopted the following statement:
“Breastfeeding is an integral part of the
reproductive process, the natural and ideal way of
feeding the infant and unique biological and
emotional basis for child development. … It is
therefore a responsibility of society to promote
breastfeeding and to protect pregnant and lactating
mothers to many influences that would disrupt it”.
(e)    Further, Section 3(ix) of the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act 2015 which enacts
inter alia the above principle of paramount interest of the
"All decisions regarding the child shall be based
on the primary consideration, that they are in the
best interest of the child and to help the child to
Section 2(9) of the said Act defines the term 'the
best interest of the child' to mean – "…The basis for any
decision taken regarding the child, to ensure fulfillment of
his basic rights and needs, identity, social well-being and
physical, emotional and intellectual development."
f)    The    modern      Medical Science   says    that
breastfeeding is the best way to give babies all the
necessary nutrients & antibodies, which provide a vital
shield of protection; the experts in the field of neo-natal
science are of a considered opinion that the interaction
between the lactating mother and the suckling infant
involves a world of messages, which is essential for the
intellectual & emotional development of the child; WHO
recommends exclusive breastfeeding until the baby
attains the age of at least six months; the research also
shows that the adolescents & adults who were breastfed
have less chance to be overweight & obese and that they
demonstrate better IQ test results; breastfeeding lowers
the risk of breast & ovarian cancers, diabetes & post
partum depression, according to Yukie Mokuo of the
(g)    In the light of domestic law and the international
law as briefly discussed above, breastfeeding needs to be
recognized as an inalienable right of lactating mother;
similarly, the right of the suckling infant for being breastfed
too, has to be assimilated with mother’s right; arguably, it is a
case   of  concurrent     rights;   this important attribute   of
motherhood, is protected under the umbrella of Fundamental
Rights guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of
India; it is unfortunate that this pretty child for no fault
remained un-breastfed, its lactating mother having had
no access to it till now; in a civilized society such things
should never happen.
(h)   The contention of learned counsel appearing
for the foster mother that his client should be permitted
to retain the custody of the child consistent with what
Devaki    Maa     allegedly  did   qua   Yashoda    Maa,    as
mentioned      in    Bhaagavatam,     is   bit  difficult   to
countenance; no authoritative text of the episode is
produced to show that there was any dispute of the kind
between these two Women of Grace, in the era that is
long gone by; in such            matters,   unsubstantiated
episodes from some history or mythology do not much
guide the decision making process; ordinarily, scriptures
cannot be cited as precedents or as instruments having
force of law, notwithstanding the light they throw when
the path we tread is shrouded in darkness; in matters
like this, scriptural texts are not treated as edicts of law,
unless they are legislated expressly or by necessary
implication or otherwise recognized;           what a great
American     Judge     of  yester-century,  Justice     Oliver
Wendell     Holmes,     Jr. had profoundly observed in
Lochner v. New York 198 US 45 (1905)                 is worth
". . .This case is decided upon an economic
theory which a large part of the country does not
entertain. . .It is settled by various decisions of
this court that State Constitutions and State laws
may regulate life in many ways, which we as
legislators might think as injudicious . . . The
Fourteenth Amendment does not enact Mr.
(i)    As   to what    great  poets  said  about
It is not impertinent to quote the poem 'My
Mother' penned by a Victorian poetess, Ann Taylor
(1782 - 1866) of the "Twinkle Twinkle Little Star" fame; it
touchingly expresses what a true mother means to a
"Who sat and watched my infant head
And tears of sweet affection shed?
When pain and sickness made me cry,
And wept for fear that I should die?
Similarly, a 1860 poem of Oliver Wendell Holmes,
Sr. (father of Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr.)        “A
Mother’s Secret”, is worth mentioning for its brevity,
them all”.
(j)    The contention of counsel for the foster mother
that she does not have any children whereas the genetic
mother has already two at home and therefore, the
custody of this child should be allowed to continue with
his client, is ludicrous; children are not chattel for being
apportioned between their genetic mother and a stranger,
on the basis of their numerical abundance; the principle
of distributive justice which intends to bridge the gap
between “haves and have nots” is not invocable, at least
in this case;       it is a matter of common knowledge
consistent with out experience that a genetic mother
treats all her children as being an integral part of her
body & soul, regardless of what the children do to her;
this contention of foster mother is abhorrent to the very
notion of motherhood.
(k) The foster mother now being convinced of
legitimacy & priority of the claim of genetic mother has
filed a Memo dated 24.09.2021 in the open court which
"The Third Respondent, has this date
handed over the custody of the child, 'Adwik' to
the petitioner herein. Therefore, the above case
may be closed; handing over of custody may be
taken note off in the interest of justice"
She also gracefully delivered the custody of the child
to its genetic parents; the genetic mother too, with equal
grace, states that the foster mother may see the child
whenever her heart so desires; such kind gestures
coming from two women hailing from two different
religious backgrounds, are marked by their rarity,
nowadays; thus, this legal battle for the custody of the
pretty child is drawn to a close with a happy note, once
for all.
In the above circumstances, these Writ Petitions are
disposed off; there is & shall be no cause of action
against the foster parents in civil or criminal law
concerning the alleged kidnapping of the child.
The observations hereinabove made being confined
to the disposal of these two Writ Petitions shall not
influence the collateral proceedings taken and/or to be
taken against others.
Before parting with this matter, this Court places on
record its deep appreciation for the able assistance
rendered by its official Research Assistant-cum-Law
Clerk, Mr. Faiz Afsar Sait and the Law Intern Mr. Rithvik
Costs made easy.