1.     This writ petition filed in terms of Article 227 of the Constitution is filed to
seek setting aside of the order dated 17th April, 2018, for short impugned order,
passed by the court of learned 1st Additional District Judge, Srinagar, for short
court below, dismissing an application filed before it by the defendant no. 1,
petitioner herein, in terms of Order VI Rule 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure, CPC,
on the grounds taken therein.
2.     A civil suit titled Reyaz Ahmad Bhat v. Ghulam Hassan Khanyari and anr.,
has been filed by the plaintiff/ respondent no. 1 herein, before the court below for
declaration, ejectment, possession and mandatory injunction on 7th May, 2013,
pleading inter alia therein that he has purchased land measuring 2 kanals and 4
marlas bearing Khasra no. 2482/2150/393, Khewat No. 324, Khata No. 1118-Min
situated at Gupt Ganga, Srinagar, along with super structure standing over it from
the defendant no. 2/ earlier respondent no. 2 herein, substituted by his wife after his
demise, but the possession of the said property has not been delivered to him as the
defendant no. 1, petitioner herein had remained in possession of the same as
trustee, brother of the defendant no. 2/ respondent no. 2 who is refusing to deliver
the possession to the plaintiff/ respondent no. 1 herein. The respondent no.
1/plaintiff had further, alongside the suit, filed an application for grant of ad-
interim relief. The Court below, upon consideration of the matter, on motion
hearing, had dispensed with the requirement of prior notice as envisaged by Order
39 Rule 3 CPC and granted the interim relief in favour of the plaintiff/ respondent
no. 1 herein to the effect that no third-party interest in respect of the suit property
shall be created till the objections are filed by the non-applicants/petitioner and
respondent no. 2 herein, and the same are considered.
3.     It appears that the petitioner as also the respondent no. 2 herein has appeared
before the court below and filed their written version. While the respondent no. 2/
defendant no. 2 in the suit, has admitted the sale of the suit property to the plaintiff,
the petitioner/ defendant no. 1 before the court below, has chosen to contest the
same and has accordingly refuted the claim of the plaintiff/ respondent no. 1 herein
in terms of the averments contained in the written statement filed by him before the
court below.
4.     During the pendency of the said suit, the defendant no. 1, is stated to have
filed an application under Order VI Rule 4 of the CPC on 13th June, 2017, seeking
leave of the court to incorporate better particulars in the written statement filed by
him earlier.
5.     The respondent no. 1/plaintiff before the court below, contested the
application by filing his objections, stating therein that the defendant no. 1/
petitioner herein is trying to prolong the matter and deprive the plaintiff/
respondent no. 1 herein of his property rights.
6.     The Court below, on consideration of the matter and after hearing the
learned counsel for the parties, did not find merit in the application and
accordingly dismissed the same, vide the impugned order, holding that if the
application is allowed and the particulars/ pleadings as are mentioned therein are
incorporated in the written statement, the same will cause prejudice to both the
defendants/ respondents herein, as they would be required to reply the contents
against the object of Order VI Rule 4 of the CPC. It has further been held by the
court below that allowing the application would mean allowing an amendment of
the pleadings of the written statement.
7.     Feeling aggrieved of the impugned order, the petitioner/ defendant no. 1, has
filed the petition in hand in terms of Article 227 of the Constitution seeking setting
aside of the same inter alia on the grounds that the impugned order is bad in law as
it converted a bilateral controversy into a triangular one; all controversies would
have got settled had the application been allowed as it would have concretized the
issues before the court below; the application deserved to be allowed even if it
would have resulted in amendment of the written statement as the defendant in a
suit is entitled to amend the written statement and in doing that the defendant does
not suffer the same limitations as the plaintiff; the petition against the order
impugned is maintainable before this court as there is no other remedy available to
the petitioner under law.
8.      Heard learned counsel for the parties and considered the submissions made.
9.      The learned counsels during the course of arguments have reiterated the
grounds taken by them in their respective pleadings.
10.     Since the petition is filed in terms of Article 227 of the Constitution,
therefore, before the merits of the matter are divulged, its maintainability against
the order impugned needs to be first addressed.
11.     It needs no reiteration that the Hon’ble Supreme Court has been consistently
holding that the petitions filed under Article 227 of the Constitution are not to be
treated as writ petitions and deprecated the practice of entertaining the petitions
under Article 227 of the Constitution against the orders against which revision is
barred in terms of amended Act of CPC. The Apex Court in case titled Shalini
Shyam Shetty v. Rajendra Shankar Patil reported as 2010 AIR SCW 6387, has
laid down the following principles to be followed by the High Courts in exercising
jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution:
“a) A petition under Article 226 of the Constitution is different
from a petition under Article 227. The mode of exercise of power
by High Court under these two Articles is also different.
(b) In any event, a petition under Article 227 cannot be called a
writ petition. The history of the conferment of writ jurisdiction on
High Courts is substantially different from the history of
conferment of the power of Superintendence on the High Courts
under Article 227 and have been discussed above.
(c) High Courts cannot, on the drop of a hat, in exercise of its
power of superintendence under Article 227 of the Constitution,
interfere with the orders of tribunals or Courts inferior to it. Nor
can it, in exercise of this power, act as a Court of appeal over the
orders of Court or tribunal subordinate to it. In cases where an
alternative statutory mode of redressal has been provided, that
would also operate as a restrain on the exercise of this power by
the High Court.
(d) The parameters of interference by High Courts in exercise of its
power of superintendence have been repeatedly laid down by this
Court. In this regard the High Court must be guided by the
principles laid down by the Constitution Bench of this Court in
Waryam Singh (supra) and the principles in Waryam Singh (supra)
have been repeatedly followed by subsequent Constitution Benches
and various other decisions of this Court.
(e) According to the ratio in Waryam Singh (supra), followed in
subsequent cases, the High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction of
superintendence can interfere in order only to keep the tribunals
and Courts subordinate to it, `within the bounds of their authority'.
(f) In order to ensure that law is followed by such tribunals and
Courts by exercising jurisdiction which is vested in them and by
not declining to exercise the jurisdiction which is vested in them.
(g) Apart from the situations pointed in (e) and (f), High Court can
interfere in exercise of its power of superintendence when there has
been a patent perversity in the orders of tribunals and Courts
subordinate to it or where there has been a gross and manifest
failure of justice or the basic principles of natural justice have
been flouted.
(h) In exercise of its power of superintendence High Court cannot
interfere to correct mere errors of law or fact or just because
another view than the one taken by the tribunals or Courts
subordinate to it, is a possible view. In other words, the jurisdiction
has to be very sparingly exercised.
(i) High Court's power of superintendence under Article
227 cannot be curtailed by any statute. It has been declared a part
of the basic structure of the Constitution by the Constitution Bench
of this Court in the case of L. Chandra Kumar vs. Union of India &
others, reported in (1997) 3 SCC 261 and therefore abridgement
by a Constitutional amendment is also very doubtful.
(j) It may be true that a statutory amendment of a rather cognate
provision, like Section 115 of the Civil Procedure Code by the Civil
Procedure Code (Amendment) Act, 1999 does not and cannot cut
down the ambit of High Court's power under Article 227. At the
same time, it must be remembered that such statutory amendment
does not correspondingly expand the High Court's jurisdiction of
superintendence under Article 227.
(k) The power is discretionary and has to be exercised on equitable
principle. In an appropriate case, the power can be exercised suo
motu.
(l) On a proper appreciation of the wide and unfettered power of
the High Court under Article 227, it transpires that the main object
of this Article is to keep strict administrative and judicial control
by the High Court on the administration of justice within its
territory.
(m) The object of superintendence, both administrative and
judicial, is to maintain efficiency, smooth and orderly functioning
of the entire machinery of justice in such a way as it does not bring
it into any disrepute. The power of interference under this Article is
to be kept to the minimum to ensure that the wheel of justice does
not come to a halt and the fountain of justice remains pure and
unpolluted in order to maintain public confidence in the
functioning of the tribunals and Courts subordinate to High Court.
(n) This reserve and exceptional power of judicial intervention is
not to be exercised just for grant of relief in individual cases but
should be directed for promotion of public confidence in the
administration of justice in the larger public interest
whereas Article 226 is meant for protection of individual
grievance. Therefore, the power under Article 227 may be
unfettered but its exercise is subject to high degree of judicial
discipline pointed out above.
(o) An improper and a frequent exercise of this power will be
counter-productive and will divest this extraordinary power of its
strength and vitality.”
12.    The Hon’ble Supreme Court has also in cases, referred to and relied upon by
the learned counsel for the respondents, titled Babubhai Jamnadas Patel v. State
of Gujarat and others; Radhey Shyam and anr. v. Chhabi Nath and othes
reported as (2009) 9 SCC 610 & AIR 2015 SC 3269 respectively, taken a similar
13.    The plain reading of the principles laid down by the Hon’ble Supreme Court
would make it clear that the petition under Article 227 of the Constitution is
subject to high degree of judicial discipline and is not to be taken recourse of for
setting right the mere irregularities occurring in the subordinate court orders. The
power, however, is not ipso facto curtailed to be exercised when it is so warranted.
The ‘border line’, therefore, for the purposes of exercising jurisdiction under
Article 227 of the Constitution, has been drawn and the jurisdiction, as such, is
warranted to be exercised to keep the Tribunals and courts subordinate to it within
the bounds of their authority; to ensure that law is followed by such tribunals and
Courts by exercising jurisdiction which is vested in them and by not declining to
exercise the jurisdiction which is vested in them; when there is patent perversity in
the orders of Tribunals and Courts subordinate to it or where there has been a gross
and manifest failure of justice or the basic principles of natural justice have been
flouted; and is not to be exercised to correct mere errors of law or just because
another view than the one taken by the Tribunals or Courts subordinate to it, is a
possible view.
14.    It is very axiomatic that this court can exercise its power of superintendence
vested with it under Article 227 of the Constitution only when the order challenged
in the said petition falls within any of the aforesaid categories. The perusal of the
order impugned would make it clear that the court below has certainly exercised
the jurisdiction that is vested with it and has not also declined to exercise the
jurisdiction vested with it. The court below does not also appear to have traversed
beyond the bounds of its authority, nor does the impugned order appear to be
perverse so as to cause a manifest failure of justice or the basic principles of
natural justice have been flouted.
15.    Having said that, the petition in hand, against the impugned order, is not
maintainable. However, the submission of the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner, that there is no efficacious alternate remedy available to the petitioner to
challenge the order impugned and the petition in hand is the only possible course
that could be adopted in the circumstances, carries weight and the petition only on
such count is entertained for adjudication.
16.    Be that as it may, it is stated at the cost of repetition that the application filed
by the petitioner under Order VI Rule 4 of the CPC has been, by the order
impugned, dismissed on the ground that it would amount to amending the written
statement, therefore, is impermissible in law. The contention of the learned senior
counsel that the order impugned is bad in law as the right to press into service the
provision of law, Order VI Rule 4 of the CPC, cannot be taken away even if it
amounted to amendment does not appear to be carrying weight, for, the mandate of
the Order VI Rule 4 of the CPC is quite limited. It provides for stating the
particulars in the pleading in all cases where the party pleading relies on any
misrepresentation, fraud, breach of trust, willful default, or undue influence, and in
all other cases in which particulars may be necessary. The Rule 4 of the Order VI,
being relevant, is taken note of hereinbelow, thus:
“4. Particulars to be given where necessary.- In all cases in
which the party pleading relies on any misrepresentation,
fraud, breach of trust, willful default, or undue influence, and
in all other cases in which particulars may be necessary
beyond such as are exemplified in the forms aforesaid,
particulars (with dates and items if necessary) shall be stated
in the pleading.”
17.    The Supreme Court in case titled V. S. Vishwavidyalaya v. Raj Kishore
reported as AIR 1977 SC 615 has held as under:
“9. We do not think it is enough to state in general terms that
there was ‘collusion’ without more particulars. This Court said
in Bishundeo v. Seogeni Rai, 1951 SCR 548 (at p. 556) = (AIR
1951 SC 280 at page 283) as under:
“General allegations are insufficient even to amount
to an averment of fraud of which any court ought to
18.     It is evident from the aforesaid provision that as per Rule 4, particulars with
dates and items are clearly required to be stated in the pleading inter alia in cases
of misrepresentation, fraud, breach of trust, willful default or undue influence, for
the reason that the opposite party knows the case it has to meet; the issue is not
enlarged and the court is enabled to determine the controversy at the earliest. The
plain reading of the provision of law makes it quite clear that the party seeking to
press into services Order VI Rule 4 of the CPC has to be specific to the relevant
particulars only. It does not come to fore as to what prevented the petitioner/
defendant no. 1 before the court below, to invoke the provision of Order VI Rule
17 to seek amendment of the written statement. The application filed before the
court below by the petitioner has certainly sought to enlarge the scope of the
provision of law which is impermissible. Further in view of the ratio laid down by
the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the V. S. Vishwavidyalaya v. Raj Kishore case
supra the contents of the application filed by the petitioner before the court below
do not qualify to mean fraud, coercion or undue influence.
19.     The application filed by the petitioner before the court below is not in
conformity with Order VI Rule 4 of the CPC as it is seeking to elaborate what is
already pleaded in the written statement filed by him prior in time.               Such
elaboration certainly amounts to amending the earlier written statement which
could not have been done and the court below has rightly rejected the same as what
the law prohibits directly cannot be done indirectly. Even otherwise, the
application filed before the Court below by the petitioner nowhere refers to fraud,
breach of trust misrepresentation, willful default or undue influence vis-à-vis the
respondent no. 1, plaintiff before the court below, which would mean that the
requirements of Order VI Rule 4 of the CPC are not fulfilled.
20.     The petition is dismissed along with connected CM on the above lines. It
goes without saying that this court has not expressed any opinion on the merits of
the case. The court below shall decide the matter without getting influenced, in any
way, by any of the observations made by this court in this order.
Whether the order is reportable:        Yes/No