Mr. Hassan Khan with Mr. Sayyed Tauseef
Yaseen for the petitioners.
Mr. Ashutosh M. Kulkarni with Mr. Sarthak
S. Diwan for respondent no. 1 (MPSC).
Mr. Mihir Desai, Senior Advocate with Mr. P.
Shinde, ‘B’ Panel Counsel fo rrespondents 2
Ms. Neeta Karnik for respondents 6 to 25.
Administration Department, GoM present.
1.        This writ petition is directed against an order dated 29th
November 2022 passed by the Maharashtra Administrative
Tribunal,      Mumbai      (hereafter    “the   Tribunal”,   for    short)
disposing of Miscellaneous Application No. 695 of 2022 filed in
Original Application No. 280 of 2022.
2.        The original applicants were the applicants in M.A.
No.695 of 2022. Recruitment on 111 posts reserved for
candidates belonging to the Economically Weaker Section
(hereafter “EWS”, for short) in the Maharashtra Engineering
Services         (MES)   is   the  subject     matter   of   the    original
application. The applicants, in their original application, have
inter alia prayed for direction on the State of Maharashtra not
to offer appointment to the candidates belonging to the
Socially        and   Educationally    Backward      Classes     (hereafter
“SEBC”, for short) who had applied for appointment on the
posts reserved for SEBC candidates but were later on
considered for appointment on posts reserved for the EWS
candidates after the Socially and Educationally Backward
Classes Act, 2018 came to be struck down by the Supreme
Court vide its decision in Jaishri Laxmanrao Patil vs. The
Chief Minister and Ors., reported in (2021) 2 SCC 785.
3.        While admitting the original application, the Tribunal by
its      order     dated    29th  March      2022   had    directed     that
appointments, if offered, would abide by the result of the
original application. However, no appointments were offered
and the original application progressed for final hearing which
is scheduled on 2nd December 2022, i.e., tomorrow.
4.        The applicants claimed to have learnt on 21st November
2022         that   appointment    letters    in favour    of   the   SEBC
candidates, for appointment on posts reserved for EWS
candidates, would be issued on 1st December 2022, i.e.,
today. This triggered M.A. No.695 of 2022, whereby it was
prayed that the Government be restrained from issuing
appointment letters to the SEBC candidates on EWS reserved
posts. The Tribunal refused the interim prayer on the ground
that the original application has been fixed for final hearing on
2nd December 2022 and also in view of the fact that
undertakings/bonds are likely to be executed by the SEBC
candidates who would be appointed on posts reserved for the
EWS candidates that they would not claim any equity, and this
would render the appointments conditional depending on
judicial decision.
5.        We have heard Mr. Khan, learned advocate for the
petitioners, Mr. Desai, learned senior advocate for the State,
Mr. Kulkarni, learned advocate for the Maharashtra Public
Service Commission and Ms. Karnik, learned advocate for the
private respondents.
6.        It does not appear from the order dated 29th November
2022, which is impugned before us, that the decision of a
coordinate Bench of this Court dated 29th July 2022 passed in
a bunch of writ petitions, with W.P. No.2663 of 2021 (Vikas
Balwant Alase and Ors. vs. Union of India and Ors.)
being the lead matter, was considered by the Tribunal. By the
said judgment, a similar decision taken by the Maharashtra
allowing SEBC candidates to be appointed on posts reserved
for EWS candidates was interdicted. Although the decision
dated 29th July 2022 has reportedly been carried in appeal to
the Supreme Court by MSEDCL, no stay is operative.
7.        We are informed by Mr. Desai that it is a fact that
appointments are being offered for filling up 111 posts
reserved for EWS candidates in the MES, and candidates
belonging       to  SEBC   have    been    selected therefor.     The
recruitment process started in 2019. The Government could
not fill up the posts during the last 3 (three) years, whatever
be the reason. It has waited so long to issue appointment
letters, despite interim relief as claimed in the original
application being refused by the order dated 29th March 2022.
Since the Government has now taken a decision on 21st
November 2022, i.e., 10 (ten) days prior to the date of final
hearing of the original application to issue appointment letters
and that the Tribunal has refused to grant any interim stay on
the ground that appointments made, if any, would be
conditional and subject to the decision on the original
application         without,    however,        even   considering       the
applicability of the decision in Vikas Balwant Alase (supra)
and the decisions referred to therein, mainly paragraph 28 of
the decision in M. Surender Reddy vs. State of Andhra
Pradesh and Ors., reported in (2015) 8 SCC 410, we are of
the view that complications are bound to arise if appointments
letters are issued today when the Tribunal has itself fixed 2nd
December 2022 as the date for final hearing of the original
application and should the original application succeed in
future. A strong prima facie case having been set up in M.A.
No.695 of 2022 based on the decision in Vikas Balwant
Alase          (supra),   which   has     surfaced   after   the    original
application was admitted, together with the factor that third
party interests could arise if we decline interim relief, in our
view,        interest   of justice   would     be   best   served    if  the
Government is restrained from issuing any appointment
letters to fill up the quota of 111 posts reserved for
candidates         belonging    to   the      EWS   category     by    SEBC
candidates till a final decision is pronounced by the Tribunal
on the original application. We order accordingly.
8.        Although we normally refrain from interfering with the
business of the Tribunal to decide pleas pending before it,
having regard to the importance of the present issue, we
would encourage the Tribunal to make earnest endeavor to
proceed with the hearing of the original application without
granting any unnecessary adjournment to any party so that
the final decision can be pronounced by it by the end of
9.        The Government shall, however, be at liberty to issue
appointment letters to the selected candidates for filling up
posts other than the posts reserved for the EWS category. We
record the statement of Mr. Desai that in the event the
petitioners succeed before the Tribunal, their seniority would
be reckoned from the date of appointment of the other
candidates in the MES pursuant to the recruitment process in
question and that their inter se seniority shall be determined
according to the extant rules.
10. We leave it open for the SEBC candidates represented by
Ms. Karnik to pursue their remedy before the appropriate
forum, in accordance with law, if at all they are entitled to be
considered for appointment on open posts but are not so
considered.
11. With the aforesaid directions, the writ petition stands
disposed of. No costs.
12. All contentions of the parties are left open and the
Tribunal shall be at liberty to decide the original application
without being influenced by any observation contained in this
order.