The prayer in the present petition under Articles 226/227 of the
Constitution of India is for the issuance of a Writ of Habeas Corpus directing
respondent Nos.1 to 3 to produce the minor child of the petitioner namely,
Riaan Shahi who is less than 02 years old (at the time of filing of the petition)
from the illegal detention of respondent Nos.4 to 6 and allow him to join the
company of the petitioner who is the mother.
2.            The brief facts of the case as emanating from the pleadings are
that the petitioner, who is qualified as B.Tech (I.T.) and is a resident of
Panchkula, solemnized a love marriage with respondent No.4 on 04.12.2017
and out of the said wedlock one son namely Riaan Shahi was born on
20.08.2020. Respondent Nos.4 to 6 (being her husband and in-laws) were
extremely greedy and on account of inadequate dowry, she was mistreated by
them and faced a lot of harassment. The details of the atrocities have been
submitted to the Police in a separate complaint dated 26.07.2022
The petitioner and respondent No.4 were employed at Noida but
on account of the Covid-19 pandemic, as a lockdown was imposed, they both
came to reside and work from home with respondent Nos.5 and 6 at
3.            On 22.07.2022, the petitioner’s employer (TSYS Noida) called
the petitioner back to office with the directions that her physical presence was
mandatory henceforth and accordingly, the petitioner requested respondent
No.4 to return to Noida on which he started quarrelling with her and gave her
physical beatings. On 23.07.2022, the family members of respondent No.4
also started quarreling with the petitioner and gave beatings to her. The real
sister of respondent No.4 who resides adjoining to the house of respondent
Nos.4 to 6 came to the house of respondent Nos.4 to 6 and gave slaps on the
face of the petitioner and in the evening she was thrown out of the
matrimonial home while retaining the minor child who was less than 02 years
old and dependent on the mother’s feed.
Despite all attempts to take her child along with her, the
respondent Nos.4 to 6 remained adamant and had retained the child against
the wishes of the petitioner. On being thrown out of the matrimonial home,
she travelled by bus to Panchkula and reached the house of her parents. She
submitted a complaint dated 26.07.2022 (Annexure R-8) against the
respondent Nos.4 to 6 and referred to the fact that they did not allow her to
take her child when she was ousted out of the matrimonial home.
It is stated that the sole purpose of respondent Nos.4 to 6 was to
retain the child so as to be used as a bargaining chip in order to protect
themselves from the process of law. She has not been permitted even to speak
to her minor child and despite her father making attempts to resolve the
dispute, he was told by respondent No.4 that they had retained the child with
them and he (father of the petitioner) could keep the petitioner.
Reliance is placed on the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in the case of Rajeswari Chandrasekar Ganesh Versus State of Tamil
Nadu & Others, Writ Petition (Criminal) No.402 of 2021 decided on
14.07.2022 to contend that a writ of Habeas Corpus is maintainable at the
instance of one parent against the other and in child custody matters, the only
relevant consideration was the welfare of the child. In the present case, since
the child was less than 02 years old (at the time of the filing of this petition)
and was on the mother’s feed his custody should be handed over to the
petitioner as he has been illegally detained by respondent Nos.4 to 6.
4.            On 29.07.2022, notice of motion was issued by this Court and on
22.09.2022, respondent Nos.4 to 6 who are the husband and in-laws of the
petitioner respectively appeared in the Court through their counsel.
The matter was referred to the Mediation and Conciliation Centre
of this Court on 23.09.2022 but an amicable settlement could not be arrived
at. Respondent Nos.4 to 6 however filed their reply in the shape of an
affidavit of respondent No.4. In the said reply, Annexure R-2 comprising of
three documents dated 04.06.2021, 16.06.2021 and 14.07.2021 were attached.
As per the said documents, the petitioner was stated to have been suffering
from depression, had adjustment disorders, was aggressive and therefore was
on medication for the same. It was the case of the private respondents that the
mental condition of the petitioner did not entitle her to the custody of the
As the veracity of the said documents was disputed, this Court on
27.09.2022 asked the Senior Superintendent of Police, Pathankot to verify the
three slips/OPD tickets.
Pursuant thereto, a short reply dated 10.10.2022 was submitted
by way of an affidavit of Harkamalpreet Singh Khakh, PPS, Senior
Superintendent of Police, District Pathankot which is already on record. As
per the said reply, the OPD tickets/prescriptions were found to be genuine as
was evident from the stamps attested and remarks made by the
doctors/officials of District MMG Hospital, Ghaziabad and Heart Car Neuro
Care Maternity and Surgery Centre of J.R. Hospital at Muradabad.
5.            Coming back to the reply submitted by respondent Nos.4 to 6, it
is stated that the petitioner and respondent No.4 were working at TATA
Consultancy Services at Gurgaon, where they got involved with each other
and ultimately solemnized their marriage at Pathankot. The child Riaan Shahi
was born on 20.08.2020 at Noida. Pursuant to residing at Pathankot with
respondent Nos.4 to 6 on account of the lockdown, the petitioner started
pressurizing respondent No.4 to move back to Noida and they shifted back
where they stayed up to July, 2021. During this period, the petitioner did not
take adequate care of the minor child who got an eye infection, which was got
treated by respondent No.4. Similarly, he was not given proper diet and
mother’s feed due to which the child had to be hospitalised often.
Even prior to the birth of the child, the petitioner suffered from a
mental condition and used to slap herself in anger and would lock herself in
the washroom for hours. She was self-abusive, scratched and beat herself on
her arms and hands and moreso after the birth of the child. Effectively, she
was short tempered, quarrelsome and suffered from a neurological problem
due to which respondent No.4 had to pay visits to various neurologists at
different cities. As she was eager to go abroad she took the IELTS
examination twice but failed leading to further depression. The mother of the
petitioner had in fact been pressurizing her to take the exams and move to the
United States (U.S.) where her younger brother was settled and this worsened
her depression. Ultimately, pursuant to her second failed attempt to crack the
IELTS in October, 2019, the petitioner consumed Harpic (toilet cleaner) to
commit suicide. She was rushed to Neuro Hospital Sector 20, Noida by
respondent Nos.4 and this fact is evident from the WhatsApp chat between
the petitioner and respondent No.4 which is attached as Annexure R-1 to the
After the birth of the child at Noida, when respondent No.4 asked
the petitioner to move to Pathankot on account of the lockdown, she refused
to do so and respondent Nos.5 and 6 had to move to Noida to look after the
child. However, subsequently they all moved to Pathankot, where the earlier
conduct resurfaced and she was aggressive, abusive and shouted for no reason
and attempted to cause injuries to herself. She was ignorant of the needs of
the child and it was respondent Nos.4 and 5 who took care of him. In fact, the
petitioner was fond of late night parties and indulged in drinking alcohol.
Ultimately, on her asking, respondent No.4 along with the minor child and the
petitioner moved back to Noida where they stayed up to July, 2021. Once
again, the child was not taken care of leading to his eye being infected. He
became increasingly weak on account of lack of proper diet and mother’s feed
leading to his hospitalization.
On account of her worsening mental condition she was taken to
District MMG Hospital, Ghaziabad on 04.06.2021, where she was treated by
Dr. Saket Nath Tiwari, firstly on 04.06.2021 and thereafter on 16.06.2021. As
there was no improvement in her condition, the petitioner, respondent No.4
and the child decided to visit Lansdowne, Uttarakhand and checked into the
Green Palms Hotel on 12.07.2021 and checked out on 14.07.2021. While on
their way to Nainital, the petitioner’s condition worsened and she started
shouting and tried to jump out of the car while holding the minor son in her
lap. The situation was handled with difficulty by respondent No.4 who took
the petitioner to J.R. Hospital, Muradabad, where Dr. D. Kumar Singh,
MBBS, MD, BNB (Neuro) (BHU), the Neuro Physician attended to the
petitioner. Pursuant thereto, the petitioner was brought back to Noida after
cancelling the tour. The petitioner was not consuming the prescribed
medicines and it later came to light that she was selling of the same. The
prescriptions are attached collectively as Annexure R-2 to the reply.
As the condition of the petitioner did not change, a decision was
taken to shift back to Pathankot for the sake of the welfare of the child in July,
2022. Once at Pathankot, the condition of the petitioner remained the same.
She continued to quarrel and pick up fights on petty matters. On 23.07.2022
at about 11.00 AM, while the petitioner was chatting on the phone with
someone, respondent No.4 inquired from her as to whom she was chatting
with. She became aggressive, picked up a wooden table and threw it towards
respondent No.4. He immediately called his mother, respondent No.6 but she
continued her misbehavior. Thereafter, she packed her clothes in a bag and
while doing so started to throw households articles towards respondent No.4.
He handed over the child to respondent No.5 and came inside the room to
pacify the petitioner but to no avail. Ultimately she took her bag and went
outside. Fervent requests were made to her not to leave. She was chased and
brought back to the matrimonial home but the petitioner remained adamant to
leave for Panchkula. Finally as the petitioner left the house, Respondent No.4
and the minor child started moving towards the bus stand but as his attempts
to restrain her from leaving failed, he got the petitioner boarded on the bus at
Panchkula at 05.20 PM in the evening. The entire occurrence was recorded
on a CCTV camera installed in the vicinity, wherein the respondent Nos.4 and
5 and his brother-in-law namely Ajay Kumar are seen making efforts to make
the petitioner understand time and again. The pen-drive containing the CCTV
footage is annexed as Annexure R-3 and the relevant photographs including
those extracted from the CCTV footage showing that the petitioner left the
matrimonial home and the child of her own are annexed as Annexure R-4 to
the reply.
In May, 2022 the child had been admitted at Little Kingdom
International School at Sujanpur, Pathankot and the relevant documents in
this regard were annexed as Annexure R-5 to the reply. It was the respondent
No.4 who was taking care of the child in the best possible manner which is
evident from his vaccination chart. The copy of the vaccination chart is
annexed as Annexure R-6 to the reply.
Pursuant to the lifting of the lockdown, the petitioner as well as
respondent No.4 were asked to join their respective companies but seeing the
ignorant attitude of the petitioner towards the child, the respondent No.4 had
changed the company he was employed with in order to work from home at
Pathankot. The relevant letter in this regard is annexed as Annexure R-7 to the
Even after the petitioner left the matrimonial home and filed the
present petition, she came to the house of Smt. Rajesh Rani Mehan, the aunt
(Tai) of the respondent No.4 at Ludhiana and acted in a hyper manner while
yelling at respondent No.4 and giving him multiple blows with the blunt
weapon. The attempt was to take illegal custody of the minor child. A DDR
No.81-A dated 01.08.22 was registered with the Police at Police Station
Division No.5, Ludhiana and the photographs extracted from the CCTV
footage from the house of the Tai of respondent No.4 showing the trespass by
the petitioner is annexed as Annexure R-9 to the reply.
The respondent No.5 had also approached the Senior
Superintendent of Police, Pathankot seeking protection of the life and liberty
of himself and his family members, wherein the entire incident that took place
at Ludhiana has been narrated. The application dated 09.08.2022 containing
the relevant extract of the CCTV footage is annexed as Annexure R-10 to the
On 16.09.2022, while the respondent No.4 was on the way with
the minor child to the house from the school two unknown persons tried to
snatch him away. He immediately rushed to the house and raised a hue and
cry. On seeing the Mohalla residents gathered, the unknown persons fled
away stating that they would take the custody of the minor son from
Thus, it is the contention of the answering respondent Nos.4 to 6
that though it was not disputed that a Writ of Habeas Corpus was
maintainable but in the present case, the child was in the legal guardianship of
his father and had not been illegally detained. In fact, the petitioner had
deserted the matrimonial home along with respondent No.4 and the child on
account of her mental condition. Looking at her mental condition and
attending circumstances, the welfare of the child lay in the lap of the
answering respondent Nos.4 to 6 and not with the petitioner.
6.            The learned counsel for the petitioner contends that there is no
dispute that the present petition for the issuance of writ in the nature of
Habeas Corpus is maintainable.          Since the welfare of the child was of
paramount importance and in the present case as the child was about 02 years
old and was on the mother’s feed, his custody ought to be handed over to the
petitioner. Reliance is placed on the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court
in the case of Rajeswari Chandrasekar Ganesh Versus State of Tamil Nadu
& others (supra), Tejaswini Gaud & others Versus Shekhar Jagdish Prasad
Tewari & others, 2019(3) R.C.R. (Civil) 104 and this Court in Rashneet
Kaur Versus State of Haryana & others (CRWP-3251-2022, decided on
He contends that the WhatsApp chat between the petitioner and
respondent No.4 (taken on record as mark 'A' and not denied by respondent
No.4) would show that the petitioner was taunted by the respondent-husband
that he will ensure that she remains mired in child custody litigation for a
number of years.
He contends that, despite the reply of the State, the medical
prescriptions are fabricated documents (Annexure R2 or R1/1). The writing
on the accompanying OPD Register at page 155, where the name of the
petitioner was shown at Sr. No.43 seems to have been written with the
different ink. Similarly, there seems to have been an interpolation/overwriting
on page 157 at Sr. No.144907-144909 in the Register dated 16.07.2021.
Similar is the case in the register dated 14.07.2021 as is evident from page
159 where her names seems to have been added later in a different
handwriting. He contends that the prescriptions (Annexure R2 or R1/1) also
referred to the fact that the identity of the person is not verified by the said
document meaning thereby that who had actually gone for treatment on the
relevant date, if at all, is unknown and therefore, the said prescription slips are
fabricated documents. Even otherwise, the petitioner and respondent No.4
were residents of Noida and the question of going for treatment to Ghaziabad
would not arise. Similarly, the prescription dated 14.07.2021 pertains to
Muradabad. On that date, the petitioner-respondent No.4 and the child were
actually at Lansdowne, Uttarakhand and checked out from Hotel Green Palms
only on 15.07.2021 as was apparent from the Google Pay Screenshot (taken
on record as mark 'B'). In fact the Hotel register photocopy would show that
the correction has been made in the check out date from 14.07.2021 to
15.07.2021 (taken on record as mark 'C').
He contends that taking the allegations of the mental condition of
the petitioner to be true, as per the Mental Health Act, 2017, even if the
women was admitted for treatment at Rehabilitation Centre, even then, a child
under the age of 03 years should ordinarily, not be separated from her during
the course of her treatment. In the present case, the petitioner is not admitted
in any such Rehabilitation Centre and therefore at any rate, the custody of the
child must be handed over to her. The petitioner was working in the corporate
sector with a multinational company and could not be said to be so unwell so
as to disentitle her to the custody of her child. In fact she had been promoted
as Associate Senior Engineer on 29.06.2021. He contends that in terms of
Section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956, where the
minor child had not completed the age of 05 years, the custody should
ordinarily be with the mother.
7.            On the other hand, the learned counsel for respondent Nos.4 to 6
while admitting the fact that the present petition for issuance of a writ of
Habeas Corpus was maintainable, contended that the facts narrated above
clearly establish that the petitioner was suffering from a mental condition,
had suicidal tendencies and attempted to commit suicide by consuming
Harpic as was evident from the WhatsApp chat (Annexure R-1) and therefore,
the welfare of the child was best served in the custody of the answering
respondents who are none other than the father and the paternal grand-
parents. This was moreso, when she had willfully deserted the child and
respondent No.4. He further vehemently denies the contention of the
petitioner that the medical documents (Annexure R2 or R1/1) were fabricated
and submits that they pertained to the petitioner and none else. In fact, the
tampering with the Hotel Register (Mark 'C') would show that the petitioner,
respondent No.4 and the child checked out on 14.07.2021 from the Hotel
Green Palms and went to the doctor at Muradabad on 14.07.2021 itself. He
thus contends that there was no merit in the present petition and same ought
to be dismissed. If the petitioner was aggrieved in any manner, she was free to
avail her civil remedies in accordance with law as the child could not be said
to be in illegal custody of the respondent Nos.4 to 6 who are the father and
parental grandparents respectively. Reliance is placed on the judgments in
Poonam Kalsi Versus State of Punjab & others, 2022(3) R.C.R. (Civil) 262
and Reetu Verma Versus State of Haryana & others, LPA No.3716 of 2018,
decided on 23.05.2019.
8.            I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length.
9.            Before proceeding further it would be necessary to examine the
relevant provisions of The Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, 1956 which
“6. Natural guardians of a Hindu minor.—The natural
guardians of a Hindu minor; in respect of the minor's person as
well as in respect of the minor’s property (excluding his or her
undivided interest in joint family property), are—
(a) in the case of a boy or an unmarried girl—the father, and
after him, the mother:
provided that the custody of a minor who has not completed
the age of five years shall ordinarily be with the mother;
(b) in the case of an illegitimate boy or an illegitimate
unmarried girl—the mother, and after her, the father;
(c) in the case of a married girl—the husband:
Provided that no person shall be entitled to act as the natural
guardian of a minor under the provisions of this section—
(a)    if he has ceased to be a Hindu, or
(b)     if he has completely and finally renounced the world by
becoming a hermit (vanaprastha) or an ascetic (yati or
sanyasi).
Explanation.—In this section, the expressions “father”
and “mother” do not include a step-father and a step-mother.
13. Welfare of minor to be paramount consideration.—
(1) In the appointment of declaration of any person as guardian
of a Hindu minor by a court, the welfare of the minor shall be
the paramount consideration.
(2) No person shall be entitled to the guardianship by virtue of
the provisions of this Act or of any law relating to
guardianship in marriage among Hindus, if the court is of
opinion that his or her guardianship will not be for the
welfare of the minor.
10.           The Hon'ble Supreme Court and this Court has on various
occasions dealt with the issue in hand and some of the relevant judgments in
this regard cited by the respective parties are as under:-
In Rajeswari Chandrasekar Ganesh Versus State of Tamil
Nadu & Others (supra), a US-based mother claimed custody of her children
stating that the father had clandestinely removed the children from the USA
contrary to the shared parenting plan of the Ohio, USA Courts and took them
to India. This led to the filing of a Habeas Corpus Petition under Article 32.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court while handing over the custody to the US-based
mother held as under:-
“91.Thus, it is well established that in issuing the writ of
Habeas Corpus in the case of minors, the jurisdiction which
the Court exercises is an inherent jurisdiction as distinct
from a statutory jurisdiction conferred by any particular
provision in any special statute. In other words, the
employment of the writ of Habeas Corpus in child custody
cases is not pursuant to, but independent of any statute. The
jurisdiction exercised by the court rests in such cases on its
inherent equitable powers and exerts the force of the State,
as parens patriae, for the protection of its minor ward, and
the very nature and scope of the inquiry and the result
sought to be accomplished call for the exercise of the
jurisdiction of a court of equity. The primary object of a
Habeas Corpus petition, as applied to minor children, is to
determine in whose custody the best interests of the child will
probably be advanced. In a Habeas Corpus proceeding
brought by one parent against the other for the custody of
their child, the court has before it the question of the rights
of the parties as between themselves, and also has before it,
if presented by the pleadings and the evidence, the question
of the interest which the State, as parens patriae, has in
promoting the best interests of the child.”
114. The petitioner is a resident of the USA and has acquired
H1B visa via sponsorship and has a good job at Ranstad,
USA. The petitioner is earning handsome salary and has the
resources to provide for a comfortable life to her children in
the USA. The petitioner is comfortably settled in the USA
and is accustomed to different kind of lifestyle, culture,
society, etc.
115. We take notice of the fact that the petitioner worked
very hard to secure admission in the Cleveland State
University and completed her studies with the GPA of more
than 3, while taking care of her children. This is indicative of
the fact that she is a hard working woman and would be in a
position to take good care of her minor children in
accordance with the shared parenting plan.
116. It would be too much for this Court to tell the petitioner
that she may periodically visit India to meet her children but
the children should not be asked to go back to the USA with
their father, i.e. the respondent no.2.
117. In the overall view of the matter, we have reached to the
conclusion that the respondent no.2, at the earliest, should
be directed to go back to the USA with both the minor
children and abide by the shared parenting plan as ordered
by the Court at Ohio. Although, the shared parenting plan as
ordered by the Court at Ohio stood terminated at the
instance of the petitioner-mother, yet the same can be revived
once again by the authorities by going before the concerned
court at Ohio. It is for the parties to take the necessary steps
in this regard. The respondent no.2 shall immediately apply
for the visa on the strength of this order. If the respondent
no.2 is in a position to obtain a job in the USA on the
strength of a work permit or any other document, then it is
well and good. However, we are sure of one thing that it will
be in the interest and welfare of both the children to go back
to the USA for the purpose of their education, etc. The
allegations levelled by the respondent no.2 that the
petitioner suffers from some mental illness appears to be
absolutely wild and reckless. Even otherwise this issue is a
highly disputed question of fact.
118. We would therefore hold that in the case at bar the
dominant consideration to which all other considerations
must remain subordinate must be the welfare of the child.
This is not to say that the question of custody will be
determined by weighing the economic circumstances of the
contending parties. The matter will not be determined solely
on the basis of the physical comfort and material advantages
that may be available in the home of one contender or the
other. The welfare of the child must be decided on a
consideration of these and all other relevant factors,
including the general psychological, spiritual and emotional
welfare of the child. It must be the aim of the Court, when
resolving disputes between the rival claimants for the
custody of a child, to choose the course which will best
provide for the healthy growth, development and education
of the child so that he or she will be equipped to face the
problems of life as a mature adult.
119. We allow this writ petition with the following directions:
(1) The respondent no.2-father shall, within one week
from today, apply to the authority concerned for visa to
travel to the USA with the two minor children.
(2) The concerned authority may keep the observations
made by this Court in the present judgment in mind and,
in the larger interest of the two minor children, consider
grant of visa to the respondent no.2-father. Once the
visa is granted, the respondent no.2 shall, within one
week thereafter, proceed to travel to the USA.
(3) Once the two minor children reach the USA,
thereafter, it will be open for the petitioner-mother to
take care of her children.
(4) We leave it open to the respondent no.2-father to
chalk out his own plan.
(5) If the respondent no.2 wants to stay back in the USA,
it is always open for him to do so in accordance with the
law of the country. If the respondent no.2 decides to
come back to India, then in such circumstances, the
petitioner-mother shall make both the minor children
speak to their father on-line at least once every week.
(6) In any event, if the visa is declined to the respondent
no.2, then in such circumstances, the petitioner-mother
shall travel to India and pick up her two minor children
and go back to the USA. In such an eventuality, the
respondent no.2 and his family members are directed to
fully cooperate and not create any impediment of any
nature. If it comes to the notice of this Court that the
respondent no.2 or any of his family members have
created any impediment for the petitioner-mother, then
the same shall be viewed as the contempt of this Court's
order. In addition, it will be open to the petitioner-
mother to contact the jurisdictional Commissioner/
Superintendent of Police, who shall thereafter ensure
that the custody of the children is immediately/ forthwith
handed over to the petitioner-mother and submit
compliance report in that regard to this Court. In case
of any impediment despite the peremptory direction, the
petitioner-mother may apply for appropriate directions
from this Court, if so advised.
(7) We leave it open for the parties to go back to the
Court at Ohio and revive the shared parenting plan as
was arrived at vide order dated 12th May 2021.
120. Before we close this matter, we would like to convey
to the parties that their two minor children are watching
them very closely. Showing the children that their parents
can respect each other and resolve the conflict respectfully
will give them a good foundation for the conflict that may,
God forbid, arise in their own lives. The parties should try
to do their best to remain relaxed and focused. It is critical
to maintain boundaries between the adult problems and
children. It is of utmost interest to protect the innocence of
children and allow them to remain children. They must not
be burdened by any adult problem. Minor children do not
have the coping skills or the intellectual ability to
understand any issues like the financial constraints, adult
relationship issues or their parents unhappiness.
121. We find the observations made by the Delhi High
Court, in the case of K.G. v. State of Delhi and another,
dated 16.11.2017 in Writ Petition (Criminal) No. 374/2017
and Criminal Miscellaneous Application No. 2007/2017,
quite commendable, that the best welfare of the child,
normally, would lie in living with both his/her parents in a
happy, loving and caring environment, where the parents
contribute to the upbringing of the child in all spheres of
life, and the child receives emotional, social, physical and
material support - to name a few. In a disturbed marriage,
unfortunately, there is bound to be impairment of some of
the inputs which are, ideally, essential for the best interest
of the child.”
In Tejaswini Gaud & others Versus Shekhar Jagdish Prasad
Tewari & others (supra), where the maternal aunt claimed custody over the
child vis-a-vis the respondent-father in the absence of the mother who had
died on account of cancer, the Hon'ble Supreme Court while handing over
custody of the child to the respondent-father held as under:-
“18. Habeas corpus proceedings is not to justify or examine
the legality of the custody. Habeas corpus proceedings is a
medium through which the custody of the child is addressed
to the discretion of the court. Habeas corpus is a prerogative
writ which is an extraordinary remedy and the writ is issued
where in the circumstances of the particular case, ordinary
remedy provided by the law is either not available or is
ineffective; otherwise a writ will not be issued. In child
custody matters, the power of the High Court in granting the
writ is qualified only in cases where the detention of a minor
by a person who is not entitled to his legal custody. In view
of the pronouncement on the issue in question by the
Supreme Court and the High Courts, in our view, in child
custody matters, the writ of habeas corpus is maintainable
where it is proved that the detention of a minor child by a
parent or others was illegal and without any authority of
19. In child custody matters, the ordinary remedy lies only
under the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act or the
Guardians and Wards Act as the case may be. In cases
arising out of the proceedings under the Guardians and
Wards Act, the jurisdiction of the court is determined by
whether the minor ordinarily resides within the area on
which the court exercises such jurisdiction. There are
significant differences between the enquiry under the
Guardians and Wards Act and the exercise of powers by a
writ court which is of summary in nature. What is important
is the welfare of the child. In the writ court, rights are
determined only on the basis of affidavits. Where the court is
of the view that a detailed enquiry is required, the court may
decline to exercise the extraordinary jurisdiction and direct
the parties to approach the civil court. It is only in
exceptional cases, the rights of the parties to the custody of
the minor will be determined in exercise of extraordinary
jurisdiction on a petition for habeas corpus.
20. In the present case, the appellants are the sisters and
brother of the mother Zelam who do not have any authority
of law to have the custody of the minor child. Whereas as per
section 6 of the Hindu Minority and Guardianship Act, the
first respondent-father is a natural guardian of the minor
child and is having the legal right to claim the custody of the
child. The entitlement of father to the custody of child is not
disputed and the child being a minor aged 1½ years cannot
express its intelligent preferences. Hence,in our considered
view, in the facts and circumstances of this case, the father,
being the natural guardian, was justified in invoking the
extraordinary remedy seeking custody of the child under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
25.Welfare      of   the minor    child   is  the   paramount
consideration:-The court while deciding the child custody
cases is not bound by the mere legal right of the parent or
guardian. Though the provisions of the special statutes
govern the rights of the parents or guardians, but the welfare
of the minor is the supreme consideration in cases
concerning custody of the minor child. The paramount
consideration for the court ought to be child interest and
welfare of the child.”
In Rashneet Kaur Versus State of Haryana & others (supra),
where the wife claimed the custody of a girl child from her husband and in-
laws stating that the child had been brought back to India from Australia by
the paternal grand-parents (in-laws) for a short duration and now was not
being returned back to her custody in Australia, this Court while granting
custody to the mother, held as under:-
“16. A perusal of Section 6 of The Hindu Minority and
Guardianship Act, 1956 along with various judgments
(supra) would show that in child custody matters, the
ordinary remedy lies under the Hindu Minority and
Guardianship Act, 1956 and The Guardianship and Wards
Act, 1890 as the case may be. There are significant
differences between an inquiry by the Civil Courts and the
exercise of powers by a Writ Court which is of summary
nature where rights are determined on the basis of affidavits.
Therefore, where the court is of the view that a detailed
inquiry is required the Court may decline to exercise the
extraordinary jurisdiction of a Writ Court and direct the
parties to approach the Civil Court. Therefore, it is only in
exceptional cases, where the rights of the parties to the
custody of the minor will be determined in the exercise of
extraordinary jurisdiction in a petition for Habeas Corpus.
Thus, where in the circumstances of a particular case the
ordinary remedy of the Civil Courts is either not available or
is ineffective a writ of Habeas Corpus is certainly
maintainable, moreso, where it is shown that the detention of
the minor child by a parent or others was illegal, without
any authority of law and was also to the detriment of the
child.
17. Thus it is apparent that the paramount consideration
ought to be the welfare of the child and due weight should be
given to the child's comfort, contentment, health, education,
intellectual development, familiar surroundings etc. The
question of the welfare and interest of a minor child has to
be judged on the consideration of the acknowledged
superiority of the mother's love and affection for her
children. The lap of the mother is a natural cradle where the
safety and welfare of the child can be assured and there is no
substitute for the same. No amount of wealth or mother like
love can substitute for a mother's love and care and,
therefore, maternal care and affection is indispensable for
the healthy growth of a child.
18. In the present case, the girl child, namely, Avneet Turka
was born on 01.08.2017 and is, therefore, less than five
years old. She was brought back to India by respondent no. 7
and 8 on 23.1.2020 after which due to COVID-19 the
petitioner-mother was unable to see her till March 2022.
Therefore, it is apparent that when the child left the company
of the petitioner she was approximately 2½ years old and
spent her growing years in the company of her grandparents
i.e. respondent no. 7 and 8. As per the father, the child had
refused to go with the petitioner at the time when the
petitioner left for her parental home on 28.03.2022. I may
point out here that even if the statement of the father is taken
as the truth that the child had refused to go with the mother,
that by itself does not have any significance as a child of
such tender age does not know what is in her best interest. It
may be reiterated that the child had not met her mother in
two years between January 2020 to March 2022. Apparently,
for the reasons beyond her control the petitioner was unable
to come back to India. The minor girl child may have
developed a bond with the respondent nos.7 & 8 with whom
she is residing for the last more than two years because of
which she might have stated that she does not wish to go
with her mother. However, in the long term for the benefit
and welfare of the child, by no stretch of imagination can it
be said that the welfare of the child would be better taken
care of by the grandparents viz-a-viz the mother. Even
otherwise, in the case of child who is less than 05 years old
(which is the case here) the custody should ordinarily be
with the mother. In fact nothing significant has been pointed
out by the respondent nos.7 & 8 as to why the custody of the
child ought not to be with the mother.
19. So far as the question of sharing the custody of the child
is concerned, the mother is a resident of Australia and so is
the father. The respondent no. 7 and 8 (grandparents of the
child) are residents of India, and, therefore, the statement of
the father that the petitioner and respondent nos.7 & 8 could
share custody is illogical and unreasonable and cannot be
accepted. Issues of the education of the child, her health,
etc., would arise and these are best dealt with by the mother
unless it is shown that the mother is completely incapable of
maintaining the minor child.
20. In view of the above discussion, the present petition is
allowed. Respondent no. 3 & 4 are directed to ensure that
the custody of the minor child, namely Avneet Turka is
handed over by respondent no. 7 and 8 (grandparents) to the
petitioner (mother) immediately. Pursuant thereto, an
affidavit regarding compliance of this order shall be
furnished by respondent no. 3 and 4 to this Court within one
week of the handing over of the custody of minor child to the
petitioner.”
In Poonam Kalsi Versus State of Punjab & others (supra),
where the mother claimed custody of a child from the father, this Court held
that the custody of the father could not be said to be illegal and therefore as
there were disputed questions of fact as to who was in a better position to take
care of the minor child, the parties were free to approach the Civil Court for
the redressal of their grievances. The relevant paragraphs from the judgment
“25. Record reveals that the petitioner filed many complaints
against her husband and in-laws family to the police wherein
the petitioner has levelled allegations of harassment and
beating by her husband, selling of narcotics by her husband
and father-in-law and keeping younger child by husband and
the said complaints have been consigned/filed after enquiry.
Learned Counsel for the private respondents has also placed
on record copy of order dated 22.07.2019 passed by learned
Judge, Special Court, Jalandhar wherein respondent No. 4
i.e. father of the minor child has been acquitted of the
charges under Sections 15 and 25 of the NDPS Act. Also,
respondent No. 4 has filed application before the learned
trial Court seeking custody of elder son namely Khushpreet
Bains who is now residing with the petitioner.
26. It is true that mother being a natural guardian of a minor
child has a preferential right to claim custody of her son.
However, the utmost consideration before this Court is the
well being of the minor and not the legal right of a
particular party. The term guardian has to be taken in its
widest possible sense. It has to be measured not only in
terms of money and physical comfort but also should include
moral and ethical welfare of the child. The term 'custody'
should not be interpreted in its strict sense as physical
custody. Custody means custody in the sense of supervision
and control over the child. The mother's or father's right to
the custody of a their minor child is no longer absolute. It is
circumscribed by the consideration of the welfare of the
minor. The welfare of the child is decisive for the claim of
custody. In case of custody of a minor child, the Court is
expected to strike a just and proper balance between the
requirements of welfare of the minor child and rights of
parents over the minor child. The Court should also take into
consideration the preference of the minor child to stay with
either parent or grand parent.
27. A Division Bench of this Court in its judgment dated
23.05.2019 passed in LPA No.3716 of 2018 in case titled as
'Reetu Verma v. State of Haryana and others', observed as
"The parties are husband and wife, having a minor son
namely Jiyanshu Verma. Admittedly, on account of
matrimonial dispute minor son is in the custody of the
father-respondent, as every time they have appeared before
us, the child has been brought by him. Habeas Corpus
petition was filed by the appellant-wife seeking custody of
the minor child for herself. Learned Single Judge
dismissed the habeas corpus petition on the ground that
the custody of a minor child with a natural guardian
cannot be said to be illegal and relegated the parties to
avail the remedy under the Guardian and Wards Act.
Before this Court innumerable efforts have been made by
us for an amicable settlement between the two, to secure
the interest of the child so that he is not deprived of either
love of father or the mother. On more than two occasions
we interacted with the parties in the Chamber to bring an
amicable settlement but the same failed. Lastly, on the
suggestion of learned counsel appearing for the parties,
we referred the matter to the mediation, where also the
parties have failed to arrive at an amicable settlement.
Since the question of the custody of the minor child and the
welfare of the child being supreme it can only be decided
on the basis of evidence as to which of the two parents are
in a better position to look after the welfare of the child
and a conclusion in respect of same only be arrived at by
way of an evidence.
Hence,in our considered opinion the impugned order and
judgment does not require any interference and it would
be in the interest of justice that the appellant is relegated
to avail the remedy under the Guardian and Wards Act to
seek the custody of the minor child before the appropriate
Court. With this, intra court appeal stands dismissed."
28. Taking into consideration the provisions of law and the
factual matrix which is disputed, I am of the opinion that
custody of the father as a natural guardian cannot be said to
be illegal or unlawful and therefore, it would not be
appropriate to issue a writ of habeas corpus in favour of the
petitioner. In the case of disputed questions of facts, it is a
matter of evidence to be led by both the parties as to which
party will be in a better position to take care of the minor
child which is concededly the paramount consideration.
29. In view of the observations made above, this Court finds
that minor child namely Lovepreet Bains has not been kept
in illegal custody of private respondents. Finding no merit
in the instant petition, the same is dismissed with liberty to
the petitioner to approach an appropriate court under
relevant provisions of law seeking the relief claimed in this
petition.”
In Reetu Verma Versus State of Haryana & others(supra) where
the mother claimed custody of the child from the father, this Court held as
“The parties are husband and wife, having a minor
son namely Jiyanshu Verma. Admittedly, on account of
matrimonial dispute minor son is in the custody of the father-
respondent, as every time they have appeared before us, the
child has been brought by him. Habeas Corpus petition was
filed by the appellant-wife seeking custody of the minor child
for herself. Learned Single Judge dismissed the habeas
corpus petition on the ground that the custody of a minor
child with a natural guardian cannot be said to be illegal
and relegated the parties to avail the remedy under the
Guardian and Wards Act. Before this Court innumerable
efforts have been made by us for an amicable settlement
between the two, to secure the interest of the child so that he
is not deprived of either love of father or the mother. On
more than two occasions we interacted with the parties in
the Chamber to bring an amicable settlement but the same
failed. Lastly, on the suggestion of learned counsel
appearing for the parties, we referred the matter to the
mediation, where also the parties have failed to arrive at an
amicable settlement. Since the question of the custody of the
minor child and the welfare of the child being supreme it can
only be decided on the basis of evidence as to which of the
two parents are in a better position to look after the welfare
of the child and a conclusion in respect of same only be
arrived at by way of an evidence.
Hence, in our considered opinion the impugned order
and judgment does not require any interference and it would
be in the interest of justice that the appellant is relegated to
avail the remedy under the Guardian and Wards Act to seek
the custody of the minor child before the appropriate Court.
With this, intra court appeal stands dismissed.”
[emphasis supplied]
11.           A perusal of the aforementioned judgments would show that the
Court while deciding child custody cases is not bound by the mere legal right
of the parent or guardian. Though the provisions of the special statutes govern
the rights of the parents or guardians, however, the interest and welfare of the
minor is the supreme consideration in cases concerning custody of the minor
child. Due weightage should be given to the child's comfort, health,
education, intellectual development and familiar surroundings. The question
of the interest and welfare of a minor child has to be judged on the
consideration of the acknowledged superiority of the mother's love and
affection for the children. The lap of the mother is a natural cradle where the
safety and welfare of the child can be assured and there is no substitute for the
same. Maternal care and affection is therefore indispensable for the healthy
growth of a child.
12.           What can also be discerned from these judgments (supra) is that
a Writ of Habeas Corpus was certainly maintainable by one parent against
another and it is the principle duty of the Court to ascertain whether the
custody of the child is unlawful or illegal and whether the welfare of the child
requires that his present custody should be changed and be handed over to
13.           The relevant provisions of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 as
referred to by the petitioner’s counsel read as under:-
Section 21 of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017.
“Right to equality and non- discrimination.- (1) Every person
with mental illness shall be treated as equal to persons with
physical illness in the provision of all healthcare which shall
include the following, namely:–
(a) there shall be no discrimination on any basis including
gender, sex, sexual orientation, religion, culture, caste, social
or political beliefs, class or disability;
(b) emergency facilities and emergency services for mental
illness shall be of the same quality and availability as those
provided to persons with physical illness;
(c) persons with mental illness shall be entitled to the use of
ambulance services in the same manner, extent and quality
as provided to persons with physical illness;
(d) living conditions in health establishments shall be of the
same manner, extent and quality as provided to persons with
physical illness; and
(e) any other health services provided to persons with
physical illness shall be provided in same manner, extent and
quality to persons with mental illness.
(2) A child under the age of three years of a woman receiving
care, treatment or rehabilitation at a mental health
establishment shall ordinarily not be separated from her
during her stay in such establishment:
Provided that where the treating Psychiatrist, based on his
examination of the woman, and if appropriate, on information
provided by others, is of the opinion that there is risk of harm
to the child from the woman due to her mental illness or it is
in the interest and safety of the child, the child shall be
temporarily separated from the woman during her stay at the
mental health establishment:
Provided further that the woman shall continue to have
access to the child under such supervision of the staff of the
establishment or her family, as may be appropriate, during the
period of separation.
(3) The decision to separate the woman from her child shall be
reviewed every fifteen days during the woman's stay in the
mental health establishment and separation shall be terminated
as soon as conditions which required the separation no longer
Provided that any separation permitted as per the assessment
of a mental health professional, if it exceeds thirty days at a
stretch, shall be required to be approved by the respective
(4) Every insurer shall make provision for medical insurance
for treatment of mental illness on the same basis as is available
for treatment of physical illness.
14.            Coming back to the facts of the present case, the entire case of
the answering respondent Nos.4 to 6 is that the petitioner is mentally
disturbed and therefore having abandoned the child was not entitled to his
custody. To establish their claim, the respondents have relied upon the
documents Annexure R2 or R1/1 which seem to be suspicious in light of the
conflicting claims of both parties. However, assuming them to be genuine, in
terms of the provisions of the Mental Healthcare Act, 2017, even if the
petitioner was admitted in an institution for care and rehabilitation, even in
such a situation, ordinarily a child under the age of 03 years ought not to be
separated from her during her stay in such an institution. In the present case,
firstly, the petitioner is not staying at any mental health establishment where
she is receiving care or treatment. On the contrary, she is working with a
multinational company namely, TSYS at Noida (currently working from
home at Panchkula) and is qualified as a B.Tech (IT). Therefore, there can be
no justifiable reason to deny her the custody of the child who is barely 02
years and 03 months old. In fact, denial of custody to the petitioner who is
the natural and biological mother of the child would be detrimental to the
mental health of not only the child but the mother as well. It may also be
pertinent to mention here that the bond between a mother and child is hard to
replicate. Therefore, in the case of a mother, specially where the custody
concerns a child less than 05 years old, she ought to be granted custody unless
she is so mentally or physically incapacitated that handing over custody to her
would be physically or mentally detrimental to the health of the child.
In the instant case, from the lengthy pleadings and arguments, the
respondent Nos.4 to 6 have not been able to establish that the petitioner was
so ill that she was in any manner incapable of maintaining the minor child. It
also appears to be a case where the minor child was detained by the
answering respondents when the petitioner left the matrimonial home on
23.07.2022 as was discernible from the complaint dated 26.07.2022
(Annexure R-8) made by the petitioner to the Deputy Commissioner of
15.            In view of the above discussion, the present petition is allowed.
Respondent nos.2 & 3 are directed to ensure that the custody of the minor
child, namely Riaan Shahi is handed over by respondent nos.4 to 6 to the
petitioner (mother) immediately in the presence of the District Program
Officer, Department of Social Security Women and Child Development
Administration Complex, Milkpur Chowk, Pathankot-145025 or any officer
authorised by him and the Civil Surgeon, Civil Hospital, Shahpur Road,
Pathankot-145001 or any doctor authorised by him. Pursuant thereto, an
affidavit regarding compliance of this order shall be furnished by respondent
nos.2 and 3 to this Court within one week of the handing over of the custody
of the minor child Riaan Shahi to the petitioner.
16.            However, it is made clear that the petitioner-wife shall grant
unfettered access to respondent Nos.4 to 6 subject to the convenience of both
the parties and keeping in view the welfare of the child.
17.              The aggrieved party is however at liberty to approach the
appropriate Civil Court if so advised seeking custody of the child and if such
an application was made, the said Court would proceed to decide the same
within a period of 03 months of the filing of such an application uninfluenced
by any observations made herein, which have been made only to decide the
present case.