1.           The petitioner by way of instant writ petition has challenged the
order dated 23.02.2017 passed by respondent No.3 whereby his application
for grant of arms licence has been rejected and the order dated 06.03.2019
passed by respondent No.2 vide which appeal preferred by the petitioner
against the order dated 23.02.2017 also stood dismissed.
2.           In brief, facts as enumerated in the writ petition are that the
petitioner on 24.11.2016 had submitted application before the competent
authority for an arms licence along with certificate of training as well as the
medical report, on which report of the district police was called for by
respondent No.3. Deputy Superintendent of Police Barnala as well as SHO,
P.S. City Barnala vide report dated 14.12.2016 recommended the case of the
petitioner for grant of arms licence, however, respondent No.3 vide order
dated 23.02.2017 rejected the application of the petitioner on the ground that
he has not shown or proved any extra-ordinary ground for grant of arms
licence. The appeal preferred against the aforesaid order before respondent
No.2 also stood dismissed by observing that the petitioner has failed to
CWP No.32495 of 2019(O&M)                                                         -2-
adduce any evidence to prove that his life is in danger and he needs a
weapon for his self-protection and therefore, aggrieved against the same,
petitioner has approached this Court in the instant petition.
3.            Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner would contend that
despite recommendation of Deputy Superintendent of Police, Barnala, the
licensing authority rejected the application of the petitioner in an illegal and
arbitrary manner. It is further contended that the grounds on which the
licensing authority can refuse to grant licence have been laid down in
Section 14 of the Arms Act and while doing so, it is bound to record reasons
for such refusal and since respondent No.3 has refused to grant fire arm
licence to the petitioner on grounds which are not enumerated in Section 14
of the Act, the order rejecting the petitioner's application for grant of licence
is not sustainable at all.
4.            Per contra, learned counsel appearing for the respondent-State
would support the impugned orders by contending that the licensing
authority may refuse grant of licence in case person does not have any threat
perception and relies upon the instructions dated 31.03.2010. The licensing
authority after considering the material before it came to the conclusion that
the petitioner has not shown or proved any extraordinary reason for grant of
arms licence and therefore, there is no infirmity in the orders passed.
5.            Learned counsel for the petitioner in response to the reliance
placed upon the instructions dated 31.03.2010 by the learned counsel
appearing for the State would refer the judgment rendered by a Coordinate
Bench of this Court in CWP No.17265 of 2015 titled as Sisan Pal Vs.
District Magistrate-cum-Deputy Commissioner, Barnala and another
decided on 11.01.2017 wherein while holding that instructions cannot
CWP No.32495 of 2019(O&M)                                                          -3-
override the statutory provisions of law, this Court had set aside the
impugned orders based on the instructions dated 31.03.2010.
6.           I have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused
the paper book. Rule 14 of the Arms Act, 1959 enumerates the grounds on
which the licensing authority can refuse grant of arms licence and the same
is reproduced as under:-
“14. Refusal of licences. (1) Notwithstanding anything in
section 13, the licensing authority shall refuse to grant-
(a) a licence under section 3, section 4 or section 5 where such
licence is required in respect of any prohibited arms or
prohibited ammunition;
(b) a licence in any other case under Chapter II,-
(i) where such licence is required by a person whom the
licensing authority has reason to believe-
(1) to be prohibited by this Act or by any other law for
the time being in force from acquiring, having in his
possession or carrying any arms or ammunition, or
(2) to be of unsound mind, or
(3) to be for any reason unfit for a licence under this Act;
(ii) where the licensing authority deems it necessary for the
security of the public peace or for public safety to refuse to
grant such licence.
(2) The licensing authority shall not refuse to grant any licence
to any person merely on the ground that such person does not
own or possess sufficient property.
(3) Where the licensing authority refuses to grant a licence to
any person it shall record in writing the reasons for such
refusal and furnish to that person on demand a brief statement
of the same unless in any case the licensing authority is of the
opinion that it will not be in the public interest to furnish such
statement.”
7.            A bare perusal of Section 14 would reflect that as per Clause 1
(a) if the application is in contravention to provisions of Section 3, 4 and 5
where such licence is required in respect of any prohibited arms or
prohibited ammunition then it has to be rejected outrightly. Sub-clause (b)
of Clause 1 empowers the licensing authority to dismiss an application when
the applicant who seeks grant of licence is believed by licensing authority:-
a) To be prohibited by any act or any other law from acquiring
or possessing or carrying any arms/ammunition or,
b) to be of unsound mind or,
c) to be for any reason unfit for a licence under this Act; or
d) for the security of the public peace or for public safety.
However, what is relevant to mention is clause (3) of Section 14
where the licensing authority is obliged to record reasons in writing where it
refuses to grant a licence to any person and furnish to that person on demand
a brief statement of the same, however, the supply of said reasons may be
denied in public interest.
8.            A perusal of the impugned order dated 23.02.2017 would reveal
that though the petitioner had a favourable report from the officer in charge
of the nearest police station, the licensing authority rejected the application
of the petitioner on the ground that he has not shown or proved any
extraordinary reason for grant of an arms license. The appeal preferred
by the petitioner against the aforesaid order also stood dismissed by the
appellate authority while stating that the appellant has failed to adduce
any evidence to prove that his life is in danger and he needs a weapon
for self protection. The licensing authority can refuse to grant licence only
on the grounds as enumerated in Section 14 of the Arms Licence Act, which
are reproduced in the preceding paragraphs. It is not in dispute that the
licensing authority may differ with the report so submitted by the incharge
CWP No.32495 of 2019(O&M)                                                      -5-
of the nearest police station but the same ought to be based on an
independent enquiry done by licensing authority as per the provisions of
Section (2A) of Section 13 of the Arms Act and that too, by recording
reasons in writing.      Moreover, the reasons assigned for dismissing an
application for grant of licence cannot be different than the reasons
prescribed under Clause (a) and (b) of Section 14(1). In the instant case, the
reason assigned by the licensing authority and the appellate authority that
there is no evidence to prove that life of the petitioner is in danger and he
needs a weapon for self protection are totally in variance to the report
submitted by the police and therefore, it was incumbent upon the licensing
authority to assign proper and real reasons, which they failed to comply
with.    It is settled law that any instruction/policy cannot override the
statutory provisions and therefore, the reliance upon the instructions dated
31.03.2010 does not serve any purpose.
9.            As an upshot of my findings, the reasons assigned by the
Licencing Authority/Appellate Authority in the impugned orders while
refusing to grant licence to the petitioner do not satisfy the mandatory
requirement of Section 14 (3) of the Arms Act. Therefore, the impugned
orders are quashed and the writ petition stands allowed. The respondents are
directed to reconsider the application of petitioner for grant of arms licence
in accordance with the statutory provision under the Arms Act as explained
above and pass a speaking order within a period of three months from the
date of receipt of certified copy of this order.
Pankaj*                     Whether speaking/reasoned       Yes/No