+               W.P.(C) 10205/2022 and CM APPL. 29513/2022
Through: Mr. Pavan Narang, Sr. Panel counsel,
UOI with Ms. Aishwarya Chhabra,
1.      This hearing has been done through hybrid mode.
2.      Vide the previous order dated 17th August, 2022, specific directions
were given to the Respondent No. 5- MCD in the following terms:
“Consequently, let the MCD take further steps to
ensure that all encroachments existing on the road in
question are removed in accordance with law. MCD
shall file a further affidavit specifically disclosing
W.P.(C) 10205/2022                                                        Page 1 of 4
whether the road in question has been rid of all
encroachments and whether further steps remain to
be taken.
The Court also takes note of the stand of MCD that
it had after undertaking the drive for removal of
encroachments addressed various letters to the
Station House Officer requiring him to ensure that
fresh encroachments are not made. The grievance of
the Corporation is that those communications have
gone unheeded by the concerned SHO.
Mr. Kumar, learned counsel representing the
Station House Officer states that the concerned SHO
shall be duly instructed to provide all assistance to
the MCD as also to ensure that no fresh
encroachments are made once the drive for their
removal is completed by the MCD. Let the concerned
SHO also file its affidavit in these proceedings on or
before the next date fixed.
The Court further observes that both MCD as well
as the local police officials stand placed under a
collective duty and obligation to ensure that public
roads are maintained free of encroachments and
illegal structures. The authorities consequently shall
undertake periodical joint exercises to ensure that the
public road is kept free of encroachments.”
3.      The Court is constrained to observe that there is an unhealthy pattern
of governmental authorities, state departments and corporations not filing
the Counter Affidavits and Status Reports as per the timelines prescribed by
the Court. In the present petition as well, neither the MCD has filed its
affidavit, nor has any affidavit been filed on behalf of the concerned SHO.
Both have only been handed over in the Court today and these are stated to
have been filed on 26th January, 2023 and 28th January, 2023 itself.
4.      It is observed that usually all the governmental authorities, despite
specific directions, are unable to file the affidavits within the specified time
W.P.(C) 10205/2022                                                      Page 2 of 4
schedule and choose to do so only within the same just one or two days
before the date of hearing. It is made clear that costs would be liable to be
imposed, if the time schedule for pleadings fixed by the Court, are not
adhered to.
5.      A perusal of the MCD’s affidavit along with photographs annexed
with the said affidavit, which have been handed over, shows that some
demolition action has been taken by the MCD. As per the said affidavit,
removal of encroachment took place on 25th August, 2022, 26th August,
2022, 27th August, 2022, 28th August, 2022, 29th August, 2022 and 30th
August, 2022 and again on 17th January, 2023 and 19th January, 2023.
6.      The MCD’s stand is that after the said removal of encroachments, the
Assistant Commissioner of Police, (North West) has been issued a letter to
ensure that no further encroachment or illegal construction takes place and a
strict watch is kept.
7.      Mr. Yadav, ld. Counsel appearing on behalf of the Petitioner, on the
other hand, submits that not only has the malba been removed from the area,
but fresh construction is also seen. According to the ld. Counsel for the
Petitioner, all the encroachments have also not been removed.
8.      The order dated 17th August, 2022 is very clear that the MCD and
local police both are placed under collective duty and obligation to ensure
that the public roads are made clear of encroachment and illegal structures.
It is usually seen that even if the demolition or encroachment removal takes
place, the local police does not thereafter, ensure that no fresh
encroachments are made. Moreover, the malba in the area is left lying as it
is which inconveniences the public. Whenever unauthorised construction
and encroachments are removed, cleaning up of the said area is an obligation
W.P.(C) 10205/2022                                                   Page 3 of 4
of the MCD, which they have to undertake without fail. The SHO of the
concerned area would also be responsible to ensure that no further
unauthorised construction is made out after encroachments are removed.
9.      Accordingly, under these circumstances, it is directed that Mr.
along with three to four representatives of the Petitioner association, and the
concerned SHO shall do a joint inspection of the area.
10.     After the said joint inspection, a joint status report shall be filed. This
shall be the last and final opportunity to the Assistant Commissioner,
Keshav Puram Zone, MCD, as also to the concerned SHO to ensure that
there are no more encroachments in the area failing which the action would
be liable to be taken against these officials personally.
11.     At this stage, Ld. Counsel for the MCD submits that further action is
already planned on 9th February, 2023 and 10th February, 2023. Accordingly,
all the encroachments and illegal constructions, pointed out, shall be
removed and a comprehensive status report shall be placed at least one week
before the next date of hearing failing which the concerned Divisional
Commissioner and SHO shall remain present in the Court on the next date of
hearing.
12.     Let the joint inspection take place from 9th February, 2023 at 11:30
13.     List on 10th April, 2023.