o Shri Kishor Singh Goadar, R/o 10, Uparli Bass, Sopra,
o   Jat   Undaniyo      Ki     Dhaniya,         Himmatpura,      Shergarh,
o Meghwalo Ka Bas, Dhaweli, Sirohi, Rajasthan
o Ward No. 19, Dhani Kadwala Ghasipura Kanwat Sikar
o Bangera Ghata Chittorgarh (Raj.)
o Udela Fala Bhekhed Sabla Dungarpur (Raj.)
o Mandir Wala Bera Mata Ka Than Jodhpur (Raj.)
o Budhwari Khurd Bharatpur Khatoti (Raj.)
o Azizpura Gumat Bari Dholpur (Raj.)
o Kayasth Para Bari Dholpur (Raj.)
o Ramagarha Basainabab Saipav Dholpur (Raj.)
o Leela Vihar Colony Dholpur (Raj.)
o Bhvda Gate Deeg Bharatpur (Raj.)
o Ward No. 08, Panchoo, Bikaner (Raj.).
o 2 Kwn, Bikaner Distt. (Raj.).
o Village-Surpura, District Nagaur, Rajasthan.
o Village- Mandwala, District Jalore, Rajasthan.
c Jat, R/o Village Daipur, Tehsil Nawa, District Nagaur
o Ward No. 3, Shiv Nagar Colony, District Dhaulpur,
o Sn Collage, Bada Goan, Bagcholi Khar, District Dholpur,
o Dhani Bura Ki, Tehsil Bansur, District Alwar, Rajasthan.
o Kirdoli Bari, Dehar Ka Bas, Sikar, Rajasthan.
o Bb, Lohawat, Bhalundiyo Ki Dhani, Moolraj Lohawat,
o Kangarh, Parijapgarh, Rajasthan - 312619
o Beranpara, Saradeet, Udaipur, Rajasthan - 313031
o Gurjar Basti Dumartya, Ruvas, Bharatpur, Rajasthan -
o Ward No. 05, Ratoo, Jael, Nagaur, Rajasthan 341023.
o Ward No. 31, Bada Bag Ki Dhani, Khetri Nagar,
o Vaulkhera, Bolkhera, Kaman, Bharatpur, Raj-321022.
o      Ward        11,          Sarsanda,              Antroli,     Khurd,
o 129, Pilaniraste Se Paschimidhani, Nuhand Th. Rajgarh,
o  Bhavaniyo      Ki   Dhani,        Bakharpura,         District   Barmer,
o Bheemsinghpura, Majari Kalan, District Alwar, Rajasthan.
o 66/123, Pratap Nagar, Sheopur Road, Sanganer, Pratap
o Shri Sanwara, Dawal, Sanchore, District Jalor, Rajasthan.
o Rampura, District Jhunjhunu, Rajasthan.
o Ward No 11, Dukiya, District Sikar, Rajasthan.
o Pasta, Teh. Deeg, Distt. Bharatpur, Rajasthan.
o   Nangla    Harsukh,        Nahara         Choth,    Distt.   Bharatpur,
o Ward No. 3, Dabliwas, Sardara, Noorpura, 1 Dbl-A, Distt.
o Tibbi, Govt. Sanskrit School, Distt. Hanumangarh,
o Bedhawari Kalan, Kalru, Distt. Nagaur, Rajasthan.
o Rajorakalan, Distt. Dholpur, Rajasthan.
o Mundi Badi, Mundi Taal, Distt. Churu, Rajasthan.
o Sarno Ka Sara, Nehro Ki Dhani, District Barmer,
o Nya Bansh, Karim Colony, Bari, Dholpur, Rajasthan.
o Sarno Ka Sara, Naharon Ki Dhani, Barmer, Rajasthan.
o Village Dwarikapura, Post Pragpura, Tehsil Kotputli,
o   Ward    No.     13,     3    Ppm,        Gandhelli,    Hanumangarh,
o Astal, Pingors, District Bharatpur, Rajasthan.
o   Ward    No.    11,     Raysinghpura,             Tehsil  Nohar,    Post
o 05 Charanon Ka Mohalla, Anewa, Anewa, Sumer, Pali
o Ward No. 3, Gudha Salt, Gurha Saolt, Nwacity Lag,
o Ward 8, Khicharo Ki Dhani, Village Purohit Ka Bass,
o The. Pahari, Barkhera, Warkhera, Bharatpur.
o Gram Post Budania, District Jhunjhunu.
o Labano Ka Mohalla, Ward 2, Akhepur, Pratapgarh.
o Bhadana (Banaka), Bhadana, Nagaur.
o Khatiyo Ka Bas, Mokala, Nagaur.
o New Colony, Jamun Wala Kua, Lalsot, Dausa.
28. Vikram Singh Yadav s/o Mothuram, Aged About 25 Years,
37. Ritesh Kumar s/o Vijaypal Yadav, Aged About 30 Years,
40. Sandeep Kumar s/o Hari Ram, Aged About 29 Years, R/o
43. Sharvan Kumar s/o Mohar Singh, Aged About 25 Years,
96. Narayan Kumar s/o Shri Shanti Lal Kumhar, Aged About
Ms. Meenaxi Arora, Sr. Adv. assisted by
Mr. R.N. Mathur, Sr. Adv. assisted by
through V.C.
Mr. G.R. Punia, Sr. Adv. assisted by Mr.
Board of Secondary           assisted by Mr. K.S. Lodha, Mr. Pankaj
Education                    Sharma, AAG with Mr. Deepak Chandak,
For NCTE               :     Mr. R.D. Rastogi, ASG through V.C. with
For Res.-UOI           :     Mr. Gaurav Jain, through V.C.
These petitions arise out of common background. They have
been heard together and are being disposed of by this common
judgment.
2.    The petitions can be divided into two groups.                     Civil Writ
Petition No.6587/2021 filed by Mukesh Kumar Royal and others
and connected petitions          call     in question          the vires  of  the
notification dated 28.06.2018 issued by the National Council for
Teacher Education (‘NCTE’, for short), by which the B.Ed. degree
holders, subject to certain conditions, are made eligible for
appointment to the post of primary school teacher grade-III
(level-1) (classes-I to V), along with other qualifications already
prescribed under its notification dated 23.08.2010 as amended
from time to time. The writ petition No.2108/2021 filed by Sunita
and other connected petitions are filed by the B.Ed. degree
holders. They support the notification dated 28.06.2018 and have
challenged the advertisement issued by the Board of Secondary
Education, State of Rajasthan inviting applications for Rajasthan
Eligibility Entrance Test (‘REET’, for short) (level-1) in which the
B.Ed. degree holders are excluded.
3.    In brief, the controversy revolves around the question
whether the NCTE had correctly and legally included B.Ed. as
essential qualification for eligibility for appointment to the post of
primary school teacher (level-I).            The petitioner Mukesh Kumar
Royal   and   others    were      qualified         as     per the   unamended
notification.   They possess the basic educational qualification
(Higher Secondary Examination pass) and the certificate of
Diploma in Elementary Education (D.El.Ed.) pass. They argue that
B.Ed. course per se cannot be stated to be a higher qualification.
According to them even the Ministry of HRD and NCTE have
viewed the situation in this manner.                It is, therefore, that while
including B.Ed. degree as one of the eligibility criteria, the
notification dated 28.06.2018 provides that such a candidate upon
appointment shall have to pass a bridge course of six months
within two years of the appointment. Counter petitioners Sunita
and others contend that this amendment is proper and legal and
the state government had no authority to ignore this additional
qualification prescribed by NCTE while declaring the REET. It is a
common ground that REET result is the source for appointment for
the primary teachers in the State.
4.    In order to appreciate the controversy, we may note in brief
the factual background as well as the statutory framework. Article
21A was inserted in the Constitution by Constitution (Eighty-sixth
Amendment) Act, 2002 with effect from 01.04.2010 which
provides that the State shall provide free and compulsory
education to all children of the age of 6 to 14 years in such
manner as the State may, by law, determine.                     Long before the
amendment of the Constitution and insertion of Article 21A, the
right to primary education was recognized as a fundamental right
being part of Article 21 by the Supreme court in the cases of
Mohini Jain vs. State of Karnataka [(1992) 3 SCC 666] and
in the case of Unni Krishnan J.P. vs. State of Andhra Pradesh
[(1993) 1 SCC 645]. With the insertion of Article 21A, this right
was recognized as an independent fundamental right in the
Constitution. To operationalise this valuable right, the Parliament
framed the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
Act, 2009 (‘RTE Act’, for short).               The term ‘school’ has been
defined in Section 2(n) as to mean any recognized school
imparting elementary education and would include the schools
established, owned or controlled by the appropriate Government
or a local authority, schools receiving aid and even unaided
schools.    Clause (g) of Section 8 of the RTE Act, pertaining to
duties of appropriate Government, requires that the appropriate
Government shall ensure good quality elementary education
conforming to the standards and norms specified in the Schedule.
Section 18 requires compulsory recognition of all schools. Section
19 of the RTE Act pertains to norms and standards for school.
Sub-section (1) of Section 19 provides that no school shall be
established or recognized under Section 18, unless it fulfills the
norms and standards specified in the Schedule. The Schedule lists
norms and standards for the schools imparting education for the
classes-I to V. There are different prescriptions for the number of
teachers for this section as compared to classes-VI to VIII.
5.   Section 23 of the RTE Act, which is of considerable
importance pertains to qualifications for appointment and terms
and conditions of service of teachers and reads as under:
“23. Qualifications for appointment and terms and
conditions of service of teachers—
(1) Any person possessing such minimum qualifications,
as laid down by an academic authority, authorised by
the Central Government, by notification, shall be
eligible for appointment as a teacher.
(2) Where a State does not have adequate institutions
offering courses or training in teacher education, or
teachers possessing minimum qualifications as laid
down under sub-section (1) are not available in
sufficient numbers, the Central Government may, if it
deems necessary, by notification, relax the minimum
qualifications required for appointment as a teacher, for
such period, not exceeding five years, as may be
Provided     that       a      teacher          who, at   the
commencement of this Act, does not possess minimum
qualifications as laid down under sub-section (1), shall
acquire such minimum qualifications within a period of
[Provided further that every teacher appointed or
in position as on the 31st March, 2015, who does not
possess minimum qualifications as laid down under sub-
section (1), shall acquire such minimum qualifications
within a period of four years from the date of
commencement of the Right of Children to Free and
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the
terms and conditions of service of, teachers shall be
such as may be prescribed.”
6.    As per Sub-section (1) of Section 23, thus a person
possessing such minimum qualifications as laid down by an
academic authority authorised by the Central Government shall be
eligible for appointment as a teacher. Sub-section (2) of Section
23, empowers the Central Government to relax such minimum
qualifications under certain circumstances subject to conditions.
We would make a detailed reference to this Section at a later
7.    Chapter-V of the RTE Act pertains to curriculum and
completion of elementary education. Section 29 contained in the
said part pertains to curriculum and evaluation procedure, and it
“29. Curriculum and evaluation procedure.—(1)
The curriculum and the evaluation procedure for
elementary education shall be laid down by an
academic authority to be specified by the appropriate
Government, by notification.
(2) The academic authority, while laying down the
curriculum and the evaluation procedure under
sub-section (1), shall take into consideration the
(a) conformity with the values enshrined in the
(b) all round development of the child;
(c) building up child's knowledge, potentiality and
(d) development of physical and mental abilities to
(e) learning through activities, discovery and
exploration in a child friendly and child-centered
(f) medium of instructions shall, as far as
practicable, be in child's mother tongue;
(g) making the child free of fear, trauma and anxiety
and helping the child to express views
(h) comprehensive and continuous evaluation of
child's understanding of knowledge and his or her
ability to apply the same.”
8.    Last section to be noted from the RTE Act is Section 35
contained in Chapter-VII of Miscellaneous provisions and reads
“35. Power to issue directions.—(1) The Central
Government may issue such guidelines to the
appropriate Government or, as the case may be, the
local authority, as it deems fit for the purposes of
implementation of the provisions of this Act.
(2) The appropriate Government may issue guidelines
and give such directions, as it deems fit, to the
local authority or the School Management Committee
regarding implementation of the provisions of this
(3) The local authority may issue guidelines and give
such directions, as it deems fit, to the School
Management Committee regarding implementation of
the provisions of this Act.”
9.    Sub-section (1) of Section 35 of the RTE Act, as noted
above, empowers the Central Government to issue such guidelines
to appropriate Government or the local authority, as it deems fit
for the purpose of implementation of the provisions of the Act.
Under Sub-section (2) of Section 35, the appropriate Government
may issue guidelines and give directions, as it deems fit, to the
local authority or the school management committee regarding
implementation of the provisions of this Act.                    Under Sub-section
(3) of Section 35, the local authority may issue such guidelines
and directions as it deems fit to the school management
10.    It is not in dispute that the Central Government has notified
the NCTE as the ‘academic authority’ for the purposes of Sub-
section (1) of Section 23 as well as Sub-section (1) of Section 29
of the RTE Act. In terms of Sub-section (1) of Section 23, thus, it
is the NCTE which has the authority to prescribe the minimum
eligibility qualifications for appointment as a teacher.                   Likewise,
the NCTE is authorised in terms of Sub-section (1) of Section 29
to   lay    down   the    curriculum         and      evaluation     procedure    for
elementary education. It may be noted that the NCTE has been
constituted under the National Council for Teacher Education Act,
1993 (‘NCTE ACT’, for short). In its original form, the preamble to
the NCTE Act provided that it was an Act to provide for
establishment of NCTE with a view to achieving planned and co-
ordinated      development        of     the      teacher        education   system
throughout the country, the regulations and proper maintenance
of norms and standards in the teacher education system and for
matters connected therewith. By Amendment Act 18 of 2011 with
effect from 01.06.2012 the words “including qualifications of
school     teachers”   were      inserted       in     the     preamble.     Similar
amendments were made in the Act and the applicability of the Act
as provided in Sub-section (4) of Section 1 of the NCTE Act, was
expanded      to schools      imparting         pre-primary,        primary, upper
primary education.        The functions of the NCTE as contained in
Section 12 were expanded to include laying down of guidelines in
respect of minimum qualifications for a persons to be employed as
a teacher in recognized institutions.              Section 12A was inserted
with effect from 01.06.2012, which provides that for the purpose
of maintaining standards of education in schools, the NCTE may,
by regulations, determine the qualifications of persons for being
recruited as teachers in any pre-primary, primary, upper primary,
secondary, senior secondary or intermediate school or college, by
whatever names called, established, run, aided or recognised by
the Central Government or a State Government or a local
authority or other authority.        First proviso, while protecting the
existing teachers, was subject to further proviso, which provides
that the minimum qualifications of a teacher shall be acquired
within the period specified in the NCTE Act or under the RTE Act.
11.   Section 29 of the NCTE Act pertains to directions by the
Central Government. Sub-section (1) of Section 29 provides that
the NCTE shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under
this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the
Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time.
Sub-section (2) of Section 29 provides that the decision of the
Central Government as to whether a question is one of policy or
not shall be final.
12.   Section 32 of the NCTE Act gives power to the NCTE to frame
regulations. As per Sub-section (1) of Section 32, the NCTE may,
by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made
thereunder, generally to carry out the provisions of this Act. Sub-
section (2) of Section 32 which provides that in particular, and
without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such
regulations may provide for all or any of the following matters,
namely those contained in various sub-clauses of the said Sub-
section, which was amended by insertion of Clause (dd) pertaining
to the minimum qualifications of teachers under Section 12A.
13.   Section 33 of the NCTE Act requires the rules and regulations
framed by the NCTE to be laid before the Parliament, which reads
“33. Rules and regulations to be laid before
Parliament.—Every rule and every regulation made
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which
may be comprised in one session or in two or more
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the
session immediately following the session or the
successive sessions aforesaid, both House agree in
making any modification in the rule or regulation, or
both House agree that the rule or regulation should
not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter
have effect only in such modified form or be of no
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice
to the validity of anything previously done under
that rule or regulation.”
14.   The NCTE in exercise of powers under Sub-section (1) of
Section 23 of the RTE Act had issued a notification dated
23.08.2010 prescribing minimum qualifications for a person to be
eligible for appointment as teacher in classes-I to VIII in a school
referred to in Clause (n) of Section 2 of the RTE Act. Clause (1) of
this notification pertains to minimum qualifications. Sub-clause (i)
prescribed minimum qualifications classes-I to V. This recognized
persons with senior secondary or equivalent with diploma in
elementary education (which is, as noted, is called D.El.Ed.) by
whatever name called or senior secondary passed with prescribed
percentage and 4 years Bachelor of Elementary Education and 2
year Diploma in Education as qualified for appointment provided
they    possess   Teacher     Eligibility       Test      passed certificate as
conducted in accordance with the guidelines framed by the NCTE.
In contrast, for classes-VI to VIII, as per this notification a
candidate must possess degree in B.A. or B.Sc. with Diploma in
Elementary Education or such degree with minimum 50% marks
with one year B.Ed. course and such similar qualifications.
15.   The notification dated 23.08.2010 was amended by the NCTE
vide notification dated 29.07.2011.                Certain modifications were
made in the essential qualifications for appointment of a teacher
for classes-I to V as well as classes-VI to VIII. We are not directly
concerned with these changes brought about by the subsequent
notification dated 29.07.2011.            The entire controversy revolves
around the notification dated 28.06.2018 issued by NCTE making
certain amendments in the earlier notification dated 23.08.2010,
as amended vide notification dated 29.07.2011.                       Since this
notification is at the center of controversy, we may reproduce the
F. No. NCTE-Regl 012/16/2018- In exercise of
the powers conferred by sub-section (1) of Section 23
of Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education
Act. 2009 (35 of 2009) and in pursuance of notification
number S.O. 750(E), dated the 31st March, 2010
issued by the Department of School Education and
Literacy, Ministry of Human Resource Development,
Government of India, the National Council for Teacher
Education (NCTE) hereby makes the following further
amendments to the notification number F.N. 61-
03/20/2010/NCTE/(N&S), dated the 23rd August, 2010
published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part
III, Section 4, dated the 25 th August, 2010, hereinafter
referred to as the said notification namely:-
(1) In the said notification, in para 1 in sub-para (i),
in clause (a) after the words and brackets “Graduation
and two year Diploma in Elementary Education (by
whatever name known), the following shall be
“Graduation with at least 50% marks and
Bachelor of Education (B.Ed.)”
2. In the said notification in para 3, for sub-para(a),
the following sub-para shall be substituted namely:-
“(a) who has acquired the qualification of
Bachelor of Education from any NCTE recognized
institution shall be considered for appointment
as a teacher in classes I to V provided the person
so appointed as a teacher shall mandatorily
undergo a six month Bridge Course in Elementary
Education recognized by the NCTE, within two
years of such appointment as primary teacher.”
16.   The petitioners, who are opponents of this notification
particularly in the case of Mukesh Kumar Royal and others sought
information from the NCTE and Ministry of Human Resources
Development under the Right to Information Act, 2005 (‘RTI Act’,
for short) as to the manner in which the decision to make
amendments in the eligibility criteria was arrived at by NCTE.
Through this process, they have brought on record certain
documents and information, which need to be noted. It appears
that on 30.05.2018 the Ministry of HRD had written to NCTE
requiring the NCTE to amend the eligibility criteria for primary
school teacher in classes-I to V as to include any person, who has
acquired qualification of B.Ed. from a recognized institute provided
the person so appointed shall compulsorily undergo a six month
bridge course, which may be recognized by NCTE and such course
would have to be completed within two years of appointment. This
communication is also being challenged by the petitioners.                 It
would be useful to take note of the contents thereof:
Ministry of School Education & Liferary
Kindly refer to the letter of even no dated
12.04.2018 regarding request of Kendriya Vidayalaya
Sangathan for recruiting primary teachers with higher
qualification i.e. B.A./B.Sc. B.ed. Plus TET pass and
letter no. NCTE-REG1012/16/2018-IJS (Regulation)-HQ
dated 23.05.2018 received from NCTE regarding the
2.    The above request has been considered in the
ministry, to order to safeguard the interest of the
students and ensure the quality of education, the
competent authority has decided to agree to the request
of KVS to recruit Primary Teacher with Higher
Qualification. The insufficient number of eligible D.EI.Ed.
candidates due to tow pass percentage of TET
examination has also become as issue for recruitment of
primary teacher. Further, with the roll out of four year
B.Ed. Integrated course from next academic year, the
existing D.EI.E.D./B.Ed. Course will be phased out is
due course of time.
3.    NCTE        vide        their          letter       No.   NCTE-
REG1012/16/2018-IJS                   (Regulation)-HQ            dated
23.05.2018 stated that the MHRD may consider
implementing the directions in the detailed noting of
Hon’ble Minister of Human Resource Development
Government of India. Further in view of the fact
presented by the commissioner, KV and since the NCTE
did not have any objection to permit KV schools to
recruit primary teachers with higher qualifications, then
there should be no objection to standing the to other
schools. Therefore considering the powers vested
in MHRD Under Section 29 of the NCTE Act 1993.
The NCTE regulation 25.08.2010 (determining of
teacher to be appointed at primary level class 1 st
to 5th) shall be amended to include that any
person who has acquired the qualification of
B./Ed. from any NCTE recognised course will also
be considered for appointment as a teacher in
classes 1st to 5th provided the person so appointed
as a teacher shall mandatory undergo a 6 month
bridge course, which is recognised by NCTE,
within two years of such appointment as primary
4.    It is therefore requested that the draft qualification
to amend the NCTE regulation may please be submitted
to this Ministry. This may please be treated as most
17.   The petitioner Mukesh Kumar Royal had raised certain
queries under the RTI Act, which were replied on 23.03.2021, in
which it was provided that the bridge course had till then not been
designed, however, a committee had been constituted to develop
the norms and standards for six months bridge course and the
report was awaited.
18.   Again through the means of RTI, the petitioners sought
further information regarding deliberations, which took place
before the impugned amendments were notified.                        Along with an
order dated 28.10.2020 the appellate authority under the RTI Act
provided certain internal documents, one of them was the minutes
of the meeting dated 09.04.2018 of the officials of MHRD,
according    to  which,    the     Kendriya         Vidhyala       Sangathan    had
informed the Ministry that up to the year 2011-2012 candidates
having professional qualification of B.Ed. were also eligible for
appointment in K.V.S. schools.             However, from the year 2012-
2013, in compliance with the guidelines of NCTE, K.V.S. did not
allow those candidates to be appointed.                        It was noted that
sufficient number of candidates having the eligibility qualifications
were not available, which adversely affected the quality in
selection of teachers.        It was recorded that the competent
authority had given conditional approval to the K.V.S. to appoint
primary teachers with higher qualification of BA, B.Sc. or B.Ed, in
case sufficient number of D.El.Ed. candidates are not available. It
was, therefore, suggested that it would not be appropriate to
remove first condition and the K.V.S. can decide as it is an
autonomous body and competent to decide such matter. In short,
the suggestion was not to include the B.Sc., B.A. or B.Ed. teachers
in the eligibility criteria at par with other educational qualifications
but to allow K.V.S. to expand the zone of consideration by
including such qualifications, in case without inclusion of such
candidates, it was not possible to fill up the posts. Significantly,
these deliberations were with respect to K.V.S. schools alone.
When this note was placed before the Hon’ble Minister of HRD, he
placed detailed note expressing his opinion as under:
“There are DL.ED. colleges is few states. Therefore,
applications for primary teachers come from limited
states. B.Ed. is a post graduate degree. They are ready
to serve as Primary Teachers. So we get best more
1. When more educated teachers are available why
students should not get benefit of better qualified
teachers, therefore, we must allow B.Ed. teachers.
2. Second issue is pedagogical for primary teacher
which is available in DL.Ed. & not in B.Ed. course. The
member has been found by teaching one specific model
through Swayam & contact programmer also. Thus, it
is very clear that students have the right to have better
teachers B.Ed. are more equipped as it is graduate +,
1. Dl.Ed. will continue to the eligible to apply for
Primary teacher post.
2. Additionally, B.Ed. pass candidates will be also
eligible to apply.
3. When, Dl.Ed. candidates is selected they can start
teaching after formalities.
4. When B.Ed. candidate are selected, they will start
teaching but will have to complete pedagogical module
5. Thus Dl.Ed. & B.Ed. Candidates can apply for the job
of Primary teacher in KV.
Selected B.Ed. candidates will have to complete
pedagogical module in 2 years of appointment.”
19.    According to the Minister, thus B.Ed. should be recognized as
an additional qualification and not an alternative qualification for
appointment to primary school teachers.                      However, this opinion
also was confined to K.V.S. schools alone.
20.    Shri   R.D.  Rastogi,     learned        Additional       Solicitor General
appearing      for  the    NCTE        had       placed       before    us  further
correspondence, which took place between NCTE and MHRD in this
regard.     These documents are taken on record.                         Perusal of
these documents would show that after the Minister put his
remarks on 11.04.2018, MHRD wrote to NCTE pointing out that
the Minister has directed the NCTE to amend the qualifications and
make B.Ed. also an eligibility for teaching primary level with a
proviso of passing the module within two years of joining the
service. We also note that in a meeting held on 28.05.2018 the
officials   of   MHRD     and      Minister        concerned       discussed    and
deliberated the issues and decided to recognize B.Ed. degree
course as an additional eligibility criteria for appointment to the
post of primary school teachers in classes-I to V.                    The relevant
portion of the minutes of this meeting reads as under:
“File was called for.
Kendriya Vidalaya Sangathan Vide letter No. F.
11054/3/KVS(HQ)/RPS dated 18.05.2016 requested
National Bank Council For Teacher Education to allow
KVS to recruit Primary Teachers with higher
qualification than prescribed by National Council for
Teacher Education i.e. graduation with 50% marks
and B.Ed.
2.    The matter was considered in this Ministry and
HRM has approved the proposal of KVS to recruit
primary teacher with higher qualification (i.e.
B.A./B.Sc., B.Ed.+TET). Further, HRM has also
directed that NCTE may amend the qualification and
make B.A./B.Sc., B.Ed. also eligible for teaching at
Primary level with provision of completing Pedagogical
module in 2 years of joining the service, these
directions were conveyed to NCTE on 12.04.2018,
however, the action is still pending at their part.
3.     The matter was again discussed and deliberated
in detail in the meeting held today(28th May, 2018)
chaired by HRM and attended by Special Secretary,
and KVS Commissioner. KVS Commissioner raised the
issues of insufficient number of candidates applying for
the post of Primary teachers and candidates applying
from few states rather than across the country. It was
informed by MS, NCTE that approximately 7.5 lakh
seat are available for D.El.Ed across the country out of
which 50% seats are filled. However, the TET pass
D.El.Ed. candidate would be much less as the result of
TET varies from 6% to 16%. This makes the
availability of eligible D.El.Ed. candidates much less
than the desired. HRM also pointed out the need for
better equipped teachers to ensure quality education
in schools. Recruitment of Teachers with higher
qualifications will ultimately be beneficial and in the
interest of the students.
4.     In addition to above, NCTE will roll out four year
B.Ed. integrated course from next academic year,
therefore, the prevalent D.El.Ed./B.Ed. etc will phase
out in time bound manner. Further, similar kind of
request has also been from the state of Uttrakhand.
5.     In view of the above discussions, HRM directed
NCTE to change its regulations, Directions are required
to be given under section 29 of the NCTE Act, 1993.
Section 29 of the NCTE Act is as follows:
(1) The Council shall in the discharge of its functions
and duties under this Act be bound by such directions
on questions of policy as the Central Government may
give in writing to it from time to time.
(2) The decision of the Central Government as to
whether a question is one of policy or not shall be
final.
6.     We may request NCTE to submit draft notification
to amend NCTE regulations at the earliest. The draft
letter is attached for approval please. Once the draft
notification is received, the same will be sent to
Legislative Department for vetting with the approval of
21.  This decision was summed up in a note dated 29.05.2018,
“Please place on file the latter from NCTE which was
handed over to the HRM by the MS, NCTE during the
meeting, the details of which have been referred to in
the draft reply. The meeting clearly took the decision
that in view of the facts presented by the
Commissioner, KV and since the NCTE did not have any
objection to permit KV schools to recruit primary
teachers with higher qualifications, then there should
be no objection to extending this to other schools, and
therefore, this Ministry could issue directions to the
NCTE under Section 29.”
22.   The State Government holds a belief that such amendment
was unconstitutional and could not have been thrust on the State.
Ignoring such amendment, the State Government issued an
advertisement dated 11th January, 2021 inviting applications for
REET aspirants. This advertisement did not recognize B.Ed degree
holders as eligible for appearing in the test. In such scenario, the
petitioner Mukesh Kumar Royal and others, who are non-B.Ed.
degree holders have challenged the NCTE notification dated
28.06.2018 Out of caution, they have also challenged the
communication dated 30.05.2018 from MHRD to NCTE. The
petitioner Sunita and others have supported the amendment and
challenged the advertisement issued by the State Government
inviting   applications    for    REET.       The       State   Government    has
supported the petitioners who have challenged the notification
23.   In such background, learned counsel appearing for the
challengers of the notification dated 28.06.2018 including learned
Advocate General appearing for the State Government have raised
(i)    B.Ed. qualification is not a higher qualification than D.El.Ed.
and therefore, cannot be automatically included as eligibility
criteria.
(ii)   Under Sub-section (1) of Section 23 of the RTE Act, the
authority for prescribing the qualifications for appointment
as primary teachers lies with the NCTE. The Ministry of HRD
had no authority to give any direction in this respect.
(iii)  By virtue of the impugned notification, the candidates who
are ineligible for appointment are made eligible subject to
acquiring eligibility which is not permissible and in any case,
is opposed to the basic idea of the responsibility of the State
to provide quality primary education flowing from Article 21A
of the Constitution.
(iv)   Even under the NCTE Act, MHRD has power only to give
directions in relation to the policy matters. The question of
prescribing eligibility criteria for appointment as teachers is
exclusively within the domain of NCTE and it is not a policy
matter in which the MHRD can have any say.
(v)    In terms of Section 35 of the NCTE Act any regulations
framed by NCTE have to be placed before the Parliament for
its approval, which has not been done in the present case.
(vi)   The eligibility criteria could not have been modified without
amending the notification dated 12.11.2014 in which such
minimum qualifications have been prescribed.
(vii) It was contended that the power to relax the minimum
qualifications were exercised without sufficient material
available on record justifying exercise of such powers. It was
argued that in the State of Rajasthan, there are large
number of D.El.Ed. Pass candidates who are qualified for
appointment as primary school teachers (classes I to V).
Without examination of such data, the B.Ed. degree holders
are made eligible.
(viii) It was contended that the entire exercise before the Ministry
of HRD was in relation to the request of the KVS to recognize
B.Ed. degree as an alternative qualification, the source to be
tapped when sufficient number of qualified candidates are
not available. This was also the view of the officials of MHRD.
The Minister alone over-ruled this suggestion and required
that B.Ed. may be recognized as additional qualification and
that such decision may be projected across all schools in the
country.
(ix)    It was argued by the learned Advocate General that the
primary education is part of the Concurrent List in Schedule
VII to the Constitution and under Article 309, it is the power
of the State Government to make appointments to the posts
created under the State Government. The Union Government
while framing regulations contrary to the RTE Act and Rules
framed thereunder, had usurped the power of the State
Government to make appointment of qualified persons in the
posts created under the State Government.
24.    On the other hand, the learned counsel for NCTE and the
petitioners, who have supported the NCTE notification dated
28.06.2018 have raised the following contentions:-
(i) The powers are exercised under Sub-section (1) of Section
23 and not under Sub-section (2) of Section 23 of the RTE
Act. It is therefore not necessary to examine the data in
different States.
(ii) The Ministry of HRD had the powers to give directions to the
NCTE in relation to the policy matters. Essentially the
educational qualification for appointment as primary teacher
is an important policy issue.
(iii) After due deliberations the MHRD formed a view that B.Ed.
degree should be recognized as an additional qualification
subject to passing the bridge course.
(iv) In policy matters, particularly in the area of technical fields
such as education, the Court would not substitute its wisdom
for that of the authorities duly empowered under the Statute
and aided by experts in the field.
(v) It was contended that the sufficiency of the materials before
the Ministry for forming final opinion is not subject to judicial
review. In any case, after full deliberations, the authority had
come to the conclusion that the B.Ed. degree should be
recognized as an additional qualification. It was pointed out
that such qualification was recognized till the year 2012.
(vi) It was contended that the earlier decisions of the Courts
holding that B.Ed. is not a higher qualification were rendered
in different background. If eventually the rule making
authority was of the opinion that a person holding B.Ed.
degree was just as qualified to impart education in primary
schools (classes-I to V), the Court would not over-rule such
matured decision arrived at after due deliberations.
(vii) It was contended that not placing the regulations before the
Parliament would not vitiate them since the provision under
Section 35 of the NCTE Act, merely requires such regulations
to be placed before the Parliament and does not attach any
adverse consequences if this procedural requirement is not
followed.
(viii)It was argued that the purpose of constituting NCTE was
principally for coordinated development of teacher education
system across the country and the dominant purpose for
constitution of NCTE was not for laying down qualifications
for school teachers.
25.   Both sides    have relied upon and referred to various
judgments, reference to which will be made at appropriate stages.
26.   As noted above, the NCTE has been authorized by the
Central Government for the purposes of Sub-section (1) of Section
23 as well as Sub-section (1) of Section 29 of the RTE Act. Sub-
section (1) of Section 23 pertains to minimum qualifications that a
person must possess for eligibility for appointment as a teacher,
whereas Sub-section (1) of Section 29 pertains to curriculum and
evaluation procedure for elementary education to be laid down by
the academic authority. The issues of eligibility for appointment as
a teacher and the curriculum and evaluation procedure for
elementary education are closely connected and interlinked. It is
possibly for this reason, that in its wisdom, the Government of
India has recognized NCTE as an academic authority for both the
purposes. While exercising such powers, the NCTE evolves
important criteria and guidelines for setting the curriculum and
evaluation   procedure     for    elementary           education  as  well  as
prescribing minimum qualification for appointment as a teacher.
27.   Sub-section (1) of Section 23 thus authorizes NCTE as an
academic authority duly notified by the Central Government for
prescribing minimum qualifications for appointment as a teacher.
The power and authority thus exclusively vests in NCTE. Sub-
section (2) of Section 23 is a special provision under which the
Central Government retains its authority to relax the qualifications
for appointment as a teacher under certain circumstances. As per
this provision where a state does not have adequate institutions
offering courses or training in teacher education or teachers
possessing minimum qualifications as laid down under Sub-section
(1)   are  not   available     in    sufficient        numbers,   the  Central
Government may, if it deems necessary, relax the minimum
qualifications for appointment as a teacher for such period not
exceeding 5 years as may be specified in the notification. First
proviso of Sub-section (2) of Section 23 provides that a teacher
who at the commencement of the Act does not possess minimum
qualifications as laid down in Sub-section (1) shall acquire such
qualification within a period of 5 years. Further proviso to Sub-
section (2) provides that every teacher appointed or in position as
on 31.03.2015, who does not possess minimum qualifications as
laid down under Sub-section (1) shall acquire such minimum
qualification within a period of 4 years from the date of
commencement of RTE (Amendment) Act 2017.
28.   Analysis of Sub-section (2) of Section 23 would thus show
that the Central Government has the power to relax the
qualifications laid down for appointment of the teacher where
adequate number of institutions offering courses or training in
teacher education or teachers possessing minimum qualifications
in a state are not available. Such powers are in the nature of
relaxation to the essential qualifications that may be prescribed
under Sub-section (1) of Section 23. In the main body of Sub-
section (2) and the first and second proviso thereto reference is to
the qualifications laid down under Sub-section (1). The emphasis
is on the person to be appointed as a teacher to possess the
qualification prescribed under Sub-section (1) of Section 23 which
can be relaxed subject to fulfillment of conditions as provided.
Thus, there is a clear distinction between the powers to be
exercised under Sub-section (1) of Section 23 which are vested in
the NCTE and those that can be exercised by the Central
Government under Sub-section (2) of Section 23 of relaxing the
standards laid down by NCTE under Sub-section (1) of Section 23.
29.    With this clarity if we revert back to the materials on record,
it would emerge that the entire exercise has been undertaken
initially by the MHRD and thereafter by the NCTE as one under
Sub-section (1) of Section 23 of the RTE Act. In fact, the learned
Additional Solicitor General Shri Rastogi had repeatedly argued
before us that the powers are exercised by NCTE under Sub-
section (1) of Section 23 and not Sub-section (2) of Section 23. If
we proceed on such basis, immediate question of the authority of
the Central Government to mandate the NCTE to make a certain
change would arise. The RTE Act does not give power to the
Central Government to give any such directions to the NCTE. We
have reproduced Section 35 of the RTE Act which are in the nature
of powers of the Central Government and other authorities to
issue directions under Sub-section (1) of Section 35. The Central
Government has the power to issue guidelines to the appropriate
Government       or   the    local      authority          for  the  purpose    of
implementation of the provisions of the Act. Local authority has
been defined under clause (h) of Section 2 as to mean a Municipal
Corporation or Municipal Council or Zila Parishad or Nagar
Panchayat or Panchayat, by whatever names called and to include
such authority or body having administrative control over the
force to function as local authority. Thus, the power of the Central
Government to issue guidelines under Sub-section (1) of Section
35 of the RTE Act does not extend to the NCTE as an academic
authority notified under Sub-section (1) of Section 23 of the RTE
Act. A reference of-course was made to Section 29 of the NCTE
Act for such purpose.       Under Sub-section (1) of Section 29, the
NCTE shall in discharge of its functions and duties under the Act
be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central
Government may give in writing to it from time to time. However,
in our opinion, the Central Government cannot trace the source of
the power to give such directions to the NCTE in exercise of its
power under Sub-section (1) of Section 23 of the RTE Act. The
primary source of the powers of the NCTE to frame regulations
prescribing    the   minimum         qualifications          for appointment    of
teachers is in Sub-section (1) of Section 23. In exercise of such
powers, the NCTE is not to be guided or be bound by any directive
that the Central Government may issue. We do not find any such
powers retained by the Central Government under the RTE Act. In
plain terms therefore, the Ministry of HRD could not have
mandated the NCTE to make the amendments in question. It is
beyond dispute that the amendment is not the original work of
NCTE. In fact, the opinion of the NCTE was that B.Ed. may be
recognized as an alternative qualification for the purpose of KVS,
where adequate number of otherwise qualified candidates are in
short supply. Over-ruling such opinion of NCTE, the Ministry of
HRD mandated that B.Ed. may be recognized as an additional
qualification for all schools. This was clearly beyond the power of
30.   The RTE Act was enacted to provide for free and compulsory
education to all children of the age of 6 to 14 years. As noted, as
per Sub-section (1) of Section 23, a person possessing such
minimum qualifications, as laid down by the academic authority
authorised by the Central Government (i.e. NCTE) by notification
shall be eligible for appointment as a teacher. The primary source
of the authority of the NCTE to lay down such minimum
qualifications thus is Sub-section (1) of Section 23 of the RTE Act.
We are not oblivion to the fact that Section 12A was inserted in
NCTE Act with effect from 1.6.2012 which provides that for the
purpose of maintaining standards of education in schools, the
NCTE may, by regulations, determine the qualifications of persons
for being recruited as teachers in various levels of schools and
colleges. We may recall that the NCTE Act, as originally enacted,
was to provide for establishment of a National Council for Teacher
Education with a view to achieving planned and coordinate
development of the teacher education system and for regulation
and proper maintenance of norms and standards in the teacher
education system. The purpose of qualifications of school teachers
was inserted in the preamble only with effect from 1.6.2012.
Essentially this Section 12A of the NCTE Act is an eco of the
primary source of power of NCTE flowing from Section 23(1) of
the RTE Act to lay down minimum qualifications for eligibility for
appointment as a teacher. It is for this reason, therefore, in our
opinion, the power of the Central Government to give directions to
the NCTE under Section 29 of the NCTE Act cannot be utilized to
require NCTE to frame regulations concerning eligibility for
appointment as teacher under Section 23(1) of the RTE Act.
31.   Even otherwise, we do not think that the powers of the
Central Government under Sub-section (1) of Section 29 of the
NCTE Act are wide enough to require the NCTE to frame
regulations for eligibility in a particular manner.            As per Sub-
section (1) of Section 29, the NCTE shall in the discharge of its
functions and duties under the Act be bound by directions on
question of policy as the Central Government may give in writing
to it from time to time. The power of the Central Government to
issue directions to the NCTE and its binding effect are confined to
the question of policy.     The legislature has advisedly limited the
powers of the Central Government to issue directions only on the
question of policy.      The powers thus are not plenary or all
pervasive but are restricted to the question of policy alone. Such
provision, therefore, has to be interpreted strictly. The legislature
has constituted the NCTE with specified duties, functions and
powers and which Council consists of various experts in the field.
The legislature has also while empowering the Central government
to give directions to the Council, advisedly restricted such powers
on the question of policy.                The directions of the Central
Government therefore cannot be for day to day functioning of the
NCTE or for purposes other than the policy matters. Framing of
regulations prescribing eligibility criteria or minimum qualifications
for appointment as primary teachers certainly cannot be seen as a
policy matter.
32.    In the case of A. Manoharan and others vs. Union of
India and others [(2008) 3 SCC 641] while interpreting the
powers of the Central Government to give directions to the Major
Trust under Sub-section (1) of Section 111 of the Major Port Trusts
Act, 1963, which provided that the authority in discharge of its
functions under the Act be bound by such directions on questions
of policy as the Central Government may give in writing from time
to time, it was held and observed as under:
“24. The power of the Central Government to issue
directions as contained in Section 111 of the 1963 Act
cannot be stretched to amend the Regulations. Power
must be exercised by the Central Government only in
regard to the administration of the Trust. Such a power
to issue direction must be construed strictly. (See
Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport
Authority of India (1979) 3 SCC 489, Harjit Singh v.
State of Punjab (2007) 9 SCC 582, Ashoka Smokeless
Coal India (P) Ltd. v. Union of India (2007) 2 SCC 640
and Poonam Verma v. DDA. (2007) 13 SCC 154)”
33.   We may also not be unduly perturbed by the finality attached
to the decision of the Central Government under Section 29(2) of
the NCTE Act on the question of what constitutes policy matter.
Any such decision is open to judicial review of the court under
Article 226 of the Constitution. Such judicial review being a basic
feature of the Constitution as held by the judgment of the
Supreme Court in the case of L. Chandra Kumar vs. Union of
India and other [(1997) 3 SCC 261] cannot be barred.
34.   Though    not   so    projected         before       us,  if  the   Central
Government was exercising powers under Sub-section (2) of
Section 23, the same had to be upon fulfillment of conditions
precedent for exercise of such powers. As noted, it is open for the
Central Government to relax the qualifications prescribed under
Sub-section (1) of Section 23, if adequate institutions offering
courses or training in teacher education or teachers possessing
minimum qualifications in a state are not available in sufficient
numbers. Firstly, Sub-section (2) refers to such short fall arising in
a state meaning thereby such powers have to be exercised state-
wise. Secondly, the powers can be exercised only upon the Central
Government finding that in such a state adequate institutions
offering  courses   or   training       are     not      available  or  teachers
possessing minimum qualifications are not available in sufficient
numbers. Only if these conditions are satisfied, the power of
relaxing the minimum qualification prescribed under Sub-section
(1) of Section 23 can be exercised, not otherwise. In the present
case, no such exercise has been undertaken. The broad discussion
of number of vacancies and short fall in certain regions would not
satisfy the requirements for exercise of powers under Sub-section
(2) of Section 23. Further, as recorded above such powers were
state specific and had to be exercised in relation to a particular
state. Undoubtedly, within the state of Rajasthan no such exercise
has been carried out.
35.   Learned   counsel     for     the     supporters         of the  impugned
notification have argued before us that the State Government or
the petitioners challenging the notification have not produced any
data to show that sufficient number of candidates other than
holding B.Ed. degree course were available. To our mind, this was
not the requirement for exercise of powers under Sub-section (2)
of Section 23. The requirement was establishing that the factors
necessary for exercising the powers existed and the required
collection of data as to the number of vacancies vis-a-vis number
of eligible candidates available without relaxing the minimum
qualifications was undertaken. Under the circumstances, it is not
necessary to go into the details of the statements made before us
either by the petitioners challenging the notification or the learned
Advocate General appearing for the State Government, who had
stated that in the REET conducted on 26.09.2021 for primary,
upper primary school teacher (level-1), 3,50,000 odd candidates
holding the qualifications of BSTC D.El.Ed. had participated against
18850 vacant posts.
36.   Even going by the insertion of B.Ed. as a recognized
qualification, it is manifest that the B.Ed. per se is not sufficient
educational qualification. It is for this reason that the MHRD
desired and NCTE has introduced the requirement of passing of
the bridge course. It is only on passing of such bridge course that
the candidate would become eligible to hold the post of primary
school teacher (classes-I to V). This should not be misunderstood
as an in-service training after recruitment. This is a part and
parcel of the eligibility criteria prescribed in the Rules.
37.   We may recall that the amended qualifications are that the
person may have a B.Ed. degree and may compete for the
appointment, however after appointment within a period of two
years, he must pass the bridge course of six months which will be
designed by the NCTE. In clear terms, the intention is to design a
course which will equip a candidate to impart education at the
primary school level (classes- I to V). This is an indirect admission
on the part of the authorities that minus such bridge course, a
B.Ed. degree holder is not qualified to hold the post of a primary
school teacher (classes-I to V). If upon fulfillment of conditions
required for exercising powers under Sub-section (2) of Section
23, the Central Government had relaxed the standards by
enabling a B.Ed. degree holder to secure appointment but to clear
the bridge course within the specified time, perhaps no challenge
would lie against exercise of such powers. However, even the
Union of India has not taken the stand that the powers are
exercised by the Central Government under Sub-section (2) of
Section 23 of the RTE Act. In any case, we have concluded that no
such powers could have been exercised without satisfying that the
conditions precedent for exercising such powers existed.
38.   Since the MHRD as well as NCTE through the process of
framing    the   amendments          and       issuing       the  notification  of
amendment have recognized that B.Ed. degree per se is not a
sufficient qualification for appointment as teacher in primary
school (classes- I to V), it is not necessary to dilate on the
question whether a B.Ed. degree is a higher qualification as
compared to D.El.Ed. or not. To borrow mathematical phraseology,
B.Ed. degree course does not form a super set of training of which
D.El.Ed. Diploma training forms a sub set. In other words, a B.Ed.
degree holder cannot argue that he has sufficient training to teach
not only higher standards but also the primary level standard I to
V and what is taught to a D.El.Ed. course is part and parcel of his
training. This was rejected by the Supreme Court in the cases of
P.M. Latha and others vs. State of Kerala and others [2003
(3) SCC 541] and Yogesh Kumar and others vs. Government
of NTC, Delhi and others [2003 (3) SCC 548].
39.   In the case of P.M. Latha (supra), for recruitment to the post
of lower and upper primary school teachers in Government
schools, qualification prescribed was Trained Teachers Certificate
(‘TTC’, for short) pass. Instead of selecting the TTC holders, B.Ed.
degree holders were selected on the basis that B.Ed. is higher
qualification than TTC. It was in this background held that there is
no force in the argument that B.Ed. qualification is higher
qualification than TTC. Similar view was expressed in the case of
Yogesh Kumar (supra). This is also a case where for the post of
assistant teachers in primary schools of Municipal Corporation,
qualifications prescribed were TTC holders.                  It was held that the
candidates holding B.Ed. degree cannot be considered eligible as
B.Ed. cannot be treated higher qualification than TTC.
40.   Learned Additional Solicitor General however painstakingly
argued that these judgments were rendered in vastly different
background and arose in a situation which no longer prevails. For
two reasons, we are not prepared to accept this contention in its
fullest form. Despite the above noted judgments of the Supreme
Court, if the rule making authority had after due deliberations
come to a conclusion that it is necessary to recognize B.Ed.
degree as one of the eligibility criteria for appointment, in exercise
of judicial review, out of due deference to the expertise of the
academic authority, we would perhaps have not interfered.
However, even the academic authority has not proceeded on the
basis that B.Ed. is a sufficient training for imparting education at
the lowest level of primary schools. It is therefore that the bridge
course, which literally would bridge the training gap has been
41.   With these conclusions, we may deal with a few peripheral
issues and contentions.
42.   Since we have held that the NCTE has exercised powers
under Sub-section (1) of Section 23 of the RTE Act and also held
that in case the Central Government could not have given
directions to the NCTE for framing the regulations in a particular
manner      for   prescribing     a     particular         eligibility  criteria   for
appointment of a teacher under Section 29 of the NCTE Act, it is
not necessary to examine the consequences of the regulations not
being placed for approval before the Parliament.
43.   The learned counsel Shri Vigyan Shah was perhaps not
correct in contending that NCTE could not have amended the
eligibility  criteria  without       amending            the    notification    dated
12.11.2014. Under this notification, Clause (4) provides for
qualification for recruitment as provided in the schedule. The first
schedule    pertains    to    minimum            academic        and    professional
qualifications at different level of schools. Clause 3 contained in
the schedule pertains to primary and upper primary (Class I to
VIII) and the qualification prescribed are “minimum qualifications
as laid down by National Council for Teacher Education vide its
notification dated 23.08.2010 as amended from time to time
issued in exercise of the powers conferred under Sub-section (1)
of Section 23 of the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory
Education Act, 2009 (35 of 2009)”. As per these Regulations thus,
the   essential   qualifications        for    appointment          are    those   as
prescribed under the notification issued under Sub-section (1) of
Section 23 of the Act, namely, one dated 23.08.2010 as amended
from time to time. Thus, the moment the notification dated
23.08.2010 is amended by NCTE in exercise of powers under Sub-
section (1) of Section 23 automatically such change gets reflected
and embedded in the qualifications prescribed in the first schedule
of these regulations. Thereafter, therefore, there was no need to
amend     this   notification.     All    challenges          in  the    preliminary
notification dated 23.08.2010 would automatically be recognized
for the purpose of the said schedule.
44.   The debate has also taken place with respect to the stand of
the   State    Government.       Firstly,      with       respect    to   the   State
Government as a respondent challenging the notification of NCTE,
it was argued by the learned Additional Solicitor General that such
challenge    without    a   counter        petition        being   filed,   was   not
maintainable as per the High Court Rules. Second contentious
issue was the act of the State Government to ignore the NCTE
notification making amendment in the eligibility criteria and not
recognizing B.Ed. degree holders for the purpose of REET.
45.   Since there are independent petitions and petitioners before
us who have challenged the notification of NCTE, it is not
necessary for us to examine whether the State Government on its
own as respondent could maintain its challenge without filing an
independent petition. However, with respect to the second ground,
we are of the opinion that the State Government could not have
ignored the notification while inviting applications for REET. Even if
the State Government was of the opinion that such notification
was unconstitutional or for any reason illegal, the same had to be
stayed or set aside by a competent court before it could be
46.   The contention of Shri Rastogi that the challengers to the
notification have no locus standi to bring the petition because the
amendment merely expands the zone of consideration, cannot be
accepted. Whether by mere expansion of zone of consideration the
challenge will succeed or not is a matter of a different context but
a person who is already eligible finds himself in a wider
competition on account of widening the zone of consideration for
appointment or promotion holds a belief that such amendment is
illegal he has every right to call in question. To reiterate the
question of locus standi of such a person and maintainability of his
or her petition stands on vastly different footing as compared to
the success or failure of such challenge to widening of the zone of
consideration for appointment or promotion. The judgments relied
upon in this context by Shri Rastogi in the cases of Government
of Andhra Pradesh vs. P. Dilip Kumar and others [1993 (2)
SCC 310] and Shyama Charan Dash and others vs. State of
Orissa and others [2003 (4) SCC 218] would fall in a latter
category. It is open for him to argue that when the only
consequence of the amendments in the regulations is expanding
the zone of consideration, the Court should not strike down the
amendment is entirely different from arguing that the persons
recognized as eligible as per the existing regulations cannot
question the amendment.
47.   We concede to the suggestion of the learned Additional
Solicitor General that in policy matters and particularly in
specialized and highly technical fields such as education, the Court
always holds the opinion of the policy framers with highest
regards and would not substitute its wisdom for that of the
specialized body. The reference to the decisions of the Supreme
Court in the case of All India Council for Technical Education
vs. Surinder Kumar Dhawan and others [(2009) 11 SCC
726] and Zahoor Ahmad Rather and others vs. Sheikh
Imtiyaz Ahmad and others [(2019) 2 SCC 404] for such
purpose is noted. However, in the present case, we have not
questioned the wisdom of the rule making authority to make a
certain change in the eligibility criteria. What we have held is that
the same was done under the mandate of the Central Government
without such powers being vested.
48.   The learned Advocate General is not quite accurate in
contending that by prescribing these qualifications there is affront
on the State’s power to recruit persons on the posts under the
State Government. Quite apart, the power under Article 309 of the
Constitution to make recruitment by the State agencies, the
eligibility criteria for various posts can be prescribed under
respective    statutes  governing          the     terms       and conditions   of
education and such similar positions. Even under Sub-rule (3) of
Rule 266 of the Rajasthan Panchayat Raj Rules, 1996, the State
legislature has provided that the qualifications of the teachers
would be as prescribed by the NCTE.
49.   We summarize our conclusions as thus:
(i)   The impugned notification dated 28.06.2018 is unlawful
(a)   it is under the direction of the Central Government,
which power the Central Government under Sub-
section (1) of Section 23 of the RTE Act did not have;
(b)   it is not in exercise of power of the Central Government
under Sub-section (2) of Section 23 of RTE Act relaxing
the eligibility criteria prescribed by the NCTE, nor there
has been any exercise for ascertaining existence of the
conditions precedent for exercising such power.
(ii)  The petitioners have locus standi to challenge the notification
dated 28.06.2018. Merely because an additional qualification
is recognized as one of the eligibility criteria, the petitioners
cannot be prevented from challenging it.
(iii) Accepting a candidate with B.Ed. degree as eligible for
appointment and thereafter subjecting him to complete the
bridge course within two years of appointment is in the
nature of relaxing the existing eligibility criteria, which the
Central Government could have done only within Sub-section
(2) of Section 23 and subject to existence of circumstances
necessary for exercise of such power.
(iv)  The    State    Government            could       not     have  ignored   the
notification    of   NCTE        dated        28.06.2018       while  issuing
advertisement for REET. However, when we have declared
that this notification is illegal and are in the process of
setting aside, the issue becomes one of academic value.
50.    In the result, the impugned notification dated 28.06.2018 is
set aside. The latter dated 30th May 2018 of the MHRD to NCTE
being in the nature of internal communication, does not give rise
to cause of action unless acted upon and therefore, it is not
necessary to separately set it aside.
51.    The     writ   petitions      being       D.B.       Civil   Writ Petition  No.
6587/2021 filed by Mukesh Kumar Royal and other similar
connected petitions are allowed.
52.    The     writ   petitions      being       D.B.       Civil   Writ Petition  No.
2108/2021 filed by Sunita and other similar connected petitions
are dismissed.
53.    The interim orders granted earlier allowing the petitioners
holding B.Ed. degree to appear in the REET are vacated.                            The
candidature of those petitioners, who appeared in the REET under
the interim orders of this Court, shall not be processed further.
54.    All applications stand disposed of accordingly.