Whether the challenge to the decision, classifying the
petitioner as a General Merit candidate, rejecting the
petitioner’s claim to be under category 2-B/KA-HK, for
selection to the post of a government school teacher, is
outside the jurisdiction of the Tribunal constituted under
02.   The question referred to above has arisen as
the decision of the Deputy Director of Public Instructions,
Raichur is under challenge in this writ petition under Article
226 of the Constitution of India.
03.    Contending   that   the   Tribunal   lacks  the
jurisdiction to consider the question raised above, and
justifying the challenge in this writ petition before this
court, Sri. K.M. Ghate, the learned counsel for the
petitioner made the following submissions.
a)    The issue, in this case, is pertaining to the
petitioner’s caste and income and the same is outside the
purview     of    the  Administrative     Tribunal  (for    short
'Tribunal'). This issue has to be considered only by this
Court in the exercise of power under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.
b)    Assuming      that   the  Tribunal   has   got   the
jurisdiction to deal with this matter under Section 15 of the
Act, the alternative remedy by itself will not oust the
jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.
c)    The present writ petition is to enforce the
petitioner’s fundamental right under Article 14 of the
Constitution of India as the persons who are similarly
placed, are classified in the 2-B/KA-HK category. The
petitioner     is    questioning    the    discrimination    and
infringement of her fundamental right under Article 14 of
Constitution of India.
04.  Sri. K. M. Ghate, the learned counsel for the
petitioner would place reliance on the judgment of the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Maharashtra State
Board of Wakfs vs. Shaikh Yusuf Bhai Chawla and
others reported in (2012) 6 SCC 328 and also the
judgment of this Court in the case of the State of
Karnataka and others vs. Smt. Yogeshwari and
others      in      W.P.No.24115/2018           c/w      with
05.  It is further urged that in similar circumstances
the High Court at Principal Bench as well as the Bench at
Dharwad, granted interim order and entertained the writ
06.  The learned Additional Government Advocate
for the respondents would refer to Sections 4, 15 and 28 of
the Act 1985 and submits that the writ petition is not
maintainable. He would place reliance on the judgment of
L. Chandrakumar vs. Union of India, reported in
(1997) 3 SCC 261. He would further submit that the
Division Bench of this Court, in the case of Shivaprasad
Biradar vs. Karnataka Lokayukta has followed the ratio
laid down by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the case of L.
Chandrakumar, and has held that the dispute relating to
service under the State are to be dealt in the first instance
by the Tribunal constituted under the Act of 1985.
07.   The   learned   Government    Advocate     would
further submit that the exceptional circumstances where
the writ petitions are entertained, despite alternative
remedies are not made out by the petitioner.
08.   This Court has considered the contentions and
also perused the judgments cited.
09.   Since   the   objection   is relating    to  the
jurisdiction of the Court to entertain the writ petition on
the premise that the remedy is said to be available under
the Act, the reference has to be made to the preamble of
the Act and the provisions of the Act.
10.   The preamble to the Act, 1985 reads as
"An Act to provide for the adjudication or
trial by Administrative Tribunals of disputes
and complaints with respect to recruitment
and    conditions   of    service    of    persons
appointed    to public services and posts in
connection with the affairs of the Union or of
any State or any local or other authority within
the territory of India or under the control of
the   Government     of   India   or    of   1[any
corporation or society owned or controlled by
the Government in pursuance of article 323A of
the Constitution]and for matters connected
therewith or incidental thereto."
11.   Preamble referred to above, is explicitly clear
as to the object of the Act. The Administrative Tribunals
are constituted to try and adjudicate;
i)   the   disputes   and   complaints    with    respect to
ii) conditions of service of persons appointed to public
services and posts specified in the Act,
iii) and for the matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
12.    Section 15 of the Act deals with the jurisdiction
of the Tribunal. Since the controversy involved in this case
is covered under Section 15 (1) (a) of the Act, the same is
extracted below for ready reference: -
"15. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of
as otherwise expressly provided in this Act,
the Administrative Tribunal for a State shall
exercise,    on and from the appointed day, all
the    jurisdiction,  powers,    and    authority
exercisable immediately before that day by all
courts (except the Supreme Court 3***)in
(a)    recruitment,   and   matters   concerning
recruitment, to any civil service of the
State or to any civil post under the
13.  Under Section 15 (1) (a) of the Act, the
Tribunal gets jurisdiction, to deal with matters relating to
(a) recruitment,
(b) matters concerning recruitment
to any civil service of the State or
to any civil post under the State;
14.  The    petitioner    would     contend    that   the
impugned order classifying the petitioner in the General
Merit category is passed pursuant to the petitioner’s
application for the post of a teacher and the impugned
order   does   not   deal   with   ‘recruitment’   or   ‘matters
concerning    recruitment’.    The    question   whether     the
petitioner is to be considered under the general merit
category or category 2-B/KA-HK, cannot be adjudicated by
15. The answer to this question is to be traced in
Section 15 (1) (a) of the Act, keeping in mind the object of
the   Act.  The   expression     ‘recruitment’   and    ‘matters
concerning recruitment’ found in Section 15 (1) (a) are not
defined in the Act. Thus, the Court has to apply the plain
grammatical      meaning      attached   to   the  above-said
expressions, unless such exercise leads to absurdity. The
Cambridge dictionary defines the word ‘recruitment’ as
the process of finding people to work for company or beco
me a new member of an organization:
The Oxford dictionary defines the expression ‘recruitment'
as the act or process of finding new people to join a
company, an organization, the armed forces, etc,
16. The plain dictionary meaning of the expression
‘recruitment’ itself uses the phrase ‘the process of finding
new people’.
17.   In addition to the expression ‘recruitment’
found in Section 15 (1) (a) in the Act, to remove any
ambiguity     or   difficulty    in  interpreting  the  word
‘recruitment’     or     to    eliminate    the   scope   for
misinterpretation, the Parliament itself has used the
expression, ‘matters concerning recruitment’ in Section 15
(1) (a) of the Act. Said expression undoubtedly has a
wider connotation than the expression ‘recruitment’. When
the word recruitment itself is wide enough to cover the act
or the process involved in the recruitment, the expression,
‘matters concerning recruitment’ found in Section 15 (1)
(a) of the Act, leads to only one conclusion that the
decision taken in processing the application for the post is
a   decision   relating  to  recruitment    or   the  matters
concerning to recruitment.
18.    In the present scheme of our Constitution,
recruitment under the State is governed by the reservation
policy of the State. The process involves reserving a
certain specified percentage of seats based on reservation
policy. Thus, the employer is under obligation to process
the applications for recruitment based on criteria fixed
under    the   reservation  policy.  While    processing  the
applications for the posts, if a decision is taken to classify
the applicant in a particular category, as happened in the
case of the petitioner, ‘the decision taken’ is indeed a
decision taken in the process of recruitment.
19.    For the reasons assigned above, there is no
difficulty to hold that the expressions ‘recruitment’ and
'matters concerning recruitment’ found in Section 15 (1)
(a) of the Act, are wide enough to cover all the stages of
recruitment, starting from the publication of notification
inviting applications to the Civil services and Civil Posts, to
the scrutiny of applications and the decisions thereon,
conducting examinations, announcement of the results and
issuance of orders of appointment. Such being the ambit of
Section 15 (1)(a) of the Act, the impugned decision to
classify the petitioner under the ‘General Merit’ category is
a decision, the correctness of which can be reviewed by
20.   Since this Court is dealing with the question
relating to the jurisdiction of the Tribunal and the High
court to deal with matters of this nature, it is also
necessary to refer to Section 28 of the Act, which reads as
"Exclusion of jurisdiction of Courts except
for the Supreme Court under article 136 of
the Constitution – On and from the date from
which any jurisdiction, powers, and authority
becomes exercisable under this Act by a
Tribunal in relation to recruitment and matters
concerning recruitment and matters concerning
recruitment to any Service or post or service
matters concerning members of any Service or
persons appointed to any Service or post,
(a)   the Supreme Court; or
(b)   any Industrial Tribunal, Labour court, or
other authority constituted under the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of
1947) or any other corresponding law for
the time being in force, shall have, or be
entitled  to   exercise  any   jurisdiction,
powers, or authority in relation to such
recruitment or matters concerning such
recruitment or such service matters.
21.   Section 28 of the Act, excludes the jurisdiction
of all courts, in respect of matters over which, the Tribunal
under the Act, exercises the jurisdiction, except the
Supreme     Court    and   the   Labour   Courts  and   other
authorities under the Industrial Disputes Act.
22.   Combined reading of Sections 15 and 28 of the
Act, leads to an inevitable conclusion that the High Court
cannot exercise the jurisdiction as a Court of first instance
in respect of the matters over which the Tribunals under
the Act are empowered to exercise the jurisdiction. The Act
not only provides for the jurisdiction of the Tribunals under
Section 15 but also provides for the exclusion of the
jurisdiction of several Courts including the High Court. The
Seven Judges Constitution Bench of the Hon’ble Apex
Court had an occasion to consider the scope of Sections 15
and 28 of the Act, in the case of L.Chandrakumar, and
the Apex court has held that the Administrative Tribunals
under the Act, have jurisdiction to consider all the matters
covered under the Act, including the constitutional validity
of the provisions relating to the recruitment of employees
and regulations governing service conditions. In terms of
the law laid in the aforementioned case, the Tribunal is the
forum of first instance in respect of matters covered under
the provisions of the Act.
23.  Considering the object which is explicit in the
preamble and the jurisdiction conferred under Section 15
r/w Section 28 of the Act, there is no room for any doubt
that the Administrative Tribunal, has the jurisdiction to
consider all matters concerning the recruitment and the
matters concerning recruitment which in its ambit includes
all decisions from the date of publication of notification
inviting applications for the posts to the orders of
24. The next point for consideration is whether the
petitioner has made out a case to entertain the writ
petition despite an alternative remedy being available. Well
established exceptional circumstances namely,
a)    the    vires  of  a   provision   of  law   under
b)    the principles of natural justice being violated,
c) the authority which passed the order, lacked the
jurisdiction to pass the order,
d) Where the petition is filed for enforcement of
fundamental rights.
25.   To entertain a writ petition despite alternative
remedy are not made out in this petition. The judgment
relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner in the
case of Maharashtra State Board of Wakfs referred
supra, does not come to the aid of the petitioner for the
reasons stated in paragraph No.157 of the said judgment.
Again, in the case of The State of Karnataka and others
vs. Smt. Yogeshwari and another referred supra, this
Court has not held that the High Court can entertain a writ
petition as a court of first instance to decide a case of this
26.   The learned counsel for the petitioner submits
that the orders passed pursuant to the notification dated
21.03.2022, have been questioned before, the Principal
Bench at Bengaluru and Bench at Dharwad and in those
matters interim orders are passed. It is to be noticed that
in those matters, the objections not raised relating to the
maintainability of the writ petition, and questions relating
to maintainability are not decided in those cases.
27.    As far as the contention that the petitioner is
enforcing her fundamental right before this court is
concerned, this Court is of the view that no such grounds
are forthcoming in the writ petition. The Tribunal is
competent to deal with all the grounds raised in the
petition and in terms of the law laid down in the case of L.
Chandrakumar referred supra, the Tribunal is the forum
of first instance and not the High Court to adjudicate the
disputes falling under Section 15 of the Act.
28.    For the aforementioned reasons, this Court is
of the opinion that the writ petition is not maintainable
before   this  Court.  Accordingly,  the  writ  petition   is
dismissed as not maintainable.
29.    The petitioner is at liberty to approach the
Tribunal constituted under the Administrative Tribunals Act
30.     The  Registry   is directed  to  return    the
annexures to the writ petition, after retaining the xerox
copy if requested by the petitioner.
No order as to cost.