Pallabi Chatterjee and others
State of West Bengal and others
WPA(P) 169 of 2022
State of West Bengal and others
…for the Petitioners in WPA(P) 168 of 2022
Mr. S.N. Mookherjee, ld AG
… for the State
Mr. Dhiraj Trivedi, ld ASGI
… for the Union of India
Mr. Billwadal Bhattacharyya, ld ASGI
… for the CBI
…for the Petitioner in WPA(P) 169 of 2022
WPA(P) 168 of 2022
…for the respondent No.2 in WPA(P) 169 of 2022
In pursuance of the previous direction of this Court,
learned Advocate General has produced the case diaries
as also reports in the form of affidavits in respect of each
of the incidents disclosing the steps which have been
taken till now by the investigating agency.
Each of the five incidents of rape, which are subject
matter of first petition are taken up today separately as
(1)     Moynaguri incident: learned counsel for
petitioners has submitted that there was an
attempt to rape a minor girl and thereafter
the threat was extended to her as a result of
which she had attempted self-immolation.
She has further submitted that the victim is
still in the hospital and there was a delay in
filing the application for cancellation of bail of
the accused.
Learned Advocate General has referred to the
report in the form of affidavit filed today and
has submitted that the statement of the
victim has already been recorded under
Section 164 of the Cr.P.C. and the same was
also videographed and the accused was
granted bail under Section 438 of the Cr.P.C.
WPA(P) 168 of 2022
by the POCSO Court and after the second
incident of extending threat and attempt by
the victim for self-immolation, a separate
case has been registered and the accused
persons have been arrested in that case. He
has further submitted that in the earlier
case, the application for cancellation of bail
has been filed on 19.04.2022 which is likely
to come up for hearing on 25.04.2022.           He
has also pointed out that the statements of
as many as 15 witnesses have been recorded
under Section 164 of the Cr.P.C. and has
referred to the steps which have been taken
by the investigating agency.       He has also
submitted that in respect of the first incident,
the victim had not agreed for the medical
examination and this has been recorded by
the medical officer.
The report filed by learned Advocate General
is taken on record.
(2) Netra    Incident:    In   this   incident     the
complaint was made on 13.04.2022 against
the named accused in respect of commission
of rape on a minor girl on 07.04.2022.
Learned counsel for the petitioners has
submitted    that   to  her    knowledge      the
investigation  has    not  been    carried    out
WPA(P) 168 of 2022
properly and the medical examination of
accused and the victim has not been done,
there was a delay in lodging the FIR and no
reason for the same has been recorded.
Learned    counsel  for  the   petitioner    has
referred   to  various   steps    which    were
required to be taken for proper investigation.
Learned Advocate General, referring to the
report in the form of affidavit, has pointed
out that the offence against the accused
person was registered on the same day of
making the complaint and the accused was
also arrested on the same day. He has also
pointed   out   the  seizure   list  and     has
submitted that both the victim and the
accused were medically examined and that
the statement of the victim has also been
recorded under Section 164 of the Cr.P.C.
The report further reveals that the steps are
being taken for sending the seized items to
the FSL by the competent authority.
An issue has also been raised that wearing
apparels of the victim and the accused may
have been washed multiple time after the
incident, therefore, they are required to be
sent to FSL which has the facility of DNA
test of such multiple time washed apparels.
WPA(P) 168 of 2022
Learned Advocate General is directed to look
into this aspect of the matter and ensure
that needful is done.
The report filed by learned Advocate General
is taken on record.
(3) Namkhana incident: It is a case where on
08.04.2022 the gang rape was committed
upon a lady aged about 40 years and
kerosene     was     poured    and  allegedly     an
attempt was made to burn her.
Submission        of    learned    counsel       for
petitioners in WPA(P) 168 of 2022 is that the
investigation has not been done properly,
kerosene jar which was used for pouring
kerosene on the victim has not been seized,
statements of the neighbours who had heard
the cries of the victim at the time of incident
have    not   been     videographed,    place     of
occurrence has not been sealed and no
offence under section 307 of the IPC has
been registered.
Connected WPA(P) 169 of 2022 has been
filed in respect of this incident and the
submission      of   learned   counsel   for    the
petitioner   is    that   from  09.04.2022       till
11.04.2022 when the second report was
made, no medical examination of the victim
WPA(P) 168 of 2022
was done and no investigation was carried
out.    She has further submitted that the
report relating to offence of rape was not
initially  registered   and  subsequently      on
account of pressure by local residents,
another FIR on 12.04.2022 was registered in
respect of the offence of gang rape.
She has also submitted that the statements
of witnesses under section 164 of the Cr.P.C.
were not videgraphed and though the victim
was     found    bleeding,  but   bloodstained
articles were not seized from the spot, no
crime reconstruction scene of the incident
was done, chemical test to trace out the
bloodstain was not done, clothes of the
victim were not seized for DNA test and that
local police officers were pressuring the
husband of the victim and also the victim to
withdraw the complaint.
In this background, a prayer has been made
to transfer the case to any independent
agency like the CBI.
Learned Advocate General has produced the
case diary as also the report in the form of
affidavit and referring to the report he has
pointed out that initially offences were
registered on the basis of the complaint
WPA(P) 168 of 2022
dated     09.04.2022     and    thereafter     the
information was received on 11.04.2022
about the rape which was committed on the
victim, therefore, offence under section 376D
of the IPC was registered.
He has also pointed out that the statement
of the victim was recorded under section 161
of   the   Cr.P.C.   and   the   statements      of
witnesses were recorded under section 161
of the Cr.P.C. and the videography was also
done.     Seizures    were   made     and      the
statements of witnesses whose names have
been disclosed in the report were recorded
under     section  164    of  the   Cr.P.C.    On
12.04.2022, the main accused persons have
been arrested. The medical examination of
the victim and the arrested accused was
done     on    11.04.2022    and    12.04.2022,
respectively     and    on    14.04.2022       the
statement of the victim under section 164 of
the Cr.P.C. was recorded.
The report in the form of affidavit reveals
that the medical officer has found burn
injuries on the victim.
We have also perused the case diary in this
Having     examined    the  case    diary    and
considering the report in the form of affidavit
as also taking note of the allegations which
have    been   made    and   the  progress      of
investigation, we deem it proper to direct
that the investigation in this case will be
done     under   the    supervision   of    Smt.
of Police, Kolkata.
If Smt. Damayanti Sen has any difficulty in
supervising the investigation, she will be at
liberty to intimate this Court on the next
date of hearing.
We make it clear that we have not rejected
the prayer for handing over the investigation
to CBI and in case if it is found that the
investigation has not been carried out in an
impartial and fair manner, then the said
prayer    can  be   later  considered    at    an
appropriate stage.
We also direct that the victim, her family
members and the witnesses will be extended
full protection by the competent authorities.
(4) Shantiniketan incident: In this incident a
minor girl aged about 15 years was gang-
raped by 4/5 persons on 15.04.2022.
WPA(P) 168 of 2022
Submission       of    learned    counsel      for
petitioners is that for three days no arrest
was made. The victim is a scheduled tribe
girl but no offence under the provisions of
Scheduled      Caste    and  Scheduled     Tribe
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 has been
registered and prime accused has not been
arrested till now.     She has also submitted
that   for   some    reason   the   victim   was
changing her version and within 24 hours
medical examination was not done. She has
further submitted that the investigation is
not progressing in proper direction and it is
not clear as on what basis the accused
persons have been picked up and the offence
under Section 367 of the IPC ought to have
been registered which has not been done.
She has also submitted that the arrest on
the basis of sketch map is suspicious.
As per earlier direction of this Court, the
case diary and report in the form of affidavit
have been produced.
Learned Advocate General has submitted
that the offence was registered on the same
day i.e. 15.04.2022 and the sketch map was
made on 15.04.2022 and the seizures were
made from three relevant places i.e. where
WPA(P) 168 of 2022
the victim was sitting with her friends
together, where the offence of rape was
committed and where the victim girl was
raped and he has also submitted that the
medical examination of the victim was done
on the same day and the statement of the
victim under Section 164 of the Cr.P.C. has
been recorded. The wearing apparels of the
victim were seized and the message was sent
to   the   Child   Welfare    Committee       on
15.04.2022 itself. The medical report of the
victim had been collected and her statement
under Section 164 Cr.P.C. is also recorded
and two persons have been arrested and two
other persons are apprehending.        He has
also referred to the various steps taken by
the investigating agency as mentioned in the
report.
The report is taken on record.
(5) Pingla   incident:   In   this   incident,    on
11.04.2022 at about 22.00 hrs the victim
was allegedly sexually assaulted by one
Abhijit Mondal, a member of local gram
panchayat.    The offence was registered on
the next day.
Learned     counsel   for    petitioners     has
submitted that the accused is a leader of
WPA(P) 168 of 2022
TMC and the panchayat member, therefore,
there is no possibility of fair investigation
and the victim is receiving threats and
earlier she had stated about commission of
rape but later changed her version stating
that there was an attempt to commit rape.
She has further submitted that offences
under Sections 376(N), 367 and 368 of the
IPC ought to have been registered.
Learned Advocate General has produced the
report in the form of affidavit alongwith the
case diary disclosing that the offence was
registered   on   12.04.2022,   the   medical
examination of the victim was done on the
same day, her wearing apparels were seized,
the statement of the victim under Section
164 of the Cr.P.C. has been recorded, the
accused has been arrested and his medical
examination has been done and the wearing
apparels of the accused have also been
seized   and  the   statements   of  two    key
witnesses have been recorded under Section
164 of the Cr.P.C.
Considering the nature of allegations which have
been made and also after perusing the materials which
have been placed before us, we are of the opinion that
WPA(P) 168 of 2022
the investigation in this case should be supervised by a
senior lady police officer.
Learned Advocate General has produced a list of
five such officers and after perusal of the same, we find
that it would be appropriate that the investigation in
this case be supervised by Smt. Parul Kush Jain, IPS,
Learned Advocate General is directed to file the
report regarding further progress of investigation in all
these matters on the next date of hearing and also to
do the needful under the Victim Compensation Scheme
in accordance with law.
List on 02.05.2022.