Counsel for Applicant :- Manoj Kumar,Manish Kumar
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
1. Heard Sri Manoj Kumar, learned counsel for the applicant
and Dr. S.B. Maurya, learned A.G.A.-I for the State.
2. The instant application has been moved on behalf of the
applicant to release him on bail in Case Crime No. 248 of
2022, under Sections 295A, 505 (2) I.P.C. and Section 67 of
Moradabad during pendency of the trial in the court concerned.
3. The allegation against the applicant is that he uploaded some
objectionable material on his Facebook with regard to Hon'ble
4. Learned counsel for the applicant submitted that applicant is
innocent and he has been falsely implicated and even if the
allegation are accepted, then also all the offences are triable by
Magistrate Ist class and maximum punishment provided for the
offences are three years and applicant is in jail since September,
2022 and he has no criminal history to his credit.
5. Per contra, learned AGA although opposed the prayer but
could not dispute the fact that maximum punishment provided
for the alleged offences is three years and applicant has no
criminal history and he is in jail since September, 2022.
6. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the
record of the case.
7. All the offences in which applicant was challaned, are having
maximum punishment of three years and applicant is in jail
since September, 2022 i.e. for about more than three months
and he has no criminal history. Further all the offences are
triable by Magistrate Ist class, therefore in view of this Court,
applicant is entitled to be released on bail.
8.In the light of discussions made above, without expressing
any opinion on the merits of the case, the instant bail
application is allowed.
9. Let the applicant- Sajid @ Sajid Pardhan be released on
bail in the aforesaid case on furnishing a personal bond and
two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the
court concerned with the following conditions:-
(i) The applicant shall appear before the trial court on the dates
fixed, unless his personal presence is exempted.
(ii) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly, make
inducement, threat or promise to any person acquainted with the
facts of the case so as to dissuade him from disclosing such
facts to the Court or any police officer or tamper with the
evidence.
(iii) The applicant shall not indulge in any criminal and anti-
social activity.
10. In case of breach of any of the above condition, the
prosecution will be at liberty to move an application before this
Court for cancellation of the bail of the applicant.
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad