This petition has been filed by the State of Uttar Pradesh
challenging the order dated 17.05.2021 passed by the Division Bench
of the High Court in Public Interest Litigation No. 574 of 2020 in
Re:  Inhuman   condition  of  quarantine  centres  and  for  providing
better treatment to corona positive.
At the outset, we may appreciate the efforts made by the High
Court of Allahabad as well as various other High Courts in taking
up the matters relating to management of COVID-19 in different
parts of the country.    The initiative in this regard by various
High Courts is laudable.   However, while dealing with such matters,
because of the concern and anxiety which the courts may have for
the corona patients and the general public, and in an endeavour to
grant utmost relief to those suffering, sometimes unwittingly, the
Courts overstep and pass certain orders which may not be capable of
being implemented.
In the present case, the petitioner is aggrieved by the order
dated  17.05.2021.     According   to  Shri  Tushar   Mehta,  learned
Solicitor General appearing for the State of U.P., howsoever much
the State may be desirous of implementing the directions issued by
the High Court, the same are incapable of being implemented. As an
example, learned SG has brought to our notice the direction as has
been issued in paragraph 18 of the said order that every ‘B’ Grade
and ‘C’ Grade town of the State should be provided with at least 20
ambulances, and further that every village should be provided with
at least 2 ambulances having Intensive Care Unit facilities, and
the same should be done within one month. Learned SG has submitted
that there are over 97000 villages in the State of U.P. and it is
practically and humanly impossible to provide two ambulances with
such facilities in each village in the entire State in such a short
period. Learned SG has stated that the endeavour of the State is to
provide as many facilities as possible and they are prepared to
work in that direction but the order issued to that effect which
cannot  be  implemented  would   cause  embarrassment  to  the  State
Government and officers who may not be able to implement the same
and could be hauled up by the Court.
Another example which the learned SG has placed before us is
in paragraph 17, whereby it has been directed that all nursing
homes in the state should have oxygen facility on every bed, and
nursing homes which have more than 20 beds should have at least 40
per cent beds as Intensive Care Units and of the designated 40 per
cent, 25 per cent should have ventilators, 25 per cent should have
High Flow Nasal Cannula and 50 per cent of the 40 per cent reserved
beds should have bipap machines, which should be compulsory for all
the nursing homes/hospitals in the State. Another direction pointed
out is that all the 5 medical colleges in the State be upgraded at
the level of Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute, Lucknow within a
period four months, and if necessary, emergency laws should be
applied for the acquisition of land for them.      Learned SG submits
that it is practically not feasible to upgrade the medical colleges
as   postgraduate  institutes   of   the   level   of   Sanjay  Gandhi
Postgraduate Institute of Medical Sciences, Lucknow especially in
such   a short  period.  The  further   submission   is  that  certain
directions/observations have also been made requiring big medical
companies to manufacture vaccines after taking formula from just
any of the vaccine manufacturers in the world and start producing
vaccine, which also, according to learned SG, is incapable of being
implemented by the State Government, and may also have national and
international ramifications.
Learned  SG  has  also  brought   to  our   notice  that  certain
observations have been made with regard to the existing medical
facilities in the State and the Court has observed that the entire
medical   system   of  the  State   pertaining    to  smaller   cities  and
villages are “Ram Bharose”, i.e. in the hands of God. According to
him, such observations demoralize the spirit of doctors and para
medical staff who are working day and night and are trying their
level   best  to  take   full  care  of    the  rising   number  of  corona
patients.
In our view, the submission that such observations were not
warranted and the same may create panic amongst the citizens of the
State and nullify the endeavours of the State Government in doing
whatever best they are able to do for control of the pandemic and
give relief to the patients, has some force.
These are some of the observations/directions which, in our
view, may be well meaning, and may have been passed by the Court in
the   anxiety   for   the  good  of    the   general   public,   but  since
apparently the same are incapable of being implemented, the said
directions need to be treated by the State Government only as
observations and as advise of the Court, and not directions passed
by the Court.     By our passing this order, it would not mean that
the State Government is not to work in the direction of providing
the facilities to the patients and the citizens of the State which
are capable of being implemented as per the guidance of the High
Court by order dated 17.05.2021.       We hope and trust that the State
Government will make every endeavour to provide as many facilities
as possible.
Learned SG has further submitted that some directions issued
by the High Court vide the impugned order and also earlier orders
with regard to the control of pandemic and supply of medicines and
treatment etc. may have ramifications affecting the other States
also and while passing such directions the High Court should take
into consideration the overall/complete picture at the national
level.  He  has  further  submitted  that  there  are  certain  policy
decisions to be taken, which are in the domain of the Executive,
which has the benefit of experts opinion and also has the complete
data, which, according to the learned SG, may not be available with
the Court and, as such, the same should be best left for the
Executive to deal with.
Learned  SG  has  further  submitted  that  since  the  concerned
issues are matters of grave importance and because such matters are
also pending in other High Courts and are mostly being dealt with
by the Bench presided over by the Chief Justice of the respective
High Courts, it would be desirable that this matter may also be
dealt with by the Bench presided over by the Chief Justice of the
Be that as it may, it is a normal practice, which is also
desirable, that such matters of public importance are dealt with by
the  Bench  presided  over  by   the Chief   Justice,  but  since  the
constitution of Benches is the prerogative of the Chief Justice, in
our view, it would be for the Chief Justice of the High Court to
consider such aspect and pass appropriate orders.
Further while again appreciating the efforts of the judges of
the High Court in looking to the matter in depth while passing
orders, we are of the opinion that the High Court should normally
consider the possibility of the implementation of the directions
given by it, and such directions which are incapable of being
implemented should be avoided. The doctrine of impossibility, in
our view, would be equally applicable to Court orders as well.
While concluding, we may also mention that in matters which
have transnational and international ramifications, the High Court
should normally refrain from issuing directions in such matters,
especially when such matters of national level are being considered
by this Court in separate proceedings.
Considering the totality of the facts and circumstances, we
thus stay the impugned order dated 17.05.2021.  However, we make it
clear that further proceedings before the High Court are not being
stayed.
We direct that this matter be now listed on 14.07.2021.
We  appoint  Mr.  Nidhesh Gupta,  learned  senior  counsel, as
Amicus Curiae to assist the Court in this matter.
The Registry is directed to supply a copy of this petition to
Mr. Nidhesh Gupta within three days.