Vijay s/o Shankarrao Talewar and others
The State of Maharashtra and others
Office notes, Office Memoranda of
Coram, appearances, Court's orders                 Court's or Judge's Orders.
or directions and Registrar's orders.
Mr. F.T.Mirza, Advocate for the petitioners.
Mr. D.P. Thakare, Addl. G.P. for respondent nos.1, 2 and
Mr. S.M. Puranik, Advocate for respondent nos. 3 and 4.
Mr. S.S.Sanyal, Advocate for Intervenor.
Mr. Aradhya Pande, Advocate for respondent no.6.
Mr. Atharva Manohar, Advocate for Intervenor-respondent
no.11.
Ms. Ankita Kamlesh Shah is personally present
before the Court and she has no objection, if the
Vakalatnama is withdrawn by Mr. Sundeep R. Badana as her
Advocate. The learned counsel has filed Pursis vide Stamp
Advocate is discharged as Advocate for Ms. Ankita Kamlesh
2.         Shri Bhandarkar, learned counsel submits that only
for the purpose of tendering an unconditional apology to
this Court, he appears for Ms. Ankita Kamlesh Shah. On
the next date, he will file an affidavit of an unconditional
apology and for this purpose, he requires some time.
has filed his affidavit tendering unconditional apology in
response to the show cause notice issued to him on the last
occasion. His affidavit of apology is not happily worded but,
we are willing to grant leniency to the Deputy
Commissioner - Dr. Gajendra Pandhari Mahalle with the
hope that he has realised now the responsibility and duty of
his office. The unconditional apology is accepted and the
issue of proposed contempt action against him is closed.
4.         Mr. Mirza, learned counsel for the petitioners
submits that the Commissioner of Police has only issued a
Circular directing the Police Stations to take appropriate
action in terms of the order of this Court initiating action
under Section 44 of the Maharashtra Police Act, 1951.
According to him, without publication of notice, no action
under Section 44 of the Maharashtra Police Act, can be
taken and, therefore, the issuance of such Circular would not
suffice any purpose.
5.         We are of the view that unless some information is
received by the Commissioner of Police regarding nuisance
created by dogs in particular locality, the Commissioner of
Police would not be in a position to exercise his statutory
powers and this information, if it is credible and disclosing
real nuisance, can possibly come amongst others, from the
concerned Police Stations. Therefore, we find nothing
wrong in issuing the Circular on the part of the
Commissioner of Police.
6.         Mr.  Atharva    Manohar,      learned       counsel         for
respondent no.11 submits that on the directions of NMC,
his organization apprehended four stray dogs and as per
further directions of the Corporation, also sterlised three out
of four. He further submits that fourth one could not be
sterilised, as he is too young and also sick. He further
submits that now there is an issue about custody of the four
stray dogs. He submits that if permission is granted by this
Court to respondent no.11 to either retain the custody of
four stray dogs or to give them in adoption to respondent
no.11, it would ensure the welfare of these four stray dogs.
We are in agreement with the said submission of learned
counsel for respondent no.11 and, therefore, we grant
permission to respondent no.11, as sought for.
7.         We direct the Nagpur Municipal Corporation to
clarify as to whether or not the dogs which have been
collared by the Corporation Authorities have been sterilised
and if so, whether their ears have been clip pet and/or
tattooed and as to whether or not tokens have been issued to
those dogs while maintaining the register of such sterilised
dogs. We direct the Nagpur Municipal Corporation to place
before us the register of sterilisation of dogs on the next date.
Stand over to 4th January, 2023.