1. The appellant-Insurance Company has challenged the Award dated
30.07.2012 (for short ‘impugned judgment) passed by the learned
MACT Srinagar in a Claim Petition titled Mehra Begum & Ors. Vs.
Gh. Mohi u din Rafique & Ors., whereby the amount of ₹3,27,864/-
together with interest @ 6% P.A from the date of institution of the
Claim Petition, has been granted as        compensation in favour of
claimants /respondents 1 to 5 payable by the appellant Company.
2. The impugned judgment has been assailed on the following grounds:-
“a) That on account of the admitted factual position as
recorded in the pleadings the subject vehicle was an
oil tanker not authorized to ferry passengers and the
deceased admittedly had stopped the oil tanker and
boarded the same for travelling from Srinagar to
Jammu. In that view of the matter, the deceased could
under no circumstances be regarded as a third party
on the strength of which the claimants could seek
indemnification from the appellant company. In view
of the settled legal position, the liability on all counts
arising out of the said accident has to be squarely
borne by the owner of the vehicle and insurance
company could not be held liable to pay compensation
to the claimants.
b) That the perusal of the award would reveal that the
Tribunal has tried to carve out a case for bracketing
the deceased as third party which fact is contrary to
the pleadings which were available before the trial
c) That the trial Tribunal has also ignored the evidence
led by the company in terms whereof it was positively
established that the subject vehicle was an oil tanker
and there was no question of ferrying passengers in it.
This aspect of the matter has been totally ignored by
the trial Tribunal and the trial Tribunal has illegally
and improperly imposed the liability upon the
appellant company.
d) That the grant of interest in view of the facts and
circumstances of the case, is not inconsonance with
law and justice keeping in view the fact that the award
passed earlier by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal,
Udhampur was restricted to ₹2,17,000/- and that too
without payment of interest because of the delay
caused by the claimants in approaching the Tribunal
for seeking payment of compensation.”
4. Learned counsel for the appellants has argued that the appellant
Company has been saddled with the liability of payment of
compensation to the claimants, though it was not liable to pay the same,
as the deceased, for whom the compensation had been awarded, was the
gratuitous passenger travelling in the Oil Tanker owned by respondents
6 & 7 and insured with the appellant Company. He has further argued
that the offending vehicle was not a passenger vehicle and the deceased
who was stated to be a police official had travelled by the said vehicle
driven by Rajeet Singh-respondent No.8 as a gratuitous passenger from
Srinagar to Jammu, which met with an accident on the way, the
passenger Habib-ullah Bhat got injured and as a result succumbed to his
injuries. He has further submitted that the legal heirs/claimants of the
deceased filed the Claim Petition before the MACT Udhampur in the
year 1997 which held that the deceased had travelled by the offending
vehicle as the gratuitous passenger, as such, the appellant Company was
not liable to indemnify the insured.
5. He next argued that the owner of the offending vehicle filed the appeal
before the High Court, and the Single Bench of this Court maintained
the order passed by the Udhampur Tribunal and confirmed the liability
of compensation to be paid by the owner. Thereafter, LPA was
preferred by the owner before the Division Bench of this Court on the
plea that he was served of notice as party respondent during the
pendency of the Claim Petition and was not granted an opportunity to
lead evidence in the matter. Division Bench, considering this aspect of
the matter, was pleased to set aside the order passed by the Tribunal and
de novo trial was directed to be conducted and simultaneously the
matter was also transferred to MACT Srinagar.
6. He further argued that during the pendency of the Claim Petition, the
respondent-owner filed an application seeking amendment in the written
statement by incorporating the plea that the deceased was wearing
police uniform and he had stopped the offending vehicle, and it is in
that view of the matter that he had boarded the Oil Tanker; that after
providing the opportunity to the parties to lead evidence, the Srinagar
Tribunal proceeded to pass the award directing payment of ₹ 3,27,864/-
together with simple interest @ 6% P.A from the date of institution of
the Claim Petition.
7. Mr. Dar, learned counsel for the appellants vehemently argued that
there was neither any pleadings nor any evidence was led by the
respondent-owner to prove that the deceased was the gratuitous
passenger and had travelled by the offending vehicle insured with the
appellant Company after paying anything, rather they had taken the plea
that the deceased as a Policeman was the gratuitous passenger. Mr. Dar
further argued that without pleadings no fact can be proved, as such, the
deceased had to be treated as gratuitous passenger and in view of the
breach of the terms of the contract/insurance policy, the appellant
Company was not liable to indemnify the insured of his liability to pay
compensation to the claimants. He has further argued that the learned
Presiding Officer of the Tribunal had read the evidence in isolation of
the pleadings which was not permissible and that the appellant
Company which had deposited the awarded amount, be held entitled to
recover the same from the respondent owners of the offending vehicle.
Following Rulings were relied upon by Mr. Dar, to buttress his
8. Mr. Tibetbakal, learned counsel for the contesting respondents 6 & 7 -
owners of the offending vehicle, on the other hand, argued that before
the amendment of 1994 in the Motor Vehicles Act, the gratuitous
passengers were also entitled to compensation as was held by the High
Court of Himachal Pradesh in the case titled New India Assurance Co.
Ltd. Vs. Veena Devi & Ors. reported as ‘2007 ACJ 460’ and by the
Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case titled New India Assurance Co.
Vs. Satpal Singh & Ors. reported as (2000) 1 SCC 237. He has argued
that the accident, wherein the deceased had died, had taken place on
22.07.1990, when the amendment was not there. He has further argued
that the plea of the learned counsel for the appellant to the extent that
the evidence cannot be read without pleadings, is untenable, in view of
the fact, that the claim proceedings before the MACT is not like a
regular suit before the Civil Court but it is an enquiry to be conducted
by the Tribunal even without pleadings, therefore, the strict rules of the
Civil Procedure Code are not required to be applied before the Tribunal.
Learned counsel further pleaded that the son of the deceased had stated
before the Tribunal that he was with his father when he had boarded the
offending vehicle after negotiating the fare to be paid by him with the
driver, as such, the deceased had travelled after making payment of fare,
therefore, he cannot be stated to be the gratuitous passenger. It was
finally prayed by him that the appeal filed by the appellant Company be
dismissed and the award passed by the learned Tribunal be maintained.
9. The moot question to be decided in this Appeal is that whether the
Appellant Company, as insurer, was not liable to indemnify the insured
owners of the offending vehicle to make payment of compensation to
the claimants. The accident, wherein deceased had died, had taken place
on 22.07.1990 when the Motor Vehicles Act 1988 was in force.
10. Learned counsel for respondents 6 & 7 - owners of the offending
vehicle submitted that since the accident had taken place in the year
1990, therefore, the law laid down by the Apex Court in a case titled
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Satpal Singh & Ors., reported as
(2000) 1 SCC 237, has to be made applicable in this case also, wherein
it has been held that the gratuitous or non-gratuitous passenger of a
goods vehicle was also entitled to be compensated and the
compensation was to be indemnified by the insurer. The Apex Court in
this case had proceeded on the assumption that the provisions of 1939
Act and the provisions of 1988 Act are in pari materia. While
interpreting the provisions contained in Sections 147 and 149 of the
Motor Vehicles Act, it was held that under the 1988 Act, the insurance
policy covering 3rd party risk is not required to exclude a gratuitous
passengers in a vehicle, no matter that the vehicle is of any type or
class.
11.The mater again came up before the larger Bench of three Judges of
Supreme Court in a case titled New India Assurance Company Ltd.
Vs. Asha Rani & Ors. reported as (2003) 2 SCC 223, and the
correctness of the decision in Satpal Singh’s case (supra) was also
considered. Hon’ble Apex Court in Asha Rani’s case held as under:-
“23. The applicability of decision of this Court
in Mallawwa (Smt.) & Ors. v. Oriental Insurance
Company Ltd. & Ors. [(1999) 1 SCC 403] in this case
must   be    considered   keeping   that    aspect   in
view. Section 2(35) of 1988 Act does not include
passengers in goods carriage whereas Section 2(25) of
1939 Act did as even passengers could be carried in a
goods vehicle. The difference in the definitions of the
"goods vehicle" in 1939 Act and "goods carriage" in
1988 Act is significant. By reason of the change in the
definitions of the terminology, the Legislature intended
that a goods vehicle could not carry any passenger, as
the words "in addition to passengers" occurring in the
definition of goods vehicle in 1939 Act were
12. Hon’ble Supreme Court again in a case titled National Insurance Co.
Ltd. Vs. Baljit Kaur & Ors., reported as (2004) 2 SCC 1, speaking
through the three Judge Bench in Para 21 held as under:-
“21. The upshot of the aforementioned discussions is
that instead and in place of the insurer the owner of
the vehicle shall be liable to satisfy the decree. The
question, however, would be as to whether keeping in
view the fact that the law was not clear so long such a
direction would be fair and equitable. We do not think
so. We, therefore, clarify the legal position which shall
have prospective effect. The Tribunal as also the High
Court had proceeded in terms of the decision of this
Court in Satpal Singh. The said decision has been
overruled only in Asha Rani. We, therefore, are of the
opinion that the interest of justice will be subserved if
the appellant herein is directed to satisfy the awarded
amount in favour of the claimant, if not already
satisfied, and recover the same from the owner of the
vehicle. For the purpose of such recovery, it would not
be necessary for the insurer to file a separate suit but it
may initiate a proceeding before the executing court as
if the dispute between the insurer and the owner was
the subject-matter of determination before the Tribunal
and the issue is decided against the owner and in
favour    of   the   insurer.   We    have   issued    the
aforementioned directions having regard to the scope
and purport of Section 168 of the Motor Vehicles Act,
1988, in terms whereof, it is not only entitled to
determine the amount of claim as put forth by the
claimant for recovery thereof from the insurer, owner
or driver of the vehicle jointly or severally but also the
dispute between the insurer on the one hand and the
owner or driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
inasmuch as can be resolved by the Tribunal in such a
proceeding.”
13. In a case titled National Insurance Co. Lts. Vs. Cholleti
Bharatamma & Ors., reported as (2008) 1 SCC 432, the Apex Court
also held that inevitable conclusion is that the provisions of the Act do
not enjoin any statutory liability on the owner of a vehicle to get his
vehicle insured for any passenger travelling in a goods carriage and the
insurer would have no liability therefor.
14. Hon’ble Supreme Court in a case titled Manager National Insurance
Co. Ltd. Vs. Saju P. Paul & Anr., reported as (2013) 2 SCR 1, after
discussing all the cases right from Satpal Singh case (supra) observed
that Section 147 as originally existed in 1988 Act being applicable and
accordingly, judgment of the Supreme Court in Asha Rani case was
fully attracted. It was further observed that the High Court committed
grave error in holding that Section 147(1)(b)(i) takes within its fold any
liability which may be incurred by the insurer in respect of the death or
bodily injury to any person. This view had been taken in a case where
the claimant was travelling in a vehicle in the course of his employment
being a spare driver of the Firm, though he was not driving the vehicle
at the relevant time and had been directed to go to worksite by his
employer.
15. The claimants initially had preferred the Claim Petition before the
MACT Udhampur which had granted compensation of ₹ 2.17 lac for the
death of one Habibullah Bhat S/O Mohammad Usman Bhat, while
travelling as off-duty Policeman from Srinagar to Jammu in a vehicle
bearing registration No.JKD 4199 (Oil Tanker) had met with an
accident in Udhampur district on 22.07.1990. The Award, challenged
before the Single Bench of this Court, was upheld and the liability fixed
by the Tribunal on the owners of the offending vehicle was confirmed,
however, in an LPA filed by the owners of the offending vehicle, the
Division Bench of this Court had set aside the order of Single Bench for
the reason that the owners had not been served by the Tribunal before
passing of the Award and the Petition was also transferred to the MACT
Srinagar. The Srinagar Tribunal vide judgment dated 30.07.2012, on the
basis of the statement of one Mehraj ud din (son of the deceased), that
the deceased before boarding the offending vehicle had negotiated with
regard to the fare to be paid for travelling to Jammu and that his father
was in the Police Uniform, therefore, the deceased cannot be stated to
be a gratuitous passenger, as such, the Insurance Company, as insurer,
was liable to indemnify the liability of the owners of the offending
vehicle.
16. In view of the law discussed hereinabove, as interpreted by the Hon’ble
Apex Court, the Tribunal had misdirected itself to hold that in view of
the deceased being non-gratuitous passenger on payment of fare, the
insurer was liable to indemnify the insured. This could have been
possible, had the law laid down by the Apex Court in Satpal Singh’s
case (supra) would not have been overruled. However, the judgment
had been overruled by the Hon’ble Apex Court in the later judgments as
discussed hereinabove. The liability of the insurer could not be there
even if the deceased would have been non-gratuitous passenger in a
carriage vehicle as decided by the Tribunal in view of the law laid down
by Hon’ble Apex Court in all the judgments after Satpal Singh’s case
17. In a claim with regard to death or disability of a person travelling by a
goods vehicle /goods carriage, as gratuitous or non-gratuitous does not,
by the application of statutory provisions of Motor Vehicles Act, fasten
the liability on the insurer, except an owner of the load /goods travelling
in the vehicle having such load /goods. In the aforesaid backdrop of the
case, the judgment impugned requires to be interfered with to the extent
of liability on the appellant-insurer. The impugned judgment is ordered
to be modified holding that the appellant –insurer was not liable to
indemnify the liability of the insured-owners of the offending vehicle.
18. In this backdrop, it is directed that the awarded amount along-with
simple interest @ 6% P.A. shall be satisfied by the appellant-insurer
payable to the claimants and the appellant shall have the right of
recovery from the owners of the offending vehicle- respondents 6 & 7,
in accordance with law.
19. Appeal is, accordingly, disposed of in terms of the above, with no order
as to costs. Record of the Tribunal be sent back along-with a copy of
this judgment, for information and compliance.