The appellant is the married sister-in-law (Jethani) of the
deceased, and aggrieved by her conviction under Section 302, 34 IPC
and Sections 3 and 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act sentencing her
for life with a default stipulation.
The deceased died in the matrimonial home on 16.07.2008 in
about one and a half years of the marriage suffering 95% burn
injuries.               PW-2, the younger brother of deceased aged about 11 to
12 years is the sole eye witness.
Shri Tripurari Ray, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellant, submitted that she had taken a specific defence in her
statement              under  Section   313   Cr.P.C.  that she   resided  in her
matrimonial              home,   which  was   separate  and at  a   distance. The
appellant, according to PW-2, is stated to have stuffed cloth in
the mouth of the deceased after which she was set on fire by other
accused. This crucial allegation was never put to the appellant
under Section 313 CrPC thus depriving her of a valuable opportunity
of defence which vitiates her conviction. It is next submitted that
PW-2 is not a reliable eye-witness inviting attention to certain
contradictions  in his  evidence.    In  addition,  reliance  has been
further placed on the evidence of DW-3 in support of the separate
mess and residence of the appellant from her parental home.
Shri Sandeep Singh, learned counsel appearing for the State,
submitted that PW-2 was a reliable witness.      He is the brother of
the deceased.  There is no reason to disbelieve him and nothing has
been elicited in the cross-examination to discredit his reliability
as a witness including his presence.         The allegation that the
deceased was set on fire is fully corroborated by the medical
evidence.   The matrimonial residence of the appellant was not at
such a distance so as to make her presence improbable, merely being
40 to 50 steps away.
We have considered the submissions.     Apart from the appellant,
the husband of the deceased namely Pramod, his brother Neetu and
mother have also been made accused.      The appellant is the wife of
another brother of the husband of the deceased namely Mappal – who
is not an accused.
Criminal jurisprudence does not hold that the evidence of a
child witness is unreliable and can be discarded.       A child who is
aged about 11 to 12 years certainly has reasonably developed mental
faculty to see, absorb and appreciate. In a given case the evidence
of a child witness alone can also form the basis for conviction.
The mere absence of any corroborative evidence in addition to that
of the child witness by itself cannot alone discredit a child
witness.   But the Courts have regularly held that where a child
witness is to be considered, and more so when he is the sole
witness,  a   heightened   level   of   scrutiny  is   called  for  of  the
evidence   so  that   the   Court   is   satisfied   with   regard  to  the
reliability and genuineness of the evidence of the child witness.
PW-2 was examined nearly one year after the occurrence.           The Court
has,  therefore,    to   satisfy   itself    that  all   possibilities   of
tutoring  or   otherwise   are  ruled    out  and  what   was  deposed  was
nothing but the truth.
The   evidence   of   a  child   witness   and   the   manner  of  its
consideration has been dealt with in State of M.P. vs. Ramesh,
“14. In view of the above, the law on the issue can
be summarised to the effect that the deposition of a
child witness may require corroboration, but in case
his deposition inspires the confidence of the court
and there is no embellishment or improvement therein,
the court may rely upon his evidence. The evidence of
a child witness must be evaluated more carefully with
greater circumspection because he is susceptible to
tutoring. Only in case there is evidence on record to
show that a child has been tutored, the court can
reject his statement partly or fully. However, an
inference as to whether child has been tutored or not,
can be drawn from the contents of his deposition.”
The allegation that the appellant stuffed cloth in the mouth
of the deceased was serious and specific against her.            We are of
the considered opinion that in absence of any question having been
put to her in this regard under Section 313 CrPC the appellant has
been seriously prejudiced in her defence. It has repeatedly been
held that the procedure under Section 313 CrPC is but a facet of
the  principles   of   natural  justice    giving  an   opportunity  to  an
accused to present the defence.       The burden of proof on an accused
in support of the defence taken under Section 313 CrPC is not
beyond all reasonable doubt as it lies on the prosecution to prove
the charge.   The accused has merely to create a doubt.     It will be
for the prosecution then to establish beyond reasonable doubt that
no benefit can flow from the same to the accused.        The mere fact
that the house of the appellant was at near quarters cannot ipso
facto lead to a conclusion with regard to her presence in her
parental home at the time of occurrence.          It is a fact to be
established and assessed from the evidence on record.
In Janak Yadav v. State of Bihar, (1999) 9 SCC 125, it was
“5. Section 313 CrPC prescribes a procedural
safeguard for an accused facing the trial to be
granted an opportunity to explain the facts and
circumstances    appearing      against   him    in   the
prosecution’s evidence. That opportunity is a valuable
one and cannot be ignored. It is not a case of
defective examination under Section 313 CrPC where the
question of prejudice may be examined but a case of no
examination at all under Section 313 CrPC and as such
the question whether or not the appellants have been
prejudiced on account of that omission is really of no
relevance….”
According to PW-2, the appellant stuffed cloth in the mouth of
the deceased, thereafter others tied her up and set her on fire
leading to 95% burns.   Events happened in continuity as is evident
from  the  deposition  of  PW-2,    where  he  states  that  after the
deceased had suffered burn injuries he had seen the entire scenario
including the room where the burnt articles were kept including
that he was a witness to his sister being put in a vehicle while
being taken to the hospital.     He then states that the deceased in
that condition was speaking. At no stage has the witness deposed
that the cloth was taken out from her mouth. It stands to reason
that if cloth was stuffed in the mouth of deceased she would have
been unable to speak.
PW-8 the Doctor who examined the deceased when she was brought
to the hospital did not depose that the deceased was unable to
speak.   He only said that she was in a serious condition.         The
witness deposed that there was no cloth recovered from the mouth of
the deceased.  At this juncture the evidence of PW-5 the doctor who
performed the post-mortem the very next day is relevant. He states
that the mouth of the deceased was closed, the jaws were shut, no
cloth was present in the mouth but burnt cloth was present on the
whole body starting from the wrist.      More crucially he states that
all the 32 teeth were intact.       Blisters were present at various
parts of the body but he does not talk about any blister being
present in the mouth.    The discussion and reasoning by the trial
court that absence of any cloth in the mouth was irrelevant because
if the deceased suffered hundred per cent burns the cloth naturally
could not be available, suggesting that it would have been burnt
also is completely fallacious.
We have already noticed no injuries of any nature have been
found inside the mouth neither has the cloth been found. PW-5 has
further deposed that all the 32 teeth were intact. In the aforesaid
background, we are not sure and satisfied that the evidence of PW-2
attributing a specific role to the appellant is of such a sterling
quality  so as  to  inspire  confidence    in  the court  to base  the
conviction on the sole evidence of a child witness.      The appellant
was a daughter-in-law like the deceased herself.    The nature of the
evidence makes it highly unlikely that she would have engaged in
such actions. The benefit of doubt in the circumstances has to be
given to the appellant.
We, therefore, set aside the judgment under appeal and give
the benefit of doubt to the appellant.       She is directed to be
released forthwith unless wanted in any other case.
The Appeal stands allowed.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand(s) disposed of.
Petition(s) for Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.)   No(s).   3319/2021
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 08-04-2019
in CRLA No. 1319/2010 passed by the High Court of Judicature at
Date : 28-07-2021 This petition was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
Leave granted.
The appeal stands allowed in terms of signed order.
Pending application(s), if any, shall stand(s) disposed of.