Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 216 of 2023
Counsel for Applicant :- Manoj Kumar Misra
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Heard Sri Manoj Kumar Misra, learned counsel for the
applicant and Sri Rajesh Kumar Singh, learned AGA for the
By means of this application filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C.,
the applicant has prayed following main reliefs:-
"For the facts, reason and circumstances as stated in
accompanying affidavit it is most respectfully prayed before
this Hon'ble Court that it may kindly be pleased to set aside the
order dated 17.11.2022 passed in Session Trail no.70/2015
State Vs. Brijesh Saurabh Mishra and others, arising out Crime
concerning police station Antu District Pratapgarh pending in
the Court of Additional Session Judge Court No.05, Pratapgarh
by means of which he has closed the opportunity of cross
examination for the applicant and also set aside the order dated
25.11.2022 passed by Additional Sessions Judge, court no.05
Pratapgarh in aforesaid case and direct Leaned Court below to
recall the witness and allow the applicant to cross examine him
in the interest of justice.
It is further prayed before this Hon'ble Court that it may kindly
be pleased to stay further proceeding in aforesaid case, during
the pendency of this case in interest of justice."
The precise contention of the learned counsel for the applicant
is that the learned trial court vide order dated 17.11.2022
recorded the chief statement of one PW-11, Uma Shankar
Tripathi. On that, particularly at that point of time, counsel for
the applicant was busy in another court, therefore, one
application was filed on his behalf to adjourn the case as his
counsel was not able to cross-examine PW-11 Uma Shankar
Tripathi. Learned trial court rejected the said application for the
reason that the counsel for the present applicant had not
indicated about the court where he was busy.
Since no adjournment of any kind whatsoever was sought
earlier to cross-examine PW-11, rather the chief-examination of
the said witness was recorded on 17.11.2022, therefore, at least,
one short time should be given to the counsel for the applicant
in terms of Section 273 Cr.P.C., which clearly provided that
except as otherwise expressly provided, all evidence taken in
the court of the trial or other proceedings shall be taken in the
presence of the accused or when his personal attendance is
dispensed with, in the presence of his pleader. On the strength
of aforesaid legal proposition, the present applicant has filed an
application dated 25.11.2022 (Annexure No.5) under Section
311 Cr.P.C. to recall the order dated 17.11.2022 and to provide
one opportunity to cross-examine PW-11. By means of order
dated 25.11.2022 (Annexure No.6), learned trial court rejected
the said application indicating therein that the cases relating to
MP/MLA should be disposed of with expedition in terms of
directions being issued by the Hon'ble High Court and said
matter was old, therefore, adjournment was not possible.
Learned trial court has also indicated that the counsel had not
indicated in his application about the court where he was busy.
Therefore, the ground of business of any Advocate on particular
date may not be a good ground to adjourn the case.
Sri Misra has sated that had this case been in a nature that
frequent adjournment had been sought from the side of the
present applicant, the observation of the learned trial court
would have been appropriated but in the present case,
admittedly, on the date when the chief-examination of PW-11
was recorded, the opportunity of cross-examination of such
witness has been closed by the learned trial court. The aforesaid
exercise is violative of Section 273 Cr.P.C. Therefore, he has
requested that quashing the orders dated 17.11.2022 and
25.11.2022, the present applicant may be afforded an
opportunity to cross-examine PW-11.
Learned AGA has opposed the aforesaid request and has
submitted that PW-11 has only proved chik FIR and if he has
not been cross-examined by the applicant, the applicant might
have not suffered any irreparable loss and that may not be
considered as miscarriage of justice to the present applicant,
therefore, the orders dated 17.11.2022 and 25.11.2022 passed
by the learned trial court need no interference.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material
available on record.
This is trite law as well as it has got statutory prescription under
Section 273 Cr.P.C. that all evidences taken in the court of trial
or other proceedings shall be taken in the presence of the
accused or if his personal attendance is dispensed with, in the
presence of his pleader. That statutory prescription may not be
avoided. Besides, this is not a case where the frequent
adjournments have been sought from the side of the present
applicant, rather it was the first application for adjournment
filed on 17.11.2022 when the chief-examination of PW-11 has
been recorded and on the same date, such opportunity has been
closed without giving any short adjournment, therefore, the
same may not be considered as a proper exercise being carried
out by the learned trial court. Learned counsel might have been
busy in another court at particular point of time and if such
application was filed before the learned court below, that
application should have been considered properly in the light of
statutory prescription of Section 273 Cr.P.C. vis-a-vis in the
light of the fact that the cross-examination of a witness is a right
of the other side. Such right may be denied only in exceptional
circumstances or in such circumstances where the order sheet
reveals that the other side/ party is habitual in seeking
adjournments for one reason or another.
Therefore, in view of the facts and circumstances, considered
above, I am of the considered opinion that the impugned orders
dated 17.11.2022 and 25.11.2022 have not been passed
properly, therefore, both the orders are set aside.
Learned trial court is directed to provide one opportunity to the
present applicant/ his counsel to cross-examine PW-11 fixing a
single date, may be a short date, and if on that date, said
prosecution witness could not be examined for any lapse on the
part of the present applicant, any appropriate orders may be
passed indicating the reason. Since the trial in question is of
2015, therefore, the precaution to that effect, which has been
taken by the learned trial court, is appreciated, but in the light of
such precaution, a single opportunity to cross-examine PW-11
may not be denied.
Accordingly, the application is allowed.