Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 27194 of 2021
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
1-Today, when the case is taken up, Mr. Ram Ker Singh, learned
counsel, (Enrollment No. UP 4309 of 1980, Advocate Roll No.
Court Allahabad, Mobile Nos. 9451302056 and 9807344717), has appeared
in this case on behalf of the applicant, whereas Mr. Hausila Prasad, learned
Hall IInd Floor, High Court, Allahabad, resident of 475 Rajapur, near police
booth, Prayagraj, 211001) has appeared on behalf of opposite party No.
2/informant, Gurdeep Verma, who is father of the victim/prosecutrix aged
about 15 years.
2-Learned counsel for the applicant after advancing his argument at
some length, stated that Mr. Hausila Prasad, learned counsel for the
informant/complainant also has no objection in granting bail to the
applicant. On being enquired by this Court, Mr. Hausila Prasad, learned
Advocate did not oppose the submissions of learned Counsel for the
applicant. In the meantime, Mr. Vivek Kumar Singh, learned Advocate
(Enrollment No. A/V-0571/2012, U.P.B.C. No. 2590 of 1998, Mobile No.
9412207892) appeared in this case and by raising a preliminary objection,
apprised the Court that in fact only he has the instructions on behalf of
informant, Gurdeep Verma S/o Heman Verma, resident of Mohalla Sarai
Gosain, police station Kotwali City, district Bulandshahr and not Mr.
Hausala Prasad, Acvocate, who has filed forged Vakalatnama on behalf of
the informant. He also pointed out that Mr. Hausila Prasad, Advocate has
filed his Vakalatnama on 26th of July, 2021 through E-mode in collusion
with Mr. Ram Ker Singh, learned counsel for the applicant only to obtain
bail by hook or crook and in fact the said Vakalatnama is a forged document,
whereas the fact is that the informant/complainant, Gurdeep Verma has not
engaged him.
3-When Mr. Hausila Prasad was confronted with the submissions of
Mr. Vivek Kumar Singh, Advocate that he has instructions on behalf of the
informant/complainant, Mr. Hausila Prasad, learned Advocate stated at the
bar that the said Vakalatnama has been provided to him by Mr. Ram Ker
Singh, learned counsel for the applicant. It is also submitted by Mr. Hausila
Prasad that he is associated with Mr. Ram Ker Singh, learned counsel
appearing for the applicant. It is further submitted that his fee to appear in
this case on behalf of the informant has also been given by Mr. Ram Ker
Singh, learned counsel for the applicant. He was engaged by Mr. Ram Ker
Singh, for the reason that the Hon'ble Court may not issue the notices to the
informant/complainant, Gurdeep Verma and victim of this case, because the
present matter pertains to offence under Section 376(2)(i), 506 IPC and 3/4
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, registered as Case Crime
No. 434 of 2021 at police station Kotwali Nagar, district Bulandshahr and
grant bail to the applicant.
4-From the aforesaid statements made by Mr. Hausila Prasad, learned
Advocate at the bar, who has appeared in this case on behalf of
informant/complainant, it is ostensibly clear that forged Vakalatnama has
been filed on behalf of informant/complainant to surreptitiously obtain bail.
Hard copy of the aforesaid "Vakalatnama" in question is made part of the
5-At this stage, Mr. Hausila Prasad learned counsel has tendered his
unconditional apology by stating that in future he will take care of such
things and will not repeat such mistake in future and also stated that he
wants to withdraw his aforesaid Vakalatnama, whereas Mr. Ram Ker Singh,
learned counsel did not tender his apology and stated at the bar that it is not
a new thing but it is a common practice in the High Court. This statement of
Mr.Ram Ker Singh advocate is very shocking and painful to the conscious
which creates a stir compelling one to ponder over the matter. The conduct
of Mr. Ram Ker Singh and Mr. Hausila Prasad, Advocates who are having a
long standing experience of more than 40 years and 26 years of the practice
respectively, is highly deplorable. This Court denounces/condemns the
conduct of both the Advocates as they made effort to tarnish the image of
noble profession of advocacy.
6-It is very painful to see the downfall in moral values of noble legal
profession. In the legal field, professional ethics are a fundamental
requirement, because it is an important tool that establishes rule of law and
keeps the legal profession and the legal institutions on a high pedestal. In the
legal profession, in order to maintain the sanctity of faith between the Bar
and the Bench, ethics are important factor, which contains the elements of
discipline, fairness, trust, moral values, help to colleagues, respect and
responsibilities, etc. It creates confidence between the Bar and the Bench.
Lawyers play a crucial role in justice delivery system and in my view,
professional ethics are the back bone of legal profession, which is self
regulating profession and it is moral duty of the Bar and the Bench both to
maintain the sanctity of legal profession and the institution.
7-Vakalatnama is a valuable document in legal profession, which
empowers a lawyer to act for or on behalf of his client. Sometimes it confers
wide authority/power upon a lawyer, therefore in the opinion of this Court,
"Vakalatnama" must be beyond the shadow of any doubt.
8-Since, Mr. Hausila Prasad learned advocate realizing his mistake has
accepted his guilt before the Court, therefore, this Court is not taking any
action against him and on his request, he is permitted to move an appropriate
application to withdraw his Vakalatnama from this case, whereas Mr. Ram
Ker Singh, learned counsel for the applicant, who had provided forged
Vakalatnama of the informant and had also given fee to Mr. Hausila Prasad,
as per disclosure made by him, neither tendered an oral apology nor did he
feel regret on his conduct. Under the facts and circumstances of the case, this
Court can not act as a silent spectator and has no option left, except to refer
the issue of filing the forged Vakalatnama of the informant as mentioned
above to the Bar Council of Uttar Pradesh for taking appropriate
action/decision in the matter.
9-The issue of filing a forged Vakalatnama of any person in a Court
proceeding is not a small one but it is serious issue, because it may adversely
affect the valuable legal right and interest of the persons/litigants concerned,
ergo keeping in view, the larger interest of the litigants/victims,complainants
or aggrieved persons specially in criminal matters and members of the bar,
who believe in professional ethics, this Court feels that now it is high time to
adopt some remedial measures, so the litigants or aggrieved persons are not
deprived of their legal rights. This Court proposes that along with
Vakalatnama, self attested copy of any identity proof (preferably Aadhar
Card) mentioning mobile number of the person concerned should also be
filed or any other method may be adopted in the interest of litigants and the
10-In view of above, the following directions are issued:-
(i)-Let a copy of this order be placed before the Registrar General of
this Court within a week, who shall forward the certified copy of this
order to the Chairman, Bar Council of Uttar Pradesh within two weeks
thereafter for taking appropriate action/decision in the matter in accordance
with law.
(ii)-The copy of this order be circulated to all the Hon'ble sitting
judges of this Court as well to the president, Allahabad High Court Bar
Association and Advocates' association.
(iii)-The aforesaid proposal as mentioned in paragraph no. 9 of this
order, be placed by the Registrar General before Hon'ble the Acting Chief
Justice for necessary directions in the matter.
(iv)-A notice be issued to the informant/opposite party No. 2, Gurdeep
Verma through Chief Judicial Magistrate concerned, who will ensure service
of notice upon the informant/opposite party No. 2 and submit report by the
next date fixed in the matter.
11-Let this case be listed on 7th of September, 2021 before the