3                This appeal arises from a judgment and order of a Division Bench of the Indore
Bench of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh dated 16 May 2018. The High Court,
in exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
19731, quashed a First Information Report 2, being Crime Case No 741 of 2013,
registered at PS Jhabua against the respondent for offences alleged under
Sections 409/120B, 420/120B, 467, 468, 471/120B of the Indian Penal Code
1860 and Section 13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the Prevention of
which, in the State of Madhya Pradesh, a manual was created to provide for the
use of the ‘Janani Mobility Express’ for the purpose of providing primary care to
women belonging to the BPL category during the pre and post natal stage and
also for the benefit of malnourished children.         Under the Scheme, private
vehicles were to be engaged as ambulances. The Chief Medical Health Officer,
Jhabua invited tenders in December 2011 to engage the vehicle. An inspection
was carried out by the Head of the Divisional Health Mission in June 2013 during
the course of which, certain discrepancies were found in the working of the
District Accounts Office. The Mission Director requested the Collector, Jhabua to
conduct an investigation.      The Collector formed a Committee to inspect the
accounts. The Committee found that there were excess payments in the amount
of Rs 1,72,768; that, there were no entries in the stock register; and, that,
certain payments were of a doubtful nature. It was on the basis of the report of
the Committee that Crime Case No 741 of 2013 was registered.           Sanction to
prosecute was granted by the Department of Public Health and Family Welfare
on 9 January 2017. The respondent was posted as the Block Medical Officer at
the relevant time.     It may be noted at this stage that after investigation was
completed, a final report under Section 173 of CrPC was submitted.
5 The respondent moved an application under Section 482 of CrPC, which has
been allowed by the Division Bench of the High Court. The High Court noted
that the statements of the service providers were recorded. One such service
provider, who was running a transport company, indicated that he received
money by cheque. But, the vehicle for which the payment was made was not
mentioned. The High Court held that the service provider had not specifically
stated that the amount which was paid was taken back by the respondent for his
own use. Having made the above observations, the High Court held that the
respondent was a signatory to the cheques and that the proposal was approved
by the accountant. While it has observed that there is a presumption in cases
involving financial irregularities and there is a burden on the person approving a
financial proposal to be cautious, any negligence in performing their duties
would not incur criminal liability unless specific unlawful gain is indicated. On
this basis, the High Court has proceeded to quash the FIR.
6 Mr Praneet Pranav, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant,
submits that in quashing the FIR, the High Court has lost sight of the fact that
there were irregularities in the administration of the Scheme which were noticed
not only by the Head of the Mission, but by the Committee which was appointed
to enquire into the matter by the Collector.       The FIR was lodged after this
exercise was carried out. It has been submitted that the respondent was also
implicated after investigation and, hence, the High Court was not justified in
evaluating the merits of the allegations, which is a matter for trial.
7 On the other hand, Mr Praneet Pranav, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
the respondent, submits that the FIR does not specifically advert to the role of
the respondent. In this context, it has been submitted that the respondent, as a
Block Medical Officer, had only approved of and signed the chques and, hence, it
would not be appropriate to fasten criminal liability at him.
8 Having heard the submissions of the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellant and the respondent, we are of the view that the High Court has
transgressed the limits of its jurisdiction under Section 482 of CrPC by enquiring
into the merits of the allegations at the present stage.         The fact that the
respondent was a signatory to the cheques is not in dispute. This, in fact, has
been adverted to in the judgment of the High Court. The High Court has also
noted that a person who is required to approve a financial proposal is duty
bound to observe due care and responsibility. There are specific allegations in
regard to the irregularities which have been committed in the course of the work
of the ‘Janani Mobility Express’ under the National Rural Health Mission. At this
stage, the High Court ought not to be scrutinizing the material in the manner in
which the trial court would do in the course of the criminal trial after evidence is
adduced. In doing so, the High Court has exceeded the well-settled limits on the
exercise of the jurisdiction under Section 482 of CrPC. A detailed enquiry into
the merits of the allegations was not warranted. The FIR is not expected to be
an encyclopedia, particularly, in a matter involving financial irregularities in the
course of the administration of a public scheme.        A final report has been
submitted under Section 173 of CrPC, after investigation.
9     For the above reasons, we allow the appeal and set aside the impugned
judgment and order of the High Court dated 16 May 2018 in MCRC No 10784 of
10    Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.
(Arising out of impugned final judgment and order dated 16-05-2018
in MCRC No. 10784/2017 passed by the High Court of M.P. at Indore)
(FOR ADMISSION and I.R. and IA No.15789/2020-CONDONATION OF DELAY
IN FILING and IA No.15792/2020-EXEMPTION FROM FILING O.T. and IA
Date : 30-07-2021 This petition was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
1    Delay condoned.
3 The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed order.
4 Pending application, if any, stands disposed of.