Though Ms. Meeraja Grace, the 2nd respondent, has been served,
there is no appearance. Therefore, this Court is inclined to consider the
writ petition on its own merits.
2. Before the Kerala State Human Rights Commission, the 2 nd
respondent herein has filed HRMP No. 7107/2018/KNR seeking
revision of pay of guest lecturers of IHRD College.
3. Considering the averments and the prayers sought for, Human
Rights Commission has passed an interim order dated 30.11.2018,
directing the Director, IHRD, the petitioner herein, to take steps to
grant the revised salary notified by the Government as per the
recommendation of the 10th Pay Commission urgently to the IHRD
workers and Guest Lecturers.
4. Challenging the correctness of the said order, Director, IHRD,
has filed the instant writ petition on the grounds inter alia that clause
(f) of Regulation 17 of the Kerala State Human Rights Commission
W. P. (C) No. 5627 of 2019
(Procedure) Regulations, 2001, clearly specifies that issues related to
civil dispute, service matter, labour or industrial disputes are not
maintainable before the Kerala State Human Rights Commission.
Therefore, the Commission ought not to have considered the complaint
preferred by the 2nd respondent, as the Regulation clearly specifies to
dismiss such complaints in the in limine itself.
5. Petitioner has contended that as per Regulation 38 of the
2001, the Commission has the power to summons. The Commission,
before passing an order based on the compliant, has the power to
summon the person, who should be heard for appropriate disposal of
the matter. The impugned order has been passed by the Commission
without hearing the petitioner or any other concerned authority, and
therefore, it is liable to be quashed.
6. Petitioner has further contended that the petitioner's institution
was served with no notice or summons before passing the impugned
order. The direction of the Human Rights Commission to implement
the 10th pay commission, without analyzing the facts and
circumstances and granting an opportunity for hearing, is against the
W. P. (C) No. 5627 of 2019
natural justice, and liable to be interfered by this Court.
7. Petitioner has also contended that the Commission, while
passing the impugned order, also failed to understand the fact that the
benefits under the 10th Pay Commission cannot be granted to the
employees and guest lectures of the petitioner's institutions with
immediate effect, as the Government of Kerala has not even taken a
decision for implementation of the benefits under the 10 th Pay
Commission in the petitioner's institutions. Moreover, the benefits
under the 9th Pay Revision has also not yet completely implemented in
the petitioner’s institution due to lack of funds. These aspects were not
considered by the Human Rights Commission.
8. On the above grounds, Mr. Deepu Thankan, learned counsel
for the petitioner, made submissions.
9. On the aspect of jurisdiction of the Kerala State Human Rights
Commission in entertaining a complaint regarding service matter, a
Hon’ble Division Bench of this Court in Malabar Cements Ltd.
(M/s.) v. K. Baburajan and Others [2019 (4) KHC 131], after
considering clause (f) of Regulation 17 of the Kerala State Human
W. P. (C) No. 5627 of 2019
Rights Commission (Procedure) Regulations, 2001, has held thus:-
“18. At this juncture, we may take note of Regulation 17
of the Kerala State Human Rights Commission (Procedure)
Regulations, 2001 which deals with maintainability of complaints
before the Commission. Regulation 17 states that, the
Commission may dismiss in limine complaints of the nature
enumerated in clauses (a) to (l). Clause (f) of Regulation 17
provides that, the Commission may dismiss in limine, complaints
wherein the issue raised relates to civil disputes, service matters,
labour or industrial dispute. Clause (i) of Regulation 17 provides
that, the Commission may dismiss in limine complaints, if the
matter is covered by a judicial verdict/decision of the National
Commission or a State Commission. Similarly, going by clause
(l), the Commission may dismiss the complaints in limine, where
the matter raised is outside the purview of the Commission or on
any other ground.
19. Clause (f) of Regulation 17 specifically provides that,
the Commission may dismiss in limine a complaint, if the issue
raised relates to service matters. The issue raised by the first
respondent in Ext.P6 petition relates to his appointment as a
Mazdoor in the company and it is a service matter. The
Commission should have dismissed the complaint in limine
especially in the light of Ext.P1judgment of this Court in the
same matter between the same parties, which had attained
finality.”
10. That apart, after considering the statutory provisions, in
District Tourism Promotion Council, represented by its Secretary
v. State of Kerala represented by the Secretary and Others [2021
SCC Online Ker. 3052], this Court has held as under:
“8. In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 10(2)
read with Section 29 of the Protection of Human Rights Act,
1993, the Kerala State Human Rights Commission has made the
Regulations, 2001. As per Regulation 17, certain complaints are
not ordinarily maintainable and that the Commission may dismiss
in limine complaints of the following nature:
(b) vague, anonymous or pseudonymous;
(c) trivial or frivolous;
(d) barred under sub-section (1) or (2) of section 36 of the
(e) allegations do not disclose involvement of any public
(f) issue raised relates to civil disputes, service matters,
labour or industrial dispute;
(g) allegations do not raise any violation of human rights;
W. P. (C) No. 5627 of 2019
(h) If the matter raised is subjudice before a Court or
(i) the matter is covered by a Judicial verdict/decision of the
National Commission or a State Commission.
(j) Where the complaint is only a copy of the petition
addressed to some other authority.
(k) Where the petition is not signed or where the original
petition is not sent to the Commission;
(l) Where the matter raised is outside the purview of the
Commission or on any other ground.
9. As the matter pertains to service dispute, in the light of
clause (f) of Regulation 17 of the Kerala State Human Rights
Commission (Procedure) Regulations, 2001, in our considered
view, the Commission ought to have dismissed Exhibit P5
complaint preferred by respondent No. 4 in limine.
10. To put it clear, undoubtedly the Commission has no
jurisdiction to entertain the complaint in service matters and
consequently to adjudicate the same. Accordingly, the order
passed in H.R.M.P. No. 7247/11/11/19/KLM is also without
jurisdiction.
11. In such a view of the matter, instant writ petition is
allowed and Exhibit P7 order dated 30.01.2020 in H.R.M.P. No.
7247/11/11/19/KLM is quashed, and consequently Exhibit P5
complaint filed by the 3rd respondent dated 3.10.2019 on the files
W. P. (C) No. 5627 of 2019
of the Kerala State Human Rights Commission is dismissed.”
11. That apart, reading of the order dated 30.11.2018 indicates
that by way of the interim order, the main relief sought for in the
complaint has been issued. Notwithstanding the jurisdiction of Kerala
State Human Rights Commission in entertaining a complaint, it is well
settled that interim order should not be issued in the guise of the main
relief itself. Reference can be made to a few decisions:-
(i) In The State of Orissa v. Madan Gopal Rungta [AIR 1952
SC 12], a Constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Apex Court clearly spelt
out the contours within which interim relief can be granted, and held
"..........An interim relief can be granted only in
aid of and as ancillary to the main relief which may be
available to the party on final determination of his rights in
a suit or proceeding. If the Court was of opinion that there
was no other convenient or adequate remedy open to the
petitioners, it might have proceeded to investigate the case
on its merits and come to a decision as to whether the
petitioners succeeded in establishing that there was an
infringement of any of their legal rights which entitled
them to a writ of mandamus or any other directions of a
like nature; and pending such determination it might have
W. P. (C) No. 5627 of 2019
made a suitable interim order for maintaining the status
quo ante. But when the Court declined to decide on the
rights of the parties and expressly held that they should be
investigated more properly in a civil suit, it could not, for
the purpose of facilitating the institution such suit, issue
directions in the nature of temporary injunctions, under
Art.226 of the Constitution. In our opinion, the language
of Art.226 does not permit such an action. On that short
ground, that judgement of the Orissa High Court under
appeal cannot be upheld."
(ii) In Deoraj v. State of Maharashtra reported in AIR 2004
SC 1975, the Hon'ble Supreme Court, at para 12, held as under:-
"Situations emerge where the granting of an
interim relief would tantamount to granting the final relief
itself. And then there may be converse cases where
withholding of an interim relief would tantamount to
dismissal of main petition itself; for, by the time the main
matter comes up for hearing there would be nothing left to
be allowed as relief to the petitioner though all the findings
may be in his favour. In such cases the availability of a
very strong prima facie case - of a standard much higher
than just prima facie case, the considerations of balance of
convenience and irreparable injury forcefully tilting the
balance of case totally in favour of the applicant may
persuade the Court to grant an interim relief though it
amounts to granting the final relief itself. Of course, such
W. P. (C) No. 5627 of 2019
would be rare and exceptional cases. The Court would
grant such an interim relief only if satisfied that
withholding of it would prick the conscience of the Court
and do violence to the sense of justice, resulting in
injustice being perpetuated throughout the hearing, and at
the end the Court would not be able to vindicate the cause
of justice. Obviously such would be rare cases
accompanied by compelling circumstances, where the
injury complained of is immediate and pressing and would
cause extreme hardship. The conduct of the parties shall
also have to be seen and the Court may put the parties on
such terms as may be prudent."
(iii) In State of U.P v. Ram Sukhi Devi [(2005) 9 SCC 733]
the Hon'ble Apex Court observed that final relief cannot be granted by
way of interim relief. Paragraph 8 of the said decision is extracted
"To say the least, approach of the learned Single
Judge and the Division Bench is judicially unsustainable
and indefensible. The final relief sought for in the writ
petition has been granted as an interim measure. There
was no reason indicated by learned Single Judge as to
why the Government Order dated 26.10.1998 was to be
ignored. Whether the writ petitioner was entitled to any
relief in the writ petition has to be adjudicated at the time
of final disposal of the writ petition. This Court has on
W. P. (C) No. 5627 of 2019
numerous occasions observed that the final relief sought
for should not be granted at an interim stage. The position
is worsened if the interim direction has been passed with
stipulation that the applicable Government Order has to
be ignored. Time and again this Court has deprecated the
practice of granting interim orders which practically give
the principal relief sought in the petition for no better
reason than that of a prima facie case has been made out,
without    being   concerned    about    the   balance   of
convenience, the public interest and a host of other
considerations. [See Assistant Collector of Central
Excise, West Bengal v. Dunlop India Ltd. (1985 (1) SCC
260 at p. 265), State of Rajasthan v. M/s Swaika
Properties (1985 (3) SCC 217 at p.224), State of U.P. and
Ors. v. Visheshwar (1995 Supp (3) SCC 590),
Bharatbhushan Sonaji Kshirsagar (Dr.) v. Abdul Khalik
Mohd. Musa and Ors. (1995 Supp (2) SCC 593), Shiv
Shankar and Ors. v. Board of Directors, U.P.S.R.T.C.
and     Anr.   (1995     Supp    (2)   SCC      726)   and
Commissioner/Secretary to Govt. Health and Medical
Education Department Civil Sectt., Jammu v. Dr. Ashok
Kumar Kohli (1995 Supp (4) SCC 214).] No basis has
been indicated as to why learned Single Judge thought the
course as directed was necessary to be adopted. Even it
was not indicated that a prima facie case was made out
though as noted above that itself is not sufficient. We,
therefore, set aside the order passed by learned Single
Judge as affirmed by the Division Bench without
W. P. (C) No. 5627 of 2019
expressing any opinion on the merits of the case we have
interfered primarily on the ground that the final relief has
been granted at an interim stage without justifiable
reasons. Since the controversy lies within a very narrow
compass, we request the High Court to dispose of the
matter as early as practicable preferably within six
months from the date of receipt of this judgment."
In the light of the statutory provisions, discussions, and the
decisions considered, we are of the view that the interim order in
HRMP No. 7107/2018/KNR dated 30.11.2018, is liable to be set aside.
Accordingly, set aside.