In the High Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh
for the petitioner.
Mr. Rajeev Anand, APP, for U.T., Chandigarh.
1.            In FIR bearing No. 209 of 8.12.2019, registered at Police
Station Manimajra, U.T., Chandigarh, offences under Sections 420, 467,
468, 471, 120-B IPC, are embodied. The allegation, as made in the FIR
(supra) is of preparation of false documents at the instance of the accused
2.            Apparently, the offences (supra), as are cast in the afore FIR,
are construable as offences, qua which the learned Magistrate can make trial
as a warrants case, and, or in other words, the offences are non-bailable
offences, besides are cognizable offences. The impact of the above is that
the investigating officer concerned, has rather independent powers of
investigations in respect of commission of offences embodied in the FIR
(supra). However, he proceeded to make an application before the learned
Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, Chandigarh, seeking an order for taking the
specimen, and, admitted signatures of the accused hence for comparisons
thereof, being made, with the admitted, and, specimen signatures of the
complainant, besides with the disputed signatures existing on the
purportedly false document(s). Though, the learned Magistrate concerned,
was required to be not entertaining the application, and, was empowered to
direct   the    investigating   officer   concerned,     to hold independent
investigations with respect to the FIR. Nonetheless, the learned Magistrate
concerned, has made affirmative directions upon the investigating officer's
application, as preferred before him, for purpose (supra).
3.            Be that as it may, Section 311A Cr.P.C., provisions whereof
become extracted hereinafter, does empower the Judicial Magistrate, subject
to his making an objective satisfaction, that when for the purposes of any
investigation or proceeding under the Code, rather it is expedient to direct
any person, including the accused person, to give specimen signatures or
handwriting, hence to make an order for the person concerned becoming
summoned for his, at the time specified in the orders, and, in the summons,
hence attending the Court for his giving his specimen signatures or
“311A- Power of Magistrate to order person to give specimen
signatures or handwriting – If a Magistrate of the first class is
satisfied that, for the purposes of any investigation or
proceedings under this Code, it is expedient to direct any
person, including an accused person, to give specimen
signatures or handwriting, he may make an order to that effect
and in that case the person to whom the order relates shall be
produced or shall attend at the time and place specified in
such order and shall give his specimen signatures or
handwriting.”
4.            A reading of the above extracted mandate, carried in Section
311 Cr.P.C., empowers the Judicial Magistrate concerned, to make the afore
order, not only qua the accused but also with respect to any person,
inasmuch as any person other than the accused, or at first glance even qua
the victim-complainant.      Though, the accused in compliance with the
apposite order, did purvey, his specimen, and, admitted handwritings, before
the Judicial Magistrate concerned. However, the direction, as, made upon
the complainant(s)-victim(s) has remained un-complied with by the latter.
The direction, as made upon the victims-complainants though at first glance
falls within the ambit of the statutory phrase “any person”, hence existing in
the substantive portion of the hereinabove extracted provision. However,
on a deepest reading of the mandate, carried thereins, especially of the
coinage “any person other than the accused person”, it may not include the
victim or the complainant, as the proviso occurring underneath, the
substantive provisions as, carried in Section 311 Cr.P.C. rather regulates,
and, governs the prior thereto substantive provision existing in Section
(supra). Since the order within the ambit of the substantive provisions,
cannot be made unless within the proviso the accused or the person
concerned, has been arrested, in connection with such investigation or
proceeding. Therefore, the apposite proviso, completely barred the learned
Judicial Magistrate concerned, to make an order upon the complainants-
victims, and, even upon the accused, as the accused, as unfolded by an
order, as, made by this Court, on 19.12.2019 in CRM-M-54760-2019,
became admitted to anticipatory bail. The consequence thereof is that, since
within the ambit of the proviso, he did not come to be arrested, whereas, his
becoming arrested in relation to the offence carried in the afore FIR (supra),
which otherwise was non-bailable, and, also cognizable offence, rather was
a statutory necessity. Therefore, the afore affirmative order, as, made upon
the application, moved by the investigating officer concerned, within the
ambit of Section 311-A Cr.P.C., was not hence legally amenable to be
pronounced by the learned Judicial Magistrate concerned. Contrarily, upon,
breach of the bail conditions appertaining to the bail petitioner rather not
rendereing his cooperation, for the afore purpose, to the investigating
officer, did empower the investigating officer concerned, to move an
application for cancellation of bail, before the Court concerned, and, upon
his arrest the application under Section 311-A Cr.P.C., became
maintainable, as the accused had become an arrested person.
5.            Be that as it may, though the complainants-victims are not
coming forward to furnish their respective admitted specimen signatures
hence for theirs, also being compared along with the disputed signatures, as,
existing on the purportedly forged documents. Nonetheless, as stated above,
the learned Judicial Magistrate concerned, may not proceed to hereafter,
insist upon the complainant to make the afore specimen/admitted signatures,
either before the investigating officer concerned, or before him/her.
Contrarily, the investigating officer concerned, is directed to ensure the
respective appearances, before him, of the victims-complainants, for theirs
accompanying him, before the Executing Magistrate concerned, hence for
theirs making before the latter, in his presence, their respective admitted,
and, disputed signatures. In case the complainant(s)-victim(s), do(es) not
adhere to the afore request, as, made upon them, by the investigating officer
concerned, thereupon, it is open to the investigating officer concerned to,
make appropriate mentioning(s) in his report, to be drawn under Section
173 Cr.P.C. However, he may thereafter proceed to send the already
collected specimen, and, admitted signatures of the accused, along with
disputed signatures, as, purportedly made on the forged document(s), to the
handwriting expert concerned.
6.           The petition stands disposed of accordingly.