W.P.Nos.12505, 12506, 13241 & 34721 of 2015
M.P.Nos.1, 1, 1 & 1 of 2015
Government of Pondicherry,
Government of Pondicherry,
3.The Registrar of Co-operative Societies,
Government of Pondicherry,
[R4 impleaded as per order dated 02.06.2015
by MP.2,2 & 2/2015 in
Government of Pondicherry,
Government of Pondicherry,
3.The Registrar of Co-operative Societies,
Government of Pondicherry,
[R4 impleaded as per order dated 02.06.2015
by MP.2,2 & 2/2015 in
Government of Pondicherry,
Government of Pondicherry,
3.The Registrar of Co-operative Societies,
Government of Pondicherry,
In W.P.No.13241 of 2015:
Government of Pondicherry,
Government of Pondicherry,
3.The Registrar of Co-operative Societies,
Government of Pondicherry,
[R4 impleaded as per order dated 02.06.2015
by MP.2,2 & 2/2015 in
COMMON PRAYER: Writ Petition is filed under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, praying to issue a Writ of Mandamus, directing
the respondents to pay the Writ Petitioners their unpaid salary from
(both employer and employee) Bonus, ESI benefits and all other
admissible entailments along with interest at 12% per annum.
in all Wps.           Mrs.V.Usha, AGP, Puducherry
Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
2. In all these Writ Petitions, the petitioners herein are the ex-
employees of three Co-operative Societies namely, a) Puducherry
Public Servants Co-operative Stores P-456; b) Ariyankuppam Public
Servants Stores P-455; and c) Bharathi Co-operative Consumer
Stores Ltd., P-564.             The petitioners herein were employed as
Salesman / Assistant Clerk / Supervisors and had put in services
between 20 to 25 years. As per the bye-laws of these Societies, the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis      who have put in more than five years of continuous
service in the stores shall be entitled for gratuity, apart from other
service         benefits   including  earned    leave   encashment,     EPF
contributions, ESI benefits and other admissible entailment. Around
the year 2011, these Co-operative Stores were running on loss,
which         prompted    the   Government   of   Puducherry   (hereinafter
referred        to   as  'Government')   to  constitute   a   Rehabilitation
Committee for improving the functioning of the Stores and to
provide alternate employment to their staffs.            By the month of
March and April 2007, the salaries payable to the petitioners were
stopped and ultimately on 22.01.2013, the Government had
ordered for winding up of all these Stores. Consequently, the affairs
of these Stores were handed over to the Liquidator. Thereafter, the
Government had initiated efforts to accommodate the employees of
the Stores including the petitioners herein in other Stores and
Societies, which proved futile. The petitioners herein now seek for
disbursement of their unpaid salaries, gratuity, earned leave
encashment, EPF Contributions, ESI benefits and other admissible
entailments along with interest.
3. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioners submitted
that the three Stores are fully owned by the Government, which was
also contributing share capital every year and since the Government
could        not   rehabilitate   the Stores  or   provide   for  alternate
employment for the petitioners herein, it is bound to settle their
dues.         According to the learned counsel, the statutory dues of
gratuity cannot be avoided or averted.         Likewise, the employees
Provident Fund, which was deducted from their salaries are
statutory benefits to which these petitioners are entitled to.
4. The learned Government Pleader appearing on behalf of the
all the respondents submitted that the Writ Petition against the Co-
operative Societies, is not maintainable in view of the decision of the
Hon'ble Five Judges Bench of this Court in K.Marappan Vs. The
Deputy Registrar of Co-operative Societies and Another,
which held that a Society cannot be characterised as a 'State', the
service conditions of its employees governed by its bye-laws, cannot
be enforced through a Writ Petition.         He further submitted that
Government would not be liable for payment of salary and other
dues of these Co-operative Societies, which are not State owned
Societies. By placing reliance on the counter affidavit filed on behalf
of the Liquidator, the learned Government Pleader submitted that all
these three Stores do not have any movable or immovable assets
for salvage, except for some condemned and damaged furniture
items. In this background, the learned Government Pleader sought
for dismissal of the Writ Petitions.
5. I have given careful consideration to the submissions made
by the respective counsels.
6.   It would   be   apposite   to  address   the  ground  of
maintainability, after addressing the other grounds with regard to
the Government's liability to pay the dues of the employees of the
7. The management of the affairs of the Co-operative
Societies Stores are governed by the Board of Executive Committee
members comprising of Directors, who are the employees of various
Departments of the Government of Puducherry.                The Managing
Director is an official of the Co-operative Department of the
Puducherry Government.            The Government infuses share capital
every year to the Stores. The object of the Societies is to cater to
the various needs to the employees of the Government of
Puducherry. When these Societies were running on loss, the
Registrar of Co-operative Societies constituted a Rehabilitation
Committee for revitalization and to make them financially sound.
However the rehabilitation efforts failed. The Government thereafter
initiated efforts to provide alternate employment to the staffs of
these three Societies including these petitioners, which also did not
fructify. It is in this background that the Government had ordered
for winding up these stores on 22.01.2013 and a Liquidator was
appointed.
8. Under the bye-laws, all these petitioners are entitled for
payment of gratuity amount, since they have put in required
number of years of service. Likewise, the Provident Fund deducted
from the salary of the employees were utilised in the business of
these Stores for many years, without depositing the deductions to
the CPF contributions.         Disappointingly, the Liquidator has now
reported that all these Stores do not own any movable or
immovable assets, which could be salvaged to meet the claims of
these petitioners.       Though the Government was instrumental in
forming the Societies and stepping into the affairs of the Societies
when they were facing the loss by taking efforts unsuccessfully to
rehabilitate and provide alternate employment, they are now trying
to wriggle out of the situation by stating that they are not liable for
payment of the salaries and other dues to these petitioners on the
ground that these Socieites are not State Owned Societies.
9. In identical circumstances, in the case of Parimal
Chandra Raha and Others V. Life Insurance Corporation of
India and Others reported in 1995 Supp (2) SCC 611, when the
employees of the canteens run by Co-operative Societies made
claims from LIC, a stand was taken that since the canteens were not
run by LIC and its employees were not the employees of LIC, they
are not liable to make the payments. The Hon'ble Supreme Court,
took not of the role of the Corporation vis-a-vis, the Co-operative
Societies canteens and found that the Co-operative Societies
canteens are in reality the agencies of LIC and by lifting the veil
between the Corporation and the Co-operative Societies' workers,
fixed the liability on LIC. The relevant portion of the order reads as
“29. The facts on record on the other hand,
show     in   unmistakable   terms   that  canteen
services have been provided to the employees of
the Corporation for a long time and it is the
Corporation which has been from time to time,
taking steps to provide the said services. The
canteen committees, the cooperative society of
the employees and the contractors have only
been acting for and on behalf of the Corporation
as its agencies to provide the said services. The
Corporation has been taking active interest even
irk organising the canteen committees. It is
further    the  Cor-  poration   which   has  been
appointing the contractors to run the canteens
and entering into agreements with them for the
purpose The terms of the contract further show
that they are in the nature of directions to the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis  contractor    about  the   manner   in  which  the
canteen should be run and the canteen services
should be rendered to the employees. Both the
appointment of the contractor and the tenure of
the contract is as per the stipulations made by
the Corporation in the agreement. Even the
prices of the items served, the place where they
should be cooked, the hours during which and
the place where they should served, are dictated
by the Corporation. The Corporation has also
reserved the right to modify the terms of the
contract unilaterally and the contractor has no
say in the matter. Further, the record shows that
almost all the workers of the canteen like the
appellants have been working in the canteen
continuously for a long time what ever the
mechanism employed by the Corporation to
supervise and control the working of the canteen.
Although the supervising and managing body of
the canteen has changed hands from time to
time, the workers have remained constant. This
is apart from the fact that the infrastructure for
running    the    canteen,    viz.,   the   promises,
furniture, electricity, water etc. is supplied by the
Corporation to the managing agency for running
the canteen. Further, it cannot be disputed that
the canteen service is essential for the efficient
working of the em- ployees and of the offices of
the Corporation, In fact, by controlling the hours
during which the counter and floor service will he
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis made available to the employees by the canteen,
the Corporation has also tied to avoid the waste
of time which would otherwise be the result if the
employees have to go outside the offices in
search of such services. The service is available
to all the employees in the pre- mises of the
office itself and continuously since inception of
the Corporation, as pointed out earlier, The
employees of the Corporation have all along been
making the complaints About the poor or in
adequate service rendered by the canteen to
them,     only   to  the   Corporation   and   the
Corporation has been taking steps to remedy the
defects in the canteen service. Further, whenever
there was a temporary breakdown in the canteen
service, on account of the agitation or of strike
by the canteen workers, it is the Corporation
which has been taking active interest in getting
the dispute resolved and the canteen workers
have also looked upon the Corporation as their
real employer and joined it as a party to the
industrial   dispute  raised  by  them.    In  the
circumstances, we are of the view that the
canteen has become a part of the establishment
of the Corporation. The canteen committees,the
cooperative society of the employees and the
contractors engaged from time to time are in
reality the agencies of the Corporation and are,
only a veil between the Corporation and the
canteen    workers.    We   have,   therefore,  no
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis hesitation in coming to the conclusion that the
canteen workers are in fact the employees of the
10. The facts in hand are identical to that of the case in
Parimal Chandra          Raha (supra).     If the ratio extracted above is
applied to the facts of the case in hand, it is seen that the
Government of Puducherry had also involved itself in the affairs of
the Co-operative Societies at the time of its inception, as well as its
unsuccessful efforts of rehabilitation of the Societies and for
providing re-employment to its workers.
11. The role of the State as a model employer has been
stressed upon in various decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
including the case of State of Jharkhand and Another V.
Harihar Yadhav & Others reported in 2014 (2) SCC 114 in the
following manner:-
“52. Having regard to the position that has
emerged, we are compelled to dwell upon the
role of the State as a model employer. In Som
Prakash Rekhi v. Union of India, Krishna Iyer, J.,
has stated thus: -
70. “Social justice is the conscience of our
Constitution,  the   State   is  the  promoter   of
economic    justice,  the   founding   faith which
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis      sustains the Constitution and the country is
Indian humanity. The public sector is a model
employer with a social conscience not an artificial
person without soul to be damned or body to be
burnt.”
53. In Gurmail Singh and others v. State of
Punjab and others,       it has been held that the
State as a model employer is expected to show
fairness in action.
54. In Balram Gupta v. Union of India and
Another, the Court observed that as a model
employer the Government must conduct itself
with    high    probity    and   candour  with  its
employees.
55. In State of Haryana v. Piara Singh, the
Court has ruled that: (SCC p.134, para 21)
“21. ... The main concern of the court in
such matters is to ensure the rule of law and to
see that the Executive acts fairly and gives a fair
deal   to  its   employees     consistent with the
requirements of Articles 14 and 16.”
56.    In   Bhupendra     Nath  Hazarika and
another v. State of Assam and others, while
laying emphasis on the role of the State as a
model employer, though in a different context,
the Court observed: (SCC p.540, para 65)
“65. .... It should always be borne in mind
that legitimate aspirations of the employees are
not guillotined and a situation is not created
where hopes end in despair. Hope for everyone
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis is gloriously precious and a model employer
should   not    convert   it  to  be  deceitful and
treacherous by playing a game of chess with
their seniority. A sense of calm sensibility and
concerned sincerity should be reflected in every
step. An atmosphere of trust has to prevail and
when the employees are absolutely sure that
their trust shall not be betrayed and they shall be
treated with dignified fairness then only the
concept      of    good      governance   can    be
concretized.””
Thus, by liftying the veil between the Societies and the Government
and by applying the ratio laid down in Parimal Chandra Raha and
Harihar Yadhav's cases (supra), I have no hesitation to hold that
there is a responsibility, as well as a liability cast upon the
Government of Puducherry, which is a public duty, to pay the dues
of these petitioners herein, in connection with their services in their
respective Stores.
12. Insofar as the first ground of maintainability of these Writ
Petitions are concerned, the learned Government Pleader placed
reliance on the decision of the Hon'ble Five Judges Bench of this
Court in K.Marappan (supra), to highlight the proposition that when
a Society cannot be characterised as a 'State', the service conditions
of its employees are governed by its bye-laws, which cannot be
enforced through a Writ Petition.
K.Marappan's case (supra) may
not be of much assistance to the respondents, since it is also held
therein that even if a Society cannot be characterized              as a State
within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution of India, a Writ
would lie against it to enforce a statutory public duty cast upon the
Society. The relevant portion of the order reads as follows:
“21.3.   Even    if  a   society   cannot     be
characterised as a State within the meaning of
Article 12 of the Constitution, a Writ would lie
against it to enforce a statutory public duty cast
upon    the   society.   In   such   a   case,   it   is
unnecessary to go into the question whether the
society is being treated as a 'person' or 'an
authority' within the meaning of Article 226 of
the Constitution and what is material is the
nature of the statutory duty placed upon it and
the Court will enforce such statutory public duty.
Although it is not easy to define what a public
function or public duty is, it can reasonably said
that such functions are similar to or closely
related to those performable by the State in its
sovereign capacity.”
13. As already held, the duty cast on the Government in the
present case, is a public duty and therefore the present Writ
Petitions       seeking   to   enforce   such   a   public  duty,    would  be
maintainable          against   a   Co-operative     Society,   in    view  of
K.Marappan's case (supra).
14. For all the foregoing reasons, a Writ of Mandamus is
hereby issued, directing the Chief Secretary to Government of
Puducherry;         the    Secretary  (Co-operation),   Government    of
Puducherry and the Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Government
of Puducherry to pass orders, in favour of each of the petitioners
herein, for disbursement of their unpaid salaries, earned leave
encashment, EPF Contributions, ESI benefits and other admissible
entailments, due to them for their respective services under the Co-
operative Societies namely, a) Puducherry Public Servants Co-
operative Stores P-456; b) Ariyankuppam Public Servants Stores P-
455; and c) Bharathi          Co-operative Consumer Stores Ltd., P-564
respectively, within three months from the date of receipt of a copy
of this order.        All the Writ Petitions stands allowed accordingly.
Consequently, the connected Miscellaneous Petition is closed. There
shall be no orders as to costs.
Government of Pondicherry,
Government of Pondicherry,
3.The Registrar of Co-operative Societies,
Government of Pondicherry,
W.P.Nos.12505, 12506, 13241 & 34721 of 2015
M.P.Nos.1, 1, 1 & 1 of 2015