The petitioners are before this Court calling in question
registration of crime in Crime No.139/2022 registered for the
offences punishable under Section 3(1) of the Prevention of
Damage to Public Property Act, 1984, Section 3 of the
Karnataka Open Place Disfigurement Act and Section 290 of the
2. Heard the learned Senior counsel Sri.A.S.Ponnanna
appearing for the petitioners and Sri.Kiran.S.Javali, learned
State Public Prosecutor-I along with Sri.K.S.Abhijith, learned
High Court Government Pleader for respondents.
3.    Brief facts that lead the petitioners to this Court as
borne out from the pleadings are as follows:
The 1st petitioner is a practicing Advocate and a President
of   the   Indian    Youth    Congress,    Nelamangala    Assembly
constituency.    The 2nd petitioner is also a practicing Advocate
and President of the legal cell of the Congress for the
Nelamangala Assembly Constituency.           A crime comes to be
registered against the petitioners in Crime No.139/2022 on
22.09.2022 for the afore-quoted offences. It is the allegation
of the complainant that he was on night beat duty and comes
across three persons pasting bills/posters on the walls in public
places and when they tried to catch them they ran away and
later they were chased and caught and when questioned they
informed that two people i.e, the petitioners herein, over
telephone had instructed them to paste bills/posters all over
CRL.P No. 9809 of 2022
Nelamangala town.      Based upon the said incident, the crime
comes to be registered.       Registration of the crime is what
drives the petitioners to this Court.
4. Learned senior counsel Sri.A.S.Ponnanna would submit
that the very registration of the crime against the petitioners is
contrary to law, as the provisions do not get attracted to any
act of the petitioners and therefore, seeks quashment of the
entire proceedings.
5.  Per-contra,   the   learned   High  Court   Government
Pleader would refute the submissions and would contend that
the matter is still at the stage of investigation and therefore,
this Court should not interfere at this stage and seeks dismissal
of the petition.
6.  I   have  given   my    anxious   consideration  to the
submissions made by the learned counsel for both the parties
and perused the material on record.
7. The incident that lead to registration of the crime
against the petitioners is the pasting of bills/posters in the
Nelamangala City constituency.         The allegation against the
petitioners is that they have telephonically instructed the
pasting    of  bills/posters  in  Nelamangala    town    within the
precincts of the police station in which the crime comes to be
registered for the afore-said offences. The offence punishable
under Section 3(1) of the Prevention of Damage to Public
Property Act, 1984 reads as follows:
“3. Mischief causing damage to public property.—
(1) Whoever commits mischief by doing any act in
respect of any public property, other than public
property of the nature referred to in sub-section (2),
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to five years and with fine.”   `
The Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act mandates that
whoever commits mischief by doing any act in respect of any
public property shall be punished with a term which may
extend up to 5 years.          Mischief is not defined under the
Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act.        Section 425 of
the IPC defines what is Mischief and reads as follows:
“425. Mischief.—Whoever, with intent to cause,
or knowing that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or
damage to the public or to any person, causes the
CRL.P No. 9809 of 2022
destruction of any property, or any such change in any
property or in the situation thereof as destroys or
diminishes its value or utility, or affects it injuriously,
commits “mischief”.
Explanation 1.—It is not essential to the offence
of mischief that the offender should intend to cause loss
or damage to the owner of the property injured or
destroyed. It is sufficient if he intends to cause, or
knows that he is likely to cause, wrongful loss or
damage to any person by injuring any property,
whether it belongs to that person or not.
Explanation 2.—Mischief may be committed by an
act affecting property belonging to the person who
commits the act, or to that person and others jointly.”
Mischief would mean whoever intends to cause wrongful loss or
damage to the public or to any person or causes destruction of
the property would be guilty of mischief. The allegation against
the petitioners is that they have telephonically instructed
pasting of the bills/posters which cannot mean that they would
become guilty of the provisions of the Prevention of Damage to
Public Property Act, as they have not done any act that would
become an offence under the Act. If they have not done any
act that would become offence under the provisions of the
Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, the provisions of
the Karnataka Open Place Disfigurement Act also cannot be laid
against   them,    as   the   allegation  against     the   petitioners
CRL.P No. 9809 of 2022
admittedly is that they have telephonically instructed some
other accused to lay the posters.
8. In the considered view of this Court, the allegations
made against the petitioners would not attract any of the
offences either under Prevention of Damage to Public Property
Act or under the Karnataka Open Place Disfigurement Act. For
the aforesaid reasons, I deem it appropriate to terminate the
proceedings against the petitioners. Wherefore, the following:
(i)   Criminal Petition is allowed.
(ii)  Registration of crime against the petitioners in
Crime No.139/2022 pending before the II Additional
Civil Judge and JMFC, Nelamangala stands quashed.
(iii) It is made clear that the observations made in the
course of the order are only for the purpose of
consideration of the case of the petitioners and shall
not bind or influence the investigation against any
other accused.