1.            The petitioner herein approached this Court under Article
226/227 of the Constitution of India praying for issuance of a writ in the
nature of mandamus, directing the respondents to pay compensation to the
tune of Rs.2 crores to the petitioner, who got electrocuted from a broken
electric pole lying on the street with live electric wires attached to it, resulting
with amputation of both arms of the petitioner.
2.     In brief, the facts as enumerated in the writ petition, are that on
01.07.2016 at 4 PM, when the petitioner, who was aged 10 years at the time
of unfortunate and heart-wrenching incident, was returning from school, near
Bhogpur Mandi, Sohna, she came into contact with live electric wires
attached with broken electric pole lying on the street, which wires were
unguarded. The father of the petitioner immediately rushed the petitioner to
the nearest hospital but considering her serious condition, she was referred to
Safdarjung Hospital, Delhi.       Thereafter, considering the critical medical
CWP No.20325 of 2018(O&M)                                                     -2-
condition of the petitioner, doctors decided to amputate both arms of the
petitioner in order to save her life, which caused 100% permanent disability to
her. The father of the petitioner approached various authorities about the
negligence of the concerned officials of the respondent-Nigam in performing
their duties but his pleas fell on deaf ears. An FIR No.520 dated 13.09.2016
was registered under Section 338 IPC at Police Station Sohna, District
Gurugram on account of this incident. The factum of broken electric pole was
in the knowledge of the officials of the respondent-Nigam, however, due to
their negligence in not taking appropriate timely action, the petitioner came
into contact with live electric wires and lost both her arms.
3.            Mr. Keshav Pratap Singh, learned counsel appearing on behalf of
the petitioner would submit that the petitioner lost both her arms and the
accident caused her 100% permanent disability owing to the negligence on
the part of the respondents and therefore, they are liable to compensate the
petitioner. He relies upon the judgment rendered by the Hon’ble Supreme
Court in M.C. Mehta and another Vs. Union of India and others 1987 (1)
SCC 395 to contend that if any harm results to any one on account of an
accident in the operation of hazardous or inherently dangerous activity, the
enterprise running such activity is absolutely liable to compensate, regardless
whether it is carried on carefully or not, as it is under obligation that such
activity must be conducted with highest standards of safety. He further relies
upon the judgment rendered by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in M.P.
Electricity Board Vs. Shail Kumari 2002 (1) CCC 685(SC) wherein it has
been held that electricity board is liable to pay compensation even in cases
where there was no negligence on its part. Reliance has also been placed on
the judgment rendered by a Coordinate Bench of this Court in CWP
CWP No.20325 of 2018(O&M)                                                      -3-
No.14046 of 2012 titled as Raman Vs. State of Haryana and others decided
on 02.07.2013 wherein while dealing with the case of a child, who had
suffered a triple amputation of limbs, this Court awarded a compensation of
Rs.60 lakhs, apart from issuing other directions to the respondent-Nigam.
4.            Per contra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents
No.2 to 5 would submit that the electric pole was broken down due to a motor
vehicular accident caused by an identified vehicle.           No information was
provided to the respondent-Nigam in that regard by any passer-by or villager
and meanwhile, the petitioner came into contact with live wires attached to
the broken pole and therefore, there is no negligence on the part of the
officials of respondent-Nigam. The officials of the respondent-Nigam on
receiving the information regarding the broken electric pole immediately
repaired the same and therefore, neither the respondent-Nigam nor its
employees are liable to pay any compensation.
5.            I have heard learned counsel for the parties and with their
assistance have perused the pleadings.        Admittedly, the petitioner herein
suffered amputation of both her arms due to electrocution and the disability
certificate attached with the petition as Annexure P-5 reflects that she has
suffered 100% permanent physical impairment. Now question is whether the
respondent-Nigam was liable for the accident in question and is liable to pay
compensation and if yes, what would be the quantum?
6.            The respondent-Nigam being the supplier of electricity is bound
to maintain live wire and other electricity system used for the purpose of
transmission of electricity. In case of an incident involving electricity line,
burden is essentially on the Electricity Board to plead and prove that it was
not their fault and the snapping of the live wire can be described to be an act
CWP No.20325 of 2018(O&M)                                                         -4-
of negligence. When an incident of this nature is involved, inference can
surely be drawn that there has been an element of carelessness on the part of
the Electricity Board in maintaining the supply line. The facts of the case in
hand lead to application of principle of “strict liability”. The concept of strict
liability has been discussed by the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of
Shail Kumari (supra) wherein it has been held that the responsibility to
supply electric energy in the particular locality was statutorily conferred on
the Board. If the energy so transmitted causes injury or death of a human
being, who gets unknowingly trapped into it, the primary liability to
compensate the sufferer, is that of the supplier of the electric energy. The
Hon’ble Supreme Court has further held that the Board is also liable under
the strict liability rule and the basis of such liability is the foreseeable risk
inherent in the very nature of such activity. The relevant paragraphs of the
judgment are reproduced as under: -
"7. It is an admitted fact that the responsibility to supply electric
energy in the particular locality was statutorily conferred on the
Board. If the energy so transmitted causes injury or death of a
human being, who gets unknowingly trapped into it the primary
liability to compensate the sufferer is that of the supplier of the
electric energy. So long as the voltage of electricity transmitted
through the wires is potentially of dangerous dimension the
managers of its supply have the added duty to take all safety
measures to prevent escape of such energy or to see that the wire
snapped would not remain live on the road as users of such road
would be under peril. It is no defence on the part of the
management of the Board that somebody committed mischief by
CWP No.20325 of 2018(O&M)                                                    -5-
siphoning such energy to his private property and that the
electrocution was from such diverted line. It is the look out of the
managers of the supply system to prevent such pilferage by
installing necessary devices. At any rate, if any live wire got
snapped and fell on the public road the electric current thereon
should automatically have been disrupted. Authorities manning
such dangerous commodities have extra duty to chalk out
measures to prevent such mishaps.
8. Even assuming that all such measures have been adopted, a
person undertaking an activity involving hazardous or risky
exposure to human life, is liable under law of torts to compensate
for the injury suffered by any other person, irrespective of any
negligence or carelessness on the part of the managers of such
undertakings. The basis of such liability is the foreseeable risk
inherent in the very nature of such activity. The liability cast on
such person is known, in law, as "strict liability". It differs from
the liability which arises on account of the negligence or fault in
this way i.e. the concept of negligence comprehends that the
foreseeable harm could be avoided by taking reasonable
precautions. If the defendant did all that which could be done for
avoiding the harm, he cannot be held liable when the action is
based on any negligence attributed. But such consideration is not
relevant in cases of strict liability where the defendant is held
liable irrespective of whether he could have avoided the
particular harm by taking precautions.
10. There are seven exceptions formulated by means of case law
to the doctrine of strict liability. It is unnecessary to enumerate
those exceptions barring one which is this. "Act of stranger i.e. if
the escape was caused by the unforeseeable act of a stranger, the
rule doesnot apply". (vide Page 535 Winfield on Tort, 15th Edn.)
13. In the present case, the Board made an endeavour to rely on
the exception to the rule of strict liability (Rylands v. Fletcher)
being "an act of stranger". The said exception is not available to
the Board as the act attributed to the third respondent should
reasonably have been anticipated or at any rate its consequences
should have been prevented by the appellant Board. In
Northwestern Utilities, Limited v. London Guarantee and
Accident Company, Limited {1936 Appeal Cases 108}, the Privy
Council repelled the contention of the defendant based on the
aforesaid exception. In that case a hotel belonging to the
plaintiffs was destroyed in a fire caused by the escape and
ignition of natural gas. The gas had percolated into the hotel
basement from a fractured welded joint in an intermediate
pressure main situated below the street level and belonging to
the defendants which was a public utility company. The fracture
was caused during the construction involving underground work
by a third party. The Privy Council held that the risk involved in
the operation undertaken by the defendant was so great that a
high degree care was expected of him since the defendant ought
to have appreciated the possibility of such a leakage."
CWP No.20325 of 2018(O&M)                                                       -7-
Similarly, the Hon’ble Supreme Court in Union of India
Vs.Prabhakaran Vijaya Kumar and others (2008) 9 SCC 527 has
"22. Strict liability focuses on the nature of the defendants'
activity rather than, as in negligence, the way in which it is
carried on (vide Torts by Michael Jones, 4th Edn. p.247). There
are many activities which are so hazardous that they may
constitute a danger to the person or property of another. The
principle of strict liability states that the undertakers of these
activities have to compensate for the damage caused by them
irrespective of any fault on their part. As Fleming says
"permission to conduct such activity is in effect made conditional
on its absorbing the cost of the accidents it causes, as an
appropriate item of its overheads" (see Fleming on 'Torts' 6th
Edn p. 302).
23. Thus, in cases where the principle of strict liability applies,
the defendant has to pay damages for injury caused to the
plaintiff, even though the defendant may not have been at any
fault.
24. The basis of the doctrine of strict liability is two- fold: (i) The
people who engage in particularly hazardous activities should
bear the burden of the risk of damage that their activities
generate and (ii) it operates as a loss distribution mechanism, the
person who does such hazardous activity (usually a corporation)
being in the best position to spread the loss via insurance and
CWP No.20325 of 2018(O&M)                                                       -8-
higher prices for its products (vide 'Torts' by Michael Jones 4th
Edn p. 267)."
Therefore, in view of the well settled law, this Court has no
hesitation in holding that the respondent-Nigam is liable to pay compensation
to the petitioner in the instant case.
7.            Now with regard to the question of quantum of compensation, a
Coordinate Bench of this Court in the judgment rendered in Raman’s case
(supra) where a four years old boy lost his limbs and while substantively
dealing with the issue, awarded a compensation of Rs.60 lakhs along with
interest @8.5% per annum, apart from Rs.2 lakhs to the mother for trauma,
mental shock, pain and agony as well as Rs.20,000/- quantified towards
litigation costs. Similarly, a Division Bench of Himachal Pradesh High Court
in the judgment rendered in CWP No. 475 of 2013 decided on 09.01.2015
titled as Naval Kumar alias Rohit Kumar vs. State of H.P. & others,
awarded a compensation of Rs.1.25 crores to a boy aged 8 years, who
suffered 100% permanent disability on account of amputation of his both
arms. The relevant portion of the said judgment is reproduced as under:-
“49. Now, we have to award the just and fair compensation as
per the principles laid down in the judgments cited herein above,
taking into consideration the 100% disability of 8 years old boy
at the time of electrocution. According to the averments made in
the petition, he was a brilliant student. The petitioner would
normally had started earning at least Rs.30,000/- per month
after attaining the age of 20 years. His life expectancy can safely
be taken as per the prevailing trends to 70 years. He would have
safely worked for 38 years. The appropriate multiplier, in the
CWP No.20325 of 2018(O&M)                                                   -9-
present case, would be 25. There is no possibility of marriage of
the petitioner, therefore, no standard deductions can be made
from the income. The income in entirety has to be taken into
consideration. The annual income of the petitioner would be
Rs.3,60,000/-, which is required to be multiplied by 25. The total
future loss of the income of the petitioner comes to ( 30,000 x 12
x 25 = Rs.90,00,000/-) i.e rupees ninety lacs. The petitioner is
also entitled to standard damages of Rs.10,00,000/- towards loss
of companionship, life amenities/pleasures and loss of happiness.
The petitioner is entitled to Rs.10,00,000/- for pain and suffering,
including    mental    distress,  trauma    and    discomfort   and
inconvenience. He is entitled to Rs.10,00,000/- towards
attendant/nursing expenses for his life. He is also entitled to a
sum of Rs.5,00,000/- for securing artificial/robotic limbs and
future medical expenses.
50. The writ petition is allowed and in order to secure financial
amenities for future of the petitioner, the respondents No. 2 & 3
would pay compensation of Rs.1,25,00,000/- (Rupees one crore
twenty five lacs) to the petitioner. The amount will be deposited
in a Fixed Deposit in the name of the petitioner under joint
guardianship of his mother at Nationalized Bank, Chowari,
Distt. Chamba, H.P., within a period of 60 days of the receipt of
certified copy of this judgment, failing which, the amount shall
carry interest @ 9% p.a. till deposited in the bank. The interest
so accrued will be transferred in a separate Savings Account to
be opened in the same Branch in the name of the petitioner, to be
CWP No.20325 of 2018(O&M)                                                   -10-
operated jointly by the parents, payable to the petitioner on
regular monthly basis. The Manager, Nationalized Bank,
Chowari, where the compensation amount shall be deposited,
would release a sum of Rs.10,000/- per month to the petitioner,
through his guardian, to meet his daily expenses. This amount
would take care of the petitioner's educational expenses,
nutritious food and cost of attendant. A sum of Rs.5,00,000/-
deposited in this Court shall be adjusted towards the amount to
be paid to the petitioner as ordered herein above. The
respondents No. 2 & 3 are directed to take all remedial measures
to raise the height of the 'Lahru-Chowari Line' to make it safe
and render the inhabitants electrically harmless and to make it
beyond the reach of children and local residents of the inhabited
localities.
The aforesaid decision passed by the Division Bench in the case
of Naval Kumar’s case (supra) was tested by the State of Himachal Pradesh
before the Hon’ble Supreme Court in State of Himachal Pradesh & Ors.
Versus Naval Kumar alias Rohit Kumar (2017) 3 SCC 115 wherein the
Hon’ble Supreme Court while reducing the compensation from Rs.1.25 crores
to Rs.90 lakhs, held as under:-
17. In our considered view, taking into consideration the facts
and circumstances of the case such as respondent's family
background, his age (8 years), nature of permanent disability
suffered by the respondent, his performance in studies, the
determination of monthly/yearly income made by the High Court,
expenses incurred and all the relevant factors, which are usually
CWP No.20325 of 2018(O&M)                                                     -11-
taken into account in awarding compensation to the victim, the
respondent is held entitled for a total lump sum compensation of
Rs.90,00,000/- (Rs. Ninety lacs) together with interest payable at
the rate of 6% p.a. in place of Rs.1,25,00,000/- awarded by the
High Court. 18. The award of Rs.90,00,000/- together with
interest payable at the rate of 6% p.a., in our view, would fetch
sufficient regular monthly income to the respondent by way of
interest alone, if the awarded sum is deposited in the Bank and
would thus take care of respondent's upbringing and other needs
for the rest of his life. The award of compensation determined by
us is just and reasonable compensation payable to the
respondent.
19. In view of foregoing discussion, the appeal succeeds and is
allowed in part. The impugned order is modified to the extent
indicated above by reducing the compensation awarded by the
20. In other words, the compensation awarded by the High Court
is, accordingly, reduced from Rs.1,25,000,00/- to Rs.90,00,000/-
with interest payable at the rate of 6% p.a. from the date of filing
of the writ petition.
21. Let the appellant-State deposit the entire amount, as has been
awarded by this Court, within 3 months from the date of receipt
of the copy of this judgment in the High Court or pay to the
respondent through his parents after proper verification.
8.          The judgement rendered in Naval Kumar’s case (supra) as
decided by the Supreme Court in the year 2017 held an amount of Rs.90 lakhs
CWP No.20325 of 2018(O&M)                                                      -12-
as adequate compensation. Keeping in view the principles laid down for
awarding compensation in Naval Kumar’s case (supra) and the fact that the
case in hand is similar to that of Naval Kumar, this Court deems it appropriate
to award a compensation of Rs.95 lakhs to the petitioner with interest payable
@7% per annum from the date of filing of the writ petition. The amount
stands enhanced considering the fact that 5 years have elapsed since the
amount was awarded by the Supreme Court in almost similar circumstances
and taking into account the cost of inflation, stated to be almost 15% as on
9.            The aforesaid amount shall be deposited by the respondent-
Nigam in the form of an FDR in a nationalized bank within a period of three
months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this judgment. The
interest accrued therein at the end of each month will be transferred in a
separate Savings Account to be opened in the same Branch in the name of the
petitioner, to be operated jointly with the parents, payable to the petitioner on
regular monthly basis, which shall take care of the daily expenses of the
petitioner. The petitioner on her attaining the age of 25 years shall be entitled
to have the amount released in her name and operate the account solely.
10.           The writ petition stands allowed in above terms.
Pankaj*                     Whether speaking/reasoned         Yes/No