Mr. Vashishtha Arora i/b Mr. Vipul M. Yadav for the Petitioner
Ms. S. D. Shinde, A.P.P for the Respondent–State
Sr. P.I Mr. Jeevan Kharat, from Dindoshi Police Station, is present
P.I Mr. Samadhan Wagh from Dindoshi Police Station, is present
2              By this petition, filed by the petitioner through his father,
the following reliefs are sought:
-a writ in the nature of Habeas Corpus or any other appropriate
writ for release/production of the petitioner, aged 16 years (presently
detained at Central Prison, Thane); for setting aside orders of the
Juvenile Justice Board, Dongri dated 26th August 2021, 8th November
2021 as well as the orders passed by the learned 67 th Metropolitan
Magistrate, Borivli Court, Mumbai, dated 9th November 2021 and 12th
November 2021 passed mechanically, without following the provisions
of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act; for
transferring the matter to the Juvenile Justice Board,          Dongri,
Mumbai; for initiating departmental inquiry, disciplinary action,
criminal prosecution against the respondent No.3- Samadhan Wagh for
misleading and misguiding the Juvenile Justice Board, Dongri as well
as the Metropolitan Magistrate and for demanding Rs. 50,000/- from
the petitioner’s father; for or a direction of payment of compensation
to the petitioner/his father for the pain and suffering at the hands of
the respondents for wrongful prosecution and for transfer of the
petitioner’s son immediately to the Observation Home, till the
aforesaid petition is finally disposed of, having regard to the fact that
the petitioner is around 17 years of age.
3           The petitioner, according to his father, is a Juvenile. The
petitioner was taken into custody by the police on 13 th August 2021 in
connection with C.R. No. 660/2021 registered with the Dindoshi
Police Station, Mumbai on 12th August 2021 for the alleged offences
punishable under Sections 302, 307, 397, 326, 143, 145, 147, 148,
149, 504, 506(II), 34 of the Indian Penal Code r/w Sections 4 and 25
of the Arms Act and Section 37(1)(A) r/w 135 of the Maharashtra
4           According to the learned counsel for the petitioner, the
petitioner at the time of the incident, was a minor i.e. a Juvenile aged
16 years 2 months and 5 days and as such, the petitioner ought to have
been treated as a Juvenile. Learned counsel for the petitioner states
that the petitioner was produced initially before the Juvenile Justice
Board, Dongri and was kept in the Children Observation Home,
however, within 3 to 4 days of sending the petitioner to the Juvenile
Justice Board, Dongri, Mumbai, the respondent No. 3 called the
petitioner’s father and asked him to produce the documents with
respect to age of his son. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits
that pursuant thereto, the petitioner produced the original School
Bonafide Certificate along with a xerox copy of the same issued by the
School, where the petitioner was studying, to show his date of birth
(4th June 2005); a copy of the Aadhar Card confirming the date of
birth of the petitioner i.e. 4 th June 2005. Learned counsel for the
petitioner submits that the respondent No. 3- PI Samadhan Wagh
returned the original School Bonafide Certificate issued by the School
authorities as well as the Aadhar Card and kept the xerox copies of the
same and further demanded a sum of Rs. 50,000/- from the
petitioner’s father. He submits that the petitioner’s father, being a
poor person, refused to make the said payment, pursuant to which,
respondent No. 3 threatened him saying that now nobody could save
his son. He further submits that the respondent No. 3, despite the said
documents received from the petitioner, filed an application to the
Juvenile Justice Board on 26 th August 2021, which is at Exhibit `B’ at
page 35 of the petition.    In the said application, it is stated that the
offence is serious in nature and that there is complicity of the
petitioner and that, in order to ascertain the boy’s age, he should be
sent for the medical examination. Although learned A.P.P states that
the respondent No. 3 had furnished the xerox copy of the Aadhar
Card before the Juvenile Justice Board, there is nothing on record in
Exhibit-B to show that the same was submitted. The Juvenile Justice
Board allowed the said request of the respondent No. 3. The order
passed by the Juvenile Justice Board reads thus :
“Allowed as per rules.”
It appears that pursuant thereto, the petitioner was taken
for medical examination to the Nagpada Police Hospital, Mumbai. It
appears from the medical certificate issued by the Medical Officer in
the proforma for age determination, which is at page 38, that the
opinion given by the Medical Officer is, that the boy was aged about
20-21 years. Detailed report of the ossification test is not produced. It
appears that the respondent No. 3 produced the said medical report
before the Juvenile Justice Board on 3 rd November 2021. The said
report is at Exhibit-D at page 37 of the petition. On the said report,
the Juvenile Justice Board has passed the following order:
“In view of medical report, P.S. to take steps to
produce Vikas Yadav before regular Court having
jurisdiction since he was major on date of offence.”
Thereafter the petitioner was produced before the regular
Court and thereafter, the learned 67th Metropolitan Magistrate, Borivli
Court, Mumbai, passed orders dated 9 th November 2021 and 12th
5            The grievance of the learned counsel for the petitioner is
that the respondent No. 3 malafidely did not produce the documents
handed over by the petitioner’s father to show that his son was a
Juvenile at the relevant time. The documents relied upon by the
petitioner’s father to show the juvenility of his son are at page 31-
Bonafide Certificate, page 32-Aadhar Card showing the age of the
petitioner i.e. date of birth as 4 th June 2005 and School Leaving
Certificate at Page 36 Exhibit-C of the petition, evidencing the
petitioner’s date of birth as 4 th June 2005.    According to the learned
counsel for the petitioner, the respondent No. 3, malafidely, did not
produce the said documents which showed the juvenility of the
petitioner, as the petitioner’s father failed to satisfy the demand of Rs.
50,000/- of the respondent No. 3.
6            Learned counsel for the petitioner further submits that
even the Juvenile Justice Board has failed to comply with the
provisions of Section 94 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act. He submits that there is a procedure laid down under
the said Act with respect to the process of age determination. In this
context, learned counsel for the petitioner relied on Section 94 (2)(i)
(ii)(iii). He submits that only in the absence of any document to show
the juvenility of a person, that the age is to be determined by
conducting an ossification test or any other latest medical age
determination test conducted on the orders of the Committee or the
7           Prima-facie, there is some substance in what is contended
by the learned counsel for the petitioner. The documents relied upon,
in particular, the Aadhar Card was prepared in 2011 and as such, the
petitioner or his father could not have anticipated of any impending
case against the petitioner. The Juvenile Justice Board also should have
sought documents from the respondent No. 3 before resorting to
clause (3) of Section 94 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of
Children) Act. From the documents which are annexed to the petition,
the date of birth of the petitioner appears to be 4 th June 2005, which,
prima-facie shows that at the relevant time, petitioner was a juvenile.
We are not aware whether the respondent No. 3 had placed any
document with respect to the age of the petitioner before the Juvenile
8           In this light of the matter and having regard to the
documents annexed by the petitioner’s father with respect to the age
of the petitioner and as there is non-compliance of the provisions of
Section 94 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children)
Act, we quash and set- aside the orders dated 26 th August 2021 and 8th
9            Having regard to the conduct of the respondent No. 3, we
direct that the investigation of the case in hand be handed over by the
respondent No. 3-PI Samadhan Wagh to Senior Inspector of Police
Jeevan Kharat, Dindoshi Police Station. The Senior PI to place all the
documents on which reliance is sought by the petitioner, to show the
juvenility of the petitioner, before the Juvenile Justice Board, at the
earliest and in any event, within one week from today. The Juvenile
Justice Board to take into consideration the said documents and pass
appropriate orders in accordance with law, having regard to the
mandate of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act.
10           In the meantime, till appropriate orders are passed in the
aforesaid petition, we direct the Superintendent, Thane Central Prison
to forthwith shift the petitioner to the Children Observation Home at
Dongri. The petitioner be kept in the said Children Observation Home
until further orders are passed in the aforesaid petition.
11           In the meantime, we direct the Additional Commissioner
of Police, North Region, Mumbai, to conduct an inquiry with respect
to the allegations made by the petitioner against the respondent No. 3.
In the course of the inquiry, the Additional Commissioner of Police to
hear the petitioner with respect to the grievance made by him.
12           In the meantime, the proceedings before the Sessions
Court being Sessions Case No. 59/2022 qua the petitioner is stayed.
13           The Juvenile Justice Board to consider the report tendered
by the new officer along with all the documents and pass appropriate
orders in accordance with law, as early as possible and in any event,
within one week from the date of filing of the report.
14         Learned A.P.P to forward the copies of this order to the
Additional Commissioner of Police, North Region, Mumbai and to the
Superintendent of Central Prison, Thane, for its prompt compliance.
15         Stand over to 22nd September 2022. To be listed at 4:00
16         All concerned to act on the authenticated copy of this
order.