1.      This petition has been filed under Section 226 of the Constitution of
India read with Section 482 Cr.P.C. for issuance of writ in the nature of
mandamus directing the respondent to release the petitioner on parole for a
period of eight weeks on the grounds of filing Special Leave Petition (for
short, „SLP‟).
2.      Mr. Faraz Maqbool, learned counsel for petitioner, submitted that
the petitioner has been convicted for the offence under Section 6 of
the Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (for short,
“POCSO Act”) vide judgment dated 19th December, 2019 and has been
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 14 years vide
order on the sentence dated 18th January, 2020 in case FIR No.513/2013,
registered at P.S. Okhla, Delhi. This conviction was challenged before this
court vide CRL.A. No.454/2020. However, the same was dismissed vide
judgment dated 10th August, 2021 and this Court upheld both, the
conviction as well as the sentence.
3.      Learned counsel for petitioner submitted that the petitioner is
presently confined in Central Jail No. 5, Tihar and has already undergone
incarceration of about 8 years out of rigorous imprisonment for 14 years
and fine. He desires to file an SLP for which he sought parole. He also
sought parole on the ground of maintaining social-ties with the family.
However, this application for parole filed before the Home Department,
Govt. of NCT of Delhi on 19th August, 2021 was dismissed by the
respondent on 18th January, 2022, observing that there were no special
circumstances that existed for grant of parole as the convict could file the
SLP from the jail itself where free legal aid was available to all prisoners.
This order of dismissal has been placed on the record as Annexure A.
4.      Learned counsel for petitioner has placed reliance on several
decisions i.e., Chhedi Paswan v. State (NCT of Delhi), 2021 SCC OnLine
Del 2230, Ravi v. State of Rajasthan, 2019 SCC OnLine Raj 5911 &
Mangal v. State of Rajasthan, 2019 SCC OnLine Raj 5912 [on the point
of grant of parole to POCSO convicts]; Surender Kumar v. State, 2016
SCC OnLine Del 3260, Gurmeet Singh v. State, 2016 SCC OnLine Del
3704, Sanjay Arora v. State of NCT of Delhi, 2013 SCC OnLine Del 3196
& Tika Ram v. State, 2009 SCC OnLine Del 356 [on the point of grant of
Parole in cases involving sentence of life imprisonment]; Somesh Gupta v.
State of the NCT of Delhi, 2010 SCC OnLine Del 76, Sharda Jain v.
State, 2010 SCC OnLine Del 633, Ramesh Kumar v. State, 2009 SCC
OnLine Del 3757 and Vimal Kumar Bahl v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2010)
93 AIC 597 (Del) [on the point of grant of Parole for filing SLP]; and,
Order dated 2nd November, 2020 titled Pilluwa@Pappu vs. State [WP
(Crl.) 1780/2020] & Samuel Onyema Anyanwu v. State (GNCT of Delhi),
2021 SCC OnLine Del 302 [regarding "Special Circumstances" as per
Delhi Prison Rules 2018], to submit that parole has been granted to
POCSO convicts or those undergoing life imprisonment, also for the
purposes of filing SLP.
5.      Ms. Kamna Vohra, learned Additional Standing Counsel for the
State, on the other hand, submitted that the reason for dismissal was very
clear and the Parole Rules have been followed. The denial of parole is not
whimsical and could not be faulted. The Status Report has verified the
petitioner‟s address.
6.      The Nominal Roll has been also received from the jail, which
records that the petitioner has been allotted work as „Lungar Sahayak‟ and
has not been found violating any prison rule and his conduct for the last
one year has been satisfactory. It is also to be noted that the Nominal Roll
discloses that the petitioner has never been released on bail, parole or
furlough.
7.      The order rejecting the parole application of the petitioner gives the
following grounds for rejection: -
“1. As per Rule 1211 (VII) of Delhi Prison Rules-
2018, which states that: -
In the following cases, parole shall not be granted,
except, if in the discretion of the competent authority special
circumstances exist for grant of parole;
(VII) If prisoner is convicted under POCSO. In this
case, as per crime detail, said convict committed offence
punishable under POCSO Act.
2. Further, no special circumstances exist for grant of
parole as the convict may file SLP from jail itself where free
legal aid facility is available to all prisoners.”
8.      As regards the observation that filing of SLP constitutes no “special
circumstance” as there is free legal aid available, suffice it to note that the
courts have not agreed with this stance of the Government. Under Article
22(1) of the Constitution as well as Section 303 Cr.P.C., an accused person
has been guaranteed with a Constitutional right to engage a
counsel/pleader of his own choice. It is no doubt true that the Legal
Services Authorities at all levels endeavour to provide excellent legal
assistance to those in prison. But, to deny the convict an opportunity to
engage with other counsel to enable him to make up his mind freely, as to
whom he would wish to engage, would violate his constitutional rights to
legal representation. In fact, it is because of the recognition of this right
that the State Prison Rules, 2018 dealing with parole and furlough,
recognizes that regular parole under Rule 1208 can be granted to a convict,
to pursue filing of a Special Leave Petition before the Supreme Court.
9.      While this ground in the impugned order does not hold water, the
more serious objection is encapsulated in ground (1), namely, that the
Rules itself do not permit a prisoner convicted under POCSO Act for
parole. It would be useful to reproduce Rule 1211 for ready reference, as
“1211. In the following cases, parole shall not be granted,
except, if in the discretion of the competent authority special
circumstances exist for grant of parole;
VII. If the prisoner is convicted under POCSO;”
10.     But this bar is not absolute, for, the competent authority has been
vested with “discretion” even in such cases, to grant parole, provided there
were special circumstances. It is clear that the impugned order does not
refer to the “special circumstances” that were required to be considered
and were found insufficient to grant parole. Rather, it is clear that the
“special circumstances” or rather their absence, have been referred to only
in respect of the filing of an SLP, but not for the entitlement of the
applicant for parole under Rule 1211(VII) of the State Prison Rules.
11.     To reiterate, a convict under the POCSO Act is not barred from
seeking parole, as discretion has been vested in the Competent Authority to
grant parole to such a convict under “special circumstances”. What those
“special circumstances” would be have not been spelt out. Nevertheless, it
is clear that the facts of each case would reveal the “special circumstances”
for grant of parole. The Competent Authority should keep in mind the
purpose of parole as listed out in Rule 1200 of the Prison Rules. These are
reproduced below for ready reference:-
“1200. The objectives of releasing a prisoner on parole and
i. To enable the inmate to maintain continuity with his family
life and deal with familial and social matters,
ii. To enable him to maintain and develop his self-confidence,
iii. To enable him to develop constructive hope and active
iv. To help him remain in touch with the developments in the
v. To help him remain physiologically and psychologically
vi. To enable him to overcome/recover from the stress and evil
effects of incarceration, and,
vii. To motivate him to maintain good conduct and discipline
in the prison.”
12.     As has been held in W.P.(Crl.) No.1479/2009, the grounds for
declining parole are the following: -
“(i) A reasonable apprehension, based upon material
available with the Government such as the circumstances in
which the offence is alleged to have been committed by him
and the other cases if any in which he is involved, that the
petitioner, if released on bail may not return back to jail to
undergo the remaining portion of the sentence awarded to
(ii) A serious apprehension of breach of law and order or
commission of another offence by the petitioner if he comes
(iii) Past conduct of the petitioner such as jumping the bail or
parole granted earlier to him;
(iv) A reasonable possibility of the petitioner trying to
intimidate or harm those who have deposed against him or
their relatives.”
13.     Balancing the two would be an expected exercise of the respondent
Department, while recommending parole or rejecting the application.
14.     In the present case, the petitioner is one who has remained interned
in prison for 8 years and more. He has never availed of bail, furlough or
parole so far as revealed by the Nominal Roll. This continuous
incarceration would be a significant factor for grant of parole. The long
incarceration would have disrupted his family life and would have
definitely impacted him physically and psychologically. In fact, all the
objectives listed in Rule 1200 are applicable to him.
15.     Moreover, he has, in all these times, maintained good conduct and
discipline in the prison. There is no reasonable apprehension that the
petitioner, if released on parole, may not return back to jail to undergo the
remaining portion of the sentence awarded to him, or that he may escape
the law, or that he may once again indulge in the same activity. Since the
appeal has been already disposed of, there is no possibility of his
intimidating or harming those who have deposed against him. In fact, the
Status Report does not reveal any such possibility.
16.     In the circumstances, the petition is allowed. The concerned Jail
Superintendent is directed to release the petitioner on parole for a period of
eight weeks on his furnishing a personal bond and surety in the sum of
Rs.10,000/- each, to the satisfaction of Jail Superintendent and subject to
further following conditions:
(i)     The petitioner shall not leave NCR Region without
informing the local SHO;
(ii)    The petitioner shall furnish his mobile phone/landline
number and residential address as well as that of his surety
to the Jail Superintendent/SHO and both shall keep their
mobile/landline phones operational at all times during the
parole period and in the event of any change of the same,
will   immediately     inform    the   same   to   the    Jail
Superintendent/SHO; and,
(iii)   The petitioner shall drop a pin location on Google Maps so
that    his   location     is   available   to    the     Jail
17.     The petition is accordingly disposed of.
18.     The judgment be uploaded on the website forthwith.