Date of Decision: 1st November, 2022
Through: Mr. Sameer Vashisht and Mr.
with Ms. Sanjana N, Advocate.
1.      This hearing has been done through hybrid mode.
2.      Vide the previous order dated 6th September, 2022, the worthy
Registrar General of this Court had been directed to file a report setting out
specific details as to the functioning of the various District Consumer
Disputes Redressal Fora in Delhi.
3.      Today, the report of the worthy Registrar General has been received
along with various other documents, including inspection reports basis visits
to the District Fora. The same is being considered by this Court. Some of
the suggestions/steps given in the said Report are as under:
“11. It is humbly submitted that the directions of
this Hon'ble Court on the following points would
be an aid in the effective functioning of the District
W.P.(C) 12490/2021                                                               Page 1 of 6
(i) A separate District Consumer Disputes
Redressal Commission for Shahdara District
may be established and made operational as
expeditiously as possible.
(ii) The nomenclature of DCDRC (South I) may be
immediately changed to DCDRC (South) and
that of DCDRC (South II) may be immediately
changed to DCDRC (South East).
(iii) All existing vacancies of Presidents and
Members in District Commissions may be
immediately filled up and a mechanism may be
devised so that the process of filling up of
anticipated vacancies is commenced well in
advance and gets concluded before the
vacancies actually arise.
(iv) The District Commissions should strictly
adhere to the timings/working hours specified
under the Consumer Protection (Consumer
(v) The District Commissions should strictly
adhere to the calendar of the Government of
NCT of Delhi and should conduct the
proceedings on all working days i.e. 6 days a
week (except Second Saturdays and other
notified holidays of the GNCTD).
(vi) The advance intimation regarding leaves of
the Presidents/Members and all other relevant
information relating to the functioning of the
District Commissions should be put on the
website.
(vii) Disposal criteria should be formulated for
being followed by the District Commissions
and they should submit monthly disposal
statements to the State Commission.
(viii) Advisories may be issued to the District
Commissions to give preference to old cases,
cases of women, senior citizens and persons
W.P.(C) 12490/2021                                                         Page 2 of 6
(ix) A separate Mediation Cell should be
established in all the Districts Consumers
(x) Adequate and dedicated staff should be
appointed for the District Commissions or
otherwise there should be a sufficiently long
fixed tenure for the transferable staff.
(xi) Adequate infrastructure (including IT
infrastructure) be provided to the District
Commissions        and     wherever      required
infrastructure should be suitably augmented/
modernized. ”
4.      Let copies of this report along with all annexures be supplied to the ld.
Counsel for the Petitioner and ld. Counsel for the Respondents.
5.      It is also noted that the report states that there are a large number of
matters pending for final arguments after conclusion of evidence. The details
of the same are as under:
S. No.         Name of District           Pending Cases
W.P.(C) 12490/2021                                                           Page 3 of 6
6.      Besides this large pendency of matters even dating back to 2003 in
some cases, submissions have been made by various counsels from time to
time, regarding the irregularity in holding of hearings at the Consumer Fora,
highlighting that the Consumer Fora adjourn matters in the cause list itself,
give en-bloc dates, do not sit post 12/1 PM on most days, and do not hold
physical hearings. These issues also seem to have been recorded in the
inspection reports, placed by the worthy Registrar General. Considering the
large pendency of hearing matters and lack of a uniform method of
prioritization, to ensure expeditious disposal of such matters, especially
where evidence has been concluded long ago, it is directed as under:
(a)     Registrars of the concerned District Fora shall start listing final
matters for hearing at 2:30 pm on a daily basis, with effect from 14th
(b)     The said matters shall be listed in a chronological manner,
starting from the oldest cases first.
(d)     Advance publication shall be made in the cause list so that the
lawyers and litigants are duly informed.
(e)     Monthly reports shall be submitted by the concerned Registrars,
District Fora to the worthy Registrar General of the status of disposal
of the final matters.
7.      In the meantime, in view of the findings in the report, let a meeting be
held in the Chamber of the worthy Registrar General for consideration of the
W.P.(C) 12490/2021                                                            Page 4 of 6
(a)     Creation of a District Consumer Forum in Shahdara, which is
the only district lacking a District Forum;
(b)     Feasibility of change of nomenclature of DCDRC (South I) and
DCDRC (South II), as per clause (ii) of paragraph 11 of the
report extracted above.
(c)     Provision of requisite infrastructure in all the District Fora,
wherever the same is currently lacking.
(d)     Feasibility and Modalities for creation of mediation cells at the
relevant District Consumer Fora or creating arrangements with
existing mediation centres for deputation of mediators on fixed
days and times, while creation of permanent centres is
underway.
8.     The said meeting shall be attended by:
(a)     President/member each of the District Consumer Disputes
Redressal Fora in Delhi;
(c)     Secretary, Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food & Public
(d)     Mr. Satyakam and Mr. Sameer Vashisht, ld. ASCs, GNCTD;
(e)     Counsel(s) for the Petitioner;
(f)     Officials of the team of worthy Registrar General, who had
conducted inspection of various District Fora.
9.      The said meeting shall be held on 10th November, 2022 at 4:30 pm
at the chamber of the worthy Registrar General, Delhi High Court. Let the
W.P.(C) 12490/2021                                                          Page 5 of 6
conclusion/minutes of the meeting be placed before this Court on or before
10.     List on 22nd November, 2022 at 2:30 pm.
11.     It is also clarified that in the previous order dated 6th September,
2022 the appearance that was to be marked on behalf of GNCTD was of Mr.
Sameer Vashisht and not Mr. Manish Vashisht. The same may be read as
12.     Copy of this order be communicated to Ms. Sumanta Chakraborty,
Vikas Bhawan, I.P. Estate, New Delhi-110002 (T-011-23370799) who shall
forward the same to all the District Fora. In addition, the said order shall
also be communicated to the worthy Registrar General for further action.
13.     This is a part-heard matter.
W.P.(C) 12490/2021                                                      Page 6 of 6