1.      Heard Sri R.L. Varma learned counsel for the appellant and Sri
Roopak Chaubey learned A.G.A. for the State-respondent.
2.      This appeal is directed against the judgment and order dated
11.8.1989 passed by the Special/Additional Sessions Judge, Shahjahanpur
in Sessions Trial No. 470 of 1987 (State vs. Ram Chandra) arising out of
Case Crime No. 235/1987, under Section 302 IPC, Police Station
Jalalabad, District Shahjahanpur whereby appellant Ram Chandra has
been convicted of the offence under Section 302 IPC and sentenced to life
3.      The first information report of the incident, occurred on 25.7.1987
at about 6:00 PM, was lodged by Puttu son of Lakhan Kahar (PW-1) on
the same day, i.e. 25.7.1987 at about 22:15 hours. As per the case of
prosecution, the wife of the first informant named as Smt. Laraiti
(deceased) was the daughter of one Jodha Kahar whose only son Maiku
Lal had died a year before the incident and the wife of Jodha Kahar had
predeceased him. The deceased Maiku Lal had no children. Jodha Kahar
was survived by two daughters Laraiti, wife of the first informant and
Kalawati mother of the appellant. A civil case about the inheritance of 40
Bighas of land of deceased Jodha was going on between the wife of the
first informant and sons of his brother-in-law, namely Ram Chandra, Lala
Ram and Roop Ram, residents of Village Mishripur, P.S. Sadar Bazar,
District Shahjahanpur, wherein 27.7.1987 was the date fixed.
It is the case of the first informant that the said civil litigation was
the cause of enmity between the parties. On 25.7.1987 at about 6:00 PM,
the wife of the first informant Smt. Laraiti was collecting “Nimouri” from
the Neem tree of one Raja Ram son of Rameshwar Dayal near the village.
From the North side, Ram Chandra son of Jodha came having 'tabal' in his
hand and as soon as he reached near Smt. Laraiti, he hit in her head by
'tabal'. The first informant, Ashiq Ali son of Munir, Krishna Pal, Chhote
son of Maiku, Badri son of Sipahi and other villagers ran towards him and
at that time the accused-appellant gave another blow of 'tabal' on the neck
of the deceased and ran away towards the North-East direction. The first
informant and the witnesses chased him but could not nab him. The
injured Smt. Laraiti was brought to her home and while they were
arranging for the vehicle to take her to the hospital, she died at around
4.      The factum of lodging of the written report on the date of the
incident by PW-1 (the first informant) was proved by PW-5, the Head
Constable posted in P.S. Jalalabad, District Shahjahanpur. He stated that
the written report was given to him by the first informant (PW-1) and on
the basis thereof, Check report was prepared as Check No. 100. PW-5
proved the Check report being in his handwriting and signature, marked
as Exhibit Ka-2. The GD entry of the FIR was made at GD Rapat No. 75
Time 22:15 Hours on 25.7.1987, the original of which was produced in
the Court. The certified copy of the carbon copy of the GD Rapat entry,
prepared in the same process was filed and proved as Exhibit Ka-3. PW-5
had denied the suggestion of the report having been prepared Ante-time.
5.      The inquest of the dead body was conducted on 26.7.1987 at about
8:30 AM in the house of the deceased and the inquest report is proved as
6.      PW-4, the Constable posted in P.S. Jalalabad at the time of the
incident, stated that the body of deceased Laraiti kept in a sealed cloth
alongwith the sample seal and relevant papers was handed over to him
and Pooran Chaukidar on 26.7.1987 at about 8:30 AM to carry for the
postmortem and they moved to Shahjahanpur and handed over the dead
body in the Police Lines Shahjahanpur. It was then sent for the
postmortem and was handed over to the doctor in the sealed state
alongwith the sample seal. The body was identified by them before the
doctor and the postmortem was done. After completion of the
postmortem, one sealed bundle of clothes of the deceased was submitted
in the police station concerned alongwith all the relevant papers kept in
two sealed envelops. PW-4 stated that during the entire process, no one
had touched the dead body.
7.     PW-6, the Doctor who conducted autopsy, stated on oath that on
26.7.1987 when he was posted in the District Hospital, the body of
deceased Laraiti was brought by Constable Magan Singh CP No. 709 with
Pooran in sealed state and the sample seal was tallied with the seal on the
bundle of the dead body. It was then opened and the body was identified
by two police personnel who brought it. The postmortem was conducted
at about 4:15 PM. The external appearance of the dead body as indicated
in the postmortem report:-
The age of the deceased about 60 years, average build body, Rigor
Mortis passed on from upper extremity and was passing off from lower
extremity. Eyes and mouth were closed.
The ante-mortem injuries found on the person of the deceased are:
(1) Incised wound 16 cm x 2 cm x Bone deep present over the Right
side of the Head. 10 cm above the Right ear, Bone is cut underneath the
injury. Margins are clean cut
(2) Incised wound 7 cm x 1 cm x muscle deep on the Right side
lower part of neck 1 cm above the Right clavicle in middle. Margins clean
On internal examination, right parietal bone was found fractured. In
stomach, semi digested food of about 200 gms. was present. In small
intestine, gases were present; faecal matter was present in the large
intestine. The cause of death indicated in the postmortem report is “Coma
as a result of ante-mortem head injury”. The postmortem report was
proved in the handwriting and signature of PW-6 as Exhibit Ka-4. PW-6
stated that both the injuries could be caused by sharp-edged weapon and
were sufficient to cause death. The proximate time of death as indicated in
the postmortem report was about one day.
8.     In cross, PW-6 admitted that there might be a gap of 6-7 hours on
both sides. On the nature of the wounds, he stated that incised wounds
could have been caused by any sharp edged weapon such as Sword,
Knife, Kanta, Khurpi or Kulhari.
9.     The Investigating Officer had entered in the witness-box as PW-7.
He proved that the initial investigation was conducted by one Senior
Inspector I.H. Jafri and the investigation was handed over to him on
5.8.1987. He arrested accused Ram Chandra on 20.8.1987 and submitted
the charge sheet on the same day, which was proved in his handwriting
and signature as Exhibit Ka-5. PW-7 stated that the previous Investigating
Officer had conducted the investigation between 25.7.1987 to 28.7.1987
and recorded statements of the witnesses namely the first informant Puttu,
Ashiq Ali and Chhote and inspected the spot. The site plan on the record
was proved in the handwriting and signature of the previous Investigating
Officer, identified by PW-7, as Exhibit Ka-6.
PW-7, in cross, stated that he did not record the statement of any of
accused nor he ever participated in the investigation alongwith the
10.    The formal witnesses, in the instant case, proved the reports
prepared by them from the inception of the case, i.e. lodging of the first
information report to the submission of the charge sheet.
11.    Nothing contrary to the case of the prosecution could be elicited
from their testimony.
12.    Amongst the witnesses of fact, three in number, PW-1 is the first
informant Puttu son of Lakhan, husband of the deceased. He stated on
oath that he knew accused Ram Chandra who was son of his brother-in-
law. His father-in-law was Jodha Kahar whose son and wife had died and
whose agricultural land was inherited by Smt. Laraiti, the deceased as also
the mother of accused-appellant Ram Chandra, namely Smt. Kalawati and
that they both were legal heirs of deceased Jodha Kahar. Two sons of Smt.
Kalawati namely Lala Ram and Roop Ram, brothers of accused Ram
Chandra got prepared a forged Will of the land in dispute in their names
and a case related to the Will was going on wherein the date fixed was
about three days after of the incident. Smt. Laraiti had all hopes of success
in the case and on account of this enmity, accused Ram Chandra caused
murder of Smt. Laraiti (the deceased) so that the landed property may
come to the share of him and his brothers.
While narrating the incident, PW-1 reiterated his version in the
written report that two blows of 'tabal' were given by accused Ram
Chandra to deceased Laraiti in the field of Raja Ram while she was
collecting 'Nimouri' from the Neem tree and that he brought his wife to
his house from the place of the incident, PW-1 stated that where Ram
Chandra gave blow of 'tabal', he was cutting the grass and there he heard
the cries of deceased Laraiti. The place where he was cutting the grass
was at a distance of 30-40 paces from the place of the incident. On the
alarm raised by him from that place itself, the witnesses Badri, Chhote,
Krishna Pal and Ashiq Ali who were cutting grass nearby also reached the
spot and witnessed the incident. On the hue and cries raised by them, the
accused fled away towards the North-Eastern direction and the witnesses
also chased the accused. The report of the incident was scribed by
Awadhesh Kumar Shukla on his dictation and it was read over to him then
he put his signature. The written report on the record was read over to this
witness (PW-1) and he deposed that it was the same report which was
dictated by him. The written report is marked as Exhibit Ka-1 on the
testimony of this witness. PW-1 further stated that he went to file the
written report in P.S. Jalalabad alongwith the Chaukidar and it was lodged
at around 10:15 PM.
In cross, PW-1 described the topography of the place of the incident
and location of his house in the village. When the written report (Exhibit
Ka-1” was put to this witness, in cross, he stated that he put his thumb
impression on the same. He further stated that there was one Chaukidar in
the village, and he called him and then after talking to him, the written
report was scribed. On a suggestion, PW-1 categorically stated that the
Investigating Officer did not ask him to call the Chaukidar rather he
himself called him at about 7-7:30 PM and it became dark by then. After
writing the report, he went to the police station and the Investigating
Officer met him there only. PW-1 stated that the Investigating Officer
came to the village after lodging of the report and after that he (PW-1) did
not go to the police station. The body was taken for the postmortem at
about 12:00 Noon by a tractor and he alongwith the police personnel
accompanied it.
In cross, PW-1 further narrated the location of the Neem Tree in the
field of Raja Ram. He then stated that after his wife got injured, he picked
her and put her on a cot.
It is pertinent to note here that though the examination-in-chief of
PW-1 was recorded on 2.5.1989 and he was cross-examined to some
extent but without completion of his cross-examination, for the reasons
best known to the Judicial Officer concerned, he had proceeded to record
the statement of other witnesses of fact namely PW-2 and PW-3 on the
same day.
13.    We may further record that the cross-examination of PW-3 was
concluded on 2.5.1989 whereas the cross-examinations of PW-1 and PW-
2 were not completed by the Court concerned. After more than two
months, i.e. 20.7.1989, when the case was taken up for cross-examination
of the remaining witnesses, i.e. PW-1 and PW-2, it was transpired that
PW-1 Puttu had died a month before and the report in that regard was
submitted by the police station concerned on 22.6.1989. The trial Judge,
therefore, noted that the attendance of PW-1 Puttu could not be procured
for his cross-examination by the defence. PW-2, however, was cross-
examined on 20.7.1989 itself.
14.     We may further record that PW-2 & PW-3 both had been declared
hostile on 2.5.1989, the first day when only the evidence of PW-3 was
From the statement of PW-2, Ashiq Ali son of Munir, in chief, it
may be noted that he had fixed the time of the incident being at about 6:00
PM and stated that when the incident had occurred, he was present at
some distance wherefrom he could see the spot but he could not witness
the accused giving the blow of 'tabal' to the wife of Puttu (PW-1) and
reached at the spot on hearing the alarm (cries). He had seen the accused
Ram Chandra running away from the place of the incident but could not
tell as to what was there in his hand as he went quite far away. He further
stated that he saw the injuries of wife of Puttu (deceased) when he
reached the spot. He then stated that he was not cutting the grass but he
was in Khandhar of the village and reached at the place of the incident on
hearing cries. This witness had been declared hostile at this stage and was
permitted to be cross-examined by the prosecution.
In his incomplete cross recorded on the first day, i.e. 2.5.1989,
PW-2 admitted that there existed a Neem tree in the field of Raja Ram and
the same was also existing at the time of the incident and was also
existing at the time of his deposition. Smt. Laraiti, the deceased used to
collect 'Nimouri' and on the date of the incident, she also went there for
the same purpose. Chhote, Badri and Krishna Pal were also present on the
spot. On another question, PW-2 stated that the Investigating Officer had
interrogated him but he did not give the statement that he was present in
the field of Raja Ram for grazing his cattle. He also denied his previous
statement that accused Ram Chandra killed deceased Laraiti from 'tabal'.
PW-2 further stated that though he went to identify accused Ram Chandra
in jail but he knew him from before. He had denied having witnessed the
accused hitting the deceased from 'tabal' and that he was making a wrong
statement to save the accused. It is noted that the record indicates that the
cross-examination of this witness was resumed on oath on 2.5.1989 after
lunch but it was not completed. It is evident that without completion of
the cross-examination of this witness, the statement of PW-3 was recorded
and concluded.
On recall for cross-examination on 20.7.1989, this witness had
retracted from his previous deposition in the Court and stated that he did
not see the assailant who was running away from the place of the incident,
inasmuch as, that person was running towards the North-East direction
and he (PW-2) was coming from the South-West direction, that means
they were on the opposite sides. He further stated that the person who was
running away from the place of the incident was at a distance of about
100 yards from him and he could see only his back and not the front. At
that time, sun had already been set.
Further, this witness (PW-2) also retracted from his previous
statement about identification of accused Ram Chandra and stated that the
complete identity of the accused was disclosed to him by the Investigating
Officer and then he was simply asked to put his hand on the same person
who was pointed out by the Investigating Officer.
15.     PW-3 Chhote son of Maiku whose examination-in-chief and cross
was completed on 2.5.1989 itself had completely denied his presence near
the place of the incident or witnessing the incident. In cross, he retracted
from his previous statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. by stating that the
Investigating Officer did not interrogate him and as to how his statement
was written was not known to him. He (PW-3) then stated that he
identified the accused as he knew him prior to the incident. In cross for
the accused, PW-3 stated that the Investigating Officer had disclosed the
identity of the accused such as construction of his face and height to him
prior to the identification parade but had denied that he identified the
accused on the asking of the Investigating Officer and that he did not
know the accused from before the incident.
16.    To assail the judgment of conviction, it is argued by the learned
counsel for the appellant that the incident had occurred in the dead of
night and no one had seen the same. For this reason, the inquest was
conducted on the next day, i.e. 26.7.1987 at about 8:30 AM.
17.    It was argued that there are material contradictions in the statement
of the prosecution witnesses about the time of lodging of the FIR and the
dead body having been taken for the postmortem. The first informant
(PW-1), the husband of deceased had falsely implicated the appellant on
account of enmity as stated by him. The motive for false implication of
the accused in a blind murder is evident from the record. No one had
supported the case of the prosecution and the independent witnesses had
turned hostile. Even the testimony of PW-1 could not be completed as he
had died before completion of his cross-examination. It is urged that the
cross-examination is the most important tool in the testimony of a witness
to know the truth which can be culled out only in his cross. The evidence
of PW-1, thus, would not be admissible. The first informant (PW-1) being
a related and partison witness, he cannot be said to be a wholly reliable
witness. There is, thus, no evidence of implication of the accused in the
criminal case. The trial court had committed a grave error of law in
recording conviction based on the testimony of PW-1.
18.    Reliance is placed on the decision of the Lucknow Bench of this
Court in Jodhi @ Ayodhya vs. State of U.P. 1 decided on 13th
August, 2014 to assert that uncorroborated part of the testimony of PW-1
on account of non-completion of his cross-examination, has to be thrown
away. The result is that the prosecution has not succeeded in proving its
case by definite evidence that the deceased Laraiti was killed by the
19.     Learned AGA, on the other hand, submitted that in a case where
cross-examination of a witness could not be completed, his testimony
cannot be thrown away in toto. Reliance is placed on the decision of the
Apex Court in Rajesh Yadav & another etc. vs. State of U.P. 2 to
assert that the issue of admissibility of evidence in a case where the cross-
examination of a witness is not over has been addressed by the Apex
Court and it was held therein that in a given case it has to be decided by
the Court as to admissibility of evidence of the witness whose cross-
examination was not over.
As per the submissions of the learned AGA though the cross-
examination of PW-1 could not be completed but his deposition in the
Court on 2.5.1989 in the examination-in-chief and cross cannot be thrown
away in totality rather if his evidence is read alongwith the evidence of
the hostile witness PW-2, coupled with the fact of lodging of a prompt
first information report, it is proved that the murder of deceased Laraiti
was committed by accused-appellant Ram Chandra at about 6:00 PM in
the field of Raja Ram.
20.     Heard learned counsels for the parties and perused the record.
Before entering into the factual aspect of the case, we find it apt to discuss
the law relating to appreciation of testimony of a hostile witness.
21.     It is settled law that the testimony of a witness who though
produced by the prosecution in the witness-box but turned to depose in
favour of the opposite party, is not to be discarded as a whole. There are
two categories of hostile witness, one who may depose in favour of the
parties in whose favour it is meant to be giving through his chief
examination, while later on change his view in favour of the opposite
side. The second category is where a witness does not support the case of
the party starting from chief examination. This classification has to be
2 2022 (3) ADJ 114 (SC)/Criminal Appeal Nos. 339-340 of 2014
borne in mind by the Court while analysing the testimony of a hostile
witness. Reference be made to the decision of the Apex Court in Rajesh
Yadav (supra) (Para 21) emphasis added.
22.     We may note that, in the instant case, PW-2 who has been declared
hostile falls in the first category as he supported the case of the
prosecution to some extent in chief examination and then became hostile,
whereas PW-3 would fall in the second category as he did not support the
case of the prosecution from the beginning, i.e. in the chief examination
With respect to the first category in which PW-2 falls, it is settled
that the Court is not denuded of its power to make an appropriate
assessment of the evidence rendered by such a witness. It was observed in
Rajesh Yadav (supra) that even a chief examination could be termed as
evidence. Such evidence would become complete after the cross-
examination. Once evidence is completed, the said testimony as a whole
is meant for the Court to assess and appreciate qua a fact. Therefore, not
only the specific part in which a witness has turned hostile but the
circumstances under which it happened can also be considered,
particularly in a situation where the chief-examination was completed and
there are circumstances indicating the reasons behind the subsequent
statement, which could be deciphered by the Court. It is held therein that
it is well within the powers of the Court to make an assessment in a matter
before it and come to the correct conclusion.
The decision in C. Muniappan v. State of T.N. 3 of the Apex
Court was noted therein to reiterate that the evidence of a prosecution
witness cannot be rejected in toto merely because the prosecution choose
to treat him as hostile and cross-examined him. The evidence of such
witnesses cannot be treated as effaced or washed off the record altogether
but the same can be accepted to the extent their version is found to be
dependable on a careful scrutiny thereof.
23.    It is settled from a catena of decisions of the Apex Court that the
evidence of a hostile witness would not be totally rejected if spoken in
favour of the prosecution or the accused but required to be subjected to
close scrutiny and that portion of the evidence which is consistent with
the case of the prosecution or the defence can be relied upon. The law that
can be summarised from the above noted decisions is that the evidence of
a hostile witness cannot be discarded as a whole, and relevant parts
thereof which are admissible in law, can be used by the prosecution or the
defence. [Reference State of U.P. vs. Ramesh Prasad Misra and
another 4 and Subbu Singh v. State by Public Prosecutor 5]
24.    Analyzing the testimony of the prosecution witnesses of fact, we
may record, at the out set, that nothing could be elicited in favour of the
prosecution case from the statement of PW-3 who had turned hostile and
completely retracted from his previous statement. His testimony also
cannot be read in favour of the defence as he had completely denied his
presence at or near the place of the incident and also admitted that he
knew accused before the incident and for this reason he had identified him
in the identification parade conducted by the police.
25.    We then proceed to analyze the testimony of another hostile
witness, PW-2, in light of the above discussed legal position stated by the
Apex Court to appreciate the testimony of a hostile witness.
Analyzing the testimony of PW-2, we may note that he had fixed
the place, time and date of the incident, which is in corroboration with the
case of the prosecution. From the testimony of PW-2, it is proved that the
incident had occurred in the field of Raja Ram at about 6:00 PM when
deceased Smt. Laraiti was collecting 'Nimouri' near the Neem tree. PW-2
also proved his presence at a place wherefrom he could witness the place
of the incident and that he had reached at the place of the incident on
hearing the cries and also seen the accused Raja Chandra running away
from the said place. PW-2 also stated in chief that when he went at the
spot he had seen the injuries of the deceased.
From the above statement of PW-2 in chief, it is evident that he had
only denied having seen accused Ram Chandra hitting the deceased with
'tabal' at the place of the incident and stated that he did not see any
weapon in the hands of accused Ram Chandra while he was running away
from the spot of the incident.
26.    For this reason only this witness was declared hostile by the
prosecution and in his incomplete cross-examination on the first date, i.e.
2.5.1989, PW-2 also fixed the presence of other witnesses namely Chhote,
Badri and Krishna Pal at the place of the incident which is in line with the
statement in the written report lodged by PW-1 as also the statement of
PW-1 before the Court. PW-2 also admitted, in cross, that he was
interrogated by the Investigating Officer though he had retracted from the
contents of his statement. PW-2 also admitted that he went to identify
accused Ram Chandra and he knew him before the incident. PW-2, on
recall, when examined on 20.7.1989, after a period of two months, after
the death of PW-1 the first informant, retracted even from his previous
version in the Court made on 2.5.1989 to the extent that he had seen
accused Ram Chandra running away from the spot and that he had
identified the accused before the police on his own. From the testimony of
PW-2, at least, it is proved that the deceased was attacked in the field of
Raja Ram near the Neem tree where she used to go to collect 'Nimouri' on
the fateful day at about 6:00 PM. The date, time and place of the incident,
thus, had been proved by PW-2.
27.    The star witness of the prosecution is PW-1, who was husband of
the deceased and the first informant. In his deposition in the Court, PW-1
proved his version in the FIR with regard to the place, date, time and the
manner of the incident and the presence of the eye-witnesses on the spot.
He also proved the written report lodged by him at about 10:15 PM as
Exhibit Ka-1. PW-1 also proved the enmity with the accused, which
according to him was the motive of causing the murder of his wife. He
also proved that he took his injured wife from the field of Raja Ram to his
house wherein she had succumbed to her injuries. The inquest was
conducted on the next day, i.e. 26.7.1989 in the house of the first
28.     It was, thus, proved by the prosecution witnesses that the homicidal
death of the deceased Smt. Laraiti was caused outside her house and she
was taken to her house by PW-1 (her husband) after she received injuries
in the field of Raja Ram.
All the above facts could not be disputed by the learned counsel for
the appellant in his arguments.
Further, PW-1 was consistent in his testimony, which could not be
completed on account of his death. His testimony is clear to the extent
that he was the eye-witness of the incident and he had seen the accused-
appellant causing injuries to his wife by a sharp edged weapon (tabal)
which had resulted in her death. The motive for the offence committed by
accused-appellant has also been proved by PW-1 in his examination-in-
chief. From the perusal of the testimony of PW-1, it is evident that he
proved the written report (Exhibit Ka-1) and its content and the fact that
he went to the police station alongwith the village Chaukidar to lodge the
first report and the Investigating Officer reached the spot after getting the
said information. The inquest was conducted and the body was sent for
postmortem. The narration of fact by PW-1 with regard to the lodging of
the first information report by giving a written report as also the inquest
conducted in his house is corroborated from the documentary evidences
on record.
The issue which has been raised by the learned counsel for the
appellant is that since the cross-examination of PW-1 could not be
completed, his testimony cannot be relied to convict the appellant. The
contention is that the corroboration of an oral testimony is required by
cross-examination of the witness, which is an important tool to cull out
falsity in the version of the witness in his examination-in-chief. The
testimony of PW-1 on account of his death, remained uncorroborated and
hence the trial court had committed a grave error of law in relying upon
his version to convict the accused-appellant.
29.    To deal with this submission, we may first go through the
authoritative pronouncements of the Apex Court, wherein the guidelines
to deal with such a situation has been laid down.
30.    However, before appreciation of the legal position, we would like to
record our assessment of the circumstances indicating the reasons behind
the subsequent statement of PW-2 dated 20.7.1989, wherein he had
retracted from his previous statement in-chief and cross, recorded on
31.    We may record that the manner in which the trial court, in the
instant case, had proceeded to examine the witnesses cannot be approved
We may also note that the trial Judge while recording his finding
had also expressed his dissatisfaction in the manner in which his
predecessor trial Judge had recorded the statements of the prosecution
witnesses of fact. The record reflects that three prosecution witnesses of
facts were examined on the same day, i.e. on 2.5.1989, but not in the
correct order of examination. We are not able to understand as to why the
trial court had proceeded to record the statements of PW-2 and PW-3
without completing the cross-examination of PW-1 on 2.5.1989. We are
also astonished with pain to note that even deposition of PW-2 Ashiq Ali
was not completed on 2.9.1989 and when his cross-examination had
continued after lunch, this witness (PW-2) though was administered oath
but his cross-examination was not proceeded, for the reasons best known
to the Presiding Officer concerned. It is not understandable nor acceptable
that the trial Judge had proceeded to record the statement of PW-3 without
completing the testimony of PW-1 and PW-2 in the chronological order.
32.    Surprisingly enough, the deposition of PW-3 was completed on the
same day, i.e. 2.5.1989 and the cross-examination of PW-1 and PW-2
could not be resumed before 20.7.1989, for about two months. The
explanation for delay in the cross-examination of PW-1 and PW-2 and
their non-examination on the date of their appearance, obviously, could
not be given by the prosecution on the query made by the Court.
However, it is evident from the record that a report dated 22.6.1989 was
received on summoning of PW-1 and PW-2 Ashiq Ali for cross-
examination that PW-1, Puttu had died about a month before. The reasons
for retraction of PW-2 from his previous version in the Court recorded on
2.5.1989 after death of PW-1, the husband of deceased, are not far to seek.
33.    It seems from the record of the instant case that the defence had
succeeded in manipulating the trial Judge who had recorded statements of
the witnesses of fact and in order to frustrate the case of the prosecution,
the testimony of PW-1 and PW-2 was not completed on the first date, i.e.
2.5.1989. Nothing could be discerned about the role of the prosecuting
officer after such a long time as we are deciding the case of the year 1989
in the year 2022. However, this much can be concluded that the trial
Judge who had recorded the statements of the prosecution witnesses of
fact (PW-1 to PW-3) did not act fairly. The right of the parties, whether
defence or the prosecution, for a fair trial has been seriously hampered in
the present case.
34.    Coming to the argument of the learned counsel for the appellant
that the testimony of PW-1 cannot be read in evidence and has to be
discarded in toto as his cross-examination could not be completed, we
may gain benefit from the decision of the Apex Court in Rajesh Yadav
(supra), wherein while dealing with the Section 3 of the Evidence Act,
1872, the Apex Court had discussed the methods for analysing the matters
before the Court, i.e. the evidence in proving the existence of a fact. It
was observed that the entire enactment (the Evidence Act) is meant to
facilitate the Court to come to an appropriate conclusion in proving a fact.
There are two methods by which the court is expected to come to such a
decision. (i) the Court can come to a conclusion on the existence of a fact
by merely considering the matters before it, in forming an opinion that it
does exist. This belief of the Court is based upon the assessment of the
matters before it. (ii) Alternatively, the Court can consider the said
existence as probable from the perspective of a prudent man who might
act on the supposition that it exists.
The question as to the choice of the options is best left to the Court
to decide. The said decision might impinge upon the quality of the matters
before it.
It was observed that a judge has to transform into a prudent man
and assess the existence of a fact after considering the matters through
that lens instead of a judge. It is only after undertaking the said exercise
can he resume his role as a judge to proceed further in the case.
It was further noted that the provision in Section 3 of the Evidence
Act indicates that the court is concerned with the existence of a fact both
in issue and relevant, as against a whole testimony. Thus, the
concentration is on the proof of a fact for which a witness is required.
Therefore, a court can appreciate and accept the testimony of a witness on
a particular issue while rejecting it on others since it focuses on an issue
of fact to be proved. However, the evidence of a witness as whole is a
matter for the court to decide on the probability of proving a fact which is
inclusive of the credibility of the witness. Whether an issue is concluded
or not is also a Court’s domain.
It was further noted that evidence of a witness can be divided into
three categories broadly, namely, (i) wholly reliable; (ii) wholly
unreliable; and (iii) neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable. The
manner in which the testimony of a witness would be appreciated depends
upon the category in which it was considered by the Court.
As to the law relating to appreciation of the testimony of a hostile
witness, we would like to refer to the foregoing paragraphs of this
judgment to note that the evidence of a hostile witness is not to be
rejected as a whole.
As noted in Rajesh Yadav (supra), the Court can also assess the
circumstance in which a witness had turned hostile, as discussed above.
35.    We may further note that the Apex Court in Rajesh Yadav (supra)
while expressing deep anguish over to manner in which long
adjournments had been granted by the trial Judge therein permitting an act
of manoeuvring, had referred to its earlier decision in Vinod Kumar v.
State of Punjab 6. It was reiterated that in Vinod Kumar (supra) the
Apex Court while dealing with the situation where a witness after
rendering testimony in line with the prosecution’s version, completely
abandoned it, in view of the long adjournments given by the trial court
had observed that a fair trial is to be fair both to the defence and the
prosecution as well as to the victim. The appropriate course on the part of
the trial Judge was to finish the cross-examination on the day the said
witness was examined. It was noted that no reason in the said case was
assigned to defer the cross-examination and then recording it after a delay
of 20 months, giving room for the witness to be gained over. While
appreciating the testimony of a hostile witness therein, it was held by the
Apex Court in Vinod Kumar (supra) that the evidence in entirety of the
prosecution witness cannot be brushed aside. The delay in cross-
examination had resulted in his prevarication from the examination-in-
chief but the part of his testimony, which supported the case of the
prosecution was relied upon.
Having noted the relevant paragraphs of the decision in Vinod
Kumar (supra), the Apex Court in Rajesh Yadav (supra) while
referring to Section 33 of the Evidence Act has held in paragraph '24' as
“24. Section 33 is an exception to the general rule which mandates
adequate facility for cross examining a witness. However, in a case where a
witness after the completion of the chief examination and while subjecting
him to a substantial and rigorous cross examination, did not choose to get
into the witness box on purpose, it is for the court to utilize the said
evidence appropriately. The issues over which the evidence is completed
could be treated as such by the court and then proceed. Resultantly, the
issues for which the cross examination is not over would make the entire
examination as inadmissible. Ultimately, it is for the court to decide the
Having noted the law laid down by the Apex Court in Vinod
Kumar (supra) and Rajesh Yadav (supra), it is settled that the part of
the testimony of a witness whose cross-examination is not over, would not
make the entire examination as inadmissible. The evidence of the hostile
witness who after examination-in-chief had abandoned the case of the
prosecution because of the long delay in completing his testimony, cannot
be read in favour of the defence or against the prosecution. It is for the
Court to utilize the said evidence appropriately and decide that the issues
over which the evidence is completed could be read in evidence and the
issues for which the cross-examination is not over, as inadmissible. As has
been held in Rajesh Yadav (supra) ultimately it is for the court to
decide the aforesaid aspect.
36.     In light of the above, having noticed the circumstances in which the
cross-examination of PW-1, the first informant, could not be completed,
we find that it is not one of those cases where non-completion of cross-
examination of the witness would result in rejection of the whole
testimony of PW-1, the eye-witness.
37.     On due consideration of the law discussed above, in the facts of the
present case, we find that PW-1 in his examination-in-chief proved the
mode and manner of occurrence and that the murder had been caused by
the accused. He proved his presence on the spot as also the place of the
occurrence and the presence of other witnesses on the spot who later
turned hostile. In the cross-examination of PW-1, the first informant,
which commenced on 2.5.1989, he proved the factum of lodging of the
written report as Exhibit Ka-1 at the date and the time indicated in the
Check report i.e. 25.7.1987 at about 10:15 PM. He also proved that he
went alongwith the village Chaukidar to lodge the first information report
and after lodging of the same, the police came on the spot, conducted the
inquest and took the body for the postmortem. The place of the incident
being the field of Raja Ram was also proved by this witness namely PW-1
in his cross-examination. Nothing contrary could be found from the
record with this part of testimony of PW-1 which stood proved from his
incomplete cross-examination. The above noted part of the testimony of
PW-1, therefore, is to be appreciated alongwith the surrounding
circumstances of the case, i.e. the other evidence on record.
38.   From the record, it is proved that the first information report of the
incident was a prompt report as it was lodged on the same day at about
10:15 PM, when the incident had occurred at about 6:00 PM. PW-1
proved that after injuries were caused to his wife by accused Ram
Chandra by 'tabal', he carried his wife to his house and while he was
making arrangements to take her to the hospital, she had succumbed to
her injuries. He then called the village Chaukidar and got the written
report scribed, went to the police station alongwith the village Chaukidar
to lodge the report. The time taken by PW-1 in lodging the report stood
explained from his testimony and the circumstances on record that the
incident had occurred in the open field and the deceased did not die on the
spot. The place of the occurrence and the reason why the deceased was
present on the said place, as narrated by PW-1, is corroborated from the
version of PW-2 in his first examination , both in chief and cross made on
39.   We may further note that even after PW-2 was declared hostile and
further retracted from his previous statement on recall after two months,
from his testimony, his presence near the place of incident cannot be
disputed. On appreciation of the whole testimony of the PW-2, a hostile
witness, it is evident that the incident in question had occurred on
25.7.1987 at about 6:00 PM near the Neem tree existing in the field of
Raja Ram where the deceased went to collect 'Nimouri' in her usual way.
It is also proved that PW-2 was present near the place of the
incident and reached on hearing the cries of PW-1 (husband of the
deceased) and had seen one person running away from the place of the
incident as also the injuries of the deceased.
40.     On a conjoined reading of the statement of PW-1 and PW-2, the
case of the prosecution is found proved as to the mode and manner of
occurrence and the involvement of accused Ram Chandra. Other
supporting evidence from the record, i.e. medical evidence also
corroborates the ocular version of PW-1, the injuries caused on the person
of the deceased, which were cause of her death. Both the injuries are of
sharp-edged weapon and as per the opinion of the doctor, it could occur
from the weapon assigned in the hands of appellant Ram Chandra, which
is 'tabal', as per the version in the first information report and the
statement of PW-1.
We may further note that 'tabal' is a weapon which is very close to
'Talwar' (sword) which was opined by the doctor being the possible
weapon relating to injuries of the deceased. It is also proved that the
injuries sustained on the deceased were sufficient to cause her death. The
fact that PW-1, the first informant, could not take his wife to the hospital
would be of no consequence.
41.     The Investigating Officer (PW-7) proved that after lodging of the
first information report, which was entered in the General Diary on the
same day, i.e. 25.7.1987, the investigation was conducted by the another
Investigating Officer namely I. H. Jafri who prepared the site plan in his
handwriting. The site plan 'Exhibit Ka-6' dated 26.7.1987 gives the
complete description of the place of the incident and the presence of the
witnesses and the accused on the spot.
42.    The motive assigned to the accused for causing death of Smt.
Laraiti being a civil dispute, had not been disputed by the defence. The
presence of motive in a case of eye-witness account is a relevant
circumstance which show the evil intent of the accused and becomes
relevant to show that the accused who had the motive to commit the crime
actually committed it. It is settled that the relevancy of motive would
primarily depend upon the facts and circumstances of the given case. In
an eye-witness account though motive is not of much of relevance,
presence and proof of motive affords a key or pointer to scan the evidence
in the case in that perspective and the motive in such a case becomes
satisfactory circumstance of corroboration. [Reference State of U.P.
vs. Moti Ram and others 7]
43.    In light of the above discussion, considering the attending
circumstances of the case and the motive with which the accused-
appellant committed the murder of Smt. Laraiti, we are of the firm
opinion that there is no infirmity in the decision of the trial court in
convicting the accused-appellant for the offence of murder under Section
The punishment inflicted upon the appellant is minimum. No
interference, as such, is required.
The judgment and order dated 11.8.1989 passed by the
Special/Additional Sessions Judge, Shahjahanpur in Sessions Trial No.
470 of 1987 (State vs. Ram Chandra) arising out of Case Crime No.
235/1987, under Section 302 IPC, Police Station Jalalabad, District
Shahjahanpur is hereby affirmed.
The appeal deserves to be dismissed, accordingly.
44.    Before parting with this judgment, we may find it profitable and
necessary to note certain observations of the Apex court in Vinod
Kumar (supra), wherein the Court had expressed deep anguish in a
situation therein wherein the cross-examination of the witness was
deferred without any reason.
The relevant paragraphs of the report are noted as under:-
“57. Before parting with the case we are constrained to reiterate
what we have said in the beginning. We have expressed our agony and
anguish the manner in which trials in respect of serious offences relating
to corruption are being conducted by the trial courts:
57.1. Adjournments are sought on the drop of a hat by the
counsel, even though the witness is present in court, contrary to all
principles of holding a trial. That apart, after the examination-in-chief of
a witness is over, adjournment is sought for cross-examination and the
disquieting feature is that the trial courts grant time. The law requires
special reasons to be recorded for grant of time but the same is not taken
note of.
57.2. As has been noticed earlier, in the instant case the cross-
examination has taken place after a year and 8 months allowing ample
time to pressurize the witness and to gain over him by adopting all kinds
of tactics.
57.3. There is no cavil over the proposition that there has to be
a fair and proper trial but the duty of the court while conducting the trial
to be guided by the mandate of the law, the conceptual fairness and
above all bearing in mind its sacrosanct duty to arrive at the truth on the
basis of the material brought on record. If an accused for his benefit
takes the trial on the path of total mockery, it cannot be countenanced.
The Court has a sacred duty to see that the trial is conducted as per law.
If adjournments are granted in this manner it would tantamount to
violation of rule of law and eventually turn such trials to a farce. It is
legally impermissible and jurisprudentially abominable. The trial courts
are expected in law to follow the command of the procedure relating to
trial and not yield to the request of the counsel to grant adjournment for
non-acceptable reasons.
57.4. In fact, it is not all appreciable to call a witness for cross-
examination after such a long span of time. It is imperative if the
examination-in-chief is over, the cross-examination should be
completed on the same day. If the examination of a witness continues
till late hours the trial can be adjourned to the next day for cross-
examination. It is inconceivable in law that the cross-examination
should be deferred for such a long time. It is anathema to the concept of
proper and fair trial.
57.5. The duty of the court is to see that not only the interest of
the accused as per law is protected but also the societal and collective
interest is safe-guarded. It is distressing to note that despite series of
judgments of this Court, the habit of granting adjournment, really an
ailment, continues. How long shall we say, “Awake! Arise!”. There is a
constant discomfort. Therefore, we think it appropriate that the copies
of the judgment be sent to the learned Chief Justices of all the High
Courts for circulating the same among the learned trial Judges with a
command to follow the principles relating to trial in a requisite manner
and not to defer the cross-examination of a witness at their pleasure or
at the leisure of the defence counsel, for it eventually makes the trial an
apology for trial and compels the whole society to suffer chicanery. Let
it be remembered that law cannot allowed to be lonely; a destitute.” ,
We may further note the observations of the Apex Court in Rajesh
Yadav (supra) in paragraph '39' as under:-
“39. Before we part with this case, we are constrained to record
our anguish on the deliberate attempt to derail the quest for justice. Day
in and day out, we are witnessing the sorry state of affairs in which the
private witnesses turn hostile for obvious reasons. This Court has already
expressed its views on the need for a legislative remedy to curtail such
menace. Notwithstanding the above stated directions issued by this court
in Vinod Kumar (supra), we take judicial note of the factual scenario that
the trial courts are adjourning the cross examination of the private
witnesses after the conclusion of the cross examination without any
rhyme or reason, at the drop of a hat. Long adjournments are being given
after the completion of the chief examination, which only helps the
defense to win them over at times, with the passage of time. Thus, we
deem it appropriate to reiterate that the trial courts shall endeavor to
complete the examination of the private witnesses both chief and cross
on the same day as far as possible. To further curtail this menace, we
would expect the trial courts to take up the examination of the private
witnesses first, before proceeding with that of the official witnesses. A
copy of this judgment shall be circulated to all the trial courts, to be
facilitated through the respective High Courts.”
The Apex Court while taking judicial notice of the factual scenario
in Rajesh Yadav (supra) reiterated that the appropriate course for the
trial court is to make endeavour to complete the examination of the
private witnesses, both chief and cross, on the same day, as far as
possible, and also to take up the examination of the private witnesses first,
before proceeding with that of the official witnesses. This approach is
needed to ensure fair and proper trial which is the duty of the trial Court
and also to curb the menace where the private witnesses turned hostile for
obvious reasons because of long adjournments, permitting an act of
45.    Though in the instant case, wherein the trial was conducted in the
year 1989, nothing much could be said on the conduct of the trial Judge
who had recorded the statements of the prosecution witnesses of fact
(PW-1 to PW-3), however, as a guidance to conduct the trial in a prudent
manner, it is imperative to notify the abovenoted judgment of the Apex
Court to the Sessions Court throughout the State of U.P., as a reminder to
the caution and directions issued by the Apex Court in Vinod Kumar
(supra) reiterated in Rajesh Yadav (supra).
46.    We, therefore, direct that the copy of the judgment and order dated
4th February, 2022 of the Apex Court in Rajesh Yadav and another
etc. vs. State of U.P. (Criminal Appeal Nos. 339-340 of 2014)
reported in 2022 (3) ADJ (SC) be circulated amongst all the trial
Judges in the State of U.P. by the Registrar General, High Court,
With the above observations and directions, on merits, the appeal is
The office is directed to transmit back the lower court record along
with a certified copy of this judgment for information and necessary
compliance.
Necessary steps shall be taken by the court below to notify this
judgment to all concerned.
The compliance report be furnished to this Court through the
Digitally signed by BRIJESH KUMAR