Date : 07-06-2021 This matter was called on for hearing today.
Union of India       Mr. Aishwarya Bhati, ASG
State of W.B.       Mr. Suhaan Mukerji, Adv.
State of Mizoram    Mr. Siddhesh Kotwal, Adv.
State of Haryana    Ms. Bansuri Swaraj, AAG
U.T. of J&K         Mr. G.M.Kawoosa,Adv.
State of Karnataka Mr. V. N. Raghupathy, AOR
State of Assam      Ms. Diksha Rai, AOR
State of Assam      Mr. Raghvendra Kumar, Adv.
State of A.P.       Mr. Mahfooz A. Nazki, AOR
State of Bihar      Mr. Manish Kumar, AOR
State of H.P.       Mr. Himanshu Tyagi, AOR
State of Manipur   Mr. Pukhrambam Ramesh Kumar, AOR
U.T. of Puducherry Mr. V.G. Pragasam, AOR
State of Goa       Mr. Arun R. Pedneker, Adv.
State of Kerala    Mr. Jishnu M.L., Adv.
State of Odisha    Mr. Sibo Sankar Mishra AOR
State of Odisha    Dr. Anindita Pujari, AOR
State of Tripura   Mr. Shuvodeep Roy, Adv.
State of Gujarat   Ms. Deepanwita Priyanka, Adv.
State of Meghalaya Mr. Amit Kumar, Sr. Adv.
State of Punjab    Ms. Jaspreet Gogia, AOR
State of Rajasthan  Dr. Manish Singhvi, Sr. Adv.
State of U.P.       Ms. Garima Prashad, Sr. Adv./AAG
State of Telangana  Mr. S. Udaya Kumar Sagar, AOR
State of T.N.       Dr. Joseph Aristotle S.,AOR
State of Nagaland   Ms. K. Enatoli Sema, AOR
State of Mah.       Mr. Sachin Patil AOR.
State of Jharkhand  Ms. Pragya Baghel, Adv
State of Uttarakhand Ms. Rachana Srivastava, AOR
State of Sikkim     Mr. Raghvendra Kumar, Adv.
State of M.P.       Mr. Purushendra Kaurav,AG /Sr.Adv.
H.C. of Guwahati    Mr. Abhimanyu Tewari, AOR
U.T. of Chandigarh    Mr. Ankit Goel, AOR
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
By   an   order   dated    01.06.2021,   this   Court
permitted the learned Amicus Curiae to have a dialogue
with    Nodal Officers to be appointed by the State
Governments to ascertain the information relating to
the  implementation    of   the  schemes  announced   by  the
Union   of    India   and    the   State   Governments/Union
Territories favouring orphans and Children in Need of
Care  and   Protection    (CNCPs).     Further,  the   Amicus
Curiae   was   authorized    to  interact   with  the   Nodal
officers for finding out the modalities adopted by the
State Governments to provide succour to the affected
children.     The learned Amicus Curiae identified the
states of Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka,
and Jharkhand initially for the purpose of obtaining
relevant information to be furnished to this Court.
Ms. Aishwarya Bhati, learned ASG undertook
to   provide     the   details     of     the   scheme     that   was
announced     by    the     Prime     Minister      of    India    on
29.05.2021.       On   behalf   of    the    Union   of   India,   an
Action Taken Report has been filed.                The learned ASG
sought further time to furnish the modalities for the
implementation of the scheme announced by the Prime
Minister of India on 29.05.2021. The Union of India is
granted    four    weeks’    time    from     today    to   file   an
affidavit setting out the details of the scheme dated
29.05.2021 and the manner of its implementation.
Mr.    Gaurav     Agrawal,      learned     Amicus    Curiae
submitted    a   note   in   which    he   has   referred    to   six
stages   for   alleviation     of   the    forlorn    children    who
have   lost    both   parents     or    a   single    parent.      He
suggested    that    identification       of   children    who   have
become   orphans     or   have   lost     one   of   their   parents
during    this    pandemic     does     not    brook    any   delay.
Immediate relief should follow the identification of
such children without any delay. Thereafter, the Child
Welfare Committees (CWC) should conduct inquiries and
pass suitable orders expeditiously which have to be
implemented without any delay. Monitoring of children
by  CWC    and   the    District    Child     Protection     Officer
(DCPO)   should    be    conducted     on   a   periodical    basis.
Suitable steps should be taken by CWC’s to ensure that
the benefits announced by the Central Government/State
Governments should reach the children.
The   information      provided      by   the    State
Governments/Union    Territories       on   the   ‘Bal   Swaraj’
Portal  upto   05.06.2021   shows     that   there   are  30,071
children  who   have  become    orphans     or   have  lost   one
parent   or  abandoned.     The     break-up     given   in   the
affidavit   filed    by   the    National      Commission     for
Protection of Child Rights (NCPCR) is that there are
3,621  orphans,    26,176   children      who   have   lost   one
parent and 274 children who have been abandoned. The
State-wise data that is given in the affidavit filed
by NCPCR shows that NCT of Delhi and the State of West
Bengal have not uploaded the correct information.
Mr.   Chirag    M.    Shroff,      learned    counsel
appearing for the NCT of Delhi submitted that there
was some difficulty in collecting data to be uploaded
on the NCPCR portal.    He submitted that a decision was
taken recently to depute government officers at the
grassroot level to take immediate steps to gather the
information which will be updated on the NCPCR portal.
Further,   the   basic  needs      of   children    who   become
orphans or have lost one parent shall be attended to
apart  from   steps   being   taken      as  provided    in   the
The learned counsel for the State of West
Bengal submitted that the data could not be uploaded
in view of some confusion about the six stages that
are mentioned in the web portal of NCPCR.        It was made
clear in the order dated 01.06.2021 that it is not
necessary    for   the   states   to   provide   information
relating to all the six stages at present and that it
would  be  sufficient    if  the  data   pertaining   to  the
first two stages are uploaded on the portal.              The
State of West Bengal is directed to take steps to
identify the children who have become orphans or lost
one parent after March, 2020 immediately and upload
the data on the NCPCR website.
The learned Amicus Curiae submitted that the
figures given by the State of Tamil Nadu does not
appear to be correct as in several districts not even
one  child   is  produced    before  the   CWC.    The   only
information provided by the State of Tamil Nadu is in
respect of those children who have lost both parents
or single parent due to Covid-19.       The direction given
by this Court is to upload information on the website
of  the  NCPCR   pertaining    to  all   children  who   have
become  orphans   or   lost  one  of   their  parents   after
March, 2020 either due to Covid-19 or otherwise.
Mr.    Joseph    Aristotle,     learned   counsel
appearing   for  the   State  of  Tamil   Nadu  stated   that
suitable directions shall be given to the concerned
authorities to take steps for identification of the
affected   children     by  collecting    information    from
health  officials/Panchayati     Raj  Institutions,   police
authorities and Non-Governmental Organisations (NGOs).
The State of Tamil Nadu is directed to collect the
details  relating   to   those  children   who  have  become
orphans or lost one parent and update the same on the
portal of NCPCR.
The learned Amicus Curiae has brought to our
notice that according to the response on behalf of the
District Child Protection Officers (DCPO) and other
officials from the States of Telangana, Tamil Nadu and
Jharkhand   almost   all  the   children   who  have  become
orphans or lost one parent need financial assistance.
The learned Amicus Curiae has suggested that the DCPO
should  meet   the  child   and   the guardian   immediately
after   receipt    of   information    and   ascertain   the
willingness of the guardian to take care of the child
apart from making an assessment of the immediate needs
of  the  child    and  the   financial   condition   of  the
guardian.    He emphasised the need for the DCPO to
ensure  that   adequate   provision   is  made  for  ration,
food, medicines and clothing etc. for the child.          He
further submitted an amount of Rs.2,000/- per month
should be released in favour of the child till CWC
passes an order after due inquiry.          The DCPO should
provide his contact number and the name of the local
official who can be contacted by the guardian.           There
should be a follow-up with the child at least once a
month to ascertain his/her well being.            The learned
Amicus Curiae stressed the need for the child being
produced before the CWC in case DCPO is of the prima
facie  opinion   that   the  guardian    is  not   capable  of
taking care the child.      Needless to say, that the CWC
shall   pass    appropriate    orders    at   the    earliest.
According to the Amicus Curiae, the CWC should open a
case  file   of   each   child   and   secure   all   relevant
information pertaining to the affected child. The CWC
should ensure that various benefits announced by the
Central  Government     and  the   State    Governments/Union
Territories reach the affected child. The financial
benefit   that    was   announced     by   Integrated    Child
Protection Scheme (ICPS) to the tune of Rs.2000/- per
month per child has to be provided immediately by the
DCPOs.      There    should    be    continuous     monitoring
regarding the welfare of the child by the District
Child   Protection     Units    (DCPUs)    even    after   the
financial order is passed by the CWC.          This should be
done periodically every three to six months.
After the identification of the children who
have become orphans or lost one parent, prompt action
has to be taken to provide the basic needs of the
children.   The DCPO should act swiftly to contact the
child on receipt of information about the loss of the
parent/parents of the child. The DCPUs shall ensure
that adequate provision is made for the ration, food,
medicines,   clothing   etc.   to   the   child.    The   State
Governments have announced certain financial benefits
to the affected children which have to be provided to
them immediately. The DCPO should produce the child
before CWC if he is not prima facie satisfied that the
guardian is capable of taking care of the child.            CWC
is  directed   to  take   steps    in   accordance    with  the
Juvenile  Justice    (Care   and   Protection    of  Children)
Act,  2015    (JJ   Act,   2015)    and    the   Rules   framed
thereunder to conduct an inquiry. During the pendency
of the inquiry, the CWC is directed to ensure that the
basic needs of the child are taken care of.
The concern of the learned Amicus Curiae is
that the affected children should not face a situation
of discontinuance of their education.          If the affected
children   are   studying    in   Government     schools   they
should be permitted to continue.           In so far as the
children  who   are   studying    in  private    schools,   the
State Governments/Union Territories should take steps
and direct the continuance of the children in those
schools at least for period of six months by which
time some arrangement can be worked out.             We accept
the  suggestion    made    by  the    learned   Amicus    Curiae
relating to the education of the affected children.
The State Government/Union Territories should ensure
that there is no break in the education of children
who  have  become    orphans   or   lost   either   one   parent
during the Pandemic.
The other issues that have been raised by
the learned Amicus Curiae relating to the protection
of property rights of the children, further education
of  the  children    including    employment    opportunities,
special care to be taken in respect of the girl child
will be taken up on the next date of hearing.
Mr.K.M.Nataraj, learned Additional Solicitor
General  appearing     for  the   NCPCR   submitted    that  the
identification    of    affected    children   is    a   dynamic
activity.      The    State   Governments     and   the    Union
Territories should be asked to update the figures on
the web portal of NCPCR promptly.            He expressed his
anguish  about   certain    NGOs   collecting    funds   in  the
names of the affected children.          It has come to the
notice of the NCPCR that the identity of the affected
children is being disclosed in public announcements by
certain unscrupulous agencies and individuals who are
inviting   interested     persons    to  adopt   the    affected
children.    He submitted that it has been brought to
the   notice   of   the    NCPCR    that   illegal     adoptions
contrary to the provisions of the Juvenile Justices
Act, 2015 (‘JJ Act, 2015’) are also resorted to, which
should be prevented. He suggested that the District
Legal Service Authorities should be associated with
the Government officials to ameliorate the condition
of the affected children.
Ms. Shobha Gupta, learned counsel appearing
in IA Nos.66075 and 66077 of 2021 filed on behalf of
the ‘We the Women of India’ stated that there are
several advertisements in the public domain inviting
people to adopt orphans.         Such posts have been found
on social media as well.         She submitted that most of
them   are    fake   and   in   any   event    no   adoption   is
permissible     without   involvement    of  Central    Adoption
Resource Authority (CARA).         She stressed the need for
immediate action to be taken by the State Governments
and Union Territories to stop the circulation of such
posts in the social media and stringent action should
be taken against those who are responsible for such
posts.    Relying upon Section 108 of the JJ Act, 2015,
Ms. Shobha Gupta submitted that wide publicity should
be  given    to   the   schemes   in   operation    which  would
favour the affected children. Unless the beneficiaries
are aware of the schemes floated by the Union of India
and   the   State    Governments/Union      Territories,     they
would    not    be    in   a   position     to    approach    the
authorities.      She supported the learned Amicus Curiae
that   the   affected    children    should   be   permitted   to
continue their education in the same schools in which
they  were     studying     prior    to    the    death     of   the
parent/parents.
We     share    the    concern      of    the    learned
Additional    Solicitor     General    and    Ms.    Shobha    Gupta
about the illegal adoption of affected children.                 The
State  Governments/Union       Territories      are   directed    to
prevent any NGO from collecting funds in the names of
the affected children by disclosing their identity and
inviting    interested     persons     to    adopt    them.       No
adoption   of    affected    children     should     be  permitted
contrary   to    the   provisions     of   the    JJ   Act,    2015.
Invitation    to    persons   for    adoption     of   orphans    is
contrary   to   law   as  no   adoption    of   a   child    can  be
permitted without the involvement of CARA. Stringent
action shall be taken by the State Governments/Union
Territories     against     agencies/individuals          who    are
responsible for indulging in this illegal activity.
Section     108  of   the   JJ   Act,   2015    provides
that    the     Central      Government       and      the     State
Governments/Union Territories should take measures to
ensure that the provisions of the JJ Act, 2015 are
given    wide      publicity     through       media     including
Television, Radio and print media at regular intervals
so as to make the general public, children and their
parents or guardians aware of such provisions. It is
true that the majority of the populace are not aware
of their rights and entitlement to several benefits
that  are   announced      by   the   Governments.     The  State
Governments/Union      Territories     are   directed    to   give
wide publicity not only to the provisions of the JJ
Act, 2015 but also to the several schemes that have
been announced by the Central Government and the State
Governments/Union Territories benefiting the children
who have become orphans and children in need of care
and protection.
For    the   present,     this  Court   is   concerned
with the implementation of the schemes that are in
place  to   meet    the  essential     needs  of   the   affected
children   forthwith.     There   is   a  need   for   continuous
monitoring    of   the  implementation     of   the   schemes   in
favour of the affected children.              Special Juvenile
Police   Unit    in   each    district    and   city    shall   be
constituted as provided in Section 107 of the JJ Act,
2015.   That apart, DCPO should take the assistance of
the   the    District     Legal     Service   Authorities      for
coordinating     the   implementation     of   the   schemes    in
favour of the affected children.             If DCPO finds it
difficult    to   monitor     the   welfare   of   the   affected
children, he should involve the government servants at
the grass root level in the task of attending to the
desolate children.
In    view   of    the   aforementioned,     following
(1) The   State     Governments/Union     Territories       are
directed to continue identifying the children who
have become orphans or lost a parent after March,
2020   either   due   to  Covid-19   or   otherwise     and
provide   the   data   on  the  website    of   the   NCPCR
without   any   delay.     The  identification      of  the
affected children can be done through Childline
(1098),     health      officials,     Panchayati       Raj
Institutions, police authorities, NGOs etc.
(2) The DCPU is directed to contact the affected child
and   his   guardian     immediately    on    receipt    of
information about the death of the parent/parents.
Assessment shall be made about the suitability and
willingness of the guardian to take care of the
child.     The   DCPU   should   ensure   that    adequate
provisions are made for ration, food, medicine,
clothing etc. for the affected child.            Financial
assistance    to   which   the disconsolate      child   is
entitled to under the prevailing schemes by the
Central Government and the State Governments/Union
Territories should be provided without any delay.
(3) The DCPO should furnish his phone number and the
name and phone number of the local official who
can be contacted by the guardian and the child.
There   should    be  a   regular   follow    up   by   the
concerned authorities with the child at least once
in a month.
(4) If the DCPO is of the prima facie opinion that the
guardian  is   not   suitable    to   take   care   of  the
child, he should produce the child before the CWC
immediately.
(5) CWC should provide for the essential needs of the
child during the pendency of the inquiry without
fail.    The     inquiry       should      be     completed
expeditiously. CWC shall ensure that all financial
benefits   to   which    the   child    is   entitled    are
provided without any delay.
(6) The   State     Governments/Union        Territories     are
directed  to   make   provisions     for   continuance    of
education of the children both in Government as
well as in private schools.
(7) The   State     Governments/Union        Territories     are
directed     to     take      action      against      those
NGOs/individuals     who   are    indulging    in    illegal
adoptions.
(8) Wide publicity should be given to the provisions
of the JJ Act, 2015 and the prevailing schemes of
the Union of India and the State Governments/Union
Territories    which    would    benefit     the   affected
children.
(9) DPCO  shall    take   the    assistance     of   government
servants at the Gram Panchayat level to monitor
the welfare of the disconsolate children who are
devastated   by  the   catastrophe     of  losing   their
parent/parents.
All other issues shall be taken up on the next
date of hearing.
List on 27.07.2021.
In  the   meanwhile,   learned   Amicus    Curiae   shall
contact  the  nodal  officers   to   be   appointed   by  the
States of Andhra Pradesh, Odisha, West Bengal, Assam,
Uttarakhand, NCT of Delhi, Punjab, Haryana, Himachal
Pradesh  and  UT  of  Jammu  and   Kashmir    to obtain   the
information relating to the welfare of the children who
are  in   a  dolorous   state   due    to   loss   of   their
parent/parents and submit a report.