1.     Pursuant to various advertisement notifications issued by the
respondent No.1 in the years 2017 and 2018, the petitioners came to be
appointed as Assistant Faculty, Associate Project Managers, Office
Associates, Stenographers, Plumbers, Electricians and Drivers on
contractual basis for a period of one year on consolidated salary. The
appointment was initially for a period of one year and terminable with a
notice period of one month from either side. The term of contractual
appointment of the petitioners was extended from time to time by the
respondent No.1 by issuing formal orders of extension. The petitioners
claim that they having rendered more than two years service, are entitled to
their regularization in view of the decision taken by the Governing Body of
respondent No.1 in its meeting held on 18-12-2007. The fourth decision
taken in the aforesaid meeting is strongly relied upon by the petitioners to
contend that, after completion of initial contractual period of two years,
right has accrued to the petitioners to have their contractual service
2.     With a view to confer such benefit of the policy decision upon the
petitioners and others, the respondent No.1 had called upon all the
contractual appointees to submit their Appraisal Reports for previous years
duly endorsed by their immediate officer. It is the further case of the
petitioners that, after the receipt of the Appraisal Reports of the petitioners
the case was also processed further for regularization. Since no decision
has been taken by the respondents to regularize the services of the
petitioners, as such, the petitioners are left with no option but to invoke the
extra ordinary jurisdiction of this Court to seek a direction to the
respondents to regularize their services against the posts they have been
appointed with effect from the date of completion of their two years
successful contractual service.
3.     The petitioners have also placed on record certain documents to
substantiate their plea that out of 165 positions of different level, 116
employees have already been regularized after completion of mandatory
period of two years service and it is only the petitioners who have been left
out despite sufficient number of vacant posts available with respondent
No.1. The petitioners claim that they constitute a single class with those
contractual employees who have been regularized after completion of their
two years service and, therefore, they cannot be discriminated.
4.     On being put on notice, respondents have entered appearance
through Mr. Rais-ud-Din Ganai, Deputy Advocate General, who has filed
two sets of objections, one on behalf of respondent No.1 and another on
behalf of respondent No.2.
5.     In the objections filed by respondent No.1 (JKEDI), the claim of the
petitioners for regularization is contested on the ground that the decision of
the Governing Body of the respondent No.1 relied upon by the petitioners
is conditional and the regularization of the contractual appointees, after
completion of contract period, is subject to their performance and need of
the Institute. It is, however, admitted by respondent No.1 that the matter of
regularization of the petitioners was taken up with the Administrative
Department ( respondent No.2), which has put the process of regularization
on hold in terms of Government Order No. 190-Ind of 2020 dated 28-12-
2020 and Government Order No. 212-Ind of 2021 dated 28-10-2021, until
the administrative issues, which have cropped up over the period of time,
are sorted out. It is thus submitted that there is clear direction from the
Administrative Department not to make any further regularization or
appointment in the Institute. It is also the stand of the respondents that
since the engagement of the petitioners was for a fixed period terminable
by one month‟s notice, as such, no right of regularization has even accrued
to them.
6.      So far as reply of respondent No.2 is concerned, it is submitted that
the Government in terms of Government Orders dated 28-12-2020 and 28-
10-2021, has kept the process of regularization of the services of the
petitioners on hold. The regularization of the petitioners has been kept in
abeyance only on the advice of the Finance Department conveyed vide UO
No. FD-BDGTOD-11/21/2021-03-FD dated 30-09-2021 wherein one of
the conditions stipulates that no further regularization or appointment shall
be made by the Institution unless the posts are created by the competent
authority and such creations are funded by the Government. It is further
pleaded in the objections that the Government in the General
Administration Department, vide Government Order No. 462-JK(GAD) of
2022 dated 21-04-2022 has constituted a Committee for re-structuring of
JKEDI and the said Committee, apart from examining other issues, has also
mandated framing revised salary structure and promotion norms of the
Institute etc. It is thus contended by respondent No.2 that it has acted
strictly as per the advice tendered by the Finance Department. Lastly it is
submitted that the only provision stipulating regularization of consolidated,
contractual and ad hoc employees made by way of the Jammu and Kashmir
Civil Services ( Special Provisions) Act, 2010 has been repealed post
reorganization of the State.
7.      Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on
8.      The Jammu and Kashmir Entrepreneurship Development Institute
(JKEDI) is a society registered under the Jammu and Kashmir Societies
Registration Act of 1998 (1941-AD) and is established by the Government
of Jammu and Kashmir to effectually enable entrepreneurship development
in the State. The society is fully controlled and funded by the Government
of Jammu and Kashmir. As a matter of fact, there has been no serious
objection taken by the learned counsel for the respondents with regard to
the nature and character of the respondent No.1 as instrumentality of the
State. With a view to run its affairs, the Governing Body of respondent
No.1 in its second meeting held on 18-12-2007 took few important
decisions, which for facility of reference are reproduced hereunder:-
“It was further decided that
i.      All the employees borne on the cadre of the Institute will b e
adjusted against the posts carrying identical pay scales. IN
respect of those employees who do not fit in their identical pay
scales under the new structure will be adjusted in the next higher
positions/pay scales.
ii.     An option will be sought from all the faculty members of the
Institute to identify their areas of interest in the new structure and
will be accordingly placed in the concerned faculties, based on
their eligibility.
iii.    All the faculty members and other ministerial stall members
recruited after following the prescribed selection procedure, will
be regularized against the post they we selected; after the
completion of their contract period. This will however, be subject
to their performance during their tenure in the Institute.
iv.     All the fresh recruitments whether faculty or ministerial will
initially be made on contract for a period of 2 years. The
regularization of appointees can be considered only after the
completion of contract period subject to their performance and
need of the Institute.
v.      All the vacant positions in the new organizational structure will
be advertised and filled up through open competition.
vi.     The proposed organizational structure shall remain in force for a
period of 5 years. However, review can be taken after 3 years, if
the need arises.
The meeting ended with a vote of thanks to the Chair.”
9.      As per Clause IV above, all fresh recruitments, whether faculty or
ministerial, are to be made on contract basis for a period of two years. The
regularization of the appointees is to be considered only after completion of
the contract period subject to their performance and need of the Institute. It
is in pursuance of this decision of the Governing Body, the process for
recruitment to various positions was set in motion by respondent No.1. In
the year 2017 and 2018 also several advertisement notifications were
issued for making these contractual appointments. After following a proper
selection process, several employees including the petitioners herein came
to be appointed to different positions by respondent no. 1 on contract basis
initially for a period of one year on consolidated salary. Those of the
employees, who were appointed prior to the petitioners, were regularized
on successful completion of their contractual period of 2 years. The
petitioners also completed their 2 years contractual period in the years 2019
and 2020. Their Appraisal reports were also sought by respondent no. 1 to
process their cases for regularization. It is not the case of the respondents
that the services of the petitioners are not required or the need, which
existed at the time of their appointment, has ceased to exist. As a matter of
fact, the employer of the petitioners i.e., respondent no. 1 agrees in
principle that petitioners have also become entitled to their regularization
but it is showing its inability to do so because of some instructions of the
administrative department based upon the advisory issued by the
Department of Finance.
10.    From the record it clearly transpires that respondent No.1-Institute
has processed the case of the petitioners for regularization and submitted
the same to the Administrative Department. As is revealed by the reply
affidavit of respondent No.2, the matter of regularization of the petitioners
has not been taken to its logical end in view of the advice tendered by the
Finance Department. The Government has come up with two Government
Orders calling upon respondent No.1 to keep in abeyance the process of
regularization of the petitioners. The Government Order No. 212-Ind of
2021 dated 28-10-2021, whereby the Administrative Department has
released the funds to the tune of Rs. 400.00 lacs in favour of respondent
No.1, inter alia mandates the JKEDI not to resort to further regularization
or appointment in the Institution unless the posts are created by the
competent authority and are funded by the Government. In the instant case,
as the pleading of the parties, the documents and the record produced
shows that the posts are available and are not required to be created. That
being the position, it is not understandable as to how the Government
Order dated 28-10-2021 can be read against the petitioners. So far as
Government Order No. 462-JK (GAD) of 2022 dated 21-04-2022 is
concerned, the same only pertains to the constitution of a Committee for re-
structuring of respondent No.1 and, therefore, cannot be taken to be an
order impinging upon the right of the petitioners to regularization. The
stand of the respondent No.1 is clear and unequivocal. It is not disputed by
respondent No.1 that petitioners have been appointed against available
posts and have successfully completed their contractual term and that the
need for their services is perennial. It is because of this reason that respon
dent No.1 processed the case of the petitioners for regularization. The
Governing Body‟s decision taken in the year 2007 serves as basis for
making recruitment to various positions in the respondent No.1 from time
to time. When the advertisement notifications were issued and the
petitioners were appointed, the aforesaid decision of the Governing Body
was in existence. The petitioners had legitimate expectation that like their
colleagues, who had earlier been regularized in terms of the decision of the
Governing Body, the petitioners too would be accorded the same treatment
and their services would be regularized after successful completion of their
contract period. Their expectation was based on the past practice of
consistently adhering to the decision of the Governing Body of respondent
No.1. There was thus, unequivocal representation to the petitioners that
their contractual services shall also be regularized after successful
completion of the contract period. To top it all, the respondents have acted
on the decision and accorded regularization to more than hundred similarly
placed appointees. Allowing the respondents to deviate from the stated
practice would be manifestly unfair and arbitrary. The doctrine of
substantive legitimate expectation is one of the ways to ensure fairness and
non-arbitrariness guaranteed under Article 14 of Constitution of India. The
subtle distinction between the Doctrine of Legitimate expectation and
Promissory estoppel has been very comprehensively brought out by the
Hon‟ble Supreme Court in the recent judgment in State of Jharkhand and
ors v. Brahmputra Metallic’s Ltd, 2020 SCC Online SC 968. What is
stated by Hon‟ble the Supreme Court in para Nos. 37 to 47 is reproduced
“37. Under English Law, the doctrine of legitimate expectation
initially developed in the context of public law as an analogy to the
doctrine of promissory estoppel found in private law. However, since
then, English Law has distinguished between the doctrines of
promissory estoppel and legitimate expectation as distinct remedies
under private law and public law, respectively. De Smith's Judicial
Review notes the contrast between the public law approach of the
doctrine of legitimate expectation and the private law approach of the
doctrine of promissory estoppel:
“[d]espite dicta to the contrary [Rootkin v. Kent CC, [1981] 1
WLR 1186 (CA); R v. Jockey Club Ex p RAM Racecourses
Ltd., [1993] A.C. 380 (HL); R v. IRC Ex p Camacq Corp,
[1990] 1 WLR 191 (CA)], it is not normally necessary for a
person to have changed his position or to have acted to his
detriment in order to qualify as the holder of a legitimate
expectation [R v. Ministry for Agriculture, Fisheries and
Foods Ex p Hamble Fisheries (Offshore) Ltd., (1995) 2 All ER
714 (QB)]… Private law analogies from the field of estoppel
are, we have seen, of limited relevance where a public law
principle requires public officials to honour their undertakings
and respect legal certainty, irrespective of whether the loss has
been incurred by the individual concerned [Simon Atrill, „The
End of Estoppel in Public Law?‟ (2003) 62 Cambridge Law
38. Another difference between the doctrines of promissory estoppel
and legitimate expectation under English Law is that the latter can
constitute a cause of action . The scope of the doctrine of legitimate
expectation is wider than promissory estoppel because it not only
takes into consideration a promise made by a public body but also
official practice, as well. Further, under the doctrine of promissory
estoppel, there may be a requirement to show a detriment suffered by
a party due to the reliance placed on the promise. Although typically it
is sufficient to show that the promisee has altered its position by
placing reliance on the promise, the fact that no prejudice has been
caused to the promisee may be relevant to hold that it would not be
“inequitable” for the promisor to go back on their promise. However,
no such requirement is present under the doctrine of legitimate
expectation. In Regina (Bibi) v. Newham London Borough Council ,
the Court of Appeal held:
“55 The present case is one of reliance without concrete
detriment. We use this phrase because there is moral
detriment, which should not be dismissed lightly, in the
prolonged disappointment which has ensued; and potential
detriment in the deflection of the possibility, for a refugee
family, of seeking at the start to settle somewhere in the
United Kingdom where secure housing was less hard to come
by. In our view these things matter in public law, even though
they might not found an estoppel or actionable
misrepresentation in private law, because they go to fairness
and through fairness to possible abuse of power. To disregard
the legitimate expectation because no concrete detriment can
be shown would be to place the weakest in society at a
particular disadvantage. It would mean that those who have a
choice and the means to exercise it in reliance on some official
practice or promise would gain a legal toehold inaccessible to
those who, lacking any means of escape, are compelled simply
to place their trust in what has been represented to them.”
39. Consequently, while the basis of the doctrine of promissory
estoppel in private law is a promise made between two parties, the
basis of the doctrine of legitimate expectation in public law is
premised on the principles of fairness and nonarbitrariness
surrounding the conduct of public authorities. This is not to suggest
that the doctrine of promissory estoppel has no application in
circumstances when a State entity has entered into a private contract
with another private party. Rather, in English law, it is inapplicable in
circumstances when the State has made representation to a private
party, in furtherance of its public functions.
H.5 Indian Law and the doctrine of legitimate expectations
40. Under Indian Law, there is often a conflation between the
doctrines of promissory estoppel and legitimate expectation. This has
been described in Jain and Jain's well known treatise, Principles of
“At times, the expressions „legitimate expectation‟ and
„promissory estoppel‟ are used interchangeably, but that is not
a correct usage because „legitimate expectation‟ is a concept
much broader in scope than „promissory estoppel‟.
A reading of the relevant Indian cases, however, exhibit some
confusion of ideas. It seems that the judicial thinking has not as yet
crystallised as regards the nature and scope of the doctrine. At times,
it has been referred to as merely a procedural doctrine; at times, it has
been treated interchangeably as promissory estoppel. However both
these ideas are incorrect. As stated above, legitimate expectation is a
substantive doctrine as well and has much broader scope than
promissory estoppel.
In Punjab Communications Ltd. v. Union of India, the
Supreme Court has observed in relation to the doctrine of legitimate
“the doctrine of legitimate expectation in the substantive sense
has been accepted as part of our law and that the decision maker can
normally be compelled to give effect to his representation in regard to
the expectation based on previous practice or past conduct unless
some overriding public interest comes in the way Reliance must have
been placed on the said representation and the representee must have
thereby suffered detriment.”
It is suggested that this formulation of the doctrine of
legitimate expectation is not correct as it makes “legitimate
expectation” practically synonymous with promissory estoppel.
Legitimate expectation may arise from conduct of the authority; a
promise is not always necessary for the purpose.”
41. While this doctrinal confusion has the unfortunate consequence of
making the law unclear, citizens have been the victims.
Representations by public authorities need to be held to scrupulous
standards, since citizens continue to live their lives based on the trust
they repose in the State. In the commercial world also, certainty and
consistency are essential to planning the affairs of business. When
public authorities fail to adhere to their representations without
providing an adequate reason to the citizens for this failure, it violates
the trust reposed by citizens in the State. The generation of a business
friendly climate for investment and trade is conditioned by the faith
which can be reposed in government to fulfil the expectations which it
generates. Professors Jain and Deshpande characterize the
consequences of this doctrinal confusion in the following terms:
“Thus, in India, the characterization of legitimate expectations
is on a weaker footing, than in jurisdictions like UK where the
courts are now willing to recognize the capacity of public law
to absorb the moral values underlying the notion of estoppel in
the light of the evolution of doctrines like LE [Legitimate
Expectations] and abuse of power. If the Supreme Court of
India has shown its creativity in transforming the notion of
promissory estoppel from the limitations of private law, then it
does not stand to reason as to why it should also not articulate
and evolve the doctrine of LE for judicial review of resilement
of administrative authorities from policies and longstanding
practices. If such a notion of LE is adopted, then not only
would the Court be able to do away with the artificial
hierarchy between promissory estoppel and legitimate
expectation, but, it would also be able to hold the
administrative authorities to account on the footing of public
law outside the zone of promises on a stronger and principled
anvil. Presently, in the absence of a like doctrine to that of
promissory estoppel outside the promissory zone, the
administrative law adjudication of resilement of policies
stands on a shaky public law foundation.
42. We shall therefore attempt to provide a cogent basis for the
doctrine of legitimate expectation, which is not merely grounded on
analogy with the doctrine of promissory estoppel. The need for this
doctrine to have an independent existence was articulated by Justice
Frankfurter of the United State Supreme Court in Vitarelli v. Seton :
“An executive agency must be rigorously held to the standards
by which it professes its action to be judged. Accordingly, if
dismissal from employment is based on a defined procedure,
even though generous beyond the requirements that bind such
agency, that procedure must be scrupulously observed. This
judicially evolved rule of administrative law is now firmly
established and, if I may add, rightly so. He that takes the
procedural sword shall perish with the sword.”
43. However, before we do this, it is important to clarify the
understanding of the doctrine of legitimate expectation in previous
judgments of this Court. In National Buildings Construction
Corporation v. S. Raghunathan (“National Buildings Construction
Corpn.”), a three Judge bench of this Court, speaking through Justice
S. Saghir Ahmad, held that:
“18. The doctrine of “legitimate expectation” has its genesis in
the field of administrative law. The Government and its departments,
in administering the affairs of the country, are expected to honour
their statements of policy or intention and treat the citizens with full
personal consideration without any iota of abuse of discretion. The
policy statements cannot be disregarded unfairly or applied
selectively. Unfairness in the form of unreasonableness is akin to
violation of natural justice. It was in this context that the doctrine of
“legitimate expectation” was evolved which has today become a
source of substantive as well as procedural rights. But claims based on
“legitimate expectation” have been held to require reliance on
representations and resulting detriment to the claimant in the same
way as claims based on promissory estoppel.”
44. However, it is important to note that this observation was made by
this Court while discussing the ambit of the doctrine of legitimate
expectation under English Law, as it stood then. As we have discussed
earlier, there was a substantial conflation or overlap between the
doctrines of legitimate expectation and promissory estoppel even
under English Law since the former was often invoked as being
analogous to the latter. However, since then and since the judgment of
this Court in National Buildings Construction Corporation (supra),
the English Law in relation to the doctrine of legitimate expectation
has evolved. More specifically, it has actively tried to separate the two
doctrines and to situate the doctrine of legitimate expectations on a
broader footing. In Regina (Reprotech (Pebsham) Ltd) v. East Sussex
County Council , the House of Lords has held thus:
“33. In any case, I think that it is unhelpful to introduce private
law concepts of estoppel into planning law. As Lord Scarman
pointed out in Newbury District Council v. Secretary of State
for the Environment [1981] A.C. 578, 616, estoppels bind
individuals on the ground that it would be unconscionable for
them to deny what they have represented or agreed. But these
concepts of private law should not be extended into “the
public law of planning control, which binds everyone”. (See
also Dyson J in R v. Leicester City Council, Ex p Powergen
34. There is of course an analogy between a private law
estoppel and the public law concept of a legitimate expectation
created by a public authority, the denial of which may amount
to an abuse of power… But it is no more than an analogy
because remedies against public authorities also have to take
into account the interests of the general public which the
authority exists to promote. Public law can also take into
account the hierarchy of individual rights which exist under
the Human Rights Act 1998, so that, for example, the
individual's right to a home is accorded a high degree of
protection (see Coughlan's case, at pp 254-255) while ordinary
property rights are in general far more limited by
considerations of public interest : see R (Alconbury
Developments Ltd) v. Secretary of State for the Environment,
Transport and the Regions [2001] 2 WLR 1389.
35. It is true that in early cases such as the Wells case [1967]
1 WLR 1000 and Lever Finance Ltd. v. Westminster (City)
MR used the language of estoppel in relation to planning law.
At that time the public law concepts of abuse of power and
legitimate expectation were very undeveloped and no doubt
the analogy of estoppel seemed useful…..It seems to me that
in this area, public law has already absorbed whatever is useful
from the moral values which underlie the private law concept
of estoppel and the time has come for it to stand upon its own
two feet.”
45. In a concurring opinion in Monnet Ispat and Energy Ltd. v. Union
of India (“Monnet Ispat”), Justice H.L. Gokhale highlighted the
different considerations that underlie the doctrines of promissory
estoppel and legitimate expectation. The learned judge held that for
the application of the doctrine of promissory estoppel, there has to be
a promise, based on which the promisee has acted to its prejudice. In
contrast, while applying the doctrine of legitimate expectation, the
primary considerations are reasonableness and fairness of the State
action. He observed thus:
“Promissory Estoppel and Legitimate Expectations
289. As we have seen earlier, for invoking the principle of
promissory estoppel there has to be a promise, and on that
basis the party concerned must have acted to its prejudice. In
the instant case it was only a proposal, and it was very much
made clear that it was to be approved by the Central
Government, prior whereto it could not be construed as
containing a promise. Besides, equity cannot be used against a
statutory provision or notification.
290…..In any case, in the absence of any promise, the
Appellants including Aadhunik cannot claim promissory
estoppel in the teeth of the notifications issued under the
relevant statutory powers. Alternatively, the Appellants are
trying to make a case under the doctrine of legitimate
expectations. The basis of this doctrine is in reasonableness
and fairness. However, it can also not be invoked where the
decision of the public authority is founded in a provision of
law, and is in consonance with public interest.”
46. In Union of India v. Lt. Col. P.K. Choudhary , speaking through
Chief Justice T.S. Thakur, the Court discussed the decision in Monnet
Ispat (supra) and noted its reliance on the judgment in Attorney
General for New South Wales v. Quinn . It then observed:
“This Court went on to hold that if denial of legitimate
expectation in a given case amounts to denial of a right that is
guaranteed or is arbitrary, discriminatory, unfair or biased,
gross abuse of power or in violation of principles of natural
justice, the same can be questioned on the well-known
grounds attracting Article 14 of the Constitution but a claim
based on mere legitimate expectation without anything more
cannot ipso facto give a right to invoke these principles.”
47. Thus, the Court held that the doctrine of legitimate expectation
cannot be claimed as a right in itself, but can be used only when the
denial of a legitimate expectation leads to the violation of Article 14
of the Constitution.”
11.    The relationship between Article 14 of the Constitution and the
doctrine of legitimate expectation has been very precisely explained in Para
7 and 8 in the judgment in Food Corporation of India v. Kamdhenu
Cattle Feed Industries, (1993) 1 SCC 71 by a three Judge bench of the
Apex Court, which reads thus:-
“7. In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all
its instrumentalities have to conform to Article 14 of the Constitution
of which nonarbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered
discretion in public law : A public authority possesses powers only to
use them for public good. This imposes the duty to act fairly and to
adopt a procedure which is „fairplay in action‟. Due observance of this
obligation as a part of good administration raises a reasonable or
legitimate expectation in every citizen to be treated fairly in his
interaction with the State and its instrumentalities, with this element
forming a necessary component of the decision-making process in all
State actions. To satisfy this requirement of nonarbitrariness in a State
action, it is, therefore, necessary to consider and give due weight to
the reasonable or legitimate expectations of the persons likely to be
affected by the decision or else that unfairness in the exercise of the
power may amount to an abuse or excess of power apart from
affecting the bona fides of the decision in a given case. The decision
so made would be exposed to challenge on the ground of arbitrariness.
Rule of law does not completely eliminate discretion in the exercise of
power, as it is unrealistic, but provides for control of its exercise by
judicial review.
8. The mere reasonable or legitimate expectation of a citizen, in such a
situation, may not by itself be a distinct enforceable right, but failure
to consider and give due weight to it may render the decision
arbitrary, and this is how the requirement of due consideration of a
legitimate expectation forms part of the principle of nonarbitrariness, a
necessary concomitant of the rule of law. Every legitimate expectation
is a relevant factor requiring due consideration in a fair decision-
making process. Whether the expectation of the claimant is reasonable
or legitimate in the context is a question of fact in each case.
Whenever the question arises, it is to be determined not according to
the claimant's perception but in larger public interest wherein other
more important considerations may outweigh what would otherwise
have been the legitimate expectation of the claimant. A bona fide
decision of the public authority reached in this manner would satisfy
the requirement of nonarbitrariness and withstand judicial scrutiny.
The doctrine of legitimate expectation gets assimilated in the rule of
law and operates in our legal system in this manner and to this extent.
12.     From the perusal of the two Government Orders (supra) relied upon
by respondent No.2, it clearly transpires that those orders are meant for
future regularization and appointments by providing that unless the posts
are created by the competent authority and are funded by the Government,
there shall be no fresh appointment in the respondent No.1.
13.    In the instant case, the posts are available and created by the
competent authority. The petitioners have been selected pursuant to a valid
selection      process        initiated       by        issuance          of     public
advertisements/notifications. They have completed their period of
contractual service successfully and, therefore, they have a legitimate
expectation that they shall also be given the benefit of 2007 decision of the
Governing Body of the respondent No.1. They are also correct in
contending that by treating them a class apart from those who were
similarly situated with them except that they were engaged earlier, the
respondents are visiting the petitioners with invidious discrimination. The
contractual employees, who were appointed by the respondent No.1 prior
to 2017 and the contractual appointees who were appointed after 2017 do
not fall in two different classes. More so, when both set of employees were
appointed pursuant to a decision of the Governing Body taken in the year
2007. The selection and appointment in both the cases were after following
the due process of law. The cut off line, dividing the employees appointed
prior to year 2017 and after 2017 is totally imaginary, irrational and does
not have any nexus with the object sought to be achieved.
14.    Viewed from any angle, the petitioners herein and the contractual
employees who have been regularized by respondent No.1 from time to
time prior to 2017 constitute one homogeneous class and, therefore, there
could be no further classification within the class. Article 14 of the
Constitution of India strikes at such classification which is based on no
rational basis and which has no nexus with the object sought to be
achieved. Reference in this regard is invited to the case of D. S. Nakara v.
Union of India, (1983) 1 SCC 305. Paras 13, 14 and 15 of the judgment are
set out below with advantage:-
“13. The other facet of Art. 14 which must be remembered is that it
eschews arbitrariness in any form. Article 14 has, therefore, not to be
held identical with the doctrine of classification. As was noticed in
Maneka Gandhi's case in the earliest stages of evolution of the
Constitutional law, Art. 14 came to be identified with the doctrine of
classification because the view taken was that Art. 14 forbids
discrimination and there will be no discrimination where the
classification making the differentia fulfils the aforementioned two
conditions. However, in EP. Royappa v. State of Tamil Nadu(1), it
was held that the basic principle which informs both Arts. 14 and 16 is
equality and inhibition against discrimination. This Court further
"From a positivistic point of view, equality is antithetic to
arbitrariness. In fact, equality and arbitrariness are sworn enemies; one
belongs to the rule of law in a republic while the other, to the whim
and caprice of an absolute monarch. Where an act is arbitrary it is
implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and
constitutional law and is, therefore, violative of Art. 14, and if it
affects any matter relating to public employment, it is also violative
of Art. 16. Articles 14 and 16 strike at arbitrariness in State action and
ensure fairness and equality of treatment.
14. Justice Iyer has in his inimitable style dissected Article 14 in
Maneka Gandhi case as under:
"The article has a pervasive processual potency and versatile quality,
equalitarian in its soul and allergic to discriminatory diktats. Equality
is the antithesis of arbitrariness and ex cathedra ipse dixit is the ally of
demagogic authoritarianism. Only knight-errants of 'executive
excesses'- if we may use current cliche-can fall in love with the Dame
of despotism, legislative or administrative. If this Court gives in here
it gives up the ghost. And so it that I insist on the dynamics of
limitations on fundamental freedoms as implying the rule of law; be
you ever so high, the law is above you.
Affirming and explaining this view, the Constitution Bench in Ajay
Hasia v. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi held that it must, therefore, now be
taken to be well settled that what Art.14 strikes at is arbitrariness
because any action that is arbitrary must necessarily involve negation
of equality. The Court made it explicit that where an act is arbitrary it
is implicit in it that it is unequal both according to political logic and
constitutional law and is, therefore, violative of Art. 14. After a review
of large number of decisions bearing on the subject, in Air India etc.
etc. v. Nargesh Meerza & Ors. etc etc. (1) the Court formulated
propositions emerging from analysis and examination of earlier
decisions. One such proposition held well established is that Art. 14 is
certainly attracted where equals are treated differently without any
reasonable basis.
15.      Thus the fundamental principle is that Art. 14 forbids class
legislation but permits reasonable classification for the purpose of
legislation which classification must satisfy the twin tests of
classification being founded on an intelligible differntia which
distinguishes persons or things that are grouped together from those
that are left out of the group and that differentia must have a rational
nexus to the object sought to be achieved by the statute in question.”
16.    The petitioners are not backdoor entrants to service and, therefore,
cannot be treated unfairly by the State. They participated in the selection
process, competed with other eligible candidates and were selected on the
basis of their merit. True it is that in the order of their appointment there
was a stipulation that their services were terminable by one month‟s notice
of either side but such stipulation has lost its significance when it was not
resorted to during their initial period of contract. Having regard to the
services rendered by the petitioners, they were given extension in their
services and on completion of two years contract, the cases of the
petitioners were also processed for regularization. It is true that respondent
No.2 could not take a final call in the matter due to intervention made by
the Department of Finance. Once the posts are created in an institution of
the Government, it must be presumed that these are created with financial
concurrence by the Government. It would have been a different matter had
the petitioners been appointed against no posts or for their regularization
fresh creation was called for. Viewed from any angle the petitioners qualify
for regularization in the light of the decision of the Governing Body taken
on 18-12-2007 on the analogy of hundreds of employees similarly situated
with the petitioners, who stand regularized in the respondent No.1 Institute
from time to time prior to year 2017.
17.    For the foregoing reasons, I find merit in this petition and the same
is, accordingly allowed. The respondents are directed to complete the
process of regularization of the services of the petitioners against the posts
on which they have been appointed with effect from the date they have
successfully completed their two years contractual service with all
consequential benefits and pass appropriate order within a period of two