Counsel for Opposite Party :- Govt. Advocate,Dileep Kumar
Heard learned counsel for the revisionist and learned A.G.A. for
Notice was issued to opposite party no.2 and the same has been
served. Case has been revised but none has appeared on behalf
of opposite party no.2 in the revised call.
The present revision has been preferred with a prayer to allow
the revision and set aside the judgment and order dated
03.02.2016 passed by Additional Principal Judge, Family Court,
Lucknow in Criminal Case No. 522/2008 (Smt. Krishna Devi
Vs. Rameshwar Dayal), Under Section 125 Cr.P.C. and to direct
the opposite party to pay at least Rs.10,000/- as the monthly
The revisionist is the wife who filed an application under
Section 125 Cr.P.c. before the Additional Principal Judge,
Family Court, Lucknow with the averments that she was
married to opposite party no.2 prior to 40 years and out of the
wedlock three children namely, Neeraj Mohan, Chandra Mohan
and Ravindra Mohan were born. The opposite party no.2 had
provided maintenance to her till 1983, but thereafter it was
stopped by him. She further stated in the application that she
was dependent on her brother Shailendra who used to provide
financial assistance but suddenly he had gone missing and the
financial assistance was automatically stopped. She filed
application due to the fact that she has no source of income at
the relevant time, therefore, she needs maintenance from her
On the application filed by the revisionist, opposite party no.2
appeared and filed his objection. In the objection he has stated
that the marriage took place on 23.06.1967 but he denied the
fact that he ever misbehaved with his wife or harassed her. He
further stated that the revisionist has got illicit relation with one
person namely Ram Singh @ Manjeet Singh. He has further
stated that the nature of the revisionist is very obstinate and she
had no adjustment with the family that is why the relationship
between them became sour.
The court below examined the revisionist as P.W.-1 and
opposite party no.2 as O.P.W.-1. After examining both the
parties the case was heard and decided. The court below passed
the order on 03.02.2016 rejecting the application under Section
125 Cr.P.C. filed by the revisionist. Revisionist has challenged
the said order on many ground, which I am going to discuss
(i) The court below has recorded the finding that the revisionist
has not submitted as to why she was living separately but para 4
of the application filed under Section 125 Cr.P.C. indicates that
she was married to opposite party no.2 prior to 29 years and
thereafter the opposite party no. 2 had performed second
marriage with Smt. Shushila Devi and she has submitted that
the maintenance was not given to her by opposite party no.2. It
is stated by the revisionist that due to the fact that opposite
party no.2 had performed second marriage she has been
deserted. This fact has not been dealt by the court below and
finding has been recorded that she was unable to show as to
why she was living separately.
(ii) The court below has further recorded the finding that the
property at Farrukhabad was sold by the revisionist and she
received money out of sold property which indicates that she
has sufficient means. On this very finding the court below has
come to the conclusion that the revisionist has concealed the
material fact because she had not disclosed the said facts at the
time of the filing of the application under Section 125 Cr.P.C.
The finding recorded by the court below appears to be perverse
because if there was some property at Farrukhabad and money
out of sold property was used for maintenance of the children as
well as revisionist; it could not be inferred that the revisionist
has lost her opportunity for grant of maintenance under Section
(iii) The court has further recorded a finding that the revisionist
was unable to state as to whether her children were literate or
illiterate or how much they were educated, therefore, some
adverse inference were drawn by the court below. I am of the
opinion that for determination of maintenance under Section
125 Cr.P.C. such finding and recourse are not proper and it is
also not relevant.
(iv) The court below has further recorded a finding that all the
three children were settled by her; thus she was having means
to sustain. If some income was received by her out of sold
property, it does not mean that she would sustain through out
(v) The court below has further recorded a finding that the
opposite party no.2 stated the fact that revisionist had illicit
relation with Ram Singh @ Manjeet Singh and the said fact was
not denied by her. The said finding is also perverse because
statement of fact cannot be relied because it will have a serious
repercussions unless it is proved.
Learned counsel for the revisionist had relied upon the
judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Rajnesh Vs.
Neha and another reported in (2021) 2 Supreme Court Cases
324. Para 13, 37, 38, 77, 78, 90, 90.1, 90.2 of the said judgment
have been relied by him and emphasis has been placed wherein
Hon'ble Supreme Court has pronounced that the status of the
husband and wife should be looked into and even if the wife is
working and has got some means of income, she is entitled for
maintenance as per the status of the husband. Hon'ble Supreme
Court has further taken a serious note in para 13 wherein it is
provided that maintenance laws have been enacted as measure
of social justice to provide recourse to dependent wife and
children for their financial support so as to prevent them from
falling into destitution. Relevant paragraphs of the said
judgment are extracted hereinbelow:-
13. Maintenance laws have been enacted as a measure of social justice to
provide recourse to dependent wives and children for their financial
support, so as to prevent them from falling into destitution and vagrancy.
Article 15(3) of the Constitution of India provides that:
“Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any special
provision for women and children.”
Article 15(3) reinforced by Article 39 of the Constitution of India, which
envisages a positive role for the State in fostering change towards the
empowerment of women, led to the enactment of various legislations from
time to time.
37. In Chaturbhuj v Sitabai7 this Court held that the object of
maintenance proceedings is not to punish a person for his past neglect,
but to prevent vagrancy and destitution of a deserted wife by providing her
food, clothing and shelter by a speedy remedy. Section 125 of the Cr.P.C.
is a measure of social justice especially enacted to protect women and
children, and falls within the constitutional sweep of Article 15(3),
reinforced by Article 39 of the Constitution.
38. Proceedings under Section 125 of the Cr.P.C. are summary in nature.
In Bhuwan Mohan Singh v Meena & Ors.8 this Court held that Section
125 of the Cr.P.C. was conceived to ameliorate the agony, anguish,
financial suffering of a woman who had left her matrimonial home, so that
some suitable arrangements could be made to enable her to sustain
herself and the children. Since it is the sacrosanct duty of the husband to
provide financial support to the wife and minor children, the husband was
required to earn money even by physical labour, if he is able-bodied, and
could not avoid his obligation, except on any legally permissible ground
mentioned in the statute.
III. Criteria for determining quantum of maintenance
77. The objective of granting interim / permanent alimony is to ensure that
the dependant spouse is not reduced to destitution or vagrancy on account
of the failure of the marriage, and not as a punishment to the other
spouse. There is no straitjacket formula for fixing the quantum of
maintenance to be awarded.
78. The factors which would weigh with the Court inter alia are the status
of the parties; reasonable needs of the wife and dependant children;
whether the applicant is educated and professionally qualified; whether
the applicant has any independent source of income; whether the income
is sufficient to enable her to maintain the same standard of living as she
was accustomed to in her matrimonial home; whether the applicant was
employed prior to her marriage; whether she was working during the
subsistence of the marriage; whether the wife was required to sacrifice
her employment opportunities for nurturing the family, child rearing, and
looking after adult members of the family; reasonable costs of litigation
for a non-working wife.
90. The Courts have held that if the wife is earning, it cannot operate as a
bar from being awarded maintenance by the husband. The Courts have
provided guidance on this issue in the following judgments.
90.1. In Shailja & Anr. v Khobbanna,39 this Court held that merely
because the wife is capable of earning, it would not be a sufficient ground
to reduce the maintenance awarded by the Family Court. The Court has to
determine whether the income of the wife is sufficient to enable her to
maintain herself, in accordance with the lifestyle of her husband in the
matrimonial home.40 Sustenance does not mean, and cannot be allowed
to mean mere survival.
90.2. In Sunita Kachwaha & Ors. v Anil Kachwaha 42 the wife had a
postgraduate degree, and was employed as a teacher in Jabalpur. The
husband raised a contention that since the wife had sufficient income, she
would not require financial assistance from the husband. The Supreme
Court repelled this contention, and held that merely because the wife was
earning some income, it could not be a ground to reject her claim for
maintenance."
The court below has passed the order without appreciating the
facts in totality. The observation appears to be influenced by
factual aspects which were not proved and without adducing
them on record. The application has been rejected without
application of mind. Since the income part and other relevant
evidences have not looked into, it is not appropriate to arrive at
any conclusion at the moment for granting maintenance because
quantum can be assessed only after recording the finding on
financial assets and income of the husband.
Therefore, it is a matter of remand and I am remanding the case
to the court below to take a fresh decision within a period of
four weeks from today, after affording an opportunity of
hearing to the parties keeping in view the observation made
above. The revision is allowed.
The judgment and order dated 03.02.2016 is set aside.
There is no order as to costs.