Heard learned counsel for the parties.
Respondent no.1 (Bhanwar Lal Lamror) was compulsorily
retired               from    Rajasthan    Higher    Judicial    Services   upon
attaining                the    age    of   50    years   vide    order    dated
31.03.2010.                The    order    was   passed    on   the   basis   of
recommendation made by the Administrative Committee which
commended to the Full Court of the High Court.
Amongst other facts, it has been noted that from the
year              1988,   respondent     no.1   till   1997   was  continuously
assessed as an average officer for almost 9 years. During
this period, in the year 1990, Hon’ble the Chief Justice
of the High Court had observed that respondent no.1 was a
officer. It was also noted that he had submitted
false                statistics      about       his    disposal      and    his
representation    with   regard    to  those   notings   had  been
rejected. Even for the subsequent period, the officer was
intermittently     graded    as    an   average   officer.    More
importantly, a disciplinary enquiry on the allegation of
taking bribe for delivering judgment was pending against
him.    Administrative    Committee      Report   mentions    that
several complaints had been received about the conduct of
respondent no.1, including allegations of taking bribe,
acquiring    movable   and   immovable     property   by   corrupt
activities etc.
In   this   backdrop,     the    Administrative     Committee
recommended compulsory retirement of respondent no.1, and
in view of the same, dropping of disciplinary enquiry
pending against him regarding allegations of breach of
The   order  passed    on  31.03.2010    was   made   subject
matter of challenge before the High Court by way of D.B.
Writ Petition (C) No. 783 of 2011 filed in the High Court
The Division Bench adverted to relevant aspects of
the matter, but concluded that it was unable to reconcile
the facts on record, and as the performance of respondent
no.1 was not unsatisfactory, it did not warrant premature
retirement   from   service.    The   impugned    decision   was,
therefore, arbitrary.
On  this  finding,    the  High    Court   allowed  the  writ
petition  and   was  pleased    to   set   aside   the  order  of
compulsory   retirement,    and    consequently     directed  the
reinstatement   of  respondent     no.1   in  service   with  all
consequential benefits. That decision of the High Court
is subject matter of the present appeal.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties.
The moot question is whether it was open to the High
Court to substitute its view for the one recorded by the
Administrative   Committee,    which    commended    to the  Full
Court of the High Court, pursuant to which the order of
compulsory retirement came to be issued.
Indeed, the High Court on judicial side could have
done so, if it found that there was absolutely no record
or   material    whatsoever      as    referred     to   in   the
recommendations made by the Administrative Committee, or
that the Committee relied on irrelevant material, or that
apposite material was overlooked and discarded. Further,
the High Court’s view would have been acceptable if it
found  patent   illegality,    breach    of   procedure   causing
prejudice to respondent no.1, or imposition of a gravely
disproportionate       measure.           We     notice     that   the
Administrative Committee, in its Report, had adverted to
the   entire     service     record,      including      the   pending
disciplinary    enquiry     regarding     integrity    of   respondent
It   is  settled    position      in   law  that   the   competent
authority   is   supposed      to  consider     the   entire   service
record of the judicial officer and even if there is a
solitary remark of lack and breach of integrity, that may
be sufficient for a Judicial Officer to be compulsory
retired   as   expounded      in   Tarak    Singh    Vs.   Jyoti  Basu
reported in (2005) 1 SCC 201.
The   High   Court    took    notice    of  this   judgment,   but
still ventured to examine the entire record by itself,
overlooking   the    thorough     examination      conducted   by  the
Administrative      Committee,        which     was    affirmed    and
commended to the Full Court. It was not open to the High
Court to substitute its own view for the satisfaction
arrived at by the Full Court of the High Court regarding
the   necessity    or    otherwise       of   the   respondent    no.1
continuing in the Rajasthan Higher Judicial Services. It
was  also   not   open   to   the    High   Court   to   re-write  the
annual confidential reports by taking over the role of
inspecting or confirming authority.
Suffice it to note that the disciplinary enquiry was
pending against respondent no.1 which raised questions
about his integrity. Past service record of respondent
no. 1 was found to be sub-par and short of the exacting
standard expected from a judicial officer.
It   is   also    noticed    from     the   record   that   the
disciplinary   enquiry    came     to  be   dropped   in   lieu  of
compulsory   retirement    of   respondent     no.1.   That  was  a
composite   recommendation      made     by   the   Administrative
Committee and commended to the Full Court of the High
Court. The two being inseparable, and the solitary remark
about integrity with the service record being sufficient
in law to proceed against the judicial officer, we fail
to comprehend as to how the conclusion reached by the
competent   authority    can   be    said   to   be  arbitrary   or
manifestly wrong.
Accordingly,     this    appeal     ought    to   succeed   and
resultantly, we set aside the impugned judgment and order
passed by the High Court.
The    writ    petition      filed     by    respondent    no.1
challenging the compulsory retirement stands dismissed.
The appeal is allowed in the above terms. No order as
to costs.
Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
Date : 24-08-2021 This appeal was called on for hearing today.
UPON hearing the counsel the Court made the following
The appeal is allowed in terms of the signed order.
Pending applications, if any, stand disposed of.
[Signed order is placed on the file]