Prayer in these petitions, filed under Section 439 read with
Section 482 of the Cr.P.C., is for grant of regular bail to petitioners Mamta
and Rituraj Yadav in FIR No. 9 dated 08.01.2022, registered under Sections
420, 465, 467, 468, 471, 506 and 120-B of the IPC Act at Police Station
Learned counsel for the petitioners has argued that as per
allegations in the FIR, registered at the instance of complainant-Monesh
Israni, it is alleged that the accused persons have played fraud and cheated
him for an amount of Rs. 64.49 crores on the pretext of providing tenders for
construction of housing projects of National Security Guards, Manesar
(hereinafter referred to as ‘NSG, Manesar’) by forging the documents of the
office of Director General, NSG, Manesar and by opening and operating a
fake bank account bearing No. 9210200000936255 in Axis Bank, NSG,
Manesar in name of G.C. (Garison) NSG, Manesar.
It is further alleged that the complainant is the Director and
authorized person of M/s Narain Dass R. Israni Co. (P) Ltd. and in the
month of September, 2021, the Directors of the complainant-company were
approached by co-accused Parveen Yadav (who is the husband of petitioner
Mamta and real brother of petitioner Rituraj Yadav) pretending himself to be
an IPS Officer and Station Commandant NSG by giving his mobile number
and Aadhar Card number through co-accused Dinesh Mohan Sorkhi, who
pretended to be an old friend of Parveen Yadav. Both the accused projected
and allured the complainant that there are two big housing projects in NSG,
Manesar and if the complainant gives his bid, they will get them allotted the
work. The complainant was regularly called to NSG, Manesar campus by the
aforesaid two persons and they would meet the accused in Officers’ Mess of
NSG, Manesar. On such allurement, the accused persons gave a letter dated
08.09.2021 to complainant for calling quotation for 740 type III residential
quarters and another letter dated 16.10.2021 for calling quotation for
construction of residential quarters, which was received by Speed Post. The
complainant, believing the representation of the accused persons to be
genuine regarding aforesaid two tenders, deposited an earnest money of
Rs. 17,71,56,000/- by way of Cheque No. 001811 dated 21.09.2021, drawn
on Bank of Baroda in the name of “Office of CG (Garrison) Station Head
Quarters NSG” and made another payment of Rs. 46,78,25,220/- by way of
Cheque No. 001829 dated 03.11.2021, drawn on Bank of Baroda in the
name of “Office of CG (Garrison) Station Head Quarters NSG”. Both the
No. 92102000036255 at Axis Bank, NSG, Manesar Branch. The accused
provided a letter dated 22.10.2021 intimating the lowest bid (L-1) through
post and acknowledged the documents, as per details given in the FIR. It was
further stated that letter of acceptance of tender will be received in the first
week of January, 2022 along with agreement and letter of intent. In the
meantime, the accused persons used to visit the complainant and they would
pretend to talking to various other persons in the office of NSG, Manesar
and other vendors, who would supply various commodities to NSG,
It is further stated in the FIR that for 02/03 days, accused
Parveen Yadav and other co-accused stopped attending the phone calls of
the complainant and when he visited the house of Parveen Yadav, he came
to know that he along with his family has left the house and later on, it came
to his notice that the entire act was a fraudulent act of cheating the
complainant by preparing and using forged documents, which were even
used for opening a new bank account in Axis Bank in the name of “Office of
GC (Garrison) Station Head Quarters NSG” and “EMD for Central
Warehouse NSG” and in that manner, the complainant has been cheated and
defrauded of an amount of Rs. 64.49 crores.
Learned counsel for the petitioners further submitted that later
on, during investigation, the police arrested both the petitioners and other
Learned counsel, on behalf of petitioner Rituraj Yadav, has
submitted that she is in fact the Branch Manager of Axis Bank, where the
alleged bank account in the name of a Government office was opened by
using fake documents. It is further argued that the petitioner had no
knowledge that his brother Parveen Yadav is playing any fraud as he was
posted as Assistant Commandant, NSG, Manesar and her husband, namely
Naveen Kumar was also posted as Commandant in NSG, Manesar.
Learned counsel further argued that on the basis of the
documents submitted by co-accused, the petitioner has opened the account
and later on, the allegations are that the entire amount was siphoned off in
the account of a company namely M/s Koshia Enterprises Pvt. Ltd., in which
co-accused/petitioner Mamta, who is the wife of accused Parveen Yadav, is
the Director and the authorized person and petitioner has no concern with
the same.
Learned counsel for the petitioners, with regard to petitioner
Mamta, has argued that she is the wife of co-accused Parveen Yadav and
being a housewife, she was having no knowledge about the conduct of her
Learned counsel for the petitioners has further argued that both
the petitioners are in judicial custody for the last 03 months and 22 days and
since investigation is complete and challan stands presented; the petitioners
are entitled to get bail in view of the special provision under Section 437
It is additionally argued that the petitioners are having infant
children and, therefore, considering this fact, they are entitled to bail, being a
special case.
Learned State counsel, assisted by learned counsel for the
complainant, has, however, opposed the prayer of the petitioners. Learned
State counsel has argued that both the petitioners, who are educated persons,
have played an active role in committing offence in conspiracy with their
husband/brother and father-in-law Kamal Singh. It is further submitted that
petitioner Mamta is the Director of M/s Koshia Enterprises Pvt. Ltd., which
was created only for siphoning off the funds from the fake bank account
opened by co-accused/petitioner Rituraj Yadav in Axis Bank, Branch at
NSG Manesar, being its Branch Manager, where the complainant deposited
the amount of Rs. 64.49 crores by way of aforesaid two cheques. It is further
submitted that thereafter the amount was transferred from the said fake
account to M/s Koshia Enterprises Pvt. Ltd., the same was again siphoned
off for other purposes by all the accused persons.
Learned State counsel further submitted that though the
petitioners are having minor children, however, there are sufficient medical
facilities available in the jail. It is further submitted that even petitioner
Rituraj Yadav, who is the real sister of accused Parveen Yadav, is a Branch
Manager in Axis Bank, NSG, Manesar Branch, where she opened the said
fake account in the name of “Office of CG (Garrison) Station Head Quarters
NSG”, on the basis of fake documents as it has come in the investigation that
accused have forged signatures of one Raj Kumar, who is an IPS Officer, for
the purpose of opening the bank account, therefore, it cannot be said that
petitioner Rituraj Yadav was only the mute spectator as she was actively
involved in opening the fake bank account in the name of a Government
Learned counsel for the complainant further submitted that
during investigation, the police recorded the statement of Vipul and Diwakar
from ICICI Bank and both of them have stated that it is Rituraj Yadav alone,
who has prepared all the documents (which are in fact forged documents) in
conspiracy with accused Parveen Yadav as even the signatures of Raj
Kumar, IPS are forged and she is the only person, who has completed the
formalities for opening the bank account knowingly that it is a fake account.
It is further submitted that during investigation, it has come that both the
petitioners were accepting very expensive gifts from their husband and have
siphoned off the amount into the account of petitioner Mamta, which was
used for buying properties, jewelries, expensive cars, bike etc.
Learned State counsel has further submitted that an account in
the name of a Government office is always opened with great caution and
proper verification and petitioner Rituraj Yadav, knowingly that the bank
account will be misused for siphoning off the funds, opened the same in
conspiracy with her brother Parveen Yadav and other accused.
Learned State counsel has further submitted that petitioner
Mamta is the Director and authorized signatory of M/s Koshia Enterprises
Pvt. Ltd. and the same was created only for siphoning off the amount from
the fake Axis Bank account and in fact all the accused persons succeeded in
transferring the amount from the said account to the account of M/s Koshia
Enterprises Pvt. Ltd., which was opened with ICICI Bank and petitioner
Mamta, being the authorized signatory, has further siphoned off the said
Learned counsel for the complainant has additionally argued
that in fact during investigation, it has come that the entire family of the
petitioners and their husband/brother, in a pre-planned and pre-meditated
manner since inception of conspiracy to commit fraud and cheating with the
complainant and similarly situated some other persons, had opened the fake
bank account in the name of “Office of CG (Garrison) Station Head Quarters
Learned counsel for the complainant further submitted that in
ordinary course, a lady would always ask her husband, who is simply an
employee, as to how he is procuring such huge amount for purchasing
properties, jewelries, expensive cars etc. and the aforesaid conduct of the
petitioners clearly reveals that they, in conspiracy with Parveen Yadav and
other accused, were actively participating in commission of offence.
Learned counsel for the complainant has referred to some other
FIRs, registered against all the accused persons by other victims, details of
Learned counsel for the complainant further submitted that in
all a total of Rs. 167 crores has been cheated by the accused persons
including petitioners in a similar fashion and modus operandi adopted by
accused is alluring the innocent persons on the pretext of providing them
tenders with NSG, Manesar, which is a very prestigious institution.
Learned counsel for the complainant has further argued that
Section 437 Cr.P.C. does not give an absolute right to an accused person to
get bail, who is habitual of committing offence.
After hearing learned counsel for the parties, I find no ground to
grant the concession of regular bail to the petitioners for the following
a)           A perusal of the FIR as well as the investigation conducted
clearly reveals that both the petitioners, in active conspiracy with co-accused
Parveen Yadav, who is the husband of petitioner Mamta and brother of
petitioner Rituraj Yadva, have firstly opened a fake account with Axis Bank,
NSG, Manesar, where petitioner Rituraj was the Branch Manager. The said
account was daringly opened in the name of a Government office on the
basis of fake documents, which are so proved during investigation that
signatures of a senior police officer were forged by the accused persons.
b)           It has also come in the investigation that all the forged
documents and formalities were completed by petitioner Rituraj Yadav alone
in opening the account as she knew that the amount by victims will be
deposited in this account, which will be further siphoned off to account of
M/s Koshia Enterprises Pvt. Ltd., where petitioner Mamta was the Director
and authorized signatory, therefore, since the time of inception of the
conspiracy to commit the offence of forgery and cheating with the
complainant by alluring him to part away Rs. 64.49 crores by way of bank
transactions on the pretext of providing tenders of some housing projects,
both the petitioners were actively involved in executing the conspiracy and
committing the offence.
c)             The arguments raised by learned counsel for the petitioners that
the petitioners are entitled to get bail in view of the provisions of Section
437(6) Cr.P.C. cannot be accepted for the reasons that both the petitioners,
apart from the present FIR, are involved in four more FIRs of similar nature,
where other victims have also been cheated by all the accused persons in
conspiracy with each other and a total fraud of around Rs. 167 crores has
been committed. Therefore, this Court finds that it is not a special case.
d)             Even otherwise, Section 437 Cr.P.C. does not give any absolute
right to bail to a lady, who is allegedly an accused in a number of other FIRs
for duping people from general public worth hundred crores of rupees. The
fact that the entire amount was transferred from the said fake account
opened in the name of a Government office by petitioner Rituraj Yadav to
the account of M/s Kohisa Enterprises Pvt. Ltd., where petitioner Mamta is
the Director and authorized signatory, further shows their criminal bent of
mind as it has come in the investigation that by using the said amount, they
have purchased properties, jewelries, expensive cars etc. and, therefore, no
ground for grant of bail under Section 437 Cr.P.C. is made out.
e)             The argument that the petitioners are having children with them
is also no ground for granting them bail at this stage in the peculiar facts and
circumstances of the case as the jail authorities are bound to provide all the
medical assistance to petitioners and their children, if so required. This is
also recorded by learned Illaqua Magistrate and Additional Sessions Judge
in their respective orders.
Therefore, in view of the above facts and circumstance and
considering the serious allegations of fraud and cheating against the
petitioners, no ground is made out to grant them the concession of regular
Accordingly, both the petitions are dismissed.
Considering the fact that investigation of this case/FIR suggests
that all the accused in conspiracy with each other have used the proceed of
crime for purchasing property, vehicle, jewellery etc. the Director,
Enforcement Directorate, New Delhi is directed to look into further
investigation under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002.
A copy of this order be handed over to the Additional Solicitor
General of India, who is present in Court for further action.