1. Leave granted. The appellant (hereinafter, “Apex”) is aggrieved by a judgment of
the High Court of Judicature of Madras1, wherein the Division Bench upheld an order
of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal2 (hereinafter, “ITAT”), which in turn upheld an
order of the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals)3 (hereinafter, “CIT(A)”). The
CIT(A) had partly allowed an appeal from an order of the respondent Deputy
Commissioner of Income Tax4, which partially allowed amounts claimed by Apex as
‘business expenditure’ under Section 37(1) of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (hereinafter,
1 Tax  Case Appeal No. 723 of 2018, dated 18.03.2019.
2 IT ACT No. 1153/Mds/2014, dated 29.01.2018.
2. The facts in brief are as follows: On 01.08.2012, the Central Board of Direct Taxes
(hereinafter, “CBDT”) issued a circular5, which clarified that expenses incurred by
pharmaceutical and allied health sector industries for distribution of incentives (i.e.,
“freebies”) to medical practitioners are ineligible for the benefit of Explanation 1 to
Section 37(1), which denies the application of the benefit for any purpose which is an
‘offence’ or ‘prohibited by law’.
3. After the circular was issued, on 22.11.2012, Apex was issued a notice under
Section 142(1) of the IT Act, to explain why the expenditure of ₹ 4,72,91,159/- incurred
towards gifting freebies such as hospitality, conference fees, gold coins, LCD TVs,
fridges, laptops, etc. to medical practitioners for creating awareness about the health
supplement ‘Zincovit’, should not be added back to the total income of Apex.
4. The reason for only a partial allowance by the authorities below was that an
amendment6 to the Medical Council Act, 1956 (now repealed) through the Indian
Medical Council (Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002
(hereinafter, “2002 Regulations”), published in the Official Gazette on 14.12.2009,
disallowed medical practitioners from accepting emoluments in the form of inter alia
gifts, travel facilities, hospitality, cash or monetary grants.7 Acceptance of such
freebies could result in a range of sanctions against the medical practitioners, from
‘censure’ for incentives received up to ₹ 5,000/-, to removal from the Indian Medical
Register or State Medical Register for periods ranging from three months to one year.8
Therefore, only the expenses incurred till 14.12.2009 were eligible for the benefit of
Section 37(1), and not for the entirety of the Assessment Year 2010-2011, as claimed
7 Id., Regulation 6.8, Code of Conduct for Doctors in their Relationship with Pharmaceutical and Allied Health Sector
8 Regulation  6.8.1, inserted by Notification No. MCI-211(1)/2010(Ethics)/163013, issued on 01.02.2016.
5. It was argued by the counsel for Apex, Mr. S. Ganesh, Senior Advocate, that the
amended 2002 Regulations were not applicable to Apex, i.e., pharmaceutical
companies were not bound by them. While medical practitioners were expressly
prohibited from accepting freebies, no corresponding prohibition in the form of any
binding norm was imposed on the pharmaceutical companies gifting them. In the
absence of any express prohibition by law, Apex could not be denied the benefit of
seeking exclusion of the expenditure incurred on supply of such freebies under
6. Counsel placed reliance on rulings by different High Court to establish that the 2002
Regulations were enforceable only against medical practitioners and not the donors,
i.e., pharmaceutical companies. In Max Hospital Pitampura v. Medical Council of
India9 (hereinafter, “Max Hospital”) the Delhi High Court held that the Medical Council
of India (hereinafter, “MCI”) had no jurisdiction to pass any orders against the
appellant hospital, and adverse observations made against the hospital by MCI were
quashed. Equally, in Dr. Anil Gupta v. Addl. Commissioner of Income Tax10, a Division
Bench of the Rajasthan High Court gave benefit of Section 37(1) to the appellant as
Explanation 1 could not be raised by the respondent for the first time at an appellate
9 W.P.  (C) No. 1334/2014 / ILR (2014) 1 Delhi 620, dated 10.01.2014.
10 Income  Tax Appeal No. 485/2008, decided on 18.07.2017.
11 See Berger Paints Ltd. v Commissioner of Income Tax, (2004) 12 SCC 42 and South India Bank Ltd. v Commissioner
of Income Tax, Civil Appeal No. 9606 of 2011 / 2021 SCCOnline SC 692, dated 09.09.2021.
“Even otherwise in income tax proceedings the medical ethics will not be taken into consideration. At the
most even if it is a professional misconduct, it is to be dealt with by Medical Council of India. The income
tax authority cannot decide the medical ethics when the original authority has partly allowed the
The Counsel urged that as these decisions were not challenged by the revenue
authorities, and thereby accepted by them, the present matter was not open for
7. The Counsel further submitted that it was not open to the revenue to deny a tax
benefit on the ‘nature’ of expenses incurred. This Court, in T.A. Quereshi v.
Commissioner of Income Tax, Bhopal12 (hereinafter, “T.A. Quereshi”) allowed the
appellant to deduct the cost of heroin seized as a business loss, holding that:
“In our opinion, the High Court has adopted an emotional and moral approach rather than a legal
approach. We fully agree with the High Court that the assessee was committing a highly immoral act in
illegally manufacturing and selling heroin. However, cases are to be decided by the court on legal
principles and not on one's own moral views. Law is different from morality, as the positivist jurists
Bentham and Austin pointed out.”
8. It was argued that similarly, in Commissioner of Income Tax v. M/s Khemchand
Motilal Jain13, a Division Bench of the Madhya Pradesh High Court allowed ransom
money paid to the kidnappers of an employee of the respondent company on a
business trip as business expenditure under Section 37(1), holding that:
14 Memorandum   Explaining the Provisions of the Finance (No. 2) Bill, 1998, Section 15. Later adopted by CBDT Circular
No. 772 ([1999] 235 ITR (St.) 35, 53), dated 23.12.1998.
“The aforesaid section provides that kidnapping a person for ransom is an offence and any person doing
so or compelling to pay is liable for the punishment as provided in the Section, but nowhere it is provided
that to save a life of the person if a ransom is paid, it will amount to an offence. No provision is brought
to our notice that payment of ransom is prohibited by any law. In absence of it, the Explanation of sub-
section (1), section 37 will not be applicable in the present case.”
“Sukhnandan Jain remained in custody for a period of nearabout 20 days. The police were also informed
and after waiting 20 days for the police action. If the respondents to save his life paid the aforesaid
amount, then the aforesaid amount cannot be treated as an action, which prohibited under the law. No
provision could be brought to our notice that payment of ransom is an offence. In absence of which, the
contention of the petitioner that it is prohibited under Explanation of section 37(1) of the Income Tax Act
has no substance. The entire tour of Sukhnandan Jain was for purchase of Tendu leaves of quality and
for this purpose, he was on business tour and during his business tour, he was kidnapped and for his
release the aforesaid amount was paid.”
9. Counsel brought this Court’s attention to the Memorandum Explaining the
Provisions of the Finance (No. 2) Bill, 1998 which stated that the introduction of
Explanation 1 to Section 37(1) would disallow tax payers from claiming “protection
money, extortion, hafta, bribes, etc.” as business expenditures,14 from which it could
be inferred that the intention of the Parliament was to only bring into the ambit of
Explanation 1 ‘illegal’ activities which were deigned as ‘offences’ under relevant
statutes. The IT Act not being a social reform statute, needed to be interpreted strictly,
and not in a wide manner so as to include in its scope an act by a pharmaceutical
company not recognized as ‘illegal’ by any statute – doing so would be against the
canons of public law.
10. Finally, Counsel submitted that the CBDT circular dated 01.08.2012 enlarged the
scope of the 2002 Regulations, and made it operable beyond medical practitioners,
i.e., to pharmaceutical companies and allied health sector industries, which, in the
absence of any enabling provision, was outside its dominion. Arguendo, if the CBDT
circular had to be brought into effect, it could be done so only ‘prospectively’, and not
‘retrospectively’, i.e., from the date of publication of the CBDT circular on 01.08.2012,
and not the date of publication of the 2002 Regulations on 14.12.2009. Reliance was
placed on various decisions of this Court to show that beneficial circulars had to be
applied retrospectively, however oppressive circulars could only be applied
15 See    for e.g., Director of Income-tax v. S.R.M.B Dairy Farming (P.) Ltd., (2018) 13 SCC 239.
11. Mr. Sanjay Jain, Additional Solicitor General appearing for the respondent
revenue authorities, submitted that while the act of pharmaceutical companies gifting
freebies to medical practitioners for promotion of their products may not be classified
as an ‘offence’ under any statue, it was squarely covered within the scope of
Explanation 1 to Section 37(1) by use of the words “prohibited by law”, as it was
specifically prohibited by the amended 2002 Regulations. While Apex could not be
‘punished’, it should not be allowed to benefit by claiming a tax exemption on the
freebies distributed.
12. Further, the ASG submitted that Parliament’s intention to disincentivize the
practice of receiving extravagant freebies in exchange for prescribing expensive
branded medication over its equally effective generic counterparts, thereby burdening
patients with unnecessary costs, was apparent not only from the amended 2002
Regulations, but also the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter, “PC Act”).
A government doctor receiving any illegal gratification amounting to malpractice or
any other offence was liable to be charged under PC Act and the Indian Penal Code,
16 Kanwarjit     Singh Kakkar v. State of Punjab, (2011) 13 SCC 158.
17 See    regulation 8 of the 2002 Regulations.
13. In the present instance, the medical practitioners were provided expensive gifts
such as hospitality, conference fees, gold coins, LCD TVs, fridges, laptops, etc. by
Apex to promote its nutritional health supplement ‘Zincovit’. It was argued that
receiving these, clearly - in letter and spirit, constituted professional misconduct on
part of the medical practitioner. The scope of the 2002 Regulations was not limited to
a finite list of instances of professional misconduct, but broad enough to cover those
instances not specifically enumerated as well.17 The menace of prescribing expensive
branded medication as a quid pro quo arrangement had a direct bearing on public
policy, which was implicit in the 2002 Regulations itself.
14. To elucidate the same, reliance was placed on two High Court decisions. In
Commissioner of Income-Tax v. Kap Scan and Diagnostic Centre P. Ltd.,18 a Division
Bench of the Punjab and Haryana High Court disallowed the benefit of the exemption
for commission provided to doctors engaged in private practice for referring their
“It, thus, emerges that an assessee would not be entitled to deduction of payments made in
contravention of law. Similarly, payments which are opposed to public policy being in the nature of
unlawful consideration cannot equally be recognized. It cannot be held that businessmen are entitled to
conduct their business even contrary to law and claim deductions of payments as business expenditure,
notwithstanding that such payments are illegal or opposed to public policy or have pernicious
consequences to the society as a whole.”
“If demanding of such commission was bad, paying it was equally bad. Both were privies to a wrong.
Therefore, such commission paid to private doctors was opposed to public policy and should be
discouraged. The payment of commission by the assessee for referring patients to it cannot by any
stretch of imagination be accepted to be legal or as per public policy. Undoubtedly, it is not a fair practice
and has to be termed as against the public policy.”
Further, the High Court referred to Section 23 of the Contract Act, 1872 (hereinafter,
“Contract Act”) to hold the consideration or object of the agreement between the
assessee and private doctors as unlawful, and the agreement therefore void, as it was
opposed to public policy.
15. A Division Bench of the Himachal Pradesh High Court decided along similar lines
in Confederation of Indian Pharmaceutical Industry (SSI) v. Central Board of Direct
“This regulation is a very salutary regulation which is in the interest of the patients and the public. This
court is not oblivious to the increasing complaints that the medical practitioners do not prescribe generic
medicines and prescribe branded medicines only in lieu of the gifts and other freebies granted to them
by some particular pharmaceutical industries. Once this has been prohibited by the Medical Council
under the powers vested in it, section 37(1) of the Income-tax Act comes into play”
The High Court also upheld the legality of the CBDT circular dated 01.08.2012, stating
that it was for the assessee to establish to the Assessing Officer that the expenditure
“Shri Vishal Mohan, advocate, on behalf of the petitioner, contends that the circular goes beyond the
section itself. We are not in agreement with this submission. The Explanation to section 37(1) makes it
clear that any expenditure incurred by an assessee for any purpose which is prohibited by law shall not
be deemed to have been incurred for the purpose of business or profession. The sum and substance of
the circular is also the same. In case the assessing authorities are not properly understanding the circular
then the remedy lies for each individual assessee to file appeals under the Income-tax Act but the circular
which is totally in line with section 37(1) cannot be said to be illegal. In fact paragraph 4 of the circular
quoted hereinabove itself clarifies that the value of the freebies enjoyed by the medical practitioner is
also taxable as business income or income from other sources depending on the facts of each case.
Therefore, if the assessee satisfies the assessing authority that the expenditure is not in violation of the
regulations framed by the Medical Council then it may legitimately claim a deduction, but it is for the
assessee to satisfy the Assessing Officer that the expense is not in violation of the Medical Council
Regulations referred to above”.
16. Lastly, the ASG submitted that had the Assessing Officer allowed Apex to claim
tax benefit, the authorities would have been deprived of revenue in the form of tax
amount leviable on ₹ 4,72,91,159/-, which was a crucial omission. Thus, on a holistic
reading of the statutes and regulations, Apex could not be allowed to claim deduction
17. An examination of the relevant provisions is first necessary. Section 37 of the IT
Section 37. General.—(1) Any expenditure (not being expenditure of the nature described in Sections
30 to 36 and not being in the nature of capital expenditure or personal expenses of the assessee), laid
out or expended wholly and exclusively for the purposes of the business or profession shall be allowed
in computing the income chargeable under the head “Profits and gains of business or profession”.
[Explanation 1].—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that any expenditure incurred by an
assessee for any purpose which is an offence or which is prohibited by law shall not be deemed to
have been incurred for the purpose of business or profession and no deduction or allowance shall be
Section 37 is a residuary provision. Any business or professional expenditure which
does not ordinarily fall under Sections 30-36, and which are not in the nature of capital
expenditure or personal expenses, can claim the benefit of this exemption. But the
same is not absolute. Explanation 1, which was inserted in 1998 with retrospective
effect from 01.04.1962, restricts the application of such exemption for “any purpose
which is an offence or which is prohibited by law”. The IT Act does not provide a
definition for these terms. Section 2(38) of the General Clauses Act, 1897 defines
‘offence’ as “any act or omission made punishable by any law for the time being in
force”. Under the IPC, Section 40 defines it as “a thing punishable by this Code”, read
with Section 43 which defines ‘illegal’ as being applicable to “everything which is an
offence or which is prohibited by law, or which furnishes ground for a civil action”. It is
therefore clear that Explanation 1 contains within its ambit all such activities which are
illegal/prohibited by law and/or punishable.
“6.8. Code of conduct for doctors in their relationship with pharmaceutical and allied health sector
6.8.1 In dealing with Pharmaceutical and allied health sector industry, a medical practitioner shall follow
(a) Gifts: A medical practitioner shall not receive any gift from any pharmaceutical or allied health care
industry and their sales people or representatives.
(b) Travel facilities: A medical practitioner shall not accept any travel Facility inside the country or outside,
including rail, road, air, ship, cruise tickets, paid vacation, etc. from any pharmaceutical or allied
healthcare industry or their representatives for self and family members for vacation or for attending
conferences, seminars, workshops, CME Programme, etc. as a delegate.]
(c) Hospitality: A medical practitioner shall not accept individually any hospitality like hotel
accommodation for self and family members under any pretext.
(d) Cash or monetary grants: A medical practitioner shall not receive any cash or monetary grants from
any pharmaceutical and allied healthcare industry for individual purpose in individual capacity under any
pretext. Funding for medical research, study etc. can only be received through approved institutions by
modalities laid down by law / rules / guidelines adopted by such approved institutions, in a transparent
manner. It shall always be fully disclosed.”
The regulation further lays down corresponding action or sanction which can be taken
against, or imposed upon, the medical practitioner for violation of each stipulation,
based on the monetary value of the same. Thus, acceptance of freebies given by
pharmaceutical companies is clearly an offence on part of the medical practitioner,
punishable with varying consequences.
1. It has been brought to the notice of the Board that some pharmaceutical and allied health sector
Industries are providing freebees (freebies) to medical practitioners and their professional associations
in violation of the regulations issued by Medical Council of India (the 'Council') which is a regulatory body
constituted under the Medical Council Act, 1956.
2. The council in exercise of its statutory powers amended the Indian Medical Council (Professional
Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002 (the regulations) on 10-12-2009 imposing a prohibition
on the medical practitioner and their professional associations from taking any Gift, Travel facility,
Hospitality, Cash or monetary grant from the pharmaceutical and allied health sector Industries.
3. Section 37(1) of Income Tax Act provides for deduction of any revenue expenditure (other than those
failing under sections 30 to 36) from the business Income if such expense is laid out/expended wholly
or exclusively for the purpose of business or profession. However, the explanation appended to this sub-
section denies claim of any such expense, if the same has been incurred for a purpose which is either
an offence or prohibited by law.
Thus, the claim of any expense incurred in providing above mentioned or similar freebees in violation of
the provisions of Indian Medical Council (Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002
shall be inadmissible under section 37(1) of the Income Tax Act being an expense prohibited by the law.
This disallowance shall be made in the hands of such pharmaceutical or allied health sector Industries
or other assessee which has provided aforesaid freebees and claimed it as a deductable expense in its
accounts against income.
4. It is also clarified that the sum equivalent to value of freebees enjoyed by the aforesaid medical
practitioner or professional associations is also taxable as business income or income from other
sources as the case may be depending on the facts of each case. The Assessing Officers of such
medical practitioner or professional associations should examine the same and take an appropriate
This may be brought to the notice of all the officers of the charge for necessary action.
The CBDT circular being clarificatory in nature, was in effect from the date of
implementation of Regulation 6.8 of the 2002 Regulations, i.e., from 14.12.2009.
20. In Dy. CIT 8(2) Mumbai v PHL Pharma P. Ltd.20 the ITAT reiterated Max Hospital’s
(supra) decision to conclude that the 2002 Regulations were inapplicable to
pharmaceutical companies, and that in absence of requisite jurisdiction, it could not
be said that the pharmaceutical companies had violated any law or regulation.
Further, it held that there was no enabling provision to allow the CBDT to bring
pharmaceutical companies within the fold of the 2002 Regulations, and even if such
an act were to be permitted, it could be only be done so prospectively:
20 ITA No. 4605/Mum/2014, dated 12.01.2017.
“Adverting to the contention of the Ld. CIT DR that CBDT is well empowered to issue such clarification,
it is seen that the CBDT Circular dated 01.08.2012 (supra) in its clarification has enlarged the scope and
applicability of 'Indian Medical Council Regulation 2002' by making it applicable to the pharmaceutical
companies or allied health care sector industries. Such an enlargement of scope of MCI regulation to
the pharmaceutical companies by the CBDT is without any enabling provisions either under the
provisions of Income Tax Law or by any provisions under the Indian Medical Council Regulations. The
CBDT cannot provide casus omissus to a statute or notification or any regulation which has not been
expressly provided therein. The CBDT can tone down the rigours of law and ensure a fair enforcement
of the provisions by issuing circulars and by clarifying the statutory provisions. CBDT circulars act like
'contemporanea expositio' in interpreting the statutory provisions and to ascertain the true meaning
enunciated at the time when statute was enacted. However the CBDT in its power cannot create a new
impairment adverse to an assessee or to a class of assessee without any sanction of law. The circular
issued by the CBDT must confirm to tax laws and for purpose of giving administrative relief or for
clarifying the provisions of law and cannot impose a burden on the assessee, leave alone creating a
new burden by enlarging the scope of a different regulation issued under a different act so as to impose
any kind of hardship or liability to the assessee. In any case, it is trite law that the CBDT circular which
creates a burden or liability or imposes a new kind of imparity, same cannot be reckoned retrospectively.
The beneficial circular may apply retrospectively but a circular imposing a burden has to be applied
prospectively only. Here in this case the CBDT has enlarged the scope of 'Indian Medical Council
Regulation, 2002' and made it applicable for the pharmaceutical companies. Therefore, such a CBDT
circular cannot be reckoned to have retrospective effect. The same CBDT circular had come up for
consideration before the co-ordinate Bench of the ITAT, Mumbai Bench in the case of Syncom
Formulations (I) Ltd. (in ITA Nos. 6429 & 6428/Mum/2012 for A.Ys. 2010-11 and 2011-12, vide order
dated 23.12.2015), wherein Tribunal held that CBDT circular would not be not be applicable in the A.Ys.
2010-11 and 2011-12 as it was introduced w.e.f. 1.8.2012.”
21. PHL Pharma (supra) further discussed the High Court decisions of Kap Scan and
Confederation (supra), holding the even though they were decided against the
assessee, they did not lay down a blanket ban on pharmaceutical companies claiming
tax benefit under Section 37(1), and made it subject to the satisfaction of the
Assessing Officer on a case-to-case basis. Subsequent decisions by ITATs across
states have placed heavy reliance on PHL Pharma to grant relief to the assessee
pharmaceutical companies.
22. This Court is of the opinion that such a narrow interpretation of Explanation 1 to
Section 37(1) defeats the purpose for which it was inserted, i.e., to disallow an
assessee from claiming a tax benefit for its participation in an illegal activity. Though
the memorandum to the Finance Bill, 1998 elucidated the ambit of Explanation 1 to
include “protection money, extortion, hafta, bribes, etc.”, yet, ipso facto, by no means
is the embargo envisaged restricted to those examples. It is but logical that when
acceptance of freebies is punishable by the MCI (the range of penalties and sanction
extending to ban imposed on the medical practitioner), pharmaceutical companies
cannot be granted the tax benefit for providing such freebies, and thereby (actively
and with full knowledge) enabling the commission of the act which attracts such
23. The illogicality and completely misconceived nature of such an interpretation was
dealt with in a similar interpretation of the provisions of PC Act, by a Constitution
Bench of this Court in P.V. Narasimha Rao v. State (CBI/SPE)21. Prior to the 2018
amendment22, the PC Act only punished the bribe-taker who was a public servant,
and not the bribe-giver. Reliance was placed on this to acquit the appellant bribe-
22 Subs. Section 8, Act   16 of 2018, w.e.f. 26.07.2018.
“145. Mr Rao submitted that since, by reason of the provisions of Article 105(2), the alleged bribe-takers
had committed no offence, the alleged bribe-givers had also committed no offence. Article 105(2) does
not provide that what is otherwise an offence is not an offence when it is committed by a Member of
Parliament and has a connection with his speech or vote therein. What is provided thereby is that a
Member of Parliament shall not be answerable in a court of law for something that has a nexus to his
speech or vote in Parliament. If a Member of Parliament has, by his speech or vote in Parliament,
committed an offence, he enjoys, by reason of Article 105(2), immunity from prosecution therefor. Those
who have conspired with the Member of Parliament in the commission of that offence have no such
immunity. They can, therefore, be prosecuted for it.
147. Mr Rao submitted that the alleged bribe-givers had breached Parliament's privilege and been guilty
of its contempt and it should be left to Parliament to deal with them. By the same sets of acts the alleged
bribe-takers and the alleged bribe-givers committed offences under the criminal law and breaches of
Parliament's privileges and its contempt. From prosecution for the former, the alleged bribe-takers, Ajit
Singh excluded, enjoy immunity. The alleged bribe-givers do not. The criminal prosecution against the
alleged bribe-givers must, therefore, go ahead. For breach of Parliament's privileges and its contempt,
Parliament may proceed against the alleged bribe-takers and the alleged bribe-givers.
150. To repeat what we have said earlier, Mr Rao is right, subject to two caveats, in saying that
Parliament has the power not only to punish its Members for an offence committed by them but also to
punish others who had conspired with them to have the offence committed : first, the actions that
constitute the offence must also constitute a breach of Parliament's privilege or its contempt; secondly,
the action that Parliament will take and the punishment it will impose is for the breach of privilege or
contempt. There is no reason to doubt that the Lok Sabha can take action for breach of privilege or
contempt against the alleged bribe-givers and against the alleged bribe-takers, whether or not they were
Members of Parliament, but that is not to say that the courts cannot take cognizance of the offence of
the alleged bribe-givers under the criminal law.
24. Even if Apex’s contention were to be accepted - that it did not indulge in any illegal
activity by committing an offence, as there was no corresponding penal provision in
the 2002 Regulations applicable to it - there is no doubt that its actions fell within the
purview of “prohibited by law” in Explanation 1 to Section 37(1).
25. Furthermore, if the statutory limitations imposed by the 2002 Regulations are kept
in mind, Explanation (1) to Section 37(1) of the IT Act and the insertion of Section 20A
of the Medical Council Act, 195623 (which serves as parent provision for the
regulations), what is discernible is that the statutory regime requiring that a thing be
done in a certain manner, also implies (even in the absence of any express terms),
that the other forms of doing it are impermissible.
23 Inserted vide Medical Council (Amendment) Act, 1964.
26. In this regard the decision of this Court in Jamal Uddin Ahmad v. Abu Saleh
Najmuddin & Anr24 is of some relevance. There, the scope of Section 81 of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 was examined in the light of powers of the
High Court to administer election petitions by invoking the rule of implied prohibition.
“Dealing with "Statutes conferring power; implied conditions, judicial review", Justice G.P. Singh states
in the Principles of Statutory Interpretation (Eight Edition 2001, at pp. 333, 334) that a power conferred
by a statute often contains express conditions for its exercise and in the absence of or in addition to the
express conditions there are also implied conditions for exercise of the power. An affirmative statute
introductive of a new law directing a thing to be done in a certain way mandates, even if there be no
negative words, that the thing shall not be done in any other way. This rule of implied prohibition is
subserved to the basic principle that the Court must, as far as possible, attach a construction which
effectuates the legislative intent and purpose. Further, the rule of implied prohibition does not negative
the principle that an express grant of statutory power carries with it by necessary implication the authority
to use all reasonable means to make such grant effective. To illustrate, an Act of Parliament conferring
jurisdiction over an offence implies a power in that jurisdiction to make out a warrant and secure
production of the person charged with the offence; power conferred on Magistrate to grant maintenance
under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 to prevent vagrancy implies a power to allow
interim maintenance; power conferred on a local authority to issue licences for holding 'hats' or fairs
implies incidental power to fix days therefore; power conferred to compel cane growers to supply cane
to sugar factories implies an incidental power to ensure payment of price. In short, conferment of a power
implies authority to do everything which could be fairly and reasonably regarded as incidental or
consequential to the power conferred.
Herbert Broom states in the preface to his celebrated work on Legal Maxims --"In the Legal Science,
perhaps more frequently than in any other, reference must be made to first principles." The fundamentals
or the first principles of law often articulated as the maxims are manifestly founded in reason, public
convenience and necessity. Modern trend of introducing subtleties and distinctions, both in legal
reasoning and in the application of legal principles, formerly unknown, have rendered an accurate
acquaintance with the first principles more necessary rather than diminishing the values of simple
fundamental rules. The fundamental rules are the basis of the law; may be either directly applied, or
qualified or limited, according to the exigencies of the particular case and the novelty of the
circumstances which present themselves. In Dhannalal vs. Kalawatibai and Ors. 25 this court has held
"When the statute does not provide the path and the precedents abstain to lead, then sound logic,
rational reasoning, common sense and urge for public good play as guides of those who decide".”
27. It is also a settled principle of law that no court will lend its aid to a party that roots
its cause of action in an immoral or illegal act (ex dolo malo non oritur action) meaning
that none should be allowed to profit from any wrongdoing coupled with the fact that
statutory regimes should be coherent and not self-defeating. Doctors and pharmacists
being complementary and supplementary to each other in the medical profession, a
comprehensive view must be adopted to regulate their conduct in view of the
contemporary statutory regimes and regulations. Therefore, denial of the tax benefit
cannot be construed as penalizing the assessee pharmaceutical company. Only its
participation in what is plainly an action prohibited by law, precludes the assessee
from claiming it as a deductible expenditure.
28. This Court also notices that medical practitioners have a quasi-fiduciary
relationship with their patients. A doctor’s prescription is considered the final word on
the medication to be availed by the patient, even if the cost of such medication is
unaffordable or barely within the economic reach of the patient – such is the level of
trust reposed in doctors. Therefore, it is a matter of great public importance and
concern, when it is demonstrated that a doctor’s prescription can be manipulated, and
driven by the motive to avail the freebies offered to them by pharmaceutical
companies, ranging from gifts such as gold coins, fridges and LCD TVs to funding
international trips for vacations or to attend medical conferences. These freebies are
technically not ‘free’ – the cost of supplying such freebies is usually factored into the
drug, driving prices up, thus creating a perpetual publicly injurious cycle. The threat
of prescribing medication that is significantly marked up, over effective generic
counterparts in lieu of such a quid pro quo exchange was taken cognizance of by the
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Health and Family Welfare26 which made the
26 45th Report    on Issues Relating to Availability of Generic, Generic-Branded and Branded Medicines, their Formulation
and Therapeutic Efficacy and Effectiveness), dated 04.08.2010.
“The Committee also notes that despite there being a code of ethics in the Indian Medical Council Rules
introduced in December 2009 forbidding doctors from accepting any gift, hospitality, trips to foreign and
domestic destinations etc from healthcare industry, there is no let-up in this evil practice and the pharma
companies continue to sponsor foreign trips of many doctors and shower with high value gifts like air
conditioners, cars, music systems, gold chains etc. to obliging prescribers who then prescribe costlier
drugs as quid pro quo. Ultimately all these expenses get added up to the cost of drugs. The Committee’s
attention was drawn to a news item in Times of India dated July 1, 2010 by Reema Nagarajan giving
specific instances of violations of MCI code. The Committee calls upon the Government to take strict
and speedy action on such violations. Since MCI has no jurisdiction over drug companies, the
Government should take parallel action through DCGI and the Income Tax Department to penalize those
companies that violate MCI rules by cancelling drug manufacturing licences and/or disallowing expenses
on unethical activities.”
Interestingly, a similar conclusion was arrived at by the US Department of Health and
Human Services Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, in a
report called Savings Available Under Full Generic Substitution of Multiple Source
Brand Drugs in Medicare Part D (dated 23.07.2018).27 The report noticed inter alia,
that an empirical study conducted in respect of 20 odd (out of the 600 drugs which
were the subject matter of the research paper) brand medications dispensed for a
particular period, were capable of generic substitution and would have resulted in
27 Extracted from  https://aspe.hhs.gov/reports/data-point-savings-available-under-full-generic-substitution-multiple-source-
brand-drugs-medicare accessed at 16:37 on 13.02.2022. The report states, inter alia, that:
“More 600 brand name drugs were dispensed and paid for by Part D plans in 2016, despite the presence of generic
competition. Plans and beneficiaries paid $8.7 billion for multiple source brands and $34.0 billion for generics. Full
substitution of multiple source brands would have resulted in total spending on generic drugs of $39.9 billion, saving the
Part D program and its beneficiaries $2.8 billion in 2016. These estimates do not account for manufacturer rebates paid
to Part D plans or pharmacy benefit managers (PBMs) or statutory discounts paid by manufacturers for brand name
drugs, and thus may overstate savings to the program after accounting for the effects that rebates often have on
Of this $2.8 billion, $2.25 billion is for brand name drugs that have faced generic competition for at least a full year (e.g.
the first generic was available in 2015 or earlier). A further $584 million in savings is estimated for substituting generics
that were first launched in 2016 and therefore on the market for less than a full year. These 12 Single source includes
payments for brand drugs prior to generic entry, e.g. $1.13 billion of Crestor spending in the example used in the
Methods section. savings are likely to grow as additional generic competitors enter the market. Beneficiaries spent $1.1
billion out-of-pocket in cost-sharing for brand drugs with comparable generics, averaging twice as much out-of-pocket
than for comparable generics. In 2016, multiple source brand drug cost-sharing averaged $39.15, while generic cost-
sharing for substitutable products was $17.04. Beneficiaries could have saved over $600 million in out of pocket
payments had they been dispensed generic equivalent drugs. A significant amount of this spending occurred among
the top 20 multiple source brands. Substituting these drugs for generic competitors at their median prices would have
saved the program and beneficiaries $1.8 billion. See Appendix Table A for these drugs, and figure 2 below for an
example. In terms of beneficiary cost-sharing, we find similar results as for the overall calculation. Average per
beneficiary spending is significantly higher for these brands than for the substitutable generics. (See Appendix Table A,
also.) Brand drug cost-sharing averaged $30.69, compared to $22.41 for their generic equivalents. For 17 of the top 20
drugs, the ratio of brand to comparable generic out-of-pocket spending ranges from 117% (Namenda) to 1,476%
(Lamictal) indicating significant per-drug savings are available for beneficiaries. In three cases (Abilify, Lovenox, and
Tricor), beneficiary out-of-pocket costs are marginally higher for the generic than the brand drug. We believe this is due
to the interaction of total drug costs and plan coverage in the coverage gap for generics (42% in 2016), meaning patients
paid 58% coinsurance for generics that year. This compares to 25% plan coverage and a 50% statutory manufacturer
discount for brand drugs in 2016.”
“Beneficiaries could have saved over $600 million in out of pocket payments had they been dispensed
generic equivalent drugs. A significant amount of this spending occurred among the top 20 multiple
source brands. Substituting these drugs for generic competitors at their median prices would have saved
the program and beneficiaries $1.8 billion.”
Likewise, in a previous study by ProPublica (an independent, non-profit newsroom
that does investigative journalism) titled “Dollars for Doctors: Now There’s Proof: Docs
who Get Company Cash Tend to Prescribe More Brand-Name Meds” (dated
28        https://www.propublica.org/article/doctors-who-take-company-cash-tend-to-prescribe-more-brand-name-drugs
“…doctors who receive payments from the medical industry do indeed tend to prescribe drugs differently
than their colleagues who don’t. And the more money they receive, on average, the more brand-name
medications they prescribe.”
Data is now available publicly, in the United States, by reason of the Physician
Payment Sunshine Act, 2010 i.e., Section 6002 of the Affordable Care Act, 2010. This
law compels manufacturers of drugs, devices, biologics, and medical supplies
covered by Medicare, Medicaid, or the Children's Health Insurance Program to report
to the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services on three broad categories of
payments or "transfers of value". These categories cover general payments or
transfers of value such as meals, travel reimbursement, and consulting fees. These
include expenses borne by manufacturers, such as speaker fees, travel, gifts,
honoraria, entertainment, charitable contribution, education, grants and research
grants, etc.
29. The impugned judgment, along with the judgments of Punjab & Haryana High
Court (Kap Scan) and Himachal Pradesh High Court (Confederation) (supra) have
correctly addressed the important public policy issue on the subject of allowance of
benefit for supply of freebies. The impugned judgment’s reasoning is quoted as
“A perusal of the decision of Co-ordinate Bench of this Tribunal in the assessee's own case as also the
decision of the Hon'ble Himachal Pradesh High Court clearly shows that the basic intention of the
decision was that the receiving of the gifts/freebies by Professionals is against public policy as also
against the law in so far as the amendment by the Medical Council Act, 1956 to the Indian Medical
Council (Professional Conduct, Etiquette and Ethics) Regulations, 2002, once receiving of such gifts
have been held to be unethical obviously the corollary to this would also be unethical, being giving of
such gifts or doing such acts to induce such Doctors and Medical Professionals to violate the Medical
30. Thus, one arm of the law cannot be utilised to defeat the other arm of law – doing
so would be opposed to public policy and bring the law into ridicule.29 In Maddi
Venkataraman & Co. (P) Ltd. v. CIT30, a fine imposed on the assessee under the
Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1947 was sought to be deducted as a business
29 Biharilal   Jaiswal v. CIT, (1996) 1 SCC 443.
31 I.T.R.   No. 27 of 1999, Allahabad HC, dated 21.02.2008.
“Moreover, it will be against public policy to allow the benefit of deduction under one statute, of any
expenditure incurred in violation of the provisions of another statute or any penalty imposed under
another statute. In the instant case, if the deductions claimed are allowed, the penal provisions of FERA
will become meaningless”.
31. It is crucial to note that the agreement between the pharmaceutical companies
and the medical practitioners in gifting freebies for boosting sales of prescription drugs
is also violative of Section 23 of the Contract Act, 1872 (as also noted by the Punjab
and Haryana High Court in Kap Scan (supra)). The provision is as follows:
“23. What considerations and objects are lawful, and what not.—The consideration or object of an
is of such a nature that, if permitted, it would defeat the provisions of any law; or
involves or implies injury to the person or property of another; or the Court regards it as immoral, or
opposed to public policy.
In each of these cases, the consideration or object of an agreement is said to be unlawful. Every
agreement of which the object or consideration is unlawful, is void.
32. Before us, Apex has continually stressed on the need to divorce interpretation of
tax provisions from a perceived immorality / violation of public policy. Apex repeatedly
relied on T.A. Quereshi (supra), M/s K.M. Jain (supra) and CIT v. Pt. Vishwanath
Sharma31. We find that none of these judgments find much favour with the case of the
appellant. T.A. Quereshi addressed a business ‘loss’, not a business ‘expenditure’ as
envisioned under Section 37(1). In M/s K.M. Jain, the ransom money paid to
kidnappers of the employee of the assessee company was allowed deduction
primarily based on the fact that the assessee was helpless and coerced to pay the
amount in order to save its employee’s life. Thus, the assessee was not a wilful
participant in commission of an offence or activity prohibited by law. The same is not
applicable to the present facts. Pharmaceutical companies have misused a legislative
gap to actively perpetuate the commission of an offence. In Pt. Vishwanath Sharma,
a Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court was faced with the question of whether
payment of commission to government doctors could be exempted under Section
37(1). At the time, there was no statutory provision prohibiting doctors engaged in
private practice from accepting such commission. Hence, the High Court held that
while the Assessing Officer had correctly allowed such deduction for private doctors,
“In the present case, payment of commission to Government Doctors cannot be placed on the same
pedestal. A distinction has already been made by the authorities while allowing deduction to the
assessee in respect to commission which the assessee has paid to private doctors since in their case,
payment of commission cannot be said to be an offence under any statute but in respect to Government
doctors such payment could not have been allowed as it is an offence under the Statutes as stated
“We are, therefore, clearly of the opinion that payment as commission to Government doctors for
obtaining a favour therefrom by prescribing medicines in which the assessee was dealing cannot be said
to be a “business expenditure” and no deduction can be allowed thereof under the Act.”
The 2002 Regulations, applicable to all medical practitioners (including doctors in
private practice), was introduced w.e.f. 14.12.2009.
33. Thus, pharmaceutical companies’ gifting freebies to doctors, etc. is clearly
“prohibited by law”, and not allowed to be claimed as a deduction under Section 37(1).
Doing so would wholly undermine public policy. The well-established principle of
interpretation of taxing statutes – that they need to be interpreted strictly – cannot
sustain when it results in an absurdity contrary to the intentions of the Parliament. A
33 Tomne     v. Eispzer, 245 U.S. 418 (1918).
“While a literary construction may be the general rule in construing taxing enactments, it does not mean
that it should be adopted even if it leads to a discriminatory or incongruous result. Interpretation of
statutes cannot be a mechanical exercise. Object of all the rules of interpretation is to give effect to the
object of the enactment having regard to the language used”.
“A word is not a crystal, transparent and unchanged; it is the skin of a living thought and may vary greatly
in colour and content according to the circumstances and the time in which it is used." 33
Holmes thus summed up the elusive nature of words, which lies at the heart of the
many issues concerning interpretation of statutes.
34. Interpretation of law has two essential purposes: one is to clarify to the people
governed by it, the meaning of the letter of the law; the other is to shed light and give
shape to the intent of the law maker. And, in this process the courts' responsibility lies
in discerning the social purpose which the specific provision subserves. Thus, the cold
letter of the law is not an abstract exercise in semantics which practitioners are wont
to indulge in. So viewed the law has birthed various ideas such as implied conditions,
unspelt but entirely logical and reasonable obligations, implied limitations etc. The
process of continuing evolution, refinement and assimilation of these concepts into
binding norms (within the body of law as is understood and enforced) injects vitality
and dynamism to statutory provisions. Without this dynamism and contextualisation,
laws become irrelevant and stale.
35. In Bihari Lal Jaiswal & Ors. v. Commissioner of Income Tax & Ors34, the issue of
what is “prohibited by law” was considered by this Court, in the context of
interpretation of a condition in a statutory license (for vending liquor) which prohibited
transfer of the license by way of sub-letting or entering into a partnership agreement.
While dealing with the recognition of such a partnership under the IT Act, this Court
held that allowing the same would attract the very mischief sought to be avoided:
35 (1824)    2 B & C 635, quoted and applied in Jagir Singh v. Ranbir Singh & Ors. 1979 (2) SCR 282.
“This object will be defeated if the licencee is permitted to bring in strangers into the business, which
would mean that instead of the licencee carrying on the business, it would be carried on by others - a
situation not conducive to effective implementation of the excise law and consequently deleterious to
public interest. It is for this very reason that transfer or sub-letting of licence is uniformly prohibited by
several State Excise enactments. It, therefore, follows that any agreement whereunder the licence is
transferred, sub-let or a partnership is entered into with respect to the privilege/business under the said
licence, contrary to the prohibition contained in the relevant excise enactment, is an agreement
prohibited by law. The object of such an agreement must be held to be of such a nature that if permitted
it would defeat the provisions of the excise law within the meaning of Section 23 of the Contract Act.
Such an agreement is declared by Section 23 to be unlawful and void. The question is whether such an
unlawful or void partnership can be treated as a genuine partnership within the meaning of Section
185(1) and whether registration can be granted to such a partnership under the provisions of the Income
Tax Act and the Rules made thereunder. We think not. When the law prohibits the entering into a
particular partnership agreement, there can be in law no partnership agreement of that nature. The
question of such an agreement being genuine cannot, therefore, arise.
It is also a known principle that what cannot be done directly, cannot be achieved
"Well-known principle of law that the provisions of an Act of Parliament shall not be evaded by shift or
"To carry out effectually the object of a Statute, it must be construed as to defeat all attempts to do, or
avoid doing, in an indirect or circuitous manner that which it has prohibited or enjoined"
This Court, in an appeal arising from an action for specific performance, in G.T. Girish
v. Y. Subba Raju (D) by L. Rs & Ors36, held that giving the relief would imply doing
something prohibited by law (bar against conveyance, for a specific period) – it had
“Taking the agreement as it is, it necessarily would be in the teeth of the obligation in law of the first
Respondent to put up the construction. The agreement to sell involved clearly terms which are impliedly
prohibited by law in that the first Defendant was thereunder to deliver title to the site and prevented from
acting upon the clear obligation under law. This is a clear case at any rate wherein enforcing the
agreement unambiguously results in defeating the dictate of the law. The 'sublime' object of the law, the
very soul of it stood sacrificed at the altar of the bargain which appears to be a real estate transaction.
It would, in other words, in allowing the agreement to fructify, even at the end of ten-year period of non-
alienation, be a case of an agreement, which completely defeats the law for the reasons already
78. Going by the recital in the agreement entered into between the Plaintiff and the first Defendant,
possession is handed over by the first Defendant to the Plaintiff. The original Possession Certificate is
also said to be handed over to the Plaintiff. The agreement, even according to the Plaintiff, contemplated
that within three months of conveyance of the site in favour of the first Defendant, the first Defendant
was to convey her rights in the site to the Plaintiff. It is quite clear that the parties contemplated a state
of affairs which is completely inconsistent with and in clear collision with the mandate of the law. On its
term, it stands out as an affront to the mandate of the law.
79. The illegality goes to the root of the matter. It is quite clear that the Plaintiff must rely upon the illegal
transaction and indeed relied upon the same in filing the suit for specific performance. The illegality is
not trivial or venial. The illegality cannot be skirted nor got around. The Plaintiff is confronted with it and
he must face its consequences. The matter is clear. We do not require to rely upon any parliamentary
debate or search for the purpose beyond the plain meaning of the law. The object of the law is set out
in unambiguous term. If every allottee chosen after a process of selection under the Rules with reference
to certain objective criteria were to enter into bargains of this nature, it will undoubtedly make the law a
hanging (sic laughing) stock.”
36. In the present case too, the incentives (or “freebies”) given by Apex, to the doctors,
had a direct result of exposing the recipients to the odium of sanctions, leading to a
ban on their practice of medicine. Those sanctions are mandated by law, as they are
embodied in the code of conduct and ethics, which are normative, and have legally
binding effect. The conceded participation of the assessee- i.e., the provider or donor-
was plainly prohibited, as far as their receipt by the medical practitioners was
concerned. That medical practitioners were forbidden from accepting such gifts, or
“freebies” was no less a prohibition on the part of their giver, or donor, i.e., Apex.
37. In view of the foregoing discussion, the impugned judgment cannot be faulted
with. The appeal is dismissed without order on costs. Pending application(s), if any,
also stand disposed of.