1.     In the present case, admission is being sought to the respondent
No.2 School on the ground that the petitioner has been successful in
draw of lots for admission to the said school under the Disadvantaged
Digitally Signed By:PURAN W.P.(C) 16191/2022                                               Page 1 of 4
Group (DG) category. Attention of this Court has been drawn to
school allotment letter, wherein, the petitioner has been allotted the
respondent No.2 School by the Education Department, Government of
NCT of Delhi (GNCTD). Further, attention of this Court has also been
drawn to the Scheduled Caste Certificate issued in favour of the father
of the petitioner.
2.     Ld. Counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No.2 School
submits that Scheduled Caste Certificate shows the residential address
of the petitioner, which is approximately 8 to 10 Kms away from the
school in question. Ld. Counsel for school also raises a plea that
school in question did not have any recognition for granting admission
to Nursery and Pre-Primary/KG classes. Thus, she submits that in
view thereof admission could not be granted.
3.     Mr. Santosh Kumar Tripathi, ld. Standing Counsel, GNCTD
appearing on behalf of the Department of Education, (DOE) submits
that once a school has been allotted in the draw of lots, the school in
question is bound to give admission.
4.     I have heard ld. Counsels for the parties.
5.     Considering the fact that Scheduled Caste Certificate has been
issued in favour of the father of the petitioner and that petitioner is
successful in draw of lots for admission to the respondent No.2
school, there is no justification for not granting admission to the
petitioner under the DG category.
6.     The objection of the respondent No.2 school with respect to the
fact that Scheduled Caste certificate gives the address of a different
place, is not justified. A Scheduled Caste certificate is not a proof of
Digitally Signed By:PURAN W.P.(C) 16191/2022                                              Page 2 of 4
residence. Even otherwise, once a school has been allotted by the
DOE and requisite exercise has been carried out on behalf of the
DOE, GNCTD, this Court will not sit as a fact finding body with
respect to any objections as may be raised by the school, unless some
glaring and prima facie discrepancy is pointed out.
7.     Mr. Santosh Kumar Tripathi, ld. Standing Counsel GNCTD
further submits that even though there may not be any permission
from the DOE for admission in the Nursery and Pre-Primary/KG
classes, however, once a school has been allotted by the DOE itself, it
was the duty of the school to grant admission.
8.     Denial of admission to any child under DG/EWS category after
allotment of school by DOE pursuant to the due procedure followed
by it, would be in violation of the object as well as express provisions
of The Right of Children To Free and Compulsory Education Act,
2009 (RTE Act, 2009), which provides for free and compulsory
education to every child between the ages of 6 to 14 years. Pertinently,
under Section 3 of the RTE Act, 2009, Right of education of a child
between the ages of 6 to 14 years is expressly and unconditionally
recognised. It deserves consideration that in addition, it is further
provided that such right shall be ensured to a child between the said
age groups uptill the completion of his/her elementary education.
9.     It is no longer res-integra in as much as the Courts have held
time and again that the 25% reservation requirement for filling up
seats in unaided private schools, in respect of children belonging to
economically weaker sections and the disadvantaged groups, has to be
mandatorily complied with.
Digitally Signed By:PURAN W.P.(C) 16191/2022                                              Page 3 of 4
10.    Section 12 of the RTE Act, 2009 expressly provides for
reservation of atleast 25% for the weaker sections and the
disadvantaged groups, as defined under the said Act. Thus, once, it is
established that the child belongs to economically weaker section of
the society or disadvantaged group and after satisfaction on this
account, school has been allotted by DOE as per its due procedure,
such child is entitled to get admission in the allotted school under the
said category.
11.    In the present case, the petitioner child has been duly allotted
the respondent school by the DOE under the DG category after
following its due procedure. Thus, the petitioner is entitled to be
granted admission in the school.
12.    In view of the aforesaid submissions, the present petition is
allowed. However, considering the fact that the current academic
session 2022-2023 is already at its fag end, the petitioner is directed to
be granted admission in the Nursery class for the academic session
2023-2024. Ld. Standing Counsel appearing on behalf of Department
of Education submits that Department of Education has no objection
if admission is granted to the petitioner in Nursery Class for the
academic session 2023-2024.
13.    Accordingly, the present petition is disposed of with the
aforesaid directions along with pending applications.
Digitally Signed By:PURAN W.P.(C) 16191/2022                                                Page 4 of 4