LIST ANNOUNCED BY THE R-6 i.e. THE ADMINISTRATOR IN SO FAR
The   1st  petitioner  common    in  both   the petitions  viz.,
‘Bengaluru Urban Zilla Amateur Kabaddi Association’ along with
others (hereinafter referred as ‘the petitioner’) is before this Court
calling in question order dated 23-08-2021 and the basis of the said
order being the Inquiry Report dated 19-07-2021.
2. Heard Sri Jayakumar S.Patil, learned senior counsel
appearing for petitioners, Smt. Rashmi Patel, learned High Court
Government       Pleader   appearing    for  respondent    No.1   and
Sri N.Dinesh Rao, learned counsel appearing for respondent No.3.
3. Shorn of unnecessary details, the facts germane for
consideration of the lis, are as follows:
The petitioner is a registered Association under the Karnataka
Societies Registration Act, 1960 (‘the Act’ for short) represented by
its President and Committee Members. The petitioner/Association
claims to have an affiliation of 60 clubs and they are said to be
members of the petitioner/Association. It is averred that there are
about 24 Kabaddi Associations throughout the State and all these
Kabaddi Associations are affiliated and are members of the
Karnataka Rajya Amateur Kabaddi Association (Regd.) which is a
State body. In terms of byelaws of the State Association, the term
of the governing body is for a period of 4 years. The petitioner was
registered on 28-02-2020. On 16-06-2020 another Association
comes up which is respondent No.3 with the same name as that of
the petitioner, with a twist. The petitioner is Bengaluru Urban Zilla
Amateur Kabaddi Association which is registered on 28-02-2020
and the 3rd respondent is Bangalore Urban District Amateur Kabaddi
Association which is registered on 16-06-2020. After coming into
existence,   the   members     of  the   3rd   respondent/Association
registered   a  complaint   against  the   petitioner/Association  on
19.10.2020. The allegation against the petitioner/Association was
that one Shanmugam who was the General Secretary had forged
signatures of Y.M.Balaji Venkatesh and D.Suresh Gowda and had
registered the Association then. Pursuant to the registration of the
said complaint, an Inquiry Officer was appointed.        The Inquiry
Officer holds an inquiry with regard to the allegations made against
the petitioner/Association. The Inquiry Officer holds the allegations
against the petitioner/Association to have been proved and based
upon the said finding of the Inquiry Officer the District Registrar of
Societies under the Act passes an order cancelling registration of
the petitioner/Association for violation of Section 27(2) of the Act.
It is this order and the report of the Inquiry Officer that are called
in question in the first petition.
4. In the companion petition, the petitioner/Association and
another    challenge   the    list announced   by   respondent   No.6/
Administrator insofar as respondent No.3 who is shown at Sl.No.4
in the voters list and the name of the petitioner being kept in the
additional ballot at Sl.No.25 for the conduct of elections. Therefore,
the facts narrated hereinabove would become applicable to the
companion petition as well, as the very registration of the Society
goes to the root of the matter.
5. The    learned senior counsel      Sri  Jayakumar   S.  Patil
appearing for the petitioners would contend with vehemence that
invocation of Section 27 of the Act itself is erroneous as there is no
offence committed by the petitioner/Association after registration of
the Association. Section 27 can be invoked only in the aftermath of
registration of the Association and not earlier. He would also place
reliance on Section 7 of the Act to contend that the 3rd
respondent/Association could not have been registered at all.      On
the conduct of inquiry, he would submit that the proceedings are
held in blatant violation of the principles of natural justice and in
the hottest haste and the resultant order of the District Registrar
based upon such an inquiry report is void ab initio. He would submit
that the very registration of the 3rd respondent/Association should
be quashed along with the order of cancellation of registration of
the petitioner/Association.
6. On the other hand, the learned High Court Government
Pleader would seek to defend the action of the District Registrar and
submits that every opportunity was given to the petitioner in the
inquiry and the allegation against the petitioner was that the
General Secretary Mr. Shanmugam of the petitioner/Association
had forged the signatures of the members of the 3rd respondent
Association and a criminal case is also registered against the
General    Secretary  of  the  petitioner/Association  alleging such
forgery.   Therefore, prima facie, it was found that the petitioner/
Association had committed acts which entailed cancellation of
registration under Section 27 of the Act.
7. The learned counsel for the 3rd respondent Sri N. Dinesh
Rao would contend that criminal proceedings are initiated against
Sri Shanmugam, General Secretary of the petitioner/Association on
the ground that he had forged the signatures of the members of the
3rd respondent/Association and the matter is pending investigation.
The complaint is taken to its logical end by the District Registrar
and no fault can be found with it. The Association was created by
the petitioner on certain forged documents. He would submit that
the petitions be dismissed.
8. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions
made by the respective learned counsel and perused the material
on record.
9. The afore-narrated facts which lay on a narrow compass do
not require reiteration. The factum of election and the genesis of
the problem with regard to the election are all dealt with in Writ
Petition No.18300 of 2021 which is tagged to these petitions. The
issue    in the   case   at   hand    is whether   registration  of the
petitioner/Association could be cancelled and its name be kept as
an additional name in the voters list on the basis of cancellation of
registration and in spite of an interim order granted by this Court.
The    dates   are   not   in   dispute.   It  is on   28-02-2020   the
petitioner/Association    is   registered.    On  16-06-2020    the  3rd
respondent/Association is registered. The name of the petitioner is
‘Bengaluru Urban Zilla Amateur Kabaddi Association ®’ and the
name of the 3rd respondent/Association is ‘Bengaluru Urban
District Amateur Kabaddi Association ®’. The difference between
the two associations is the word “Zilla” and “District”. Both mean
one and the same in Kannada and English versions. Except this
change, there is no other change in the names of the Associations.
The issue now is whether the 3rd respondent/ Association could
have been registered at all. Section 7 of the Act reads as follows:
“7. Societies not to be registered with undesirable
names. - No society shall be registered by a name which, in
the opinion of the Registrar, is undesirable. A name which
is identical with, or too nearly resembles, the name by
which a society in existence has been previously
registered, may be deemed to be undesirable by the
Registrar under this section.”
Section 7 mandates that Societies should not be registered with
undesirable names.       The mandate of the provision is that Society
shall not be registered by name which in the opinion of the
Registrar is undesirable for the reason that a name which is
identical with or too nearly reassembles the name by which the
Society first in existence has been previously registered would be
deemed to be undesirable.           If the names of the petitioner/
Association and the 3rd respondent/Association are juxtaposed and
considered on the mandate of the statute, what would unmistakably
emerge is, the names are identical, they are not too nearly
resembling each other but they are the same except usage of
version of the language in Kannada and English. Such a Society of
the 3rd respondent could not have been registered by the District
Registrar after registration of the petitioner/Association as the
petitioner/Association is registered long before the registration of
the 3rd respondent/Association. This is the genesis of the problem
that is generated by the District Registrar.
10. It is also to be noticed that on the very day of registration
of the 3rd respondent/Association, the Registrar of Societies passes
an order that henceforth no new Association will be registered even
before the ink on the registration of the 3rd respondent/Association
could dry. The reason behind this direction that no new Society
would be registered is ostensibly for the conduct of elections. Long
after the aforesaid events, a complaint comes to be registered
against the petitioner/Association which is before the conduct of
elections.   The said complaint was concerning alleged forgery by
the General Secretary of the petitioner/Association while forming
the Association or at the time of registration of the Association.
Therefore, the allegations would fall within the realm of a pre-
registration acts. The inquiry was conducted in terms of Section 25
of the Act and the Inquiry Officer holds the petitioner/Association
guilty. The District Registrar cancelled the registration of the
petitioner/Association invoking Section 27 of the Act. Therefore, it
becomes germane to notice Section 27 of the Act. Section 27 deals
with cancellation of registration and dissolution of certain societies
and reads as follows:
“27. Cancellation of registration and dissolution of
certain societies. - (1) If it appears to the Registrar that
any society registered or deemed to be registered under
this Act, is carrying on any unlawful activity or allows
unlawful activity to be carried on within any premises
under the control of the society, the Registrar may hold
an enquiry or authorise any officer to hold an enquiry
into the activities of such society and in respect of every
such enquiry, the Registrar or the authorised
officer shall have the same powers as are specified in
sub-section (2) of section 25. The authorised officer
shall, on completion of the enquiry, submit a report to
the Registrar.
(2) If on an enquiry under sub-section (1), the Registrar
is satisfied that any such society has been carrying on any
unlawful activity or has allowed any unlawful activity to be
carried on within any premises under the control of the
society, he shall, after giving reasonable notice to the society
to show cause why the registration of the society should not
be cancelled and the society dissolved, and after considering
the representations, if any, made on behalf of the society, by
order cancel the registration of the society and direct
dissolution of the society; and thereupon the assets of the
society shall be distributed, and the liabilities discharged, in
the same manner as if the society had been dissolved under
section 22.
(3) An appeal shall lie to the Karnataka Appellate
Tribunal against any order passed by the Registrar under sub-
section (2), within sixty days from the date of communication
of the order, and the decision on such appeal shall be final.
Explanation. - For purposes of this section, an activity
shall be deemed to be unlawful if such activity is an offence
punishable under any provision of law for the time being in
force.”
Sub-sections (1) and (2) of Section 27 direct that any society
carrying on any unlawful activity within its premises would become
open for an inquiry and if the Registrar is satisfied that the Society
has been carrying on any unlawful activity or has allowed any
unlawful    activity  to  be  carried on    would become      open for
cancellation of registration. Admittedly in the case at hand, the
allegations are all of pre-registration stage. Section 27 nowhere
mandates that a pre-registration act of registration of a Society
could also become an offence. After the Inquiry Officer’s report and
the order so passed, the petitioner/Association files this subject writ
petition – W.P.No.17533 of 2021.        The co-ordinate Bench of this
Court on 27-10-2021 passed the following interim order:
“Issue emergent notice to respondent nos. 5 & 6;
Learned AGA is requested to accept notice for respondent nos.
The interim order as prayed for, is granted on the
following grounds:
1) Despite vehement arguments from the side of
Government and the contesting respondent, it is not
shown that the pre-registration act fall within the
framework of Section 27 of the Karnataka Societies
Registration Act, 1960, as a ground for cancellation of
registration of a society as rightly pointed out by
learned Sr. Advocate, Mr. Jayakumar S Patil; the text of
Section 27 unmistakably indicates that the unlawful
activities being committed or carried on by the
Management of the Society post-registration alone can
be the grounds for the cancellation of its registration; if
the Legislature intended that the pre-registration acts
also could constitute a ground for cancellation of
registration, it would have indicated the same textually
or by necessary implication; which it has not.
2) The registration of a Society is one thing and its
cancellation is another; in the matter of registration,
ordinarily, there is a larger amount of discretion availing
to the authorities going by the text & context of
Sections 7 & 8 of the Act; but, once registration of a
Society takes place, deregistration or cancellation of
cannot be done save by the authority of law and in a
strict adherence thereto; this view finds support from the
observations of the Hon’ble Delhi High Court in SUPREME
SOCIETIES & OTHERS, in W.P.No.(C) 3260/2012, decided on
12.04.2012 para 18, which reads as under;
There is yet another aspect which needs to be
considered. Once the Act provides a procedure for
dissolution of the society registered under the Act, it is
only that procedure which can be invoked, and no other
procedure can be adopted. If a thing is prescribed to be
done in a particular way, it can be done in only that
way, and by no other way. (See Patna Improvement
Trust V. Smt. Lakshmi Devi, 812 SCR [1963] Supp. and
State of Bihar & Anr. V. J.A.C. Saldanha & Ors, (1980) 1
SCC 554). Therefore, the ROS cannot invent other
methods or reasons to suspend or dissolve a society
registered under the Act.
3) The vehement contention of the respondents that
Sub-Section (3) of Section 27 provides an appellate remedy
against cancellation of registration and therefore, the writ
petition should not be entertained, is bit difficult to
countenance; the doctrine of alternate remedy is an invention
of the Writ Courts only and that cannot be invoked as a
mantra in every case as a Thumb Rule to defeat the legitimate
claim of an aggrieved citizen; there is a lot of force in the
contention of Mr. Patil that where a Writ of Certiorari is sought
for on the ground of lack of jurisdiction, the doctrine of
alternate remedy ordinarily cannot be invoked to non-suit the
Petitioner; even otherwise, the petitioners have made out a
prima facie case for grant of interim relief, since denial cannot
be compensated in terms of money, the elections being visible
at the horizon.
It is made clear that first Petitioner- Association shall be
treated as having affiliated to the State Association and the
consequences on that basis shall follow, subject to outcome of
the writ petition.”
The order clearly holds albeit, prima facie, that a pre-registration
act could not have been made an offence and directed that the
petitioner/Association shall be treated as having been affiliated to
the State Association and the consequence on that basis shall follow
which would be subject to the outcome of the writ petition. This
Court fully concurs with the reasons rendered by the co-ordinate
Bench while granting interim order. After the interim order, the
Administrator who was in place of the State Unit does not include
the name of the petitioner/Association in the list of voters, but
includes the name of the 3rd respondent/Association at Sl.No.4.
This is called in question in Writ Petition No.22023 of 2021. This
Court on 3-12-2021 passed the following order:
“Learned HCGP is requested to accept notice for
Respondent Nos.1 & 2. Issue Emergent Notice to other
respondents.
The elections as scheduled shall go on; however,
election result shall not be announced without the leave of this
court; further, the ballot paper of the 3rd respondent Amateur
Kabbadi Association shown at Sl.No.4 in the voters list at
Annexure-Q shall be kept in a sealed cover.”
This Court directed that election as scheduled would go on and the
result of the election shall not be announced without the leave of
the Court and the ballot paper of the 3rd respondent/Association
shall be kept in a sealed cover.        Later on 7-12-2021 the list is
drawn     by    the    Administrator.     At    Sl.No.4     is   the    3rd
respondent/Association      and    at   Sl.No.25    is   the    petitioner/
Association terming it to be additional ballot and in terms of the
interim order in Writ Petition No.17533 of 2021. In the aforesaid
manner the elections had gone on and the result of the election is
yet to be announced.
11. In the light of the preceding analysis, what would
unmistakably emerge is that registration of the 3rd respondent/
Association runs foul of the mandate of Section 7 of the Act, as
both the Associations are not too nearly similar but are virtually
same. Once a Society is registered with a particular name,
registration   of  a   second   Society    with   the   same     name    is
impermissible. Section 27 of the Act makes acts to be unlawful
activity only after the registration of the Society. The Legislature in
its  wisdom    has   not  made     pre-registration    acts   an  offence.
Therefore, the very complaint registered, inquiry held and the order
of cancellation of registration of the petitioner/Association would all
thus be rendered illegal and unsustainable. The manner of conduct
of inquiry need not be gone into, as the very complaint registered
and the order passed would run foul of Section 27 of the Act.
Whether the inquiry has been conducted in consonance with the
principles of natural justice or otherwise need not be gone into. In
the result what would unmistakably emerge is the illegality of
registration of the 3rd respondent/Association and illegal order
passed cancelling registration of the petitioner/Association.
12. For the aforesaid reasons, I pass the following:
(i)      Writ Petitions are allowed.
(ii)     Impugned order dated 23-08-2021 passed by the 2nd
respondent stands quashed. The registration of the
3rd respondent/Association is declared illegal and
accordingly quashed.
(iii)   It is declared that the petitioner/Association is
deemed to have been affiliated and the votes cast by
the petitioner/Association are valid and the votes
cast by the 3rd respondent/ Association, placed in the
sealed cover, are invalid.
(iv)    The result of the elections, in accordance with the
directions, shall be declared by the competent
authority within a period of one week from today and
further actions shall be regulated in accordance with
Consequently, I.A.No.1/2022 filed in W.P.No.22023/2021
stands disposed.